2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Preparation


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Preparation 
The fraud examiner must adequately prepare prior to any interview or information-gathering 
process. Proper preparation entails analyzing what is to be expected as an end product. It 
should also involve having a good idea of what is to be learned from each witness. 
 
Active listening is an essential function of effective report writing. The fraud examiner must 
have good listening skills so that the information is properly assimilated, evaluated, and 
communicated to others. Listening skills are lear ned. Listening involves perceiving what the 
respondent is actually communicating. To do so properly, you must set aside any 
preconceived notions and listen objectively, not only to what is being said, but to how it is 
said and why. The fraud examiner should withhold judgment until the entire message has 
been heard. 
 
Active listening often involves participating with the respondent during the information-gathering 
process. Participation conveys interest in the subject and promotes rapport. 
Participation might require reacting openly to information by verbal and nonverbal 
responses. 
 
 



:


prepar
the fraud examin must adequ prepar prior to ani interview or informationgath
process proper prepar entail analyz what is to be expect as an end product it
should also involv have a good idea of what is to be learn from each wit
activ listen is an essenti function of effect report write the fraud examin must
have good listen skill so that the inform is properli assimil evalu and
commun to other listen skill ar lear ned listen involv perceiv what the
respond is actual commun to do so properli you must set asid ani
preconceiv notion and listen object not onli to what is be said but to how it is
said and why the fraud examin should withhold judgment until the entir messag ha
been heard
activ listen often involv particip with the respond dure the informationgath
process particip convei interest in the subject and promot rapport
particip might requir react openli to inform by verbal and nonverb
respons
