2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ACCOUNTING CONCEPTS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Basic Accounting Concepts


:


ACCOUNTING CONCEPTS 
 
Fraudulent acts are usually of a financial nature. The fraud examiner must therefore 
understand the essential nature of financial transactions and how they affect records. 
Additionally, the fraud examiner should have a grasp of both financial terminology and 
accounting theory.  
 
 
Accounting Basics 
Accounting can be defined as the identification, accumulation, measurement, and 
communication of economic data about an enterprise for decision makers and other 
interested parties. The measurement and recording of this data are accomplished through 
keeping a balance of the accounting equation. The accounting model or accounting equation, 
as shown below, is the basis for all double-entry accounting:  
 
Assets = Liabilities + Owners’ Equity 
 
By definition, assets consist of the net resources owned by an entity. Examples of assets 
include cash, receivables, inventory, property, and equipment, as well as intangible items of 
value such as patents, licenses, and trademarks. To qualify as an asset, an item must (1) be 
owned by the entity and (2) provide future benefit.  
 
Liabilities are the obligations of an entity or outsiders’ claims against a company’s assets. 
Liabilities usually arise from the acquisition of assets or the incurrence of operational 
expenses. 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.102                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Owners’ equity  represents the investment of a company’s owners plus accumulated profits 
(revenues less expenses). Owners’ equity is equal to assets minus liabilities.  
 
This equation has been the cornerstone of accounting since 1494, when Luca Pacioli 
invented it. The balance of the equation is the key. If a company borrows from a bank, cash 
(an asset) and notes payable (a liability) increase to show the receipt of cash and an 
obligation owed by the company. Since both assets and liabilities increase by the same 
amount, the equation stays in balance.  
 
Accounts and the Accounting Cycle 
The major components of the accounting equation are made up of numerous detail 
accounts. An account is nothing more than a specific accounting record that provides an 
efficient way to categorize similar transactions. All transactions are recorded in accounts that 
are categorized as asset accounts, liability accounts, owners’ equity accounts, revenue 
accounts, and expense accounts. Account format occurs in a number of ways. The simplest, 
most fundamental format is the use of a large letter T, often referred to as a T account.  
 
Entries to the left side of an account are debits (dr) and entries to the right side of an account 
are credits (cr). Debits increase asset and expense accounts, while credits decrease them. 
Conversely, credits increase liability, owners’ equity, and revenue accounts; debits decrease 
them. Every transaction recorded in the accounting records will have both a debit and a 
credit, thus the term double-entry accounting. The accounting equation, in the form of T 
accounts, looks like the following:   
 
 
 
Fraud investigation often requires an understanding of the debit-and-credit process. For 
example, a fraud examiner who is searching for a mysterious $5,000 disappearance of cash 
finds a debit in the legal expense account and a corresponding credit in the cash account for 
$5,000, but cannot find genuine documentation for the charge. The examiner can then 
reasonably suspect that a perpetrator may have attempted to conceal the theft by labeling the 
misappropriated $5,000 as a legal expense.  
 
 Assets  =  Liabilities + Owner's Equities

Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.103 
Discovering concealment efforts through a review of accounting records is one of the easier 
methods of detecting internal fraud; usually, one needs only to look for weaknesses in the 
various steps of the accounting cycle. Legitimate transactions leave an audit trail. They start 
with a source document such as an invoice, a check, a receipt, or a receiving report. These 
source documents become the basis for journal entries, which are chronological listings of 
transactions with their debit and credit amounts. Entries are made in various accounting 
journals. Then, entries are posted to the appropriate general ledger accounts. The 
summarized account amounts become the basis for financial statements for a particular 
period. 
 
Illustrated below is this flow of transactional information through the accounting records, 
followed by examples of typical accounting transactions, to help in understanding how 
transactions affect the balance sheet: 
 
 
Journal Entries  
As transactions occur, they are recorded in a company’s books via journal entries. Each journal 
entry serves as a record of a particular transaction and forms an audit trail that can be 
retraced later for an understanding of a company’s operations. Journal entries that are not 
triggered by a transaction, called adjusting journal entries, are also made periodically for items 
such as depreciation expense and accounts receivable write-offs.  
 
 
Transaction Occurs 
Purchase Orders, Receipts, and Other 
Documents Are Created 
Transaction Is Recorded in Journals 
Journals Are Posted to Individual Accounts
Financial Statements Are Generated with 
Account Balances 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.104                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE  
XYZ Company completed the following transactions during its first year of operations, 
20XX. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accounting Methods 

There are two primary methods of accounting: cash-basis and accrual-basis. Cash-basis 
accounting involves recording revenues and expenses based on when a company pays or 
receives cash. For example, sales are recorded when a company receives payment for goods, 
regardless of when the goods are delivered. If a customer purchases goods on credit, the 
company does not book the sale until the cash is received for the sale. Likewise, if a 
customer prepays for a sale, the company records the sales revenue immediately, rather than 
when the goods are passed off to the customer. The same holds true with expenses: they are 
recorded when paid without consideration to when they are incurred.  
 
Accrual-basis accounting, on the other hand, requires revenues to be recorded when they are 
earned (generally, when goods are delivered or services are rendered to a customer), without 
Transaction Analysis Account Debit Credit Assets Liabilities  Equity
 Enterprise established, Cash increased Cash 192,000 192,000    
Owner invests $192,000 Liabilities no effect   Common Stock 192,000  192,000   
Equity increased
 Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 1 9 2,000 192,000 192,000    -    192,000   
Company borrowed $80,000 Cash increased Cash 80,000  80,000    
on a note payable Liabilities increased   Notes Payable 80,000  80,000    
Equity no effect
 Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 2 7 2,000 272,000 272,000    80,000    1 9 2,000   
Purchase business Cash decreased Equipment 70,000   70,000    
equipment for $70,000 Assets increased   Cash 70,000  (70,000)  
Liab & Equity no effect
 Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 3 4 2,000 342,000 272,000    80,000    1 9 2,000   
Services rendered to client Cash increased Cash 15,000  15,000    
$40,000, $15,000 collected A /R increased   Accounts Receivable 25,000  25,000    
in advance Equity increased   Sales Revenue 40,000   40,000   
Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 3 8 2,000 382,000 312,000    80,000    2 3 2,000   
Operating expenses incurred Cash decreased Operating Expenses 25,000  (25,000)   
$25,000, Liabilities increased Cash 14,000  (14,000)  
14,000 paid in cash Equity decreased   Accounts Payable 11,000  11,000    
Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 4 0 7,000 407,000 298,000    91,000    2 0 7,000   
Paid $5,000 on Note Cash decreased Notes Payable 5,000  (5,000)    
Payable  Liabilities decreased   Cash 5,000  (5,000)    
Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 4 1 2,000 412,000 293,000    86,000    2 0 7,000   
Depreciated equipment for Asset decreased Depreciation expense 7,000  (7,000)   
1 yr, estimated life 10yr  Equity decreased   Accum. Depreciation 7,000  (7,000)    
($70,000 /1 0) = $7,000
 Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 4 1 9,000 419,000 286,000    86,000    2 0 0,000   
Balance Sheet Effect  
Journal Entry Assets = Liabilities + Owners Equity
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.105 
regard to when cash exchanges hands. Expenses are recorded in the same period as the 
revenues to which they relate. For example, employee wages are expensed in the period 
during which the employees provided services, which may not necessarily be the same 
period in which they were paid. 
 
Under cash accounting, a company may decide to postpone paying some expenses so they 
are not recorded in the current period, resulting in an artificially inflated bottom line. 
Conversely, accrual accounting requires expenses to be matched to revenues; therefore, it 
provides a truer picture of a company’s financial situation. As such, generally accepted 
accounting principles mandate the use of accrual-basis accounting.  
 
 
Financial Statements 
The results of the accounting process are reports, or financial statements, that exemplify the 
financial position and operating results of an entity. Financial statements are often the 
vehicles through which fraud occurs. 
 
According to AU section 623, Special Reports, promulgated by the AICPA’s Auditing 
Standards Board, financial statements include presentations of financial data and 
accompanying notes prepared in conformity with either generally accepted accounting 
principles or some other comprehensive basis of accounting. The following is a list of such 
financial statements: 
• Balance sheet 
• Statement of income or statement of operations 
• Statement of retained earnings 
• Statement of cash flows 
• Statement of changes in owners’ equity 
• Statement of assets and liabilities that does not include owners’ equity accounts 
• Statement of revenue and expenses 
• Summary of operations 
• Statement of operations by product lines 
• Statement of cash receipts and disbursements 
 
Although not specifically noted in AU section 623, financial statements may also include 
other financial data presentations, such as: 
• Prospective financial information (forecasts) 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.106                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Proxy statements 
• Interim financial information (for example, quarterly financial statements) 
• Current value financial presentations 
• Personal financial statements (current or present value) 
• Bankruptcy financial statements 
• Registration statement disclosures (Securities Act of 1933) 
 
Other comprehensive bases of accounting, according to AU section 623, include: 
• Government or regulatory agency accounting 
• Tax-basis accounting 
• Cash receipts and disbursements, or modified cash receipts and disbursements 
• Any other basis with a definite set of criteria applied to all material items, such as the 
price-level basis of accounting 
 
Consequently, the term financial statements  includes almost any financial data presentation 
prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles or another 
comprehensive basis of accounting. Throughout this section, the term financial statements 
will include the above forms of reporting financial data, including the accompanying 
footnotes and management’s discussion. For most companies, however, a full set of financial 
statements comprises a balance sheet, a statement of income, a statement of owners’ equity 
or a statement of retained earnings, and a statement of cash flows. Therefore, fraud 
examiners should be familiar with the purpose and components of each of these financial 
statements.  
 
Balance Sheet 
The balance sheet shows a “snapshot” of a company’s financial situation at a specific point in 
time, generally the last day of the accounting period. The balance sheet is an expansion of 
the accounting equation, assets = liabilities + owners’ equity. That is, it lists a company’s assets 
on one side and its liabilities and owners’ equity on the other side. The nature of the 
accounting equation means that the two sides of the statement should balance, hence the 
name “balance sheet.”  
 
The following balance sheet, derived from the journal entries in the above example, shows 
the financial position of XYZ Company on the last day of its first year of operations.  
 
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.107 
XYZ Company 
Balance Sheet  
December 31, 20XX 
      
      
Assets     Liabilities    
Current Assets    Current Liabilities   
Cash  $  198,000    Accounts Payable  $    11,000   
Accounts Receivable 25,000   Total Current Liabilities   $    11,000 
Total Current Assets   $  223,000     
    Long-term Liabilities   
Fixed Assets    Notes Payable 75,000   
Equipment 70,000   
Total Long-term 
Liabilities  75,000 
Less: Accum. Depreciation (7,000)   Total Liabilities  86,000 
Total Fixed Assets  63,000     
    Owners’ Equity    
    Common Stock 192,000   
    Retained Earnings 8,000   
    Total Owners’ Equity  200,000 
       
Total Assets   $  286,000  
Total Liabilities and 
Equity   $  286,000 
 
As mentioned, assets are the resources owned by a company. Generally, assets are presented 
on the balance sheet in order of liquidity, or how soon they are expected to be converted to 
cash. The first section on the assets side, current assets, includes all those assets that are 
expected to be converted to cash, sold, or used up within one year. This category usually 
includes cash, accounts receivable (the amount owed to a company by customers for sales 
on credit), inventory, and prepaid items. Following the current assets are the long-term assets, 
or those assets that will likely not be converted to cash in the near future, such as fixed assets 
(e.g., land, buildings, equipment) and intangible assets (e.g., patents, trademarks, goodwill). A 
company’s fixed assets are presented net of accumulated depreciation, an amount that 
represents the cumulative expense taken for wear-and-tear on a company’s property. 
Likewise, intangible assets are presented net of accumulated amortization, an amount that 
represents the collective expense taken for declines in value of the intangible property. 
 
Liabilities are presented in order of maturity. Like current assets, current liabilities  are those 
obligations that are expected to be paid within one year, such as accounts payable (the 
amount owed to vendors by a company for purchases on credit), accrued expenses (e.g., 
taxes payable or salaries payable), and the portion of long-term debts that will come due 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.108                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
within the next year. Those liabilities that are not due for more than a year are listed under 
the heading long-term liabilities. The most common liabilities in this group are bonds, notes, 
and mortgages payable. The total balance of the note payable is listed under long-term 
liabilities on XYZ Company’s balance sheet, indicating that it does not have to make any 
payments on the note during the next year. However, if a $5,000 payment was required 
during the next year, the company would have to reclassify $5,000 of the note balance to the 
current liabilities section and show the remaining $70,000 as a long-term liability. This 
adjustment would not change the total amount of the outstanding liability that was shown — all 
$75,000 would still appear on the balance sheet - but it would allow financial statement 
users to know that the company had an obligation to pay $5,000 during the next year rather 
than at some unspecified time in the future.  
 
The owners’ equity in a firm generally represents amounts from two sources — owner 
contributions (usually referred to as common or capital stock, and paid-in capital) and 
undistributed earnings (usually referred to as retained earnings). The balance in the capital stock 
account increases when the owners of a company invest in it through the purchase of 
company stock. The retained earnings balance increases when a company has earnings and 
decreases when a company has losses. The retained earnings account is also decreased when 
earnings are distributed to a company’s owners in the form of dividends, or when a company 
has losses. XYZ Company’s balance sheet shows that the company’s owners have 
contributed $192,000 to the company and that the company has retained $8,000 of earnings 
as of December 31, 20XX.  
 
Income Statement 
Whereas the balance sheet shows a company’s financial position at a specific point in time, 
the income statement details how much profit (or loss) a company earned during a period of 
time, such as a quarter or a year. The accounts reflected on the income statement are 
temporary; at the end of each fiscal year, they are reduced to a zero balance (closed), with the 
resulting net income (or loss) added to (or subtracted from) retained earnings on the balance 
sheet.  
 
Below is the income statement for XYZ Company for its first year of operations based on 
the sample transactions above. 
 
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.109 
XYZ Company 
Statement of Income 
For the Year Ended December 31, 20 X X  
   
Revenue   
Net Sales  $             40,000  
Less: Cost of Goods Sold  25,000  
Gross Profit   $             15,000 
   
Operating Expenses    
Depreciation 7,000  
Total Operating Expenses  7,000 
   
Net Income   $               8,000 
 
Two basic types of accounts are reported on the income statement - revenues  and expenses. 
Revenues represent amounts received from the sale of goods or services during the 
accounting period. Most companies present net sales  or net service revenues  as the first line item 
on the income statement. The term “net” means that the amount shown is the company’s 
total sales minus any sales refunds, returns, discounts, or allowances.  
 
From net sales, an expense titled cost of goods sold  or cost of sales  is deducted. Regardless of 
industry, this expense denotes the amount a company spent (in past, present, and/or future 
accounting periods) to produce the goods or services that were sold during the current 
period. For a company that manufactures goods, cost of goods sold signifies the amount the 
company spent on materials, labor, and overhead expenses to produce the goods that were 
sold during the accounting period. For a merchandise reseller, this expense is the amount the 
company has paid to purchase the goods that were resold during the period. For a service 
company, the cost of sales is typically the amount of salaries paid to the employees who 
performed the services that were sold. The difference between net sales and cost of goods 
sold is called gross profit  or gross margin, which represents the amount left over from sales to 
pay the company’s operating expenses.  
 
Operating expenses are those costs that a company incurs to support and sustain its business 
operations. Generally, these expenses include items such as advertising, management’s 
salaries, office supplies, repairs and maintenance, rent, utilities, depreciation, interest, and 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.110                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
taxes. Accrual accounting requires that these items be included on the income statement in 
the period in which they are incurred, regardless of when they are paid.  
 
After subtracting operating expenses from gross profit, a company’s net income or net earnings 
for the period is determined. If a company’s total expenses were greater than its total 
revenues and the bottom line is negative, then it had a net loss  for the period. Commonly, a 
profitable company will distribute some of its net income to its owners in the form of 
dividends. Whatever income is not distributed is transferred to the retained earnings account 
on the balance sheet. In the case of XYZ Company, net income for the year was $8,000. The 
company did not distribute any of these earnings, so the total amount — $8,000 — is shown 
on the balance sheet as retained earnings. If the company is also profitable during its next 
year of operations, any net income that is not distributed as dividends will be added to the 
$8,000 balance in retained earnings. If expenses outpace revenues and XYZ Company shows 
a loss for its second year, that loss will be deducted from the $8,000 retained earnings 
balance at the end of the second year.  
 
To summarize, the income statement ties to the balance sheet through the retained earnings 
account as follows: 
 
 
 
Statement of Owners’ Equity 
The statement of owners’ equity details the changes in the total owners’ equity amount listed 
on the balance sheet. Because it shows how the amounts on the income statement flow 
through to the balance sheet, it acts as the connecting link between the two statements. The 
balance of the owners’ equity at the beginning of the year is the starting point for the 
statement. The transactions that affect owners’ equity are listed next and added together. 
The result is added to (or subtracted from, if negative) the beginning-of-the-year balance, 
which provides the end-of-the-year balance for total owners’ equity.  
Assets Liabilities + Owners’ Equity =  
Common Stock Retained Earnings
 Dividends Net  Income
 Revenue Expenses 
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.111 
The statement of owners’ equity for XYZ Company would appear as follows:  
 
XYZ Company 
Statement of Owners’ Equity 
For the Year Ended December 31, 20XX  
  
Owners’ equity, January 1, 20XX  $              -  
Investment by owners during the year  $      192,000  
Net income for the year 8,000  
Increase in owners’ equity 200,000  
Owners’ equity, December 31, 20XX  $      200,000  
 
XYZ Company completed two types of transactions that affected the owners’ equity during 
20XX: the $192,000 invested by the company’s shareholders, and the revenue and expenses 
that resulted in the net income of $8,000. Had the company distributed any money to the 
shareholders in the form of dividends, that amount would be listed on the statement of 
owners’ equity as well. Notice that the $8,000 ties directly to the bottom line of the income 
statement, and the $200,000 owners’ equity ties to the “total owners’ equity” amount on the 
balance sheet.  
 
Some companies present a statement of retained earnings rather than a statement of owners’ 
equity. Similar to the statement of owners’ equity,  the statement of retained earnings starts 
with the retained earnings balance at the beginning of the year. All transactions affecting the 
retained earnings account are then listed and added to the beginning balance to arrive at the 
ending balance in the retained earnings account. Below is an example of the statement of 
retained earnings for XYZ Company:  
 
XYZ Company 
Statement of Retained Earnings 
For the Year Ended December 31, 20XX  
   
Retained earnings, January 1, 20XX  $              -   
Net income for the year  $         8,000  
Increase in owners’ equity 8,000  
Retained earnings, December 31, 20XX  $         8,000  
 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.112                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Statement of Cash Flows 
The statement of cash flows reports a company’s sources and uses of cash during the 
accounting period. This statement is often used by potential investors and other interested 
parties in tandem with the income statement to determine the true financial performance of 
a company during the period being reported. The nature of accrual accounting allows (and 
often requires) the income statement to contain many non-cash items and subjective 
estimates that make it difficult to fully and clearly interpret a company’s operating results. 
However, it is much harder to distort the amount of cold, hard cash that was received and 
paid during the year, so the statement of cash flows adds to the transparency of the financial 
statements.  
 
The following is the statement of cash flows for XYZ Company:  
 
XYZ Company 
Statement of Cash Flows — Direct Method 
For the Year Ended December 31, 20 X X  
   
Cash flows from operating activities   
Cash received from customers  $       15,000  
Cash paid for merchandise (14,000)  
Net cash flows from operating activities  $         1,000  
  
Cash flows from investing activities  
Cash paid for purchase of equipment (70,000)  
Net cash flows from investing activities (70,000) 
  
Cash flows from financing activities  
Cash received as owners’ investment 192,000  
Cash received from issuing note payable 80,000  
Cash paid on note payable (5,000)  
Net cash flows from financing activities 267,000  
  
Increase in cash 198,000  
Cash balance at the beginning of the year           0  
Cash balance at the end of the year  $      198,000  
 
The statement of cash flows is broken down into three sections: cash flows from operating 
activities, cash flows from investing activities, and cash flows from financing activities.  
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.113 
Cash Flows from Operations 
The cash flows from operations section summarizes a company’s cash receipts and payments 
arising from its normal business operations. Cash inflows included in this category 
commonly consist of payments received from customers for sales, and cash outflows include 
payments to vendors for merchandise and operating expenses and to employees for wages.  
 
This category can also be summarized as those cash transactions that ultimately affect a 
company’s operating income; therefore, it is often considered the most important of the 
three categories of cash flows. If a company continually shows large profits per its income 
statement, but cannot generate positive cash flows from operations, then questionable 
accounting practices might be to blame. On the other hand, net income that is supported by 
positive and increasing net cash flows from operations is generally considered an indicator of 
a strong company. 
 
There are two methods of reporting cash flows from operations. In the above example, 
XYZ Company’s statement of cash flows is presented using the direct method. This method 
lists the sources of operating cash flows and the uses of operating cash flows, with the 
difference between them being the net cash flow from operating activities.  
 
In contrast, the indirect method  reconciles net income per the income statement with net cash 
flows from operating activities; that is, accrual-basis net income is adjusted for non-cash 
revenues and expenses to arrive at net cash flows from operations. Below is an example of 
XYZ Company’s cash flows from operations using the indirect method:  
 
XYZ Company 
Statement of Cash Flows — Indirect Method 
For the Year Ended December 31, 20 X X  
Cash flows from operating activities   
Net income, per income statement   $         8,000  
Add:  Depreciation  $         7,000  
  Increase in accounts payable 11,000 18,000  
  26,000  
Subtract:  Increase in accounts receivable (25,000) (25,000) 
Net cash flows from operating activities  1,000  
 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.114                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Note that the net cash flows from operating activities is the same amount - in this case, 
$1,000 — regardless of the method that is used.  The indirect method is usually easier to 
compute and provides a comparison of a company’s operating results under the accrual and 
cash methods of accounting. As a result, most companies choose to use the indirect method, 
but either method is acceptable.  
 
Cash Flows from Investing Activities 
Cash inflows from investing activities usually arise from the sale of fixed assets (e.g., 
property and equipment), investments (e.g., the stocks and bonds of other companies), or 
intangible assets (e.g., patents and trademarks). Similarly, cash outflows from investing 
activities include any cash paid for the purchase of fixed assets, investments, or intangible 
assets.  
 
Cash Flows from Financing Activities 
Cash flows from financing activities involve the cash received or paid in connection with 
issuing debt and equity securities. Cash inflows in this category occur when a company sells 
its own stock, issues bonds, or takes out a loan. A company’s cash outflows from financing 
activities include paying cash dividends to shareholders, acquiring shares of its own stock 
(called treasury stock), and repaying debt.  
  
The total cash flows from all three categories are combined to arrive at the net increase or 
decrease in cash for the year. This total is then added to or subtracted from the cash balance 
at the beginning of the year to arrive at the cash balance at the end of the year, which ties 
back to the amount of cash reported on the balance sheet.  
 
Users of Financial Statements 
Financial statement fraud schemes are most often perpetrated by management against 
potential users of the statements. These users of financial statements include company 
ownership and management, lending organizations, investors, regulating bodies, vendors, 
and customers. The production of truthful financial statements plays an important role in 
the continued success of an organization. However, fraudulent statements can be used for a 
number of reasons. The most common use is to increase the apparent prosperity of an 
organization in the eyes of potential and current investors. (For more information, see the 
chapter on “Financial Statement Fraud.”)  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.115 
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) 
In preparing financial statements, management, accountants, and auditors are charged with 
following measurement and reporting practices known as generally accepted accounting principles  
(GAAP). The accounting practices that compose GAAP have developed through the 
accumulation of authoritative accounting pronouncements issued by several authoritative 
bodies. Historically, these pronouncements included Accounting Research Bulletins, 
Accounting Principles Board (APB) Opinions, Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB) Statements and Interpretations, Emerging Issues Task Force Abstracts, and SEC 
Staff Accounting Bulletins.  
 
In 2009, FASB launched the FASB Accounting Standards Codification(FASB ASC)  as the 
sole source of authoritative U.S. GAAP for non-governmental organizations. The 
Codification compiles and organizes all previous sources of GAAP by topic, providing an 
efficient and easy-to-use structure for researching and referencing accounting standards. The 
FASB ASC effectively supersedes the pre-Codification GAAP hierarchy established in SAS 
No. 69 and FASB Statement No. 162.  
 
While the U.S. has its own set of accounting standards that form GAAP, the various 
accounting rules from different countries are converging. The International Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB) is developing a single set of standards, called International Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS). For each accounting function, the IASB is looking for the most 
appropriate principle for how transactions should be accounted for, or the most suitable 
method of reporting the results. The IASB has sought the best, sometimes adopting a 
standard from one country or another, other times creating a new standard entirely. 
Currently, more than 120 countries require or permit the use of IFRS, with several more 
planning to adopt IFRS in the next few years. A list of the countries that have adopted the 
IFRS is available at www.iasplus.com/country/useias.htm.  
 
Basic Underlying Accounting Principles 
Basic accounting principles, referred to as generally accepted accounting principles, are the 
rules by which a company’s financial transactions are recorded into their appropriate account 
classifications. These principles have evolved over time and are expected to continue 
changing in response to shifts in social and economic conditions, advancements in 
technology, and demand by users for more useful or productive standards. The following is 
a list of the basic underlying principles on which accountants should base their practices.  
 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.116                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Historical Cost 
Although some exceptions exist, historical cost is, generally, the proper basis for the 
recording of assets, expenses, equities, etc. For example, a piece of operational machinery 
should be shown on the balance sheet at initial acquisition cost and not at current market 
value or an estimated replacement value. 
 
Revenue Recognition 
In general, revenue is recognized or recorded when it becomes realized or realizable, and 
earned. These criteria are usually met when:  
• Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists,  
• Delivery has occurred or services have been rendered,  
• The seller’s price to the buyer is fixed or determinable, and 
• Collectibility is reasonably assured.  
 
Therefore, revenue should not be recognized for work that is to be performed in subsequent 
accounting periods, even though the work may currently be under contract; the revenue 
should be recognized in the period in which the work is performed.  
 
Matching 
The matching principle requires that expenses be recorded in the same accounting period as 
the revenues they help generate. Estimates, accruals, and allocations are often needed to 
meet this requirement. When a sale is recorded, the appropriate charges for cost of goods 
sold, or other expenses directly corresponding to the sale, should be recorded in the same 
accounting period.  
 
Consistency 
Entities should employ consistent accounting procedures from period to period. Variations 
or changes in accounting policies and procedures must be justifiable. Standards used to value 
inventory, depreciate assets, or accrue expenses should be consistent from one accounting 
period to the next. 
 
Full Disclosure 
The financial statements of an entity should include all information necessary for the 
formation of valid decisions by the users. The statements should not include too much 
information, but are required to include enough information so that the user is not misled. 
Supplemental notes to the financial statements are usually required to meet these criteria. 
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.117 
Objectivity 
Accounting records should be designed and kept on objective, rather than subjective, 
evidence. Underlying verifiability must exist for the information contained in the statements. 
For example, assets are carried at historical cost and not at an estimated current value. 
Historical cost should be verifiable through legitimate proof of purchase.  
 
Separate Entity Assumption 
Economic activity of an entity should be kept separate from other personal or business 
entities. For example, personal business transactions of an entity’s owners or operators 
should not be included in the financial reports of the entity.  
 
Going Concern — Continuity Assumption 
There is an assumption that an entity will continue as a going concern; that is, the life of the 
entity will be long enough to fulfill its financial and legal obligations. Any evidence to the 
contrary must be reported in the financial statements of the entity. 
 
Unit of Measure 
All financial reports are based on the monetary unit, e.g., the dollar for U.S. entities. This 
assumption recognizes that the monetary unit is an effective means of communicating 
financial information. Adjustments for inflationary trends are not shown in the financial 
statements of the entity. 
 
Periodicity—Time Period Assumption 
The life of an entity is divided into economic time periods on which reporting statements are 
fashioned. These reporting periods vary, but a year is the most common. Some companies 
follow the calendar year, while others use a business year that ends near the lowest point of 
business activity in a 12-month cycle, regardless of where that point falls in the calendar year.  
 
Departures from GAAP — Modifying Conventions 
As with rules for most things, departures from GAAP are sometimes required. The 
following modifying conventions give guidance and should be considered when deviating 
from what is generally acceptable. 
 
Conservatism 
When considering an accounting matter in which there are two alternatives that equally 
satisfy conceptual and implementation principles for a transaction, an accountant should 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.118                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
take a conservative approach, and follow the alternative that will have the least favorable 
impact on the net income of the entity. 
 
Industry Practices and Peculiarities 
The peculiarities and practices of an industry (such as banking, investment, and insurance) 
may warrant selective exceptions to accounting principles. Some differences in accounting 
also occur in response to legal requirements, such as those entities subject to regulatory 
controls.  
 
Substance over Form 
The economic substance of a transaction determines the accounting treatment, which may 
differ from the legal treatment. For example, although a lease contract may not transfer 
property rights, if the true substance of the transaction is a sale, then the lessee should 
record the transaction as an acquisition and capitalize the property.  
 
Application of Judgment 
An accountant may depart from GAAP if the results of departure appear reasonable under 
the circumstances, especially when strict adherence to GAAP will produce unreasonable 
results and the departure is properly disclosed.  
 
Materiality 
The amount of an item is material if its omission would affect the judgment of a reasonable 
person who is relying on the financial statements. The materiality threshold does not mean 
that immaterial items do not have to be recorded; rather, strict adherence to GAAP is 
necessary only when the item has a significant impact on the financial statements of an 
entity. In addition, the aggregate effect of immaterial items must also be considered. 
 
Cost-Benefit 
A departure from GAAP is permitted if the expected costs of reporting a transaction in 
compliance with GAAP exceed the expected benefits of compliance. 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.201 



:


account concept
fraudul act ar usual of a financi natur the fraud examin must therefor
understand the essenti natur of financi transact and how thei affect record
addition the fraud examin should have a grasp of both financi terminolog and
account theori
account basic
account can be defin as the identif accumul measur and
commun of econom data about an enterpris for decis maker and other
interest parti the measur and record of thi data ar accomplish through
keep a balanc of the account equat the account model or account equat
as shown below is the basi for all doubleentri account
asset liabil owner equiti
by definit asset consist of the net resourc own by an entiti exampl of asset
includ cash receiv inventori properti and equip as well as intang item of
valu such as patent licens and trademark to qualifi as an asset an item must 1 be
own by the entiti and 2 provid futur benefit
liabil ar the oblig of an entiti or outsid claim against a compani asset
liabil usual aris from the acquisit of asset or the incurr of oper
expens
account concept financi transact
1102 2011 fraud examin manual
owner equiti repres the invest of a compani owner plu accumul profit
revenu less expens owner equiti is equal to asset minu liabil
thi equat ha been the cornerston of account sinc 1494 when luca pacioli
invent it the balanc of the equat is the kei if a compani borrow from a bank cash
an asset and note payabl a liabil increas to show the receipt of cash and an
oblig ow by the compani sinc both asset and liabil increas by the same
amount the equat stai in balanc
account and the account cycl
the major compon of the account equat ar made up of numer detail
account an account is noth more than a specif account record that provid an
effici wai to categor similar transact all transact ar record in account that
ar categor as asset account liabil account owner equiti account revenu
account and expens account account format occur in a number of wai the simplest
most fundament format is the us of a larg letter t often refer to as a t account
entri to the left side of an account ar debit dr and entri to the right side of an account
ar credit cr debit increas asset and expens account while credit decreas them
convers credit increas liabil owner equiti and revenu account debit decreas
them everi transact record in the account record will have both a debit and a
credit thu the term doubleentri account the account equat in the form of t
account look like the follow
fraud investig often requir an understand of the debitandcredit process for
exampl a fraud examin who is search for a mysteri 5000 disappear of cash
find a debit in the legal expens account and a correspond credit in the cash account for
5000 but cannot find genuin document for the charg the examin can then
reason suspect that a perpetr mai have attempt to conceal the theft by label the
misappropri 5000 as a legal expens
asset liabil owner equiti
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1103
discov conceal effort through a review of account record is on of the easier
method of detect intern fraud usual on need onli to look for weak in the
variou step of the account cycl legitim transact leav an audit trail thei start
with a sourc document such as an invoic a check a receipt or a receiv report these
sourc document becom the basi for journal entri which ar chronolog list of
transact with their debit and credit amount entri ar made in variou account
journal then entri ar post to the appropri gener ledger account the
summar account amount becom the basi for financi statement for a particular
period
illustr below is thi flow of transact inform through the account record
follow by exampl of typic account transact to help in understand how
transact affect the balanc sheet
journal entri
as transact occur thei ar record in a compani book via journal entri each journal
entri serv as a record of a particular transact and form an audit trail that can be
retrac later for an understand of a compani oper journal entri that ar not
trigger by a transact call adjust journal entri ar also made period for item
such as depreci expens and account receiv writeoff
transact occur
purchas order receipt and other
document ar creat
transact is record in journal
journal ar post to individu account
financi statement ar gener with
account balanc
account concept financi transact
1104 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
xyz compani complet the follow transact dure it first year of oper
20xx
account method
there ar two primari method of account cashbasi and accrualbasi cashbasi
account involv record revenu and expens base on when a compani pai or
receiv cash for exampl sale ar record when a compani receiv payment for good
regardless of when the good ar deliv if a custom purchas good on credit the
compani doe not book the sale until the cash is receiv for the sale likewis if a
custom prepai for a sale the compani record the sale revenu immedi rather than
when the good ar pass off to the custom the same hold true with expens thei ar
record when paid without consider to when thei ar incur
accrualbasi account on the other hand requir revenu to be record when thei ar
earn gener when good ar deliv or servic ar render to a custom without
transact analysi account debit credit asset liabil equiti
enterpris establish cash increas cash 192000 192000
owner invest 192000 liabil no effect common stock 192000 192000
equiti increas
cumul balanc 1 9 2000 192000 192000 192000
compani borrow 80000 cash increas cash 80000 80000
on a note payabl liabil increas note payabl 80000 80000
equiti no effect
cumul balanc 2 7 2000 272000 272000 80000 1 9 2000
purchas busi cash decreas equip 70000 70000
equip for 70000 asset increas cash 70000 70000
liab equiti no effect
cumul balanc 3 4 2000 342000 272000 80000 1 9 2000
servic render to client cash increas cash 15000 15000
40000 15000 collect a r increas account receiv 25000 25000
in advanc equiti increas sale revenu 40000 40000
cumul balanc 3 8 2000 382000 312000 80000 2 3 2000
oper expens incur cash decreas oper expens 25000 25000
25000 liabil increas cash 14000 14000
14000 paid in cash equiti decreas account payabl 11000 11000
cumul balanc 4 0 7000 407000 298000 91000 2 0 7000
paid 5000 on note cash decreas note payabl 5000 5000
payabl liabil decreas cash 5000 5000
cumul balanc 4 1 2000 412000 293000 86000 2 0 7000
depreci equip for asset decreas depreci expens 7000 7000
1 yr estim life 10yr equiti decreas accum depreci 7000 7000
70000 1 0 7000
cumul balanc 4 1 9000 419000 286000 86000 2 0 0000
balanc sheet effect
journal entri asset liabil owner equiti
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1105
regard to when cash exchang hand expens ar record in the same period as the
revenu to which thei relat for exampl employe wage ar expens in the period
dure which the employe provid servic which mai not necessarili be the same
period in which thei were paid
under cash account a compani mai decid to postpon pai some expens so thei
ar not record in the current period result in an artifici inflat bottom line
convers accrual account requir expens to be match to revenu therefor it
provid a truer pictur of a compani financi situat as such gener accept
account principl mandat the us of accrualbasi account
financi statement
the result of the account process ar report or financi statement that exemplifi the
financi posit and oper result of an entiti financi statement ar often the
vehicl through which fraud occur
accord to au section 623 special report promulg by the aicpa audit
standard board financi statement includ present of financi data and
accompani note prepar in conform with either gener accept account
principl or some other comprehens basi of account the follow is a list of such
financi statement
balanc sheet
statement of incom or statement of oper
statement of retain earn
statement of cash flow
statement of chang in owner equiti
statement of asset and liabil that doe not includ owner equiti account
statement of revenu and expens
summari of oper
statement of oper by product line
statement of cash receipt and disburs
although not specif note in au section 623 financi statement mai also includ
other financi data present such as
prospect financi inform forecast
account concept financi transact
1106 2011 fraud examin manual
proxi statement
interim financi inform for exampl quarterli financi statement
current valu financi present
person financi statement current or present valu
bankruptci financi statement
registr statement disclosur secur act of 1933
other comprehens base of account accord to au section 623 includ
govern or regulatori agenc account
taxbasi account
cash receipt and disburs or modifi cash receipt and disburs
ani other basi with a definit set of criteria appli to all materi item such as the
pricelevel basi of account
consequ the term financi statement includ almost ani financi data present
prepar in accord with gener accept account principl or anoth
comprehens basi of account throughout thi section the term financi statement
will includ the abov form of report financi data includ the accompani
footnot and manag discuss for most compani howev a full set of financi
statement compris a balanc sheet a statement of incom a statement of owner equiti
or a statement of retain earn and a statement of cash flow therefor fraud
examin should be familiar with the purpos and compon of each of these financi
statement
balanc sheet
the balanc sheet show a snapshot of a compani financi situat at a specif point in
time gener the last dai of the account period the balanc sheet is an expans of
the account equat asset liabil owner equiti that is it list a compani asset
on on side and it liabil and owner equiti on the other side the natur of the
account equat mean that the two side of the statement should balanc henc the
name balanc sheet
the follow balanc sheet deriv from the journal entri in the abov exampl show
the financi posit of xyz compani on the last dai of it first year of oper
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1107
xyz compani
balanc sheet
decemb 31 20xx
asset liabil
current asset current liabil
cash 198000 account payabl 11000
account receiv 25000 total current liabil 11000
total current asset 223000
longterm liabil
fix asset note payabl 75000
equip 70000
total longterm
liabil 75000
less accum depreci 7000 total liabil 86000
total fix asset 63000
owner equiti
common stock 192000
retain earn 8000
total owner equiti 200000
total asset 286000
total liabil and
equiti 286000
as mention asset ar the resourc own by a compani gener asset ar present
on the balanc sheet in order of liquid or how soon thei ar expect to be convert to
cash the first section on the asset side current asset includ all those asset that ar
expect to be convert to cash sold or us up within on year thi categori usual
includ cash account receiv the amount ow to a compani by custom for sale
on credit inventori and prepaid item follow the current asset ar the longterm asset
or those asset that will like not be convert to cash in the near futur such as fix asset
eg land build equip and intang asset eg patent trademark goodwil a
compani fix asset ar present net of accumul depreci an amount that
repres the cumul expens taken for wearandtear on a compani properti
likewis intang asset ar present net of accumul amort an amount that
repres the collect expens taken for declin in valu of the intang properti
liabil ar present in order of matur like current asset current liabil ar those
oblig that ar expect to be paid within on year such as account payabl the
amount ow to vendor by a compani for purchas on credit accru expens eg
tax payabl or salari payabl and the portion of longterm debt that will come due
account concept financi transact
1108 2011 fraud examin manual
within the next year those liabil that ar not due for more than a year ar list under
the head longterm liabil the most common liabil in thi group ar bond note
and mortgag payabl the total balanc of the note payabl is list under longterm
liabil on xyz compani balanc sheet indic that it doe not have to make ani
payment on the note dure the next year howev if a 5000 payment wa requir
dure the next year the compani would have to reclassifi 5000 of the note balanc to the
current liabil section and show the remain 70000 as a longterm liabil thi
adjust would not chang the total amount of the outstand liabil that wa shown all
75000 would still appear on the balanc sheet but it would allow financi statement
user to know that the compani had an oblig to pai 5000 dure the next year rather
than at some unspecifi time in the futur
the owner equiti in a firm gener repres amount from two sourc owner
contribut usual refer to as common or capit stock and paidin capit and
undistribut earn usual refer to as retain earn the balanc in the capit stock
account increas when the owner of a compani invest in it through the purchas of
compani stock the retain earn balanc increas when a compani ha earn and
decreas when a compani ha loss the retain earn account is also decreas when
earn ar distribut to a compani owner in the form of dividend or when a compani
ha loss xyz compani balanc sheet show that the compani owner have
contribut 192000 to the compani and that the compani ha retain 8000 of earn
as of decemb 31 20xx
incom statement
wherea the balanc sheet show a compani financi posit at a specif point in time
the incom statement detail how much profit or loss a compani earn dure a period of
time such as a quarter or a year the account reflect on the incom statement ar
temporari at the end of each fiscal year thei ar reduc to a zero balanc close with the
result net incom or loss ad to or subtract from retain earn on the balanc
sheet
below is the incom statement for xyz compani for it first year of oper base on
the sampl transact abov
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1109
xyz compani
statement of incom
for the year end decemb 31 20 x x
revenu
net sale 40000
less cost of good sold 25000
gross profit 15000
oper expens
depreci 7000
total oper expens 7000
net incom 8000
two basic type of account ar report on the incom statement revenu and expens
revenu repres amount receiv from the sale of good or servic dure the
account period most compani present net sale or net servic revenu as the first line item
on the incom statement the term net mean that the amount shown is the compani
total sale minu ani sale refund return discount or allow
from net sale an expens titl cost of good sold or cost of sale is deduct regardless of
industri thi expens denot the amount a compani spent in past present andor futur
account period to produc the good or servic that were sold dure the current
period for a compani that manufactur good cost of good sold signifi the amount the
compani spent on materi labor and overhead expens to produc the good that were
sold dure the account period for a merchandis resel thi expens is the amount the
compani ha paid to purchas the good that were resold dure the period for a servic
compani the cost of sale is typic the amount of salari paid to the employe who
perform the servic that were sold the differ between net sale and cost of good
sold is call gross profit or gross margin which repres the amount left over from sale to
pai the compani oper expens
oper expens ar those cost that a compani incur to support and sustain it busi
oper gener these expens includ item such as advertis manag
salari offic suppli repair and mainten rent util depreci interest and
account concept financi transact
1110 2011 fraud examin manual
tax accrual account requir that these item be includ on the incom statement in
the period in which thei ar incur regardless of when thei ar paid
after subtract oper expens from gross profit a compani net incom or net earn
for the period is determin if a compani total expens were greater than it total
revenu and the bottom line is neg then it had a net loss for the period commonli a
profit compani will distribut some of it net incom to it owner in the form of
dividend whatev incom is not distribut is transfer to the retain earn account
on the balanc sheet in the case of xyz compani net incom for the year wa 8000 the
compani did not distribut ani of these earn so the total amount 8000 is shown
on the balanc sheet as retain earn if the compani is also profit dure it next
year of oper ani net incom that is not distribut as dividend will be ad to the
8000 balanc in retain earn if expens outpac revenu and xyz compani show
a loss for it second year that loss will be deduct from the 8000 retain earn
balanc at the end of the second year
to summar the incom statement ti to the balanc sheet through the retain earn
account as follow
statement of owner equiti
the statement of owner equiti detail the chang in the total owner equiti amount list
on the balanc sheet becaus it show how the amount on the incom statement flow
through to the balanc sheet it act as the connect link between the two statement the
balanc of the owner equiti at the begin of the year is the start point for the
statement the transact that affect owner equiti ar list next and ad togeth
the result is ad to or subtract from if neg the beginningoftheyear balanc
which provid the endoftheyear balanc for total owner equiti
asset liabil owner equiti
common stock retain earn
dividend net incom
revenu expens
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1111
the statement of owner equiti for xyz compani would appear as follow
xyz compani
statement of owner equiti
for the year end decemb 31 20xx
owner equiti januari 1 20xx
invest by owner dure the year 192000
net incom for the year 8000
increas in owner equiti 200000
owner equiti decemb 31 20xx 200000
xyz compani complet two type of transact that affect the owner equiti dure
20xx the 192000 invest by the compani sharehold and the revenu and expens
that result in the net incom of 8000 had the compani distribut ani monei to the
sharehold in the form of dividend that amount would be list on the statement of
owner equiti as well notic that the 8000 ti directli to the bottom line of the incom
statement and the 200000 owner equiti ti to the total owner equiti amount on the
balanc sheet
some compani present a statement of retain earn rather than a statement of owner
equiti similar to the statement of owner equiti the statement of retain earn start
with the retain earn balanc at the begin of the year all transact affect the
retain earn account ar then list and ad to the begin balanc to arriv at the
end balanc in the retain earn account below is an exampl of the statement of
retain earn for xyz compani
xyz compani
statement of retain earn
for the year end decemb 31 20xx
retain earn januari 1 20xx
net incom for the year 8000
increas in owner equiti 8000
retain earn decemb 31 20xx 8000
account concept financi transact
1112 2011 fraud examin manual
statement of cash flow
the statement of cash flow report a compani sourc and us of cash dure the
account period thi statement is often us by potenti investor and other interest
parti in tandem with the incom statement to determin the true financi perform of
a compani dure the period be report the natur of accrual account allow and
often requir the incom statement to contain mani noncash item and subject
estim that make it difficult to fulli and clearli interpret a compani oper result
howev it is much harder to distort the amount of cold hard cash that wa receiv and
paid dure the year so the statement of cash flow add to the transpar of the financi
statement
the follow is the statement of cash flow for xyz compani
xyz compani
statement of cash flow direct method
for the year end decemb 31 20 x x
cash flow from oper activ
cash receiv from custom 15000
cash paid for merchandis 14000
net cash flow from oper activ 1000
cash flow from invest activ
cash paid for purchas of equip 70000
net cash flow from invest activ 70000
cash flow from financ activ
cash receiv as owner invest 192000
cash receiv from issu note payabl 80000
cash paid on note payabl 5000
net cash flow from financ activ 267000
increas in cash 198000
cash balanc at the begin of the year 0
cash balanc at the end of the year 198000
the statement of cash flow is broken down into three section cash flow from oper
activ cash flow from invest activ and cash flow from financ activ
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1113
cash flow from oper
the cash flow from oper section summar a compani cash receipt and payment
aris from it normal busi oper cash inflow includ in thi categori
commonli consist of payment receiv from custom for sale and cash outflow includ
payment to vendor for merchandis and oper expens and to employe for wage
thi categori can also be summar as those cash transact that ultim affect a
compani oper incom therefor it is often consid the most import of the
three categori of cash flow if a compani continu show larg profit per it incom
statement but cannot gener posit cash flow from oper then question
account practic might be to blame on the other hand net incom that is support by
posit and increas net cash flow from oper is gener consid an indic of
a strong compani
there ar two method of report cash flow from oper in the abov exampl
xyz compani statement of cash flow is present us the direct method thi method
list the sourc of oper cash flow and the us of oper cash flow with the
differ between them be the net cash flow from oper activ
in contrast the indirect method reconcil net incom per the incom statement with net cash
flow from oper activ that is accrualbasi net incom is adjust for noncash
revenu and expens to arriv at net cash flow from oper below is an exampl of
xyz compani cash flow from oper us the indirect method
xyz compani
statement of cash flow indirect method
for the year end decemb 31 20 x x
cash flow from oper activ
net incom per incom statement 8000
add depreci 7000
increas in account payabl 11000 18000
26000
subtract increas in account receiv 25000 25000
net cash flow from oper activ 1000
account concept financi transact
1114 2011 fraud examin manual
note that the net cash flow from oper activ is the same amount in thi case
1000 regardless of the method that is us the indirect method is usual easier to
comput and provid a comparison of a compani oper result under the accrual and
cash method of account as a result most compani choos to us the indirect method
but either method is accept
cash flow from invest activ
cash inflow from invest activ usual aris from the sale of fix asset eg
properti and equip invest eg the stock and bond of other compani or
intang asset eg patent and trademark similarli cash outflow from invest
activ includ ani cash paid for the purchas of fix asset invest or intang
asset
cash flow from financ activ
cash flow from financ activ involv the cash receiv or paid in connect with
issu debt and equiti secur cash inflow in thi categori occur when a compani sell
it own stock issu bond or take out a loan a compani cash outflow from financ
activ includ pai cash dividend to sharehold acquir share of it own stock
call treasuri stock and repai debt
the total cash flow from all three categori ar combin to arriv at the net increas or
decreas in cash for the year thi total is then ad to or subtract from the cash balanc
at the begin of the year to arriv at the cash balanc at the end of the year which ti
back to the amount of cash report on the balanc sheet
user of financi statement
financi statement fraud scheme ar most often perpetr by manag against
potenti user of the statement these user of financi statement includ compani
ownership and manag lend organ investor regul bodi vendor
and custom the product of truth financi statement plai an import role in
the continu success of an organ howev fraudul statement can be us for a
number of reason the most common us is to increas the appar prosper of an
organ in the ey of potenti and current investor for more inform see the
chapter on financi statement fraud
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1115
gener accept account principl gaap
in prepar financi statement manag account and auditor ar charg with
follow measur and report practic known as gener accept account principl
gaap the account practic that compos gaap have develop through the
accumul of authorit account pronounc issu by sever authorit
bodi histor these pronounc includ account research bulletin
account principl board apb opinion financi account standard board
fasb statement and interpret emerg issu task forc abstract and sec
staff account bulletin
in 2009 fasb launch the fasb account standard codificationfasb asc as the
sole sourc of authorit us gaap for nongovernment organ the
codif compil and organ all previou sourc of gaap by topic provid an
effici and easytous structur for research and referenc account standard the
fasb asc effect supersed the precodif gaap hierarchi establish in sa
no 69 and fasb statement no 162
while the us ha it own set of account standard that form gaap the variou
account rule from differ countri ar converg the intern account
standard board iasb is develop a singl set of standard call intern financi
report standard ifr for each account function the iasb is look for the most
appropri principl for how transact should be account for or the most suitabl
method of report the result the iasb ha sought the best sometim adopt a
standard from on countri or anoth other time creat a new standard entir
current more than 120 countri requir or permit the us of ifr with sever more
plan to adopt ifr in the next few year a list of the countri that have adopt the
ifr is avail at wwwiaspluscomcountryuseiashtm
basic underli account principl
basic account principl refer to as gener accept account principl ar the
rule by which a compani financi transact ar record into their appropri account
classif these principl have evolv over time and ar expect to continu
chang in respons to shift in social and econom condit advanc in
technolog and demand by user for more us or product standard the follow is
a list of the basic underli principl on which account should base their practic
account concept financi transact
1116 2011 fraud examin manual
histor cost
although some except exist histor cost is gener the proper basi for the
record of asset expens equiti etc for exampl a piec of oper machineri
should be shown on the balanc sheet at initi acquisit cost and not at current market
valu or an estim replac valu
revenu recognit
in gener revenu is recogn or record when it becom realiz or realiz and
earn these criteria ar usual met when
persuas evid of an arrang exist
deliveri ha occur or servic have been render
the seller price to the buyer is fix or determin and
collect is reason assur
therefor revenu should not be recogn for work that is to be perform in subsequ
account period even though the work mai current be under contract the revenu
should be recogn in the period in which the work is perform
match
the match principl requir that expens be record in the same account period as
the revenu thei help gener estim accrual and alloc ar often need to
meet thi requir when a sale is record the appropri charg for cost of good
sold or other expens directli correspond to the sale should be record in the same
account period
consist
entiti should emploi consist account procedur from period to period variat
or chang in account polici and procedur must be justifi standard us to valu
inventori depreci asset or accru expens should be consist from on account
period to the next
full disclosur
the financi statement of an entiti should includ all inform necessari for the
format of valid decis by the user the statement should not includ too much
inform but ar requir to includ enough inform so that the user is not misl
supplement note to the financi statement ar usual requir to meet these criteria
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1117
object
account record should be design and kept on object rather than subject
evid underli verifi must exist for the inform contain in the statement
for exampl asset ar carri at histor cost and not at an estim current valu
histor cost should be verifi through legitim proof of purchas
separ entiti assumpt
econom activ of an entiti should be kept separ from other person or busi
entiti for exampl person busi transact of an entiti owner or oper
should not be includ in the financi report of the entiti
go concern continu assumpt
there is an assumpt that an entiti will continu as a go concern that is the life of the
entiti will be long enough to fulfil it financi and legal oblig ani evid to the
contrari must be report in the financi statement of the entiti
unit of measur
all financi report ar base on the monetari unit eg the dollar for us entiti thi
assumpt recogn that the monetari unit is an effect mean of commun
financi inform adjust for inflationari trend ar not shown in the financi
statement of the entiti
periodicitytim period assumpt
the life of an entiti is divid into econom time period on which report statement ar
fashion these report period vari but a year is the most common some compani
follow the calendar year while other us a busi year that end near the lowest point of
busi activ in a 12month cycl regardless of where that point fall in the calendar year
departur from gaap modifi convent
as with rule for most thing departur from gaap ar sometim requir the
follow modifi convent give guidanc and should be consid when deviat
from what is gener accept
conservat
when consid an account matter in which there ar two altern that equal
satisfi conceptu and implement principl for a transact an account should
account concept financi transact
1118 2011 fraud examin manual
take a conserv approach and follow the altern that will have the least favor
impact on the net incom of the entiti
industri practic and peculiar
the peculiar and practic of an industri such as bank invest and insur
mai warrant select except to account principl some differ in account
also occur in respons to legal requir such as those entiti subject to regulatori
control
substanc over form
the econom substanc of a transact determin the account treatment which mai
differ from the legal treatment for exampl although a leas contract mai not transfer
properti right if the true substanc of the transact is a sale then the lesse should
record the transact as an acquisit and capit the properti
applic of judgment
an account mai depart from gaap if the result of departur appear reason under
the circumst especi when strict adher to gaap will produc unreason
result and the departur is properli disclos
materi
the amount of an item is materi if it omiss would affect the judgment of a reason
person who is reli on the financi statement the materi threshold doe not mean
that immateri item do not have to be record rather strict adher to gaap is
necessari onli when the item ha a signific impact on the financi statement of an
entiti in addit the aggreg effect of immateri item must also be consid
costbenefit
a departur from gaap is permit if the expect cost of report a transact in
complianc with gaap exce the expect benefit of complianc
2011 fraud examin manual 1201
