2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ACCOUNTING CONCEPTS/Accounting Basics/Accounts and the Accounting Cycle


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Basic Accounting Concepts


:


Accounts and the Accounting Cycle 
The major components of the accounting equation are made up of numerous detail 
accounts. An account is nothing more than a specific accounting record that provides an 
efficient way to categorize similar transactions. All transactions are recorded in accounts that 
are categorized as asset accounts, liability accounts, owners’ equity accounts, revenue 
accounts, and expense accounts. Account format occurs in a number of ways. The simplest, 
most fundamental format is the use of a large letter T, often referred to as a T account.  
 
Entries to the left side of an account are debits (dr) and entries to the right side of an account 
are credits (cr). Debits increase asset and expense accounts, while credits decrease them. 
Conversely, credits increase liability, owners’ equity, and revenue accounts; debits decrease 
them. Every transaction recorded in the accounting records will have both a debit and a 
credit, thus the term double-entry accounting. The accounting equation, in the form of T 
accounts, looks like the following:   
 
 
 
Fraud investigation often requires an understanding of the debit-and-credit process. For 
example, a fraud examiner who is searching for a mysterious $5,000 disappearance of cash 
finds a debit in the legal expense account and a corresponding credit in the cash account for 
$5,000, but cannot find genuine documentation for the charge. The examiner can then 
reasonably suspect that a perpetrator may have attempted to conceal the theft by labeling the 
misappropriated $5,000 as a legal expense.  
 
 Assets  =  Liabilities + Owner's Equities

Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.103 
Discovering concealment efforts through a review of accounting records is one of the easier 
methods of detecting internal fraud; usually, one needs only to look for weaknesses in the 
various steps of the accounting cycle. Legitimate transactions leave an audit trail. They start 
with a source document such as an invoice, a check, a receipt, or a receiving report. These 
source documents become the basis for journal entries, which are chronological listings of 
transactions with their debit and credit amounts. Entries are made in various accounting 
journals. Then, entries are posted to the appropriate general ledger accounts. The 
summarized account amounts become the basis for financial statements for a particular 
period. 
 
Illustrated below is this flow of transactional information through the accounting records, 
followed by examples of typical accounting transactions, to help in understanding how 
transactions affect the balance sheet: 
 
 



:


account and the account cycl
the major compon of the account equat ar made up of numer detail
account an account is noth more than a specif account record that provid an
effici wai to categor similar transact all transact ar record in account that
ar categor as asset account liabil account owner equiti account revenu
account and expens account account format occur in a number of wai the simplest
most fundament format is the us of a larg letter t often refer to as a t account
entri to the left side of an account ar debit dr and entri to the right side of an account
ar credit cr debit increas asset and expens account while credit decreas them
convers credit increas liabil owner equiti and revenu account debit decreas
them everi transact record in the account record will have both a debit and a
credit thu the term doubleentri account the account equat in the form of t
account look like the follow
fraud investig often requir an understand of the debitandcredit process for
exampl a fraud examin who is search for a mysteri 5000 disappear of cash
find a debit in the legal expens account and a correspond credit in the cash account for
5000 but cannot find genuin document for the charg the examin can then
reason suspect that a perpetr mai have attempt to conceal the theft by label the
misappropri 5000 as a legal expens
asset liabil owner equiti
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1103
discov conceal effort through a review of account record is on of the easier
method of detect intern fraud usual on need onli to look for weak in the
variou step of the account cycl legitim transact leav an audit trail thei start
with a sourc document such as an invoic a check a receipt or a receiv report these
sourc document becom the basi for journal entri which ar chronolog list of
transact with their debit and credit amount entri ar made in variou account
journal then entri ar post to the appropri gener ledger account the
summar account amount becom the basi for financi statement for a particular
period
illustr below is thi flow of transact inform through the account record
follow by exampl of typic account transact to help in understand how
transact affect the balanc sheet
