2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ACCOUNTING CONCEPTS/Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Basic Accounting Concepts


:


Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) 
In preparing financial statements, management, accountants, and auditors are charged with 
following measurement and reporting practices known as generally accepted accounting principles  
(GAAP). The accounting practices that compose GAAP have developed through the 
accumulation of authoritative accounting pronouncements issued by several authoritative 
bodies. Historically, these pronouncements included Accounting Research Bulletins, 
Accounting Principles Board (APB) Opinions, Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB) Statements and Interpretations, Emerging Issues Task Force Abstracts, and SEC 
Staff Accounting Bulletins.  
 
In 2009, FASB launched the FASB Accounting Standards Codification(FASB ASC)  as the 
sole source of authoritative U.S. GAAP for non-governmental organizations. The 
Codification compiles and organizes all previous sources of GAAP by topic, providing an 
efficient and easy-to-use structure for researching and referencing accounting standards. The 
FASB ASC effectively supersedes the pre-Codification GAAP hierarchy established in SAS 
No. 69 and FASB Statement No. 162.  
 
While the U.S. has its own set of accounting standards that form GAAP, the various 
accounting rules from different countries are converging. The International Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB) is developing a single set of standards, called International Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS). For each accounting function, the IASB is looking for the most 
appropriate principle for how transactions should be accounted for, or the most suitable 
method of reporting the results. The IASB has sought the best, sometimes adopting a 
standard from one country or another, other times creating a new standard entirely. 
Currently, more than 120 countries require or permit the use of IFRS, with several more 
planning to adopt IFRS in the next few years. A list of the countries that have adopted the 
IFRS is available at www.iasplus.com/country/useias.htm.  
 
Basic Underlying Accounting Principles 
Basic accounting principles, referred to as generally accepted accounting principles, are the 
rules by which a company’s financial transactions are recorded into their appropriate account 
classifications. These principles have evolved over time and are expected to continue 
changing in response to shifts in social and economic conditions, advancements in 
technology, and demand by users for more useful or productive standards. The following is 
a list of the basic underlying principles on which accountants should base their practices.  
 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.116                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Historical Cost 
Although some exceptions exist, historical cost is, generally, the proper basis for the 
recording of assets, expenses, equities, etc. For example, a piece of operational machinery 
should be shown on the balance sheet at initial acquisition cost and not at current market 
value or an estimated replacement value. 
 
Revenue Recognition 
In general, revenue is recognized or recorded when it becomes realized or realizable, and 
earned. These criteria are usually met when:  
• Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists,  
• Delivery has occurred or services have been rendered,  
• The seller’s price to the buyer is fixed or determinable, and 
• Collectibility is reasonably assured.  
 
Therefore, revenue should not be recognized for work that is to be performed in subsequent 
accounting periods, even though the work may currently be under contract; the revenue 
should be recognized in the period in which the work is performed.  
 
Matching 
The matching principle requires that expenses be recorded in the same accounting period as 
the revenues they help generate. Estimates, accruals, and allocations are often needed to 
meet this requirement. When a sale is recorded, the appropriate charges for cost of goods 
sold, or other expenses directly corresponding to the sale, should be recorded in the same 
accounting period.  
 
Consistency 
Entities should employ consistent accounting procedures from period to period. Variations 
or changes in accounting policies and procedures must be justifiable. Standards used to value 
inventory, depreciate assets, or accrue expenses should be consistent from one accounting 
period to the next. 
 
Full Disclosure 
The financial statements of an entity should include all information necessary for the 
formation of valid decisions by the users. The statements should not include too much 
information, but are required to include enough information so that the user is not misled. 
Supplemental notes to the financial statements are usually required to meet these criteria. 
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.117 
Objectivity 
Accounting records should be designed and kept on objective, rather than subjective, 
evidence. Underlying verifiability must exist for the information contained in the statements. 
For example, assets are carried at historical cost and not at an estimated current value. 
Historical cost should be verifiable through legitimate proof of purchase.  
 
Separate Entity Assumption 
Economic activity of an entity should be kept separate from other personal or business 
entities. For example, personal business transactions of an entity’s owners or operators 
should not be included in the financial reports of the entity.  
 
Going Concern — Continuity Assumption 
There is an assumption that an entity will continue as a going concern; that is, the life of the 
entity will be long enough to fulfill its financial and legal obligations. Any evidence to the 
contrary must be reported in the financial statements of the entity. 
 
Unit of Measure 
All financial reports are based on the monetary unit, e.g., the dollar for U.S. entities. This 
assumption recognizes that the monetary unit is an effective means of communicating 
financial information. Adjustments for inflationary trends are not shown in the financial 
statements of the entity. 
 
Periodicity—Time Period Assumption 
The life of an entity is divided into economic time periods on which reporting statements are 
fashioned. These reporting periods vary, but a year is the most common. Some companies 
follow the calendar year, while others use a business year that ends near the lowest point of 
business activity in a 12-month cycle, regardless of where that point falls in the calendar year.  
 
Departures from GAAP — Modifying Conventions 
As with rules for most things, departures from GAAP are sometimes required. The 
following modifying conventions give guidance and should be considered when deviating 
from what is generally acceptable. 
 
Conservatism 
When considering an accounting matter in which there are two alternatives that equally 
satisfy conceptual and implementation principles for a transaction, an accountant should 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.118                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
take a conservative approach, and follow the alternative that will have the least favorable 
impact on the net income of the entity. 
 
Industry Practices and Peculiarities 
The peculiarities and practices of an industry (such as banking, investment, and insurance) 
may warrant selective exceptions to accounting principles. Some differences in accounting 
also occur in response to legal requirements, such as those entities subject to regulatory 
controls.  
 
Substance over Form 
The economic substance of a transaction determines the accounting treatment, which may 
differ from the legal treatment. For example, although a lease contract may not transfer 
property rights, if the true substance of the transaction is a sale, then the lessee should 
record the transaction as an acquisition and capitalize the property.  
 
Application of Judgment 
An accountant may depart from GAAP if the results of departure appear reasonable under 
the circumstances, especially when strict adherence to GAAP will produce unreasonable 
results and the departure is properly disclosed.  
 
Materiality 
The amount of an item is material if its omission would affect the judgment of a reasonable 
person who is relying on the financial statements. The materiality threshold does not mean 
that immaterial items do not have to be recorded; rather, strict adherence to GAAP is 
necessary only when the item has a significant impact on the financial statements of an 
entity. In addition, the aggregate effect of immaterial items must also be considered. 
 
Cost-Benefit 
A departure from GAAP is permitted if the expected costs of reporting a transaction in 
compliance with GAAP exceed the expected benefits of compliance. 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.201 



:


gener accept account principl gaap
in prepar financi statement manag account and auditor ar charg with
follow measur and report practic known as gener accept account principl
gaap the account practic that compos gaap have develop through the
accumul of authorit account pronounc issu by sever authorit
bodi histor these pronounc includ account research bulletin
account principl board apb opinion financi account standard board
fasb statement and interpret emerg issu task forc abstract and sec
staff account bulletin
in 2009 fasb launch the fasb account standard codificationfasb asc as the
sole sourc of authorit us gaap for nongovernment organ the
codif compil and organ all previou sourc of gaap by topic provid an
effici and easytous structur for research and referenc account standard the
fasb asc effect supersed the precodif gaap hierarchi establish in sa
no 69 and fasb statement no 162
while the us ha it own set of account standard that form gaap the variou
account rule from differ countri ar converg the intern account
standard board iasb is develop a singl set of standard call intern financi
report standard ifr for each account function the iasb is look for the most
appropri principl for how transact should be account for or the most suitabl
method of report the result the iasb ha sought the best sometim adopt a
standard from on countri or anoth other time creat a new standard entir
current more than 120 countri requir or permit the us of ifr with sever more
plan to adopt ifr in the next few year a list of the countri that have adopt the
ifr is avail at wwwiaspluscomcountryuseiashtm
basic underli account principl
basic account principl refer to as gener accept account principl ar the
rule by which a compani financi transact ar record into their appropri account
classif these principl have evolv over time and ar expect to continu
chang in respons to shift in social and econom condit advanc in
technolog and demand by user for more us or product standard the follow is
a list of the basic underli principl on which account should base their practic
account concept financi transact
1116 2011 fraud examin manual
histor cost
although some except exist histor cost is gener the proper basi for the
record of asset expens equiti etc for exampl a piec of oper machineri
should be shown on the balanc sheet at initi acquisit cost and not at current market
valu or an estim replac valu
revenu recognit
in gener revenu is recogn or record when it becom realiz or realiz and
earn these criteria ar usual met when
persuas evid of an arrang exist
deliveri ha occur or servic have been render
the seller price to the buyer is fix or determin and
collect is reason assur
therefor revenu should not be recogn for work that is to be perform in subsequ
account period even though the work mai current be under contract the revenu
should be recogn in the period in which the work is perform
match
the match principl requir that expens be record in the same account period as
the revenu thei help gener estim accrual and alloc ar often need to
meet thi requir when a sale is record the appropri charg for cost of good
sold or other expens directli correspond to the sale should be record in the same
account period
consist
entiti should emploi consist account procedur from period to period variat
or chang in account polici and procedur must be justifi standard us to valu
inventori depreci asset or accru expens should be consist from on account
period to the next
full disclosur
the financi statement of an entiti should includ all inform necessari for the
format of valid decis by the user the statement should not includ too much
inform but ar requir to includ enough inform so that the user is not misl
supplement note to the financi statement ar usual requir to meet these criteria
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1117
object
account record should be design and kept on object rather than subject
evid underli verifi must exist for the inform contain in the statement
for exampl asset ar carri at histor cost and not at an estim current valu
histor cost should be verifi through legitim proof of purchas
separ entiti assumpt
econom activ of an entiti should be kept separ from other person or busi
entiti for exampl person busi transact of an entiti owner or oper
should not be includ in the financi report of the entiti
go concern continu assumpt
there is an assumpt that an entiti will continu as a go concern that is the life of the
entiti will be long enough to fulfil it financi and legal oblig ani evid to the
contrari must be report in the financi statement of the entiti
unit of measur
all financi report ar base on the monetari unit eg the dollar for us entiti thi
assumpt recogn that the monetari unit is an effect mean of commun
financi inform adjust for inflationari trend ar not shown in the financi
statement of the entiti
periodicitytim period assumpt
the life of an entiti is divid into econom time period on which report statement ar
fashion these report period vari but a year is the most common some compani
follow the calendar year while other us a busi year that end near the lowest point of
busi activ in a 12month cycl regardless of where that point fall in the calendar year
departur from gaap modifi convent
as with rule for most thing departur from gaap ar sometim requir the
follow modifi convent give guidanc and should be consid when deviat
from what is gener accept
conservat
when consid an account matter in which there ar two altern that equal
satisfi conceptu and implement principl for a transact an account should
account concept financi transact
1118 2011 fraud examin manual
take a conserv approach and follow the altern that will have the least favor
impact on the net incom of the entiti
industri practic and peculiar
the peculiar and practic of an industri such as bank invest and insur
mai warrant select except to account principl some differ in account
also occur in respons to legal requir such as those entiti subject to regulatori
control
substanc over form
the econom substanc of a transact determin the account treatment which mai
differ from the legal treatment for exampl although a leas contract mai not transfer
properti right if the true substanc of the transact is a sale then the lesse should
record the transact as an acquisit and capit the properti
applic of judgment
an account mai depart from gaap if the result of departur appear reason under
the circumst especi when strict adher to gaap will produc unreason
result and the departur is properli disclos
materi
the amount of an item is materi if it omiss would affect the judgment of a reason
person who is reli on the financi statement the materi threshold doe not mean
that immateri item do not have to be record rather strict adher to gaap is
necessari onli when the item ha a signific impact on the financi statement of an
entiti in addit the aggreg effect of immateri item must also be consid
costbenefit
a departur from gaap is permit if the expect cost of report a transact in
complianc with gaap exce the expect benefit of complianc
2011 fraud examin manual 1201
