2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS 
 
Fraud prevention requires a system of rules, which, in their aggregate, minimize the 
likelihood of fraud occurring while maximizing the possibility of detecting any fraudulent 
activity that may transpire. The potential of being caught most often persuades likely 
perpetrators not to commit the fraud. Because of this principle, the existence of a thorough 
control system is essential to fraud prevention. 
 
 
Responsibility for Fraud Prevention 
 
Vicarious or Imputed Liability 
Corporations and other organizations can be held liable for criminal acts committed as a 
matter of organizational policy. Fortunately, most organizations do not expressly set out to 
break the law. However, corporations and other organizations may also be held liable for the 
criminal acts of their employees if those acts are done in the course and scope of their employment 
and for the ostensible purpose of benefiting the corporation. An employee’s acts are considered to be 
in the course and scope of employment if the employee has actual authority  or apparent authority  
to engage in those acts. Apparent authority means that a third party would reasonably believe 
the employee is authorized to perform the act on behalf of the company. Therefore, an 
organization could be held liable for something an employee does on behalf of the 
organization even if the employee is not authorized to perform that act.  
 
An organization will not be vicariously liable for the acts of an employee unless the 
employee acted for the ostensible purpose of benefiting the corporation. This does not mean 
the corporation has to receive an actual benefit from the illegal acts of its employee. All that 
is required is that the employee intended  to benefit the corporation. 
 
A company cannot seek to avoid vicarious liability for the acts of its employees by simply 
claiming that it did not know what was going on. Legally speaking, an organization is 
deemed to have knowledge of all facts known by its officers and employees. That is, if the 
government can prove that an officer or employee knew of conduct that raised a question as 
to the company’s liability, and the government ca n show that the company willfully failed to 
act to correct the situation, then the company may be held liable, even if senior management 
had no knowledge or suspicion of the wrongdoing.  
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.702   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
In addition, the evolving legal principle of “conscious avoidance” allows the government to 
prove the employer had knowledge of a particular fact, which establishes liability by showing 
that the employer knew there was a high probability the fact existed and consciously avoided 
confirming the fact. Employers cannot simply turn a blind eye when there is reason to 
believe that there may be criminal conduct within the organization. If steps are not taken to 
deter the activity, the company itself may be found liable.  
 
The corporation can be held criminally responsible even if those in management had no knowledge or 
participation  in the underlying criminal events and even if there were specific policies or 
instructions prohibiting the activity undertaken by the employees. The acts of any employee, 
from the lowest clerk to the CEO, can impute liability upon a corporation. In fact, a 
corporation can be criminally responsible for the collective knowledge  of several of its employees 
even if no single employee intended to commit an offense. Thus, the combination of vicarious 
or imputed corporate criminal liability and the Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations creates 
an extraordinary risk for corporations today. 
 
Responsibility (and Liability) of a Corporation’s Directors and Officers 
Although many companies do not realize it, the current legal environment imposes a 
responsibility on companies to ferret out employee misconduct and to deal with any known 
or suspected instances of misconduct with efficient and decisive measures. 
 
First, the doctrine of accountability suggests that officers and directors aware of potentially 
illegal conduct by senior employees may be liable for any recurrence of similar misconduct, and 
may have an obligation to halt and cure any continuing effects of the initial misconduct. 
 
Second, the Corporate Sentencing Guidelines, which are discussed in more detail below, 
provide stiff penalties for corporations that fail to take voluntary action to redress apparent 
misconduct by senior employees. 
 
Third, the Private Securities Litigation Reform  Act of 1995 now requires, as a matter of 
statute, that independent auditors look for, and assess, management’s response to indications 
of fraud or other potential illegality. Where the corporation does not have a history of 
responding to indications of wrongdoing, the auditors may not be able to reach a conclusion 
that the company took appropriate and prompt action in response to indications of fraud. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.703  
Fourth, the Delaware Court of Chancery in In re Caremark Internationa l, Inc. Derivative Litigation, 
698 A.2d 959 (Del Ch. 1996), stated that, in its view, a director’s duty of care includes a duty to 
attempt in good faith to ensure corporate information and reporting systems exist. These 
systems must be reasonably designed to provide senior management and the board of directors 
with timely, accurate information that would permit them to reach informed judgments 
concerning the corporation’s compliance with law and its business performance. 
 
The court in Caremark  also stated that the failure to create an adequate compliance system, 
under some circumstances, could render a director liable for losses caused by non-compliance 
with applicable legal standards. Therefore, directors should make sure that their companies 
have a corporate compliance plan in place to detect misconduct and deal with it effectively. 
The directors should then monitor the company’s adherence to the compliance program. 
Doing so will help the corporation avoid fines under the Sentencing Guidelines and help 
prevent individual liability on the part of the directors and officers. 
 
The Treadway Commission 
The National Commission on Fraudulent Financial Reporting (commonly known as the 
Treadway Commission) was established in 1987 with the purpose of defining the 
responsibility of the auditor in preventing and detecting fraud. The commission was formed 
by the major professional auditing organizations—the American Institute of CPAs, the 
Institute of Internal Auditors, and the National Association of Accountants. The Treadway 
Commission made several major recommendations that, in combination with other 
measures, are designed to reduce the probability of fraud in financial reports: 
• A mandatory independent audit committee  made up of outside directors 
• A written charter that sets forth the duties and responsibilities of the audit committee  
• The audit committee should have adequate resources and authority  to carry out its 
responsibilities 
• The audit committee should be informed, vigilant, and effective 
 
COSO Recommendations 
The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations was formed to support the implementation of 
the Treadway Commission. In 1992, the Committee issued Internal Control—Integrated 
Framework. This report was a collaborative effort of  the American Accounting Association, 
the American Institute of CPAs, the Financial Executives Institute, the Institute of Internal 
Auditors, and the Institute of Management Accountants. The report is meant to apply to all 
entities, public and private, regardless of size.  
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.704   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The COSO report complements Treadway’s recommendation to the SEC that public 
companies’ management reports include an acknowledgment for responsibility  for internal 
controls and an assessment of effectiveness in meeting those responsibilities. The report 
provided the following definition: 
 
Internal Control is a broadly defined process … designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
achievement of objectives in the following categories:  
? Reliability of financial reporting 
? Effectiveness and efficiency of operations  
? Compliance with applicable laws and regulations 
 
COSO also identified five interrelated components of internal control. The effectiveness of 
internal controls can be determined from an assessment of whether these five components are 
in place and functioning effectively. The five components are control environment, risk 
assessment, control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. 
 
Control Environment 
The control environment  sets the moral tone of an organization, influencing the control 
consciousness of the organization and providing a foundation for all other control 
components. This component takes into account whether managers and employees within 
the organization exhibit integrity in their activities.  
 
COSO envisions that upper management will be  responsible for the control environment of 
organizations. Employees look to management for guidance in most business affairs, and 
organizational ethics are no different. It is important for upper management to operate in an 
ethical manner, and it is equally important for employees to view management in a positive 
light. Managers must set an appropriate moral to ne for the operations of an organization.  
 
In addition to merely setting a good example, however, COSO suggests that upper 
management take direct control of an organization’s efforts at internal controls. This idea 
should be regularly reinforced within the organization. There are several actions that 
management can take to establish the proper control environment for an organization. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.705  
These include:  
• The establishment of a code of ethics for the organization. The code should be disseminated to all 
employees and every new employee should be required to read and sign it. The code 
should also be disseminated to contractors who do work on behalf of the organization. 
Under certain circumstances, companies may face liability due to the actions of 
independent contractors. It is therefore very important to explain the organization’s 
standards to any outside party with whom the organization conducts business.  
• Careful screening of job applicants. One of the easiest ways to establish a strong moral tone 
for an organization is to hire morally sound employees. Too often, the hiring process is 
conducted in a slipshod manner. Where permitted by law, organizations should conduct 
thorough background checks on all new employees, especially managers and those 
employees handling sensitive financial functions. In addition, it is important to conduct 
thorough interviews with applicants to ensure that they have adequate skills to perform 
the duties that will be required of them.  
• Proper assignment of authority and responsibility. In addition to hiring qualified, ethical 
employees, it is important to put these people in situations where they are able to thrive 
without resorting to unethical conduct. Organizations should provide employees with 
well-defined job descriptions and performance goals. Performance goals should be 
routinely reviewed to ensure that they do not set unrealistic standards. Training should 
be provided on a consistent basis to ensure that employees maintain the skills to perform 
effectively. Regular training on ethics will also help employees identify potential trouble 
spots and avoid getting caught in compromising situations. Finally, management should 
quickly determine where deficiencies in an employee’s conduct exist and work with the 
employee to fix the problem.  
• Effective disciplinary measures. No control environment will be effective unless there is 
consistent discipline for ethical violations. Consistent discipline requires a well-defined 
set of sanctions for violations, and strict adherence to the prescribed disciplinary 
measures. If one employee is punished for an act and another employee is not punished 
for a similar act, the moral force of the company’s ethics policy will be diminished. The 
levels of discipline must be sufficient to deter violations. It may also be advisable to 
reward ethical conduct. This will reinforce the importance of organizational ethics in the 
eyes of employees.  
 
Risk Assessment  
Risk assessment  involves an entity’s identification and assessment of the risks involved in 
achieving organizational objectives. This component involves tailoring ethics policies or 
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.706   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
compliance programs to the nature of the organization’s business. According to COSO, risk 
assessment is a three-step process: 
• Set objectives for the organization. Management should establish mission statements or similar 
expressions of organizational objectives. These statements must take into account the 
nature of the organization’s business, the industry in which the organization operates, 
and the political and economic environment in which it operates, as well as the 
organization’s resources and goals. In stating its goals, the organization should establish 
measurable criteria so that progress can be measured. Goals should not be so lofty that 
they cannot be reached considering the organization’s resources and environment. In 
setting objectives, input from all levels of management should be sought. Once an 
appropriate statement of objectives is established, it should be communicated to  
all employees.  
• Analyze potential risks of violations. COSO divides risks into two categories: external risks 
and internal risks. External risks include things like increased competition, changes in 
technology, shifting economic conditions, and new legislation. Internal risks are factors 
such as personnel changes, availability of funds for organizational projects, new 
operating systems, and the development of new products.  
• Develop a strategy to manage risks. Organizations should identify and be prepared to react to 
any external or internal risk. This means developing controls that are tailored to the 
inherent risks of the organization’s business and establishing set policies for dealing  
with violations.  
 
Control Activities  
Control activities  are the policies and procedures that enforce management’s directives. 
Management should set forth policy and procedure guidelines in a manual that is issued to 
employees. A person or persons should be designated to keep statements of policies 
updated and to make sure they are properly disseminated. All control activities should be 
closely monitored by management, and changes should be made where control failures are 
identified. Consistent with the risk analysis component, when a control failure is identified, 
the risk of additional failures should be considered in redesigning controls.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.707  
Information and Communication 
The information and communication  component relates to the exchange of information in a way 
that allows employees to carry out their responsibilities. Organizations should work to 
identify pertinent information and see that it is delivered to those who need it most. A 
proper information system will accomplish the following: 
• Assimilate important financial, operational, and compliance information. This information should 
be drawn from both internal and external sources, meaning management may have to go 
outside the organizational structure to identify pertinent information. There should be a 
means of screening incoming information so that pertinent information is maintained 
but unnecessary information is not allowed to clog channels of communication. 
Examples of pertinent information include facts on organizational performance,  
market conditions, competitor programs, economic changes, and legislative or  
regulatory changes. 
• Pass on pertinent informat ion to those who need it. Management should provide timely 
information to employees to help them carry out their duties more effectively. Important 
facts should be communicated in readily usable form. It is also important to 
communicate the importance of observing controls. Management should help employees 
understand their own roles in the internal control system and make it clear that internal 
controls have a high priority.  
• Provide for upstream communication. Communication in an organization should flow  
in all directions. Employees should be provided with clear channels for reporting 
suspected control violations. Provisions should be made for employees to make 
anonymous reports in order to avoid fears of retaliation, which can have a chilling effect 
on upstream communication. A similar reporting mechanism for customers and other 
external parties should be in place. Serious efforts should be made to follow up on  
these communications.  
 
Monitoring 
Monitoring is the process that assesses the quality of a control environment over time. This 
component should include regular evaluations of the entire control system. It also requires 
the ongoing monitoring of day-to-day activities by managers and employees. This may 
involve reviewing the accuracy of financial information, or verifying inventories, supplies, 
equipment, and other organization assets. Finally, organizations should conduct 
independent evaluations of their internal control systems. An effective monitoring system 
should provide for the free flow of upstream communication as discussed under the 
information and communication component.  
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.708   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Implementing an Effective Compliance and Ethics Program Under the Corporate Sentencing Guidelines 
To review, the United States Sentencing Commission began a study of sanctions for 
corporate wrongdoing in 1988. After three years of study and hearings, on May 1, 1991, the 
USSC submitted its Proposed Guidelines for Sentencing Organizations  to Congress. The 
introductory commentary to the Guidelines clearly states that they are designed to provide 
incentives for organizations to maintain internal mechanisms for preventing, detecting, and 
reporting criminal conduct. Among other things, the Guidelines suggest a substantial 
reduction of fines for organizations that have effective compliance programs. (See the 
chapter on “Organizational Crime” for more in formation about how penalties are calculated 
under the Guidelines.) 
 
The United States Sentencing Commission promulgated modifications to the existing 
provisions of Chapter 8 dealing with effective compliance and ethics programs for business 
organizations that became effective November 1, 2004. These provisions (contained in 
Section 8B2.1) narrowly tailor the criteria for compliance and ethics programs, thereby 
providing organizations with guidance in establishing and maintaining effective programs for 
detecting and preventing internal illegal activities, as well as mitigating sentencing culpability.  
 
Under the Guidelines, if a convicted organization has an effective compliance program in 
place at the time of the offense, the sentencing judge will consider the organization’s acts of 
due diligence in trying to prevent the illegality when deciding whether to increase or mitigate 
the sentence. The guidelines define effective compliance program as one that is reasonably 
designed, implemented, and enforced so that it generally will be effective in preventing and 
detecting criminal conduct. 
 
In April 2010, however, the U.S. Sentencing Commission modified the sentencing guidelines 
for organizations, especially as they relate to compliance programs. The most significant 
change under the modified sentencing guidelines for organizations concerns the sentence 
reduction credit for having an effective compliance program. Before the guidelines were 
modified, organizations were disqualified from receiving a reduction in sentencing for 
maintaining an effective compliance program if a “high-level person” was involved with the 
fraudulent activity. Under the modified guidelines, however, involvement of a high-level 
person is no longer an automatic bar from effective compliance program credit, but the 
amendments impose several conditions to receive a reduction under these circumstances, 
including a direct reporting requirement to the governing authority (board or audit 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.709  
committee). The changes will become effective on November 1, 2010, barring any 
Congressional modifications or rejection. 
 
As provided by the Guidelines, to have an “effective compliance and ethics program,” the 
organization shall: 
• Exercise due diligence to prevent and detect criminal conduct 
• Otherwise promote an organizational culture that encourages ethical conduct and a 
commitment to compliance with the law 
 
The Guidelines further require that such a compliance and ethics program be reasonably 
designed, implemented, and enforced so that it is generally effective in preventing and 
detecting criminal conduct. However, this Section further provides that the failure to prevent 
or detect the offense in question does not necessarily mean that the program is ineffective. 
 
In designing such a program, certain factors must be considered by each organization: 
1. Applicable industry size and practice — An organization’s failure to incorporate and 
follow industry practice or the standards called for by any applicable government 
regulation weighs against a finding that the program is effective. 
2. Size of the organization—Large organizations are expected to devote more formal 
operations and greater resources to meeting the requirements than are small 
organizations. For example, smaller organizations may use available personnel rather 
than employ separate staff to carry out ethics and compliance. 
3. Recurrence of similar misconduct — The recurrence of a similar event creates doubt as to 
whether the organization took reasonable steps to meet the requirements. 
 
To meet the two requirements of due diligence and promotion of an ethical culture, Section 
8B2.1 (b) sets forth the seven factors that are minimally required for such a program to be 
considered effective:  
1. The organization must have established standards and procedures to prevent and detect 
criminal conduct.  
2. Item 2 has three specific subparts: 
a. The organization’s governing authority shall be knowledgeable about the content and 
operation of the compliance and ethics program and shall exercise reasonable 
oversight with respect to implementation and effectiveness of the compliance and 
ethics program. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.710   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
b. High-level personnel shall ensure that the organization has an effective compliance 
and ethics program, and specific individual(s) within the organization shall be 
assigned overall responsibility for the compliance and ethics program. 
c. Specific individual(s) within the organization shall be delegated day-to-day 
operational responsibility for the compliance and ethics program. These individuals 
shall report periodically to high-level personnel and, as appropriate, to the governing 
authority (or a subgroup thereof) on the effectiveness of the program. It is also 
required that these specific individuals be given adequate resources and authority to 
accomplish their responsibilities and be given direct access to the governing 
authority. 
3. The organization shall use reasonable efforts not to include within the substantial 
authority personnel any individual whom the organization knew, or should have known, 
has engaged in illegal activities or other conducts inconsistent with an effective 
compliance and ethics program. 
4. Item 4 has two subparts: 
a. The organization shall take reasonable steps to communicate periodically and in a 
practical manner its standards and procedures, and other aspects of the compliance 
and ethics program, to the individuals referred to in subpart (b) below by conducting 
effective training programs and otherwise disseminating information appropriate to 
such individuals’ respective roles and responsibilities.  
b. The individuals referred to in subpart (a) above are the 1) members of the governing 
authority, 2) high-level personnel, 3) substantial authority personnel, 4) the 
organization’s employees, and, as appropriate, the 5) organization’s agents. 
5. The organization shall take reasonable steps to accomplish the following: 
a. Ensure that the organization’s compliance and ethics program is followed, including 
monitoring and auditing to detect criminal conduct. 
b. Evaluate periodically the effectiveness of the organization’s compliance and ethics 
program. 
c. Have and publicize a system, which may include mechanisms that allow for 
anonymity or confidentiality, whereby the organization’s employees and agents 
may report or seek guidance regarding potential or actual criminal conduct without 
fear of retaliation. 
6. The organization’s compliance and ethics program shall be promoted and enforced 
consistently throughout the organization through (a) appropriate incentives to  
perform in accordance with the program and (b) appropriate disciplinary measures for 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.711  
engaging in criminal conduct and for failing to take reasonable steps to prevent or detect 
criminal conduct. 
7. After criminal conduct has been detected, the organization shall take reasonable steps to 
respond appropriately to the criminal conduct and to prevent further similar criminal 
conduct, including making any necessary modifications to the organization’s compliance 
and ethics program. 
 
The following are some tips and suggestions for developing a compliance and ethics program 
that complies with these seven requirements: 
 
1. Establishing Standards 
The first step is to establish standards and procedures that are reasonably capable of 
preventing and detecting criminal conduct. One should start by producing a clear statement 
of management philosophy. This statement will serve as the backbone of all compliance 
procedures. This is similar to the COSO requirement that management must set the ethical 
tone for the organization.  
 
Organizations should draft clear, concise compliance standards that are consistent with 
management’s ethics policy and are relevant to business operations. A sample corporate 
compliance program is included later in this section. It should provide a framework from 
which fraud examiners can build compliance programs tailored to their own organizations.  
 
2. Assigning Responsisbility 
The Guidelines require that the company’s gove rning authority shall be knowledgeable about 
the content and operation of the compliance and ethics program and shall exercise 
reasonable oversight with respect to the implementation and effectiveness of the program. 
Governing authority  is defined as the board of directors, or if the organization does not have a 
board of directors, the highest-level governing body of the organization. 
 
It is also required that high-level personnel  shall ensure that the company has an effective 
program and that specific individuals within this group be assigned the overall responsibility 
for the program. 
 
High-level personnel are those who have “subst antial control over the organization or who 
have a substantial role in the making of policy within the organization.” Specific examples of 
high-level personnel include: 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.712   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Directors 
• Executive officers 
• Individuals in charge of major business or functional units of the organization 
• Individuals with substantial ownership interests in the organization 
 
Audit Committees 
If a board of directors exists, the board must be knowledgeable about the compliance 
program and oversee its implementation. Accordingly, it is preferable for the board of 
directors or one of the board’s committees to control the organization’s compliance 
program. For instance, many companies place their compliance programs under the control 
of audit committees. There are three principal benefits to this practice: 
• The involvement of the board of directors lends an air of authority to the compliance 
program. It clearly identifies the program as a matter of company policy. 
• The involvement of a board committee provides oversight to the operation of the 
program by personnel who are not involved in the day-to-day operation of the program. 
• Efforts to implement an effective compliance program can be documented in the 
committee’s minutes. This documentation can prove useful if the company ever has to 
defend its actions and seek mitigation of a criminal fine. 
• A member of the board should also be a member of the audit committee. This will help 
ensure that the board is knowledgeable about the content and operation of the program. 
 
Although the board and the officers may delegate the day-to-day operational responsibility 
for the program to other individuals (such as a compliance officer and his staff), these 
individuals must report periodically to the board or other high-level personnel regarding the 
effectiveness of the program. They must also have sufficient authority to ensure that 
standards are strictly adhered to as well as adequate resources to implement and monitor the 
program.  
  
3. Due Diligence in Hiring  
The Guidelines require that the organization “use reasonable efforts not to include within 
the substantial authority personnel of the organization any individual whom the organization 
knew, or should have known through the exercise of due diligence, has engaged in illegal 
activities or other conduct inconsistent with an effective compliance and ethics program.”  
 
Substantial authority personnel  is defined as individuals who exercise a substantial measure of 
discretion in acting on behalf of an organization. The term includes high-level personnel of 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.713  
the organization, individuals who exercise substantial supervisory authority (such as a plant 
manager or a sales manager), and any other individuals who, although not a part of an 
organization’s management, nevertheless exercise  substantial discretion when acting within 
the scope of their authority (such as an individual with authority in an organization to 
negotiate or set price levels or an individual authorized to negotiate or approve significant 
contracts). Whether an individual falls within this category must be determined on a case-by-
 case basis. 
 
Like COSO, the Guidelines require that organi zations hire ethical employees. This requires 
careful screening of applicants, thorough background checks (where permitted by law), and 
effective monitoring of the performance of current employees. Although the Guidelines only 
require such screening for “substantial authority personnel,” it is recommended that such 
screening be adopted for all employees. 
 
4. Communicating the Policy 
The corporate compliance policy should be communicated to everyone who can potentially 
bind a corporation through their own misconduct. This includes the following: 
• Board of directors 
• Executive officers and directors  
• Managers and supervisors 
• Low-level employees 
• Independent contractors 
 
Note in particular that organizations can be held liable for the acts of independent contractors 
if the contractor is acting for the benefit of the organization. It is therefore important to 
distribute copies of the compliance program to contractors as well as employees. 
 
Training Employees 
As required by the Sentencing Guidelines, organizations must  conduct “effective training 
programs.” Organizations are also required to periodically and appropriately communicate the 
program’s compliance requirements and procedures to all employees affected by the program, 
including upper-level personnel. These programs should be designed to inform employees 
about the company’s stance on corporate complia nce. They should also inform employees 
about what kinds of acts and omissions are prohibited by the law and by the organization. The 
training should be designed to help employees identify and avoid situations that could lead to 
criminal conduct. Common training techniques include: 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.714   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Lectures 
• Training films 
• Interactive workshops 
• Computer-based courses 
 
Employees should be trained to understand the organization’s ethical policy. They  
should also be trained to identify potentially compromising situations and learn how to  
avoid them. This training should be tailored to the nature of the organization’s business, 
taking into account the external and internal risks that are inherent in that business. Training 
should also include a review of statutes and regulations that are particularly applicable to  
the organization. 
 
Training should not be a one-time event. Simply handing out a copy of the company’s 
compliance policy at the beginning of an employee’s tenure is insufficient. Organizations 
should stress compliance by regularly emphasizing their standards to all personnel. For 
example, many companies disseminate a copy of their ethics policies every six months along 
with employee paychecks.  
 
5. Achieving Compliance 
An organization is required to take reasonable measures to ensure program compliance 
through monitoring, auditing, periodically evaluating the program’s effectiveness, and having 
a publicized reporting system whereby employees and agents may retain anonymity or 
confidentiality when reporting or seeking guidance regarding actual or potential illegal 
conduct without fear of retribution. These include such things as proactive fraud detection 
and hotlines, which are discussed in more detail in the next section. 
 
6. Disciplinary Action 
Enforcing a compliance program means adhering to a system of disciplinary actions for rule 
breakers. Employees must know that if they violate the company’s compliance policy, they will 
be punished. The opportunity to commit fraud is psychologically more acceptable when 
employees believe fraud normally goes undetected and unprosecuted. New employees should 
be advised of the compliance program at the time of hire, and should sign an annual statement 
acknowledging their understanding of it. The range of possible punishments for violations of 
the policy should be spelled out. These may include:  
• Reprimand 
• Probation 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.715  
• Suspension 
• Reduction in salary 
• Demotion 
• Reimbursement of losses of damages 
• Dismissal 
• Referral for criminal prosecution or civil action 
• A combination of the above 
 
In addition, the Guidelines recommend the discipline of individuals who are responsible for 
failing to detect offenses. 
 
If a compliance program is not enforced, it is nothing more than a paper tiger. There are two 
purposes to any compliance program. The first is to prevent criminal conduct. The second is 
to mitigate any potential fines for criminal conduct by showing that the organization is 
dedicated to preventing illegal activity. If an organization does not enforce its compliance 
program, its chances of mitigating fines are nil. Therefore, organizations should adhere to 
well-defined procedures when investigating potential violations and when disciplining 
individuals for offenses. The organization’s efforts should be documented so that it can 
prove that it made every effort to enforce compliance. For every allegation of an offense, the 
company should maintain: 
• An account of the alleged offense 
• A description of the steps taken to investigate the allegation 
• A description of the actions taken by the organization in response to the violation 
 
Note, however, that the Guidelines also require that the organization promote the compliance 
and ethics program through appropriate incentives that encourage employees to perform in 
accordance with the program. Such incentives can include rewards for reporting ethical concerns 
or misconduct, or rewards for ideas for new or innovative detection and monitoring methods. 
 
7. Appropriate Responses 
After detection of an offense, the organization must take all reasonable steps to appropriately 
respond to this offense and to prevent further similar offenses—including modifying its 
program and administering appropriate discipline for the individuals responsible for the offense 
and those who failed to detect it. When a control failure is identified, changes may be necessary. 
Both COSO and the Guidelines require organizations to identify the weakness in the control 
system and make modifications to prevent similar failures in the future. The Guidelines require 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.716   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
that organizations explain the modifications they have made and demonstrate why they will  
be effective.  
 
The proposed amendments clarify subsection 8B2.1(b)(7), adding an Application Note to 
provide guidance on what actions qualify as “rea sonable steps” for the purposes of this 
subsection. First, the proposed Note states that if the criminal conduct has an identifiable 
victim(s), “the organization should take reasonable steps to provide restitution and otherwise 
remedy the harm resulting from the criminal conduct.” 1 It provides that other proper responses 
include self-reporting and cooperation with authorities. Second, the proposed Note provides 
that the organization should appraise and, if needed, alter its compliance program to guarantee 
that the compliance program is more productive. Finally, the proposed Note provides that, if 
an organization decides to alter its compliance program, it may take the added step of retaining 
an autonomous monitor to guarantee sufficient appraisal and application of the changes. 
 
Periodic Assessment 
The Guidelines also require that the organization periodically assess the risk that criminal 
conduct will occur and modify its actions and its compliance and ethics program accordingly. In 
doing so, the organization should assess the following: 
• The nature and seriousness of criminal conduct that could occur 
• The likelihood that certain criminal conduct may occur because of the nature of the 
organization’s business 
• The prior history of the organization, which may indicate the types of criminal conduct 
that the company should be trying to prevent 
 
Moreover, the proposed amendments add an Application Note that clarifies the requirement 
that organizations conduct periodic assessments. The Note provides that an organization, as 
part of a periodic assessment, should monitor “the nature and operations of the organization 
with regard to particular ethics and compliance functions.” 2  
 
Relation of COSO and Corporate Sentencing Guidelines 
The Guidelines and COS O focus on the development of a stronger control system. The 
Guidelines contain explicit requirements for an effective control program. COSO does not 
mandate specific actions. It only provides illustrations of what constitutes a strong control 
                                                 
1 Sentencing Guidelines for United States Courts, 75 Fed. Reg. at 3535. 
2 Sentencing Guidelines for United States Courts, 75 Fed. Reg. at 3535. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.717  
system. The seven minimum requirements of the Guidelines are covered within the COSO 
system. The following table summarizes the relation between the components of the two 
pronouncements. 
 
COMPONENTS COSO GUIDELINES 
Control Environment  
Managemenst • Sets the ethical tone 
• Leads by actions, such as 
rewarding ethical conduct while 
punishing unethical actions 
• Sanctions for knowing, tolerating, 
or condoning improper conduct 
• Rewards for cooperation and 
contrition 
• “Due diligence” requirement 
• Upper management oversight of 
compliance program 
Integrity and Ethical 
Values 
• Code of ethics 
• Mechanism to encourage 
employee reporting 
• Code of ethics 
• Additional reporting mechanisms 
Human Resources • Hiring those who demonstrate 
integrity 
• Consistent discipline 
• Non-delegation of authority to 
those with criminal tendencies 
• Consistent discipline 
Risk Assessment • Objectives related to operations, 
financial reporting, and 
compliance 
• Identification and analysis of 
relevant risks 
• A strategy to manage risks 
• Incentives to maintain internal 
controls 
• Identification of industry-specific 
risks 
Control Activities • Policies and procedures to help 
ensure that management’s 
directives are followed 
• Standards and procedures capable 
of reducing the prospect of 
criminal conduct 
• Determination of modifications 
needed to prevent future problems
 Information and 
Communication 
• The identification, capture, and 
communication of pertinent 
information in an appropriate 
format and time frame 
• Effective communication of 
standards and procedures to all 
employees and other agents 
• Required training and  distribution 
of publications 
• Establishment of additional 
reporting mechanisms (such as 
hotlines or helplines) 
Monitorin g  • Ongoing assessment of the 
internal control system 
• Utilization of monitoring and 
auditing systems designed to 
detect criminal conduct 
• Periodic evaluation of program 
effectiveness 
  [Fiorelli, Rooney, COSO and the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, INTERNAL AUDITOR, April 1997] 
 
Sample Corporate Compliance Policy 
A sample corporate compliance policy is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.718   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Procedures to Prevent Fraud 
The following are examples of procedures that can be implemented into a compliance 
program that are specifically designed to detect and prevent fraud. 
 
Proactive Fraud Policies 
Proactive fraud policies  are generated from the top of the operation. A proactive policy means 
that the organization will aggressively seek out possible fraudulent conduct, instead of 
waiting for instances to come to their attention. This can be accomplished by several means, 
including the use of analytical review, fraud assessment questioning, enforcement of 
mandatory vacations, job rotation, and surprise audits where possible.  
 
Use of Analytical Review 
Much internal fraud is discovered as a result of analytical review. To uncover such fraud and 
defalcations, they must materially impact the financial statements. Auditors should be 
especially mindful of the following trends: 
• Increasing expenses 
• Increasing cost of sales 
• Increasing receivables/decreasing cash 
• Increasing inventories 
• Increasing sales/decreasing cash 
• Increasing returns and allowances 
• Increasing sales discounts 
 
Fraud Assessment Questioning 
Fraud assessment questioning  is a non-accusatory interview technique used as a part of a normal 
audit. See the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  for further details. It 
operates on the theory that employees’ attitudes are a good indicator of potential problems, 
and that one of the most effective ways to deal with fraud is to ask about it. 
 
Below are some suggested questions that can be asked as a part of the normal audit. Note 
that the questions here begin with the general and proceed to the specific.  
• Part of my duty as an auditor is to find fraud, waste, and abuse. Do you understand that? 
• Do you think fraud is a problem for business in general? 
• Do you think this company has any particular problem with fraud? 
• Has anyone ever asked you to do anything that you felt was illegal or unethical? 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.719  
• If you felt that there was a problem in the company with respect to fraud, what would 
you do? 
• Do you have any indication that there is fraud occurring in the company now? 
 
Enforcement of Mandatory Vacations 
Many internal frauds require manual intervention, and are therefore discovered when the 
perpetrator is away on vacation. The enforcement of mandatory vacations will aid in the 
prevention of some frauds.  
 
Job Rotation 
Some frauds are detected during sickness or unexpected absences of the perpetrator because 
they require continuous, manual intervention. 
 
EXAMPLE  
A manager who embezzled $1.6 million from  his company said, “If the company had 
coupled a two-week vacation with four weeks of rotation to another job function, my 
embezzlement would have been impossible to cover up.” His fraud lasted three years. 
 
Surprise Audits Where Possible 
All too many fraud perpetrators know when auditors are coming, and therefore have time to 
alter, destroy, or misplace records and other evidence. A proactive fraud policy involves 
using the technique of surprise audits as much as possible. It might have a significant 
deterrent effect. 
 
Management Oversight 
It is most common for employees who steal to use the proceeds for lifestyle improvements. 
Some examples include more expensive cars, extravagant vacations, expensive clothing, new 
or remodeled homes, expensive recreational property, and outside investments. Managers 
should be educated to be observant of these signs.  
 
EXAMPLE  
Discovery of a $97,000 embezzlem ent that occurred over a two- year period resulted when 
an observant manager asked the internal auditors  to examine the responsibilities of a seven-
 year veteran of the company. The manager no ticed that this female employee had begun 
wearing designer clothes (and making a big deal about it), and was driving a new BMW. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.720   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The manager was also aware of the fact that  this employee had no outside income that 
might explain the upgrade in lifestyle. 
 
Increasing the Perception of Detection 
Most experts agree that it is much easier to prevent than detect fraud. To prevent fraud, we 
should understand something about the mind of the potential perpetrator. Increasing the 
perception of detection might be the most effective fraud prevention method. Controls, for 
example, do little good in forestalling theft and fraud, if those at risk do not know of the 
presence of possible detection. In the audit profession, this means letting employees, 
managers, and executives know that auditors are actively seeking out information concerning 
internal theft. This can be accomplished in several ways. 
 
Employee Education 
Each entity should have some policy for educating managers, executives, and employees 
about fraud. This can be done as a part of employee orientation, or it can be accomplished 
through memoranda, training programs, and other intercompany communication methods. 
The goal is to make others within the company your eyes and ears. 
 
Any education effort should be positive and not accusatory. Illegal conduct in any form 
eventually costs everyone in the company through lost profits, adverse publicity, and 
decreased morale and productivity. These facts should be emphasized in training. 
 
Minimize Employee Pressures 
Pressures, such as financial hardship or family problems, can be especially difficult to  
detect in employees. Companies can take steps to assist an employee who might be having 
difficult times. 
 
Open-Door Policies 
If employees and others can speak freely, many managers will understand the pressures and 
might be able to eliminate them before they become acute. 
 
EXAMPLE  
The controller of a small frui t-packing company in California stole $112,000 from the 
company. When asked why, he said, “Nobody at the company ever talked to me, especially 
the owners. They were unfair. They talked do wn to me, and they we re rude. They deserve 
everything they got.” 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.721  
Employee Support Programs 
Many progressive companies and agencies have realized the benefit of employee support 
programs. Some kinds of support programs include alcohol and drug assistance, and 
counseling for gambling, abortion, marital problems, and financial difficulties. 
 
Management Climate 
If the style of management is conducted by objective measures rather than by subjective 
measures, then employees will not manufacture or imagine the performance criteria 
employed by management. In addition, it is obvious that management that is perceived to be 
dishonest will beget dishonest employees. 
 
EXAMPLE  
Jim, a loan officer for a mortgage bank, received his primary compensation based on the total 
volume of loans (measured by dollars) he was able to put on the books each year. Dollar 
volume was the only criteria for the compensation. In addition, the loan officers were all in 
competition with each other for the high volume  award of the year. The pressure to earn more 
than his fellow officers became more acute each year. 
 
When the mortgage company was closed down, most of Jim’s loans were in default. Because 
Jim perceived that his job performance was based solely on volume, no attention was paid to 
the quality of the loans. In fact, it was discov ered that on several occasions, Jim coerced the 
loan processing department to close loans, even though all the requirements had not been 
completed. 
 
EXAMPLE  
A large fast food chain lost $200,000 when one of its buyers got involved with a supplier. 
The company decided to notify all of its vendors of the company’s policy prohibiting the giving 
of anything of value to influence a purchasing decision. Two vendors called in with complaints 
about competitors, resulting in the discovery of two other frauds totaling an additional 
$360,000. 
 
Monitoring Systems 
Both the Guidelines and Sarbanes-Oxley specifically mention the importance of having a 
reporting system for employees and agents of the organization to report criminal conduct. 
Confidential hotlines are one of the best ways for an organization to monitor compliance.  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.722   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Reporting Programs 
Each employee in the company should know where to report suspicious, unethical, or illegal 
behavior. A reporting program should emphasize that: 
• Fraud, waste, and abuse occur in nearly all companies. 
• Such conduct costs the company jobs and profits. 
• The company actively encourages any employee with information to come forward. 
• The employee can come forward and provide information anonymously and without 
fear of recrimination for good-faith reporting. 
• There is an exact method for reporting (i.e., a telephone number, name, or other 
information). 
• The report need not be made to one’s immediate superiors. 
 
Hotlines 
Hotlines have proved to be a very effective reporting mechanism. However, most hotline 
reports do not result in fraud cases. At the federal level, published reports indicate that about 
five percent of hotline calls result in serious allegations. With careful screening of calls and 
proper handling, spurious complaints can be effectively weeded out. There are three general 
types of hotlines. The advantages and disadvantages of each are summarized below. 
 
PART TIME, IN-HOUSE 
These hotlines are assigned to an employee with other duties. An audit or security department 
usually staffs an in-house hotline. When the employee is out, a recorder takes calls. The main 
advantage is cost. The main disadvantage is that the hotline is not staffed full-time, which can 
discourage calls. Also, some people might be reluctant to report to the company.  
 
FULL TIME, IN-HOUSE 
A full-time, in-house hotline may be feasible depending on the company size. The advantage 
is that people can make reports at any time, day or night, and talk to a person. The 
disadvantage is cost, and like the part-time line, some people might be reluctant to report 
directly to the company.  
 
THIRD PARTY 
An outside company that specializes in services of this type most often staffs a third-party 
hotline. The advantages are cost, efficiency, and anonymity. A few are staffed around the 
clock, and will provide the information immediately to the client subscriber. They also 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.723  
provide anonymity to those who might be more comfortable with it. Their disadvantage is 
that the operation is beyond the company’s control. 
 
Rewards 
Some companies have a policy of rewarding information that leads to the recovery of 
merchandise, property, or money. Others offer rewards upon the criminal conviction of the 
person(s) involved. If a reward policy exists, strict criteria should establish reward payments, 
and such proposed policies should be reviewed and approved by counsel. The amount of 
reward paid by companies varies from fixed fees to a percentage of the recovery. Studies 
indicate that rewards should not exceed a few thousand dollars.  
 
 
Fraud Prevention Standards Under Sarbanes-Oxley 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) set forth a number  of preventive measures public companies 
must take to help reduce the threat of fraud. The Act as a whole is discussed in detail in the 
Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. Here, we will cover only the portions of SOX 
that directly relate to fraud prevention.  
 
Audit Committee Responsibilities 
One of the keys to effective fraud prevention is assigning high-level personnel responsibility 
for fraud prevention efforts. This signals to employees that fraud is a serious matter and it 
helps ensure that fraud prevention issues will receive consideration at the highest levels of 
the company. SOX mandates that audit committees for publicly traded companies be 
directly responsible for two key components of an effective fraud prevention program—
 outside audits and internal reporting mechanisms. It also establishes requirements for the 
composition of audit committees to ensure that they are capable of carrying out  
their duties.  
 
Overseeing Audits 
Section 301 of the Act requires the audit committee for every publicly traded company to be 
directly responsible for hiring, paying, and overseeing the work of the company’s outside 
auditors. Auditors must report directly to the audit committee, and the committee is 
responsible for resolving disputes between auditors and the company’s management. 
 
Section 204 of SOX requires outside auditors to report certain information to the audit 
committee, including any alternative accounting treatments within GAAP that have been 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.724   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
discussed with management, the effect of using those alternative treatments, and the 
treatment preferred by the auditors. This is designed to give the audit committee a warning 
in the event that management has used questionable or overly aggressive accounting in the 
preparation of the company’s financial statements. 
 
Receiving Complaints 
Section 301 also specifies that audit committees must establish procedures for receiving and 
dealing with complaints and anonymous employee tips regarding irregularities in the 
company’s accounting methods, internal controls, or auditing matters.  
 
Composition of the Audit Committee 
The Act also sets forth certain requirements regarding the composition of audit committees. 
Under Section 301, every member of the audit committee must also be a member of the 
company’s board of directors, which ensures that the committee will have sufficient 
authority within the company to carry out its duties. Furthermore, Section 407 of the Act 
requires every public company to disclose in its SEC reports whether at least one member of 
the audit committee is a “financial expert,” and if  not, to explain the reasons why. Financial 
experts are defined by SOX as persons who, through education and professional experience, 
possess the following: (1) an understanding of generally accepted accounting principles and 
financial statements; (2) experience in prepar ing or auditing financial statements of 
comparable companies and in accounting for estimates, accruals, and reserves in those 
companies; (3) experience with internal controls; and (4) an understanding of audit 
committee functions.  
 
Finally, Section 301 expressly states that audit committees must be given sufficient authority 
and funding to hire attorneys and other advisors necessary to carry out their duties. 
 
Management Responsibilities  
Sarbanes-Oxley also places a number of requirements on manag ement related to fraud 
prevention. It makes management directly responsible for internal controls, requires 
companies to establish codes of ethics for their senior financial officers, and requires CEOs 
and CFOs to personally certify their companies’ financial reports.  
 
Management’s Responsibility for Internal Controls 
Internal controls are among the most important aspects of any fraud prevention program. 
Section 404 of SOX requires each annual report filed with the SEC to contain an internal 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.725  
control report that (1) states management’s re sponsibility for establishing and maintaining an 
adequate internal control structure and (2) contains an assessment of the effectiveness of the 
internal control structure and procedures of the company for financial reporting. 
Management’s internal control assessment must be attested to and reported on by the 
company’s outside auditors.  
 
Codes of Ethics for Senior Financial Officers 
In order to have an effective anti-fraud program, organizations must set clear standards for 
conduct; it is also critical to establish an ethical tone at the top of an organization to serve as 
a guide and example for employees. Sarbanes-Oxley addresses both of these issues by 
requiring publicly traded companies to disclose in their periodic reports whether they have 
adopted a code of ethics for their senior financial officers, and if not, to explain their 
reasoning. SOX also requires companies to make an immediate disclosure any time there is a 
change in the code of ethics or a waiver for a senior financial officer.  
 
Certification Obligations 
As part of an effort to eliminate financial statement fraud, Sarbanes-Oxley requires CEOs 
and CFOs of publicly traded companies to personally certify their companies’ annual and 
quarterly SEC filings. There are two categories of officer certifications required by SOX: 
criminal certifications, which are contained in Section 906 of the Act, and civil certifications, 
which are contained in Section 302.  
 
CRIMINAL CERTIFICATIONS 
Under Section 906, all periodic filings with the SEC must be accompanied by a statement 
which certifies that the report fully complies with the SEC’s reporting requirements and that 
the information in the report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition 
and results of operation of the company. This statement must be signed by both the CEO 
and CFO. These certifications are known as  “criminal certifications” because the Act 
imposes criminal penalties for violations of this Section, including fines of up to $1 million 
and imprisonment of up to ten years.  
 
CIVIL CERTIFICATIONS 
Section 302 requires that the CEO and CFO certify  the following six items in every annual 
and quarterly report: 
• They have personally reviewed the report. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.726   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Based on their knowledge, the report does not contain any material misstatement that 
would render the financials misleading. 
• Based on their knowledge, the financial information in the report fairly presents  in  
all material respects the financial condition, results of operations, and cash flow of  
the company.  
• They are responsible for designing, maintaining, and evaluating the company’s  
internal controls; they have designed the controls to ensure that they receive material 
information about the company; they have evaluated the controls within 90 days prior to 
the report; and they have presented their conclusions about the effectiveness of the 
controls in the report. 
• They have disclosed to the auditors and the audit committee any material weaknesses in 
the controls and any fraud, whether material or not, that involves management or other 
employees who have a significant role in the company’s internal controls.  
• They have indicated in the report whether there have been significant changes in the 
company’s internal controls, including any corrective actions with regard to significant 
deficiencies and material weaknesses. 
 
IMPACT OF CERTIFICATION OBLIGATIONS 
Sarbanes-Oxley requires CEOs and CFOs to  take personal responsibility for their 
companies’ financial statements; they cannot  delegate their responsibilities to their 
subordinates and then claim ignorance when fraud is discovered. If the financials include 
fraudulent reporting, then the senior financial officers may be held individually civilly liable 
for the misstatements.  
 
The “fairly presents” standard of item 3 is broader than what is required by GAAP. It 
essentially requires the CEO and CFO to certi fy that the company has selected appropriate 
accounting policies; has properly applied those accounting standards; and has disclosed 
financial information that reflects the underlying transactions of the company.  
 
Item 4 requires senior financial officers to take an active role in the design and maintenance 
of their companies’ internal controls. It not only requires the CEO and CFO to certify that 
they are responsible for controls, but also that they have evaluated their controls within 90 
days prior to their quarterly or annual report. This effectively requires companies to 
continually re-evaluate their control structures. Item 5 requires the CEO and CFO to report 
any material weaknesses in their company’s controls, along with any fraud involving 
management, whether it is material or not.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.727  
The overall effect of these certification requirements is to force CEOs and CFOs to take an 
active role in the anti-fraud efforts of their companies, making internal controls and fraud 
prevention a high priority.  
 
Whistleblower Protection 
A key to any fraud prevention program is the establishment of a mechanism by which fraud 
can be reported. As was stated above, Section 301 of Sarbanes-Oxley requires audit 
committees to establish mechanisms for receiving complaints about irregularities in a 
company’s accounting, auditing, or internal control systems.  
 
In order to protect those who make such reports, SOX established broad protections for 
corporate whistleblowers. Section 806 of the Act creates civil liability for publicly traded 
companies that retaliate against employees who provide information or assist in the 
investigation of securities fraud. Penalties for violating this Section include reinstatement, 
back pay with interest, and compensation for special damages such as litigation costs and 
attorney’s fees. 
 
Section 1107 makes it a crime to retaliate against a person for providing truthful information 
relating to the commission or possible commission of any federal offense. This Section 
offers much broader protection than the civil whistleblower protection afforded under 
Section 806. The whistleblower protections under Section 1107 cover all individuals, not just 
employees of publicly traded companies. They also protect individuals who provide 
information about any federal offense, not just securities fraud. Vi olations of Section 1107 are 
punishable by fines of up to $250,000 and up to ten years in prison for individuals. 
Corporations can be fined up to $500,000.  
 
Fraud Prevention Requirements for External Auditors  
Attesting to Internal Controls 
As was stated above, Section 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley requires a company’s auditors to attest 
to and report on management’s assessment of in ternal controls in each annual report filed 
with the SEC. In addition, each audit report must describe the scope of the auditor’s testing 
of the company’s internal control structure. The audit report must include an evaluation of 
whether the company’s internal controls are acceptable and a description of material 
weaknesses in the control structure or any material noncompliance with controls.  
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.728   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Restrictions on Non-Audit Activity 
In order to address concerns about potential conflicts of interest that can arise when public 
accounting firms receive consulting fees and other compensation for non-audit services 
from their audit clients, Sarbanes-Oxley established a list of activities that public accounting 
firms are now prohibited from performing on behalf of their audit clients. The list includes 
most consulting and expert services, although tax services are still permissible if they are 
approved in advance by the audit committee.  
 
 
Fraud Prevention Policy 
Another important element of an overall fraud prevention program is a written fraud policy 
that specifically spells out who in an organization handles varying fraud matters under 
differing circumstances.  
 
Fraud Policy Objectives 
A fraud prevention program will entail objectives very similar to those of internal control. 
According to the Institute of Internal Auditors’ Standards for the Professional Practice of 
Internal Auditing, the primary objectives for management to achieve proper internal controls 
include reasonable assurance that: 
• Financial and operating information is accurate and reliable. 
• Policies, procedures, plans, laws, and regulations are complied with. 
• Assets are safeguarded against loss and theft. 
• Resources are used economically and efficiently. 
• Established program/operating goals and objectives are met. 
 
A fraud prevention policy with the above-mentioned goals is the first step toward effective 
fraud deterrence.  
 
Selling Fraud Prevention to Management 
Management might not support fraud prevention for one of several reasons: 
• Management’s concerns are often on areas other than audit or fraud. They don’t typically 
understand that fraud is hidden and that losses go undetected. They also might refuse to 
believe that their own workers are capable of stealing even when studies suggest a third 
of us might do such a thing. 
• Because of the hidden nature of fraud, managers are understandably reluctant to believe 
in the presence of fraud. And if one employee is caught committing fraud, management 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.729  
might too often claim that this is an isolated problem and not worth additional 
consideration. Management must understand that when instances of fraud are detected, 
it is too late to do anything about them.  
• Management sometimes unreasonably feels that  bringing up the issue will alienate the 
work force. This problem can be addressed by reminding management that the rank-and-file workers 
appreciate working for an honest company. It is also helpful to point 
out to management what the losses might be. 
 
Many auditors complain that management does not adequately support fraud prevention 
efforts. That is largely for two reasons: either they believe that fraud is not really a problem 
in the company or they believe that even addressing the subject has a negative impact. In 
either scenario, it is difficult for the auditor to break down management’s built-in resistance 
to dealing with fraud prevention. Some of the following suggestions might be helpful in 
“selling” fraud prevention to management.  
 
The Impact on the Bottom Line 
One of the best ways to sell management on fraud prevention is by showing the impact on 
the bottom line. Fraud impacts net sales dollar for dollar. For example, if a company nets 20 
percent on sales, they must sell five items at regular prices to recover losses from the theft of 
one item. Fraud can be very expensive.  
 
The Impact of Publicity 
Many corporate executives are more sensitive to adverse publicity than almost any other 
issue. Certainly, one way to convince management of the logic of fraud prevention is to 
point out that negative publicity, even in small cases, can have a devastating impact on the 
bottom line. This negative impact can be eliminated or reduced by a proactive fraud 
prevention program.  
 
One of the more significant examples of adverse publicity can be demonstrated in the E.F. 
Hutton case. As one might recall, 20 or so executives of E.F. Hutton participated in a kiting 
scheme in the late 1980s. The fraud itself was insignificant to the bottom line, but its 
resulting impact was devastating to E.F. Hutton, which eventually sold out. This situation 
pointedly illustrates that insignificant fraud can have a very significant impact.  
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.730   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Writing the Fraud Policy 
Companies often have an ethics policy that sets forth in detail what is expected in the ethical 
climate of the company. Still other companies have a fraud policy that specifically spells out 
who handles fraud matters under what circumstances. The components of a fraud policy will 
differ from company to company. Many fraud policies have some of the following elements.  
 
Policy Statement 
The policy statement sets forth that management is responsible for fraud, and each member 
of the management team should be familiar with the types of signals present within his scope 
of responsibilities. The policy statement also designates who is in charge of investigating 
suspected irregularities.  
 
Scope of Policy 
This area of the fraud policy statement covers what constitutes an irregularity and the fact 
that the policy covers everyone from management to workers.  
 
Actions Constituting Fraud 
This area sets forth in detail what actions constitute fraudulent conduct. This is important as 
it gives management the legal grounds to investigate and punish violators. The actions listed 
can include: 
• Any dishonest or fraudulent act 
• Forgery or alteration of documents 
• Misapplication of funds or assets 
• Impropriety with respect to reporting financial transactions 
• Profiting on insider knowledge 
• Disclosing securities transactions to others 
• Accepting gifts from vendors 
• Destruction or disappearance of records or assets 
• Any similar or related irregularity 
 
Non-fraud Irregularities 
This section covers allegations of personal improprieties or irregularities and states that they 
should be resolved by management and not an auditor. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.731  
Investigation Responsibilities 
This part deals with who will investigate suspected irregularities, as well as to whom these 
irregularities will be reported (management, law enforcement, or legal counsel). 
 
Confidentiality 
Under this section, the confidential nature of the investigation is set forth. It states that the 
investigation will not be disclosed to outsiders except as required.  
 
Authorization for Investigation 
This delineates that whoever is in charge of the investigation has the authority to take 
control of and examine records.  
 
Reporting Procedures 
This part states that anyone suspecting fraud should report it and not attempt an 
investigation. It also states that management and others should not make statements 
regarding the alleged guilt of the perpetrator. 
 
Termination  
This section states that any recommendations to terminate employees should be reviewed by 
counsel and management. 
 
Communicating the Fraud Policy 
It obviously does little good to have a fraud or ethics policy if it is not communicated to the 
employees. This communication can be accomplished in several ways. Again, the 
communication of the policy should be presented in a positive, non-accusatory manner. 
 
Orientation/Annual Training 
During initial employee orientation, the fraud policy should be discussed. This is the first 
opportunity the company has to make its point, and it should be made thoroughly. 
Reminding employees via annual online or live training may reinforce the policy and 
management’s expectations that it be followed. 
 
Memoranda 
An interoffice memorandum from the chief executive officer detailing the fraud policy is a 
good idea. Once again, the policy should con centrate on the positive aspects of working for 
an ethical company.  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.732   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Posters  
Some companies might wish to use posters displayed in common areas. However, this 
should be carefully considered, as some employees might object to such tactics.  
 
Employee Morale 
If an employee is properly instructed, communication of a fraud policy can have a positive 
impact on morale. Honest workers want to work for an honest company. A fraud policy 
helps set the proper tone.  
 
Quizzes/Games 
Games may be a fun and informal way to reinforce and communicate the fraud policy in an 
organization. Quizzes with prizes may also  be used to reward those who demonstrate 
awareness of the policy. 
 
Legal Considerations 
Many companies have learned that it is best to spell out specific unacceptable conduct. If the 
type of conduct that is considered unacceptable is not accurately detailed, there might be 
legal problems in discharging a dishonest employee. Check with your counsel regarding any 
legal considerations with respect to a fraud policy. One of the most important legal 
considerations is to ensure everyone and every allegation is handled in a uniform manner. A 
sample fraud policy is contained at the end of the chapter. 
 
 
Ethics Programs 
A written ethics policy is an excellent method by which management can objectively 
communicate its philosophy and develop a successful ethics program. The policy should be 
disseminated among both new and old employees. Additionally, some companies have 
found it effective to share the ethics policy with their vendors. 
 
In most cultures, the majority of people share the same values. They agree on what is good 
and bad, what is right and wrong, and what is moral and immoral. Although all will not hold 
the same set of values, the social values of the majority will affect the beliefs and behaviors 
of all people.  
 
The collection of a person’s beliefs and morals makes up a set of principles known as ethics. 
Ethics are the judgments about right and wrong or, more specifically, a person’s moral 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.733  
obligations to society that determine a person’s actions. Determining ethical rights and 
wrongs is complicated by the fact that moral standards and generally accepted social 
behavior change with time. In addition, different groups in the same society may have 
conflicting ideas of right and wrong. These values and ethics of an individual are reflected in 
their actions as employees. There are four factors that generally affect the ethical decisions  
of employees: 
• The law and other government regulations 
• Industry and organizational ethical codes 
• Social pressures 
• Tension between personal standards and organizational needs 
 
Employees’ ethics, whatever they may be, influe nce a wide range of organizational decisions 
and actions.  
 
A common fallacy in discussions about ethics is If it’s legal, it’s ethical. A common defense to 
charges of unethical behavior is to invoke the law. This legalistic approach to ethics 
mistakenly implies that actions that are not explicitly prohibited by the law are ethical. The 
main error in this approach is that legal standards do not establish ethical principles. 
Although abiding by the law is a part of ethical behavior, laws themselves do not describe 
how an ethical person should behave. One can be dishonest, unprincipled, untrustworthy, 
unfair, and uncaring without breaking the law. Ethical people measure their conduct by basic 
principles rather than rules. Thus, in making personal or occupational decisions, the law is 
only the minimum threshold in determining what is legally possible, and does not address 
how people should behave ethically. 
 
Origins of Ethics 
There are theories that state that by the time one becomes an adult and enters the work-
 place, a basic code of ethics is already in place. Ethical character is hardwired into the 
personality before or during adolescence. By this theory, if a person did not learn to be 
ethical in childhood, there is a slim chance that he will act ethically as an adult.  
 
An opposing theory holds that operational values that guide behavior are not formed until 
early adulthood and, even after that, they are subject to change. Until one has to make 
serious, binding decisions, it is not necessary to act according to one’s beliefs. By this theory, 
as long as individuals have the capacity to reflect and make value judgments, they can modify 
their personal ethics and change their behavior.  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.734   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Business ethics programs rely on the validity of the latter theory. With the hope that adult 
behavior can be affected or modified, ethics programs are designed to steer employees in the 
right direction.  
 
Ethics’ Current Place in Business 
The decline in public attitudes about business in recent years has reinforced the importance 
of ethics in the workplace. Although there seems to be a further deterioration of public 
confidence, substantial endeavors have been made by organizations with respect to business 
ethics. These initiatives include adoption of codes of conduct, introduction of ethics into 
employee and management training, and the establishment of ethics and compliance offices.  
 
Corporate ethics initiatives have accelerated over the last decade due in part to the impact of 
the U.S. Federal Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations. These Guidelines can multiply or 
mitigate potentially devastating penalties for errant corporations, depending on their 
attempts to prevent such misconduct with effective compliance programs.  
 
Ethics Program Development 
Identifying key organizational characteristics and issues is a start to the development of an 
ethics program. These items include: 
• Understanding of why good people can commit unethical acts 
• Defining current—as well as desired—organizational values 
• Determining if organizational values have been properly communicated 
• Producing written ethics policies, procedures, or structures 
• Ascertaining how board members, stockholders, management, employees, and any other 
pertinent members of the organization define success 
• Determining if ethics is a leadership issue in the organization 
 
With a good understanding of the above-mentioned issues, a more effective ethics program 
can be built. The following 12 components are necessary to develop, implement, and 
manage a comprehensive ethics program: 
• Focus on ethical leadership 
• Vision statement 
• Values statement 
• Code of ethics 
• Designated ethics official 
• Ethics task force or committee 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.735  
• Ethics communication strategy 
• Ethics training 
• Ethics help and fraud report telephone line 
• Ethical behavior rewards and sanctions 
• Comprehensive system to monitor and track ethics data 
• Periodic evaluation of ethics efforts and data 
 
A sample of a typical Code of Business Ethics and an Annual Compliance Questionnaire are 
provided at the end of this chapter. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.736   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Sample Corporate Compliance Program 3  
 
I. SCOPE AND IMPLEMENTATION 
 
This Corporate Compliance Program (“comp liance program”) applies to corporate 
headquarters and to all groups, operating divisions, and units of, and to all employees 
and agents of, (company)  whose functions or responsibilities involve compliance with 
laws, regulations, or standards of conduct applicable to the operations or practices of the 
Corporation, in the United States or abroad. 
 
II. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT 
 
A. (Company) ’s standards of conduct for employee compliance with applicable laws and 
regulations are set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the Employee Handbook 
for Nonexempt Employees (“Employee Handbook”), which may be revised and 
supplemented from time to time. 
 
B. With the prior approval of (company)  management, the Compliance Coordinator shall, 
as may appear necessary from time to time, revise and supplement the standards of 
conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the Employee Handbook. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall, from time to time, distribute to relevant groups 
of employees materials incorporated by reference into the Business Ethics Policy, 
such as the HIMA Code of Ethics with respect to dealings with health care 
providers, professionals, and institutions. 
 
III. ROLE OF THE COMPLIANCE COORDINATOR 
 
A. The Compliance Coordinator shall have overall responsibility (1) to oversee 
compliance with the standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and 
the Employee Handbook, and with the compliance procedures established by or 
under the compliance program, and (2) to ensure the proper functioning of the 
compliance program. 
 
B. The Compliance Coordinator shall confer generally with Management about matters 
relating to the compliance program, including all matters that, under the compliance 
program, the Compliance Coordinator is required to report to the Regulatory Affairs 
Committee of the Board of Directors under ¶ XI.B of the compliance program. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall monitor developments relating to compliance 
with applicable laws, regulations, and standards of conduct, and, shall, from time to 
                                                 
3 Source: BNA/ACCA Compliance Manual:  Prevention of Corporate Liability, pp. 1900:4-11. Published by 
The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc. (800-372-1033) <http://www.bna.com> 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.737  
time, distribute to particular employees or groups of employees memoranda, news 
articles, or other informational materials that explain compliance requirements, 
report changes in requirements or industry standards, highlight the importance of 
compliance, or are otherwise relevant to their compliance responsibilities. 
 
D. The Compliance Coordinator and/or the Corporate Compliance Audit Director shall 
review, on a continuing basis, the Corporation’s internal procedures for preventing 
violations of law and shall create a compendium of such procedures, including: 
 
1. Procedures for review of proposed product labeling, promotional materials, and 
advertising materials 
 
2. Procedures for obtaining opinions of counsel on proposed transactions or 
activities that may raise questions under the anti-trust laws or other laws 
 
3. Procedures for review by regulatory affairs professionals of product testing, 
product modifications, introduction of new products, and other matters that may 
raise regulatory issues 
 
4. Procedures for timely preparation and submission of disclosures and reports 
required by law 
  
5. Internal and external programs 
 
E. The Compliance Coordinator shall (1) report to and meet with Management, as 
necessary and appropriate, with respect to any deficiencies identified or 
improvements needed in the compliance program, and (2) report to and meet with 
the Regulatory Affairs Committee of the Board of Directors as required by ¶ XI.B of 
this compliance program. 
 
F. The Compliance Coordinator shall see to it that all reports of suspected misconduct 
or impropriety relating to (company)  operations or practices are promptly, thoroughly, 
and properly investigated in accordance with a Standard Operating Procedure 
approved by Management; and that, where appropriate, disciplinary sanctions are 
imposed in accordance with ¶ IX of this compliance program. 
 
G. The Compliance Coordinator shall discharge the responsibilities assigned to him by 
or under this compliance program. 
 
H. The Compliance Coordinator shall take such other actions as are necessary and 
appropriate to implement and improve the compliance program. 
 
I.  ___________________________ is designated as the Compliance Coordinator. 
  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.738   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
IV.  DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY  
 
A. It is the policy of (company)  that substantial discretionary authority shall not be 
delegated to individuals who the Corporation knows, or through the exercise of 
diligence could know, have a propensity to engage in illegal activities. In particular, 
substantial discretionary authority shall be delegated only to individuals who the 
Corporation is confident will not engage in illegal activities. 
 
B. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, review the delegations of 
discretionary authority within the Corporation, the checks, balances, and controls 
applicable to such delegated discretionary authority, and the performance and 
background of the persons exercising such authority to determine whether any 
current delegation violates corporate policy. In conducting such review, the 
Compliance Coordinator may rely on information in personnel files, on the results of 
corporate audits, on the opinions of managers and supervisors, on consultation with 
the Corporation’s independent outside auditors, on surveys of persons outside the 
Corporation who deal with the Corporation, and on other available information. At 
least annually, the Compliance Coordinator shall report in writing to the Chief 
Executive Officer the results of that review. The Compliance Coordinator shall 
recommend to Management any needed actions. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator and the Personnel Department shall from time to time 
jointly review the Corporation’s procedures (including background and reference 
checks) and criteria for filling (whether by new hiring or by promotion from within) 
positions involving substantial discretion, so as to ensure that only persons of 
integrity are selected for such positions. The Compliance Coordinator and the 
Personnel Department shall recommend to Management any needed actions. 
 
V. COMMUNICATION OF STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES TO EMPLOYEES 
 
A. The Compliance Coordinator shall ensure, and, subject to ¶ B, at least annually shall 
certify in writing to the Chief Executive Officer, that: 
 
1. Every officer and every key employee (as determined by the Compliance 
Coordinator) of the Corporation has, within the preceding twelve months, 
acknowledged to the Compliance Coordinator in writing that he has reviewed 
and understands the Business Ethics Policy. 
 
2. Every employee of the Corporation whose function or responsibilities involve 
compliance with laws, regulations, or standards of conduct applicable to the 
operations or practices of the Corporation (other than officers and key 
employees) has, within the preceding twelve months, acknowledged to the 
Compliance Coordinator in writing that he has reviewed and understands the 
provisions of the Employee Handbook that relate to standards of conduct. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.739  
3. Every employee whose function or responsibilities involve compliance with laws, 
regulations, or standards of conduct applicable to the operations or practices of 
the Corporation who was newly hired by (company)  within the preceding twelve 
months has, within thirty days from the commencement of employment with 
(company)  (a), received the Business Ethics Policy or Employee Handbook, as 
applicable, and (b) acknowledged to the Compliance Coordinator in writing that 
he has reviewed and understands the provisions of the Business Ethics Policy or 
Employee Handbook that relate to standards of conduct, as applicable. 
 
B. If the Compliance Coordinator cannot truthfully make the certifications required by 
¶ A, he shall certify to the extent the facts permit, shall identify the employees as to 
whom the required certification cannot be given, and shall state the reasons (to the 
extent known) why the requirements of ¶ A.1-3, as applicable, have not been 
satisfied with respect to those employees, and what measure will be taken promptly 
to satisfy those paragraphs, as applicable, with respect to those employees. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall maintain records supporting the certifications 
called for by ¶ A. 
 
D. The Compliance Coordinator shall cause to be posted in prominent places 
accessible, in the aggregate, to all ( company)  employees whose functions and 
responsibilities involve compliance with laws, regulations, or standards of conduct 
applicable to the operations or practices of the Corporation, a Notice that: 
 
1. States ( company) ’s commitment to comply with all applicable laws and regulations 
and the standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the 
Employee Handbook 
 
2. Designates the Compliance Coordinators (or a designee of the Compliance 
Coordinator) to receive any reports of misconduct or impropriety relating to 
(company) ’s operations or practices of whic h any employees may have knowledge, 
whether committed by an employee of (company), an employee of another 
company or organization, an employee of a governmental agency, or any  
other person 
 
3. States that no employee will suffer any penalty or retribution for good faith 
reporting of any suspected misconduct or impropriety 
 
4. States that reports of misconduct or impropriety may be anonymous 
 
5. States that reports of misconduct or impropriety may be made directly to a 
government agency 
 
6. States that ( company)  will investigate all such reports, and that any (company)  
employee found to have engaged in misconduct will receive prompt and 
appropriate discipline, up to and including dismissal 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.740   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
7. States that the Compliance Coordinator or designee (with telephone number) is 
available for consultation on any question a ( company)  employee may have 
concerning the application to ( company) ’s operations or practices of any law, 
regulation, or standard of conduct or any other matter relating to (company) ’s 
compliance program. 
 
E. The Compliance Coordinator shall, in consultation and coordination with other units 
of the Corporation, arrange for compliance training sessions for all employees whose 
functions or responsibilities involve compliance with laws, regulations, or standards 
of conduct applicable to the operations or practices of the Corporation. Each such 
session shall include a presentation of some aspect or aspects of the laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct applicable to the employees who attend the 
session. Every such employee shall attend at least one such session during each 
twelve months of employment with ( company). Special sessions shall be held, as 
necessary and convenient, for new employees. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at 
least annually, certify to the Chief Executive Officer that (1) every such employee has 
attended at least one such compliance training session within the preceding twelve 
months, or (2) that all but certain identified employees have attended at least one 
such session, the reasons why the identified employees have not attended one, and 
the measures that will be taken to ensure that those employees promptly attend such 
a session. 
 
F. Each supervisor shall annually certify to the Compliance Coordinator in writing that 
he has personally: 
 
1. Discussed with each employee under his immediate supervision the standards of 
conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy or the Employee Handbook, as 
applicable 
 
2. Informed each employee that strict compliance with such standards of conduct is 
a condition of employment 
 
3. Informed each such employee that (company) will take disciplinary action, 
including dismissal as appropriate, for violation of such standards of conduct 
 
G. The Compliance Coordinator shall maintain a file of such certifications, and shall 
report, at least annually, to Management with respect to compliance with this 
provision of the compliance program. 
 
H. The Compliance Coordinator and the Personnel Department shall jointly develop 
and implement tests or other methods to measure the effectiveness of the 
communications of standards and procedures to employees. The Compliance 
Coordinator and the Personnel Department shall report the results of such tests or 
measures to Management. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.741  
VI. MONITORING, AUDITING, AND REPORTING 
 
A. Monitoring 
 
1. The Compliance Coordinator shall, by memorandum, at least annually advise all 
employees with supervisory responsibility of their duty to monitor all activities of 
their subordinates in the course of their employment with ( company)  to ensure 
that those activities are conducted in compliance with all applicable laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct. 
    
2. Each supervisor shall sign a copy of the memorandum referred to in ¶ 1 and 
return it to the Compliance Coordinator, who shall maintain a file of such 
memoranda. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, report to 
Management with respect to complia nce with this provision of the  
compliance program.  
 
B. Auditing 
 
1. The Corporate Compliance Audit Director shall be responsible for the conduct 
of internal non-financial audits to promote compliance with applicable laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct (other than those relating to financial 
matters). 
 
2. The Chief Financial Officer of the Company shall be responsible for the conduct 
of internal financial audits to promote compliance with applicable laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct relating to financial matters. 
 
3. Management shall arrange for the conduct of annual audits by independent 
outside auditors to promote compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and 
standards of conduct, both financial and non-financial. 
 
4. Copies of all internal and outside audit reports relating to compliance  
with laws, regulations, or standards of conduct (whether financial or non-
 financial) shall be provided to the Compliance Coordinator and to the Audit 
Committee or the Regulatory Affairs [Committee] of the Board, whichever is the 
appropriate recipient. 
 
C. Reporting 
 
1. The Compliance Coordinator shall establish and oversee a reporting system in 
which: 
 
a. Any employee may report to the Compliance Coordinator (or a designee of 
the Compliance Coordinator) any suspected misconduct or impropriety 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.742   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
relating to (company) ’s operations or practices, whether committed by an 
employee of (company), an employee of another company or organization, an 
employee of a government agency, or other person. 
 
b. No employee will suffer any penalty or retribution for good faith reporting of 
any suspected misconduct or impropriety. 
 
c. Any report of misconduct or impropriety may be anonymous. 
 
2. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, communicate to all (company)  
employees the policy of the Corporation that any employee who learns of an 
apparent violation of law, regulations, or unethical conduct relating to the 
business or activities of the Corporation shall report such violation or conduct to 
the Compliance Coordinator (or a designee of the Compliance Coordinator), and 
may do so anonymously. 
 
3. At least annually, the Compliance Coordinator shall report to Management and 
to the Regulatory Affairs Committee of the Board on the functioning of the 
reporting system. 
 
VII. DEBARRED INDIVIDUALS 
 
A. It is the policy of (company)  that the Corporation shall not knowingly employ or retain 
as a consultant, with or without pay, any individual who is publicly listed by a federal 
agency as debarred, suspended, or otherwise ineligible for federal programs. 
 
B. To carry out its policy, the Corporation shall make reasonable inquiry into the status 
of any potential employee or consultant. Such reasonable inquiry shall include review 
of the General Services Administration’s List of Parties Excluded from Federal 
Procurement Programs and information on debarments imposed by any other relevant 
 federal agency. 
 
C. The Corporation’s policy does not require the Corporation to terminate the 
employment or consultancy of individuals who become suspended, or are proposed 
for debarment during their employment or consultancy with the Corporation. The 
Corporation shall, however, remove such employees or consultants from 
responsibility for, or involvement with, governmental business until the resolution of 
such suspension or proposed debarment. 
 
D. If such employee or consultant is debarred, his employment or consultancy with the 
Corporation shall be terminated. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.743  
VIII. BUSINESS DEALINGS WITH DEBARRED INDIVIDUALS AND ENTITIES, AND EMPLOYEES AND CONSULTANTS CHARGED WITH OR CONVICTED OF CRIMES 
 
A. Debarred individuals and entities 
 
1. It is the policy of (company)  that it shall not knowingly form a contract with, 
purchase from, or enter into any business relationship with, any individual or 
business entity that is publicly listed by a federal agency as debarred, suspended, 
or proposed for debarment, other than (1) sales by the Corporation in the 
ordinary course of business and (2) purchases by the Corporation in the ordinary 
course of business of goods or services that are not specific to the Corporation’s 
medical device operations regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 
unless there is a compelling reason to do so.  
 
2. The Corporation shall make reasonable inquiry as to the status of any potential 
business partner whose relationship to the Corporation would not be within the 
scope of ¶ A(1) or ¶ A(2). Such reasonable inquiry shall include review of the 
General Services Administration’s List  of Parties Excluded from Federal 
Procurement Programs and review of information on debarments imposed by 
any other relevant federal agency. 
 
3. In the case of any decision to proceed with a business relationship not within the 
scope of ¶ A(1) or ¶ A(2) and permissible under ¶ A solely due to a compelling 
reason, the decision and the compelling reason shall be documented by the 
Compliance Coordinator. 
 
B. Individuals charged with or convicted of offenses relating to  
governmental business 
 
1. If any employee or consultant of the Corporation is charged by Indictment or 
Information with criminal offense, the Corporation shall remove that employee 
or consultant immediately from responsibility for, or involvement with, matters 
relating to the Corporation’s business. 
 
2. If the employee or consultant is convicted of an offense relating to the 
Company’s business, his employment or consultancy with the Corporation shall 
be terminated. 
 
3. With respect to any person convicted of a federal offense relating to the  
business or operations of (company), the Corporation shall have and enforce the 
following policies: 
 
a. All business relations under the Corporation’s control with such person shall 
be terminated, and such person shall not be re-employed or further retained 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.744   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
by the Corporation in any capacity. This provision does not apply to any 
relationship involving the holding of any type of securities. 
 
b. No such person, nor any other person affiliated with such person, shall share 
any office space or storage space, or any building or computer system, with 
the Corporation. 
 
c. No such person shall be permitted to enter the premises of the Corporation, 
except as required by law. 
 
IX. DISCIPLINE 
 
A. It is the policy of (company)  that the standards of conduct set forth in the Business 
Ethics Policy and in the Employee handbook shall be consistently enforced through 
appropriate disciplinary mechanisms. Disciplinary actions may be up to and including 
dismissal, and may extend, as appropriate, to individuals responsible for the failure to 
prevent, detect, or report an offense. 
 
B. The Compliance Coordinator shall, in consultation with Management and 
supervisors as appropriate, establish and administer a company-wide disciplinary 
system, including written disciplinary cases. The system shall provide for the making 
of disciplinary decisions by appropriate company officials in consultation with the 
Compliance Coordinator. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall maintain records of all disciplinary actions taken 
for violation of the standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and 
in the Employee Handbook. 
 
D. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, report to Management in 
writing on the disciplinary system. 
 
X. RESPONSE TO VIOLATIONS 
 
A. It is a policy of (company)  that, if a violation of any applicable law, regulation, or 
standard of conduct relating to the business of the Corporation is detected, the 
Corporation shall take all reasonable steps to respond appropriately to the violation 
and to prevent further similar violations, including any modifications to this 
compliance program. It is the policy of (company)  that if ( company)  learns that any 
statement previously made by ( company)  to any government agency is false or 
incorrect in any material respect, ( company)  shall voluntarily and promptly (after 
appropriate preliminary investigation) report the matter to the government agency. It 
is also the policy of (company)  that if (company)  learns of a violation of any applicable 
law or regulation that is not known to the government agency but is likely to be of 
interest to that agency, (company)  shall voluntarily and promptly (after appropriate 
investigation) report the matter to that agency. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.745  
B. Any employee of the Corporation who learns of a violation of the type referred to in 
¶ A shall report it to the Compliance Coor dinator (or designee of the Compliance 
Coordinator). Although it is preferable that any such report be made by an employee 
who identifies himself so that the matter may be investigated promptly and 
thoroughly, an employee may make such a report anonymously. Failure to report 
such a violation known to an employee may, itself, be a basis for disciplinary action. 
 
C. Whenever the Compliance Coordinator receives information regarding a possible 
violation of any applicable law or regulation, the Compliance Coordinator shall take 
appropriate steps to examine information and conduct the investigation necessary to 
determine whether an actual violation has occurred. The Compliance Coordinator 
shall recommend to Management an appropriate course of action, and Management 
shall render a timely decision with respect to such recommendation. The Compliance 
Coordinator shall prepare a memorandum reflecting the information developed, the 
recommendation made, and the Management decision rendered, and this 
memorandum shall promptly be furnished to the Audit Committee of the Board. 
 
XI. ROLE OF THE REGULATORY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
A. The Regulatory Affairs Committee shall be responsible for reviewing and suggesting 
to Management any necessary improvements in: 
 
1. The standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the 
Employee Handbook 
 
2. The compliance program generally 
 
B. The Regulatory Affairs Committee shall, at least annually: 
 
1. Receive a written report from, and meet with, the Compliance Coordinator with 
respect to the compliance program generally, including: 
 
a. The Compliance Coordinator’s review of  delegations of authority within  
the Corporation 
 
b. The certifications required by ¶ V.A of this program, and employee 
familiarity with the corporate standards of conduct generally 
 
c. The certifications required by ¶ V.D of this program, the compliance 
communications and training generally, including their effectiveness 
 
d. The certifications required by ¶ V.E of this program, the compliance by 
supervisors with ¶ VI.A.2 of this program, and the participation of 
supervisors in this program generally 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.746   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
e. The results of internal and any external audits (whether financial or non-
 financial) relating to compliance with laws, regulations, or standards of 
conduct 
 
f. The reporting system required by ¶ VI.C of this program 
 
g. The disciplinary system required by ¶ IX of this program 
 
2. Discuss with Management the compliance program and the report of the 
Compliance Coordinator. 
 
3. Report to the Board of Directors with respect to the report of the Compliance 
Coordinator and the Committee’s meetings with the Compliance Coordinator 
and Management, and with respect to the compliance program generally. 
 
C. At each meeting of the Regulatory Affairs Committee, the Compliance Coordinator 
shall report to the Committee any and all recommendations made by the Compliance 
Coordinator to Management, and decisions by Management, under ¶ X.C of this 
program since the last meeting of the Committee. 
 
D. The Regulatory Affairs Committee shall adopt a standard operating procedure for 
the performance of its responsibilities under this compliance program. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.747  
Sample Fraud Policy
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
The corporate fraud policy is established to facilitate the development 
of controls that will aid in the detection and prevention of fraud 
against ABC Corporation. It is the intent of ABC Corporation to 
promote consistent organizational behavior by providing guidelines 
and assigning responsibility for the development of controls and the 
conduct of investigations. 
 
 
SCOPE OF POLICY 
 
This policy applies to any irregularity, or suspected irregularity, 
involving employees, as well as shareholders, consultants, vendors, 
contractors, outside agencies doing business with employees of such 
agencies, and/or any other parties with a business relationship with 
ABC Corporation (also called the Company). 
 
Any investigative activity required will be conducted without regard 
to the suspected wrongdoer’s length of service, position/title, or 
relationship to the Company. 
 
 
POLICY 
 
Management is responsible for the detection and prevention of fraud, 
misappropriations, and other irregularities. Fraud is defined as the 
intentional, false representation or concealment of a material fact for 
the purpose of inducing another to act upon it to his injury. Each 
member of the management team will be familiar with the types of 
improprieties that might occur within his area of responsibility, and 
be alert for any indication of irregularity. 
 
Any irregularity that is detected or suspected must be reported 
immediately to the Director of ______ _ __ _ _ __, who coordinates all 
investigations with the Legal Department and other affected areas, 
both internal and external. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.748   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
 
ACTIONS CONSTITUTING FRAUD 
 
The terms defalcation, misappropriation, and other fiscal irregularities  refer 
to, but are not limited to: 
 
 
• Any dishonest or fraudulent act 
• Misappropriation of funds, securities, supplies, or other assets 
• Impropriety in the handling or reporting of money or financial 
transactions 
• Profiteering as a result of insider knowledge of company activities
 • Disclosing confidential and proprietary information to outside 
parties 
• Disclosing to other persons securities activities engaged in or 
contemplated by the company 
• Accepting or seeking anything of material value from contractors, 
vendors, or persons providing services/materials to the 
Company. Exception: Gifts less than $50 in value. 
• Destruction, removal, or inappropriate use of records, furniture, 
fixtures, and equipment 
• Any similar or related irregularity
  
OTHER IRREGULARITIES 
 
Irregularities concerning an employee’s moral, ethical, or behavioral 
conduct should be resolved by departmental management and the 
Employee Relations Unit of Human Resources rather than the 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ Unit.  
 
If there is any question as to whether an action constitutes fraud, con-
 tact the Director of _______ _ _ __ _ __ for guidance. 
 
 
INVESTIGATION RESPONSIBILITIES  
 
The ______ __ _ _ __ Unit has the primary responsibility for the 
investigation of all suspected fraudulent acts as defined in the policy. 
If the investigation substantiates that fraudulent activities have oc-
 curred, the _______ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Unit will issue reports to appropriate 
designated personnel and, if appropriate, to the Board of Directors 
through the Audit Committee. 
 
Decisions to prosecute or refer the examination results to the 
appropriate law enforcement and/or regulatory agencies for 
independent investigation will be made in conjunction with legal 
counsel and senior management, as will final decisions on disposition 
of the case. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.749  
 
CONFIDENTIALITY 
 
The ______ __ _ _ __ _ _ Unit treats all information received 
confidentially. Any employee who suspects dishonest or fraudulent 
activity will notify the _______ _ _ _ _ _ _ Unit immediately, and should 
not attempt to personally conduct invest igations or interviews/interrogations  
related to any suspected fraudulent act (see REPORTING 
PROCEDURES section below). 
 
Investigation results will not be disclosed or discussed  with anyone other 
than those who have a legitimate need to know. This is important in 
order to avoid damaging the reputations of persons suspected but 
subsequently found innocent of wrongful conduct and to protect 
the Company from potential civil liability. 
 
 
AUTHORIZATION FOR INVESTIGATING SUSPECTED FRAUD 
 
Members of the Investigation Unit will have: 
• Free and unrestricted access to all Company records and 
premises, whether owned or rented 
• The authority to examine, copy, and/or remove all or any 
portion of the contents of files, desks, cabinets, and other 
storage facilities on the premises without prior knowledge or 
consent of any individual who might use or have custody of any 
such items or facilities when it is within the scope of their 
investigation
  
REPORTING PROCEDURES 
 
Great care must be taken in the investigation of suspected impropri-
 eties or irregularities so as to avoid mistaken accusations or alerting 
suspected individuals that an investigation is under way. 
 
An employee who discovers or suspects fraudulent activity will 
contact the ______ __ _ __ _ _ Unit immediately. The employee or other 
complainant may remain anonymous. All inquiries concerning the 
activity under investigation from the suspected individual, his 
attorney or representative, or any other inquirer should be directed 
to the Investigations Unit or the Legal Department. No information 
concerning the status of an investigation will be given out. The 
proper response to any inquiries is: “I am not at liberty to discuss 
this matter.” Under no circumstances  should any reference be made to 
“the allegation,” “the crime,” “t he fraud,” “the forgery,” “the 
misappropriation,” or any other specific reference.  
 
The reporting individual should be informed of the following: 
• Do not contact the suspected individual in an effort to 
determine facts or demand restitution. 
• Do not discuss the case, facts, suspicions, or allegations with 
anyone unless specifically asked to do so by the Legal 
Department or ______ __ __ _ _ Unit. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.750   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
 
ACTING IN GOOD FAITH 
 
Anyone reporting any irregularity that is detected or suspected 
must be acting in good faith and have reasonable grounds for 
believing the information provided. Allegations made maliciously 
or with knowledge of their falsity will not be tolerated. People 
making such allegations may be subject to institutional disciplinary 
action and/or legal actions by the individuals accused of fraudulent 
conduct.  
 
 
WHISTLEBLOWER 
PROTECTION 
 
Employees of ABC Corporation may not retaliate against a 
whistleblower for reporting an activity which that person believes 
to be fraudulent or dishonest with the intent or effect of adversely 
affecting the terms or conditions of employment (including, but 
not limited to, threats of physical harm, dismissal, transfer to an 
undesirable job assignment, demotion, suspension, or impact on 
salary or wages). A whistleblower is defined as an employee who 
informs a manager, supervisor, or Director of _______ _ _ __ _ _ 
about an activity which that person believes to be fraudulent or 
dishonest. 
 
Whistleblowers who believe that they have been retaliated against 
may file a written complaint with the Director of ______ _ _ __ _ __. 
Any complaint of retaliation will be promptly investigated by the 
______ __ _ ___ _ and appropriate remedial  measures will be taken if 
allegations of retaliation are proven. This protection from 
retaliation is not intended to prohibit managers or supervisors from 
taking action, including disciplinary action, in the usual scope of 
their duties and based on valid performance-related factors. This 
protection against retaliation is not intended to prohibit managers 
from taking action, including disciplinary action, in the usual scope 
of their duties and on the basis of valid performance-related 
factors. 
 
 
TERMINATION 
 
If an investigation results in a recommendation to terminate an 
individual, the recommendation will be reviewed for approval by the 
designated representatives from Human Resources and the Legal 
Department and, if necessary, by outside counsel, before any such 
action is taken. The _______ _ _ __ Unit  does not have the authority 
to terminate an employee. The decision to terminate an employee is 
made by the employee's management. Should the ______ _ __ _ __ _ 
Unit believe the management decision inappropriate for the facts 
presented, the facts will be presented to executive level management 
for a decision.  
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.751  
 
ADMINISTRATION 
 
The Director of ______ _ _ _ _ _ is responsible for the administration, 
revision, interpretation, and application of this policy. The policy will 
be reviewed annually and revised as needed. 
 
 
APPROVAL 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___         ______ _ _ __ _ __ _ _ 
(CEO/Senior Vice President/Executive                    Date 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs      Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
 
4.752            2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
   
 
Fraud Policy Decision Matrix 
 Investigation Internal Finance/Executive Line Risk Legal Public Employee
  Action Required Unit Audit Accounting Mgmt Mgmt Mgmt  Relations Relations
 1.  Controls to Prevent Fraud  
2.  Incident Reporting  
3.  Investigation of Fraud  
4.  Referrals to Law Enforcement  
5.  Recovery of Monies Due to Fraud     
6.  Recommendations to Prevent Fraud   
7. Internal Control Reviews   
8. Handle Cases of a Sensitive Nature   
9. Publicity/Press Releases 
10. Civil Litigation 
11. Corrective Action/Recommendations 
  to Prevent Recurrences 
12. Monitor Recoveries   
13. Proactive Fraud Auditing 
14. Fraud Education/Training 
15. Risk Analysis of Areas of Vulnerability 
16. Case Analysis 
17. Hotline 
18. EthicsLine 
 P (Primary Responsibility)       S (Secondary Responsibility)      SR (Shared Responsibility) 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.753 
Sample Code of Business Ethics and Conduct 
 
Introduction 
This section reaffirms the importance of high standards of business conduct. Adherence to 
this Code of Business Ethics and Conduct by all employees is the only sure way we can 
merit the confidence and support of the public. 
 
Many of us came from a culture that provided answers or direction for almost every 
situation possible. Managing our business was not so complex; the dilemmas we faced 
were — for the most part — simple, making our choices relatively easy. We would probably all 
agree that managing in today’s environment is not so simple. 
 
This code has been prepared as a working guide and not as a technical legal document. Thus, 
emphasis is on brevity and readability rather than providing an all-inclusive answer to 
specific questions. For example, the term employee  is used in its broadest sense and refers to 
every officer and employee of the company and its subsidiaries. The word “law” refers to 
laws, regulations, orders, etc. 
 
In observance of this code, as in other business conduct, there is no substitute for common 
sense. Each employee should apply this code with common sense and the attitude of seeking 
full compliance with the letter and spirit of the rules presented. 
 
It is incumbent upon you, as an employee of the company, to perform satisfactorily and to 
follow our policies and comply with our rules as they are issued or modified from time  
to time. 
 
These policies and rules are necessary to effectively manage the business and meet the ever-
 changing needs of the marketplace. Good performance and compliance with business rules 
lead to success. Both are crucial since our ability to provide you with career opportunities 
depends totally upon our success in the marketplace. Nonetheless, changes in our economy, 
our markets, and our technology are inevitable. Indeed, career opportunities will vary 
between the individual companies. For these reasons, we cannot contract or even imply that 
your employment will continue for any particular period of time. While you might terminate 
your employment at any time, with or without cause, we reserve that same right. This 
relationship might not be modified, except in writing signed by an appropriate representative 
of the company. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.754   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
This Code of Business Ethics and Conduct is a general guide to acceptable and appropriate 
behavior at the company, and you are expected to comply with its contents; however, it does 
not contain all of the detailed information you will need during the course of your 
employment. Nothing contained in this code or in other communications creates or implies 
an employment contract or term of employment. We are committed to reviewing our 
policies continually. Thus, this code might be modified or revised from time to time. 
 
You should familiarize yourself with this code so that you might readily distinguish any 
proposal or act that would constitute a violation. Each employee is responsible for his 
actions. Violations can result in disciplinary action, including dismissal and criminal 
prosecution. There will be no reprisal against an employee who in good faith reported a 
violation or suspected violation. 
 
The absence of a specific guideline practice or instruction covering a particular situation  
does not relieve an employee from exercising the highest ethical standards applicable to  
the circumstances. 
 
If any employee has doubts regarding a questionable situation that might arise, that 
employee should immediately consult his supervisor or a higher-level manager. 
 
Competition and Anti-Trust 
Fair Competition 
The company supports competition based on quality, service, and price. We will conduct our 
affairs honestly, directly, and fairly. To comply with the anti-trust laws and our policy of fair 
competition, employees: 
• Must never discuss with competitors any matter directly involved in competition 
between us and the competitor (e.g., sales price, marketing strategies, market shares, and 
sales policies) 
• Must never agree with a competitor to restrict competition by fixing prices, allocating 
markets, or other means 
• Must not arbitrarily refuse to deal with or  purchase goods and services from others 
simply because they are competitors in other respects 
• Must not require others to buy from us before we will buy from them 
• Must not require customers to take from us a service they don’t want just so they can get 
one they do want 
• Must never engage in industrial  espionage or commercial bribery 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.755 
• Must be accurate and truthful in all dealings with customers and be careful to accurately 
represent the quality, features, and availability of company products and services 
 
Compliance with Laws and Regulatory Orders 
The applicable laws and regulatory orders of every jurisdiction in which the company 
operates must be followed. Each employee is charged with the responsibility of acquiring 
sufficient knowledge of the laws and orders relating to his duties in order to recognize 
potential dangers and to know when to seek legal advice. 
 
In particular, when dealing with public officials, employees must adhere to the highest ethical 
standards of business conduct. When we seek the resolution of regulatory or political issues 
affecting the company’s interests, we must do so solely on the basis of merit and pursuant to 
proper procedures in dealing with such officials. Employees may not offer, provide, or 
solicit, directly or indirectly, any special treatment or favor in return for anything of 
economic value or the promise or expectation of future value or gain. In addition, there shall 
be no entertaining of employees of the U.S. Government. 
 
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
No employee will engage in activity that might involve the employee or the company in a 
violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977. The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
requires that the company’s books and records accurately and fairly reflect all transactions 
and that we maintain a system of internal controls; that transactions conform to 
management’s authorizations; and that the accounting records are accurate. No employee 
will falsely report transactions or fail to report the existence of false transactions in the 
accounting records. Employees certifying the correctness of records, including vouchers or 
bills, should have reasonable knowledge that the information is correct and proper. 
 
Under the Act, it is also a federal crime for any U.S. business enterprise to offer a gift, 
payment, or bribe, or anything else of value, whether directly or indirectly, to any foreign 
official, foreign political party or party official, or candidate for foreign political office for the 
purpose of influencing an official act or decision, or seeking influence with a foreign 
government in order to obtain, retain, or direct business to the company or to any person. 
Even if the payment is legal in the host country, it is forbidden by the Act and violates  
U.S. law. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.756   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Conflicts of Interest 
There are several situations that could give rise to a conflict of interest. The most common 
are accepting gifts from suppliers, employment by another company, ownership of a 
significant part of another company or business, close or family relationships with outside 
suppliers, and communications with competitors. A potential conflict of interest exists for 
employees who make decisions in their jobs that would allow them to give preference or 
favor to a customer in exchange for anything of personal benefit to themselves or their 
friends and families. 
 
Such situations could interfere with an employee’s ability to make judgments solely in the 
company’s best interest. 
 
Gifts and Entertainment 
DEFINITION OF GIFTS 
Gifts are items and services of value that are given to any outside parties, but do not include 
items described below. 
• Normal business entertainment items, such as meals and beverages, are not to be 
considered gifts. 
• Items of minimal value, given in connection with sales campaigns and promotions or 
employee service, safety, or retirement awards are not to be considered gifts for purposes 
of this code. 
• Contributions or donations to recognized charitable and nonprofit organizations are not 
considered gifts. 
• Items or services with a total value under $100 per year are excluded. 
 
DEFINITION OF SUPPLIER 
“Supplier” includes not only vendors providin g services and material to the company, but 
also consultants, financial institutions, advisors, and any person or institution that does 
business with the company. 
 
GIFTS  
No employee or member of his immediate family shall solicit or accept from an actual or 
prospective customer or supplier any compensation, advance loans (except from established 
financial institutions on the same basis as other customers), gifts, entertainment, or other 
favors that are of more than token value or that the employee would not normally be in a 
position to reciprocate under normal expense account procedures. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.757 
Under no circumstances should a gift or entertainment be accepted that would influence the 
employee’s judgment. In particular, employees must avoid any interest in or benefit from any 
supplier that could reasonably cause them to favor that supplier over others. It is a violation 
of the code for any employee to solicit or encourage a supplier to give any item or service to 
the employee regardless of its value, no matter how small. Our suppliers will retain their 
confidence in the objectivity and integrity of our company only if each employee strictly 
observes this guideline. 
 
REPORTING GIFTS  
An employee who receives, or whose family member receives, an unsolicited gift  
prohibited by these guidelines should report it to his supervisor and either return it to  
the person making the gift or, in the case of a perishable gift, give it to a nonprofit  
charitable organization.  
 
DISCOUNTS 
An employee might accept discounts on a personal purchase of the supplier’s or customer’s 
products only if such discounts do not affect the company’s purchase price and are generally 
offered to others having a similar business relationship with the supplier or customer.  
 
BUSINESS MEETINGS  
Entertainment and services offered by a supplier or customer may be accepted by an 
employee when they are associated with a business meeting and the supplier or customer 
provides them to others as a normal part of its business. Examples of such entertainment 
and services are transportation to and from the supplier’s or customer’s place of business, 
hospitality suites, golf outings, lodging at the supplier’s or customer’s place of business, and 
business lunches and dinners for business visitors to the supplier’s or customer’s location. 
The services should generally be of the type normally used by the company’s employees and 
allowable under the applicable company’s expense account.  
 
Outside Employment 
Employees must not be employed outside the company: 
• In any business that competes with or provides services to the company or its 
subsidiaries  
• In a manner that would affect their objectivity in carrying out their company 
responsibilities  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.758   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Where the outside employment would conflict with scheduled hours, including overtime, 
or the performance of the company assignments; employees must not use company 
time, materials, information, or other assets in connection with outside employment 
 
Relationships with Suppliers and Customers 
Business transactions must be entered into solely for the best interests of the company. No 
employee can, directly or indirectly, benefit from his position as an employee or from any 
sale, purchase, or other activity of the company. Employees should avoid situations 
involving a conflict or the appearance of conflict between duty to the company and  
self-interest.  
 
No employee who deals with individuals or organizations doing or seeking to do business 
with the company, or who makes recommendations with respect to such dealings, should: 
• Serve as an officer, director, employee, or consultant. 
• Own a substantial interest in any competitor of the company, or any organization doing 
or seeking to do business with the company. Substantial interest means an economic 
interest that might influence or reasonably be thought to influence judgment or action, 
but shall not include an investment representing less than 1 percent of a class of 
outstanding securities of a publicly held corporation. Every employee must complete the 
Conflict of Interest Questionnaire included with this book.  
 
In addition, no employee who deals with individuals or organizations doing or seeking to  
do business with the company, or who makes recommendations with respect to such 
dealings, might: 
• Have any other direct or indirect personal interest in any business transactions with the 
company (other than customary employee purchases of company products and services 
as consumers and transactions where the interest arises solely by reason of the employee 
relationship or that of a holder of securities). 
• Provide telecommunications or information service or equipment, either directly  
or as a reseller, in a manner that would place the objectivity or integrity of the company 
in question. 
 
Our policy is that employees will not do busi ness on behalf of the company with a close 
personal friend or relative; however, recognizing that these transactions do occur, they must 
be reported on the Conflict of Interest Questionnaire. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.759 
This policy is applicable equally to the members of the immediate family of each employee, 
which normally includes your spouse, children and their spouses, and the father, mother, 
sisters, and brothers of yourself and your household. 
 
Employment of Relatives 
Relatives of employees will not be employed on a permanent or temporary basis by the 
company where the relative directly reports to the employee or the employee exercises any 
direct influence with respect to the relative’s hiring, placement, promotions, evaluations,  
or pay.  
 
Confidential Information and Privacy of Communications 
Confidential Information 
Confidential information includes all information, whether technical, business, financial, or 
otherwise concerning the company, which the company treats as confidential or secret 
and/or which is not available or is not made available publicly. It also includes any private 
information of, or relating to, customer records, fellow employees, other persons or other 
companies, and national security information obtained by virtue of the employee’s position.  
 
Company policy and various laws protect the integrity of the company’s confidential 
information, which must not be divulged except in strict accordance with established 
company policies and procedures. The obligation not to divulge confidential company 
information is in effect even though material might not be specifically identified as 
confidential, and the obligation exists during and continues after employment with  
the company.  
 
A few examples of prohibited conduct are:  
• Selling or otherwise using, divulging, or transmitting confidential company information  
• Using confidential company information to knowingly convert a company business 
opportunity for personal use 
• Using confidential company information to acquire real estate that the employee knows 
is of interest to the company  
• Using, divulging, or transmitting confidential company information in the course of 
outside employment or other relationship, or any succeeding employment or other 
relationship at any time 
• Trading in the company stocks, or the stocks of any company, based on information that 
has not been disclosed to the public or divulging such information to others so that they 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.760   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
might trade in such stock. Insider trading is prohibited by company policy and federal 
and state law. 
 
Employees shall not seek out, accept, or use any confidential company information of or 
from a competitor of the company. In particular, should we hire an employee who 
previously worked for a competitor, we must neither accept nor solicit confidential 
information concerning that competitor from our employee.  
 
Classified National Security Information 
Only employees with proper government clearance and a need to know have access to 
classified national security information. Government regulations outlined in company 
instructions for safeguarding must be followed. Disclosing such information, without 
authorization, even after leaving employment, is a violation of law and this code.  
 
Adverse information about employees having government clearance must be reported to the 
Security or Law Departments’ representatives having responsibility for clearances.  
 
Company Assets 
Cash and Bank Accounts 
All cash and bank account transactions must be handled so as to avoid any question or 
suspicion of impropriety. All cash transactions must be recorded in the company’s books  
of account.  
 
All accounts of company funds, except authorized imprest funds, shall be established and 
maintained in the name of the company or one of its subsidiaries and might be opened or 
closed only on the authority of the company’s Board of Directors. Imprest funds must be 
maintained in the name of the custodian and the custodian is wholly responsible for these 
funds. All cash received shall be promptly recorded and deposited in a company or 
subsidiary bank account. No funds shall be maintained in the form of cash, except 
authorized petty cash, and no company shall maintain an anonymous (numbered) account at 
any bank. Payments into numbered bank accounts by the company might leave that 
company open to suspicion of participation in a possibly improper transaction. Therefore, 
no disbursements of any nature might be made into numbered bank accounts or other 
accounts not clearly identified to the company as to their ownership.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.761 
No payments can be made in cash (currency) other than regular, approved cash payrolls and 
normal disbursements from petty cash supported by signed receipts or other appropriate 
documentation. Further, corporate checks shall not be written to “cash,” “bearer,” or  
similar designations.  
 
Company Assets and Transactions 
Compliance with prescribed accounting procedures is required at all times. Employees 
having control over company assets and transactions are expected to handle them with the 
strictest integrity and ensure that all transactions are executed in accordance with 
management’s authorization. All transactions shall be accurately and fairly recorded in 
reasonable detail in the company’s accounting records.  
 
Employees are personally accountable for company funds over which they have control. 
Employees who spend company funds should ensure that the company receives good value 
in return and must maintain accurate records of such expenditures. Employees who approve 
or certify the correctness of a bill or voucher should know that the purchase and amount are 
proper and correct. Obtaining or creating “false” invoices or other misleading 
documentation or the invention or use of fictitious sales, purchases, services, loans, entities, 
or other financial arrangements is prohibited.  
 
Employees must pay for personal telephone calls and use, except to the extent that 
specifically defined benefit programs or allowances otherwise provide.  
 
Expense Reimbursement 
Expenses actually incurred by an employee in performing company business must be 
documented on expense reports in accordance with company procedures. In preparing 
expense reports, employees should review these procedures for the documentation in order 
to be reimbursed for business expenses.  
 
Company Credit Card 
Company credit cards are provided to employees for convenience in conducting company 
business. No personal expenses can be charged on company credit cards except as 
specifically authorized by company procedures. Any charged personal expenses must be paid 
promptly by the employee. Company credit cards should not be used to avoid preparing 
documentation for direct payment to vendors. Where allowed by local law, charges on 
company credit cards for which a properly approved expense report has not been received at 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.762   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
the time of an employee’s termination of employment might be deducted from the 
employee’s last paycheck. The company will pursue repayment by the employee of any 
amounts it has to pay on the employee’s behalf.  
 
Software and Computers 
Computerized information and computer software appear intangible, but they are valuable 
assets of the company and must be protected from misuse, theft, fraud, loss, and 
unauthorized use or disposal, just as any other company property. 
  
Use of mainframe computers must be customer service or job related. Employees cannot 
access company records of any kind for their personal use. Misappropriation of computer 
space, time, or software includes, but is not limited to, using a computer to create or run 
unauthorized jobs, operating a computer in an unauthorized mode, or intentionally causing 
any kind of operational failure. 
 
Personal computers can be used for company-sanctioned education programs as well as 
personal use incidental to company business use with the permission of your supervisor. 
However, personal use cannot be allowed for personal financial gain. 
 
It is also understood that personal computers will occasionally be used at home with the 
permission of your supervisor.  
 
Political Contributions 
Federal law and many state laws prohibit contributions by corporations to political parties or 
candidates. The term political contributions  includes, in addition to direct cash contributions, 
the donation of property or services, and the purchases of tickets to fundraising events. 
Employees can make direct contributions of their own money, but such contributions are 
not reimbursable. In addition, employees can make contributions to a company-sponsored 
Political Action Committee. 
 
Where corporate political contributions are legal in connection with state, local, or foreign 
elections, such contributions shall be made only from funds allocated for that purpose, and 
with the written approval of the president of the company making the contribution. The 
amounts of contributions made shall be subject to inter-company allocation.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.763 
It is improper for an employee to use his position within the company to solicit political 
contributions from another employee for the purpose of supporting a political candidate or 
influencing legislation. It is also improper for an employee to make a political contribution in 
the name of the company. 
 
Employee Conduct 
Conduct on Company Business 
Dishonest or illegal activities on company premises or while on company business will not 
be condoned and can result in disciplinary action, including dismissal and criminal 
prosecution. The following illustrates activities that are against company policy, and  
that will not be tolerated on company premises, in company vehicles, or while engaged in 
company business: 
• Consumption and storage of alcoholic beverages, except where legally licensed or 
authorized by an officer of the company 
• The use of controlled substances, such as drugs or alcohol; the unlawful manufacture, 
distribution, dispensation, possession, transfer, sale, purchase, or use of a  
controlled substance 
• Driving vehicles or operating company equipment while under the influence of alcohol 
or controlled substances 
• Illegal betting or gambling 
• Carrying weapons of any sort on company premises, in company vehicles, or while on 
company business; even employees with permits or licenses cannot carry weapons on 
company property or while on company business 
 
The company reserves the right to inspect any property that might be used by employees for 
the storage of their personal effects. This includes desks, lockers, and vehicles owned by the 
company. It is a violation of company policy to store any contraband, illegal drugs, toxic 
materials, or weapons on company property.  
 
Reporting Violations  
All employees are responsible for compliance with these rules, standards, and principles. In 
the area of ethics, legality, and propriety, each employee has an obligation to the company 
that transcends normal reporting relationships. Employees should be alert to possible 
violations of the code anywhere in the company and are encouraged to report such 
violations promptly. Reports should be made to the employee’s supervisor, the appropriate 
security, audit, or legal department personnel, or elsewhere as the circumstance dictates. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.764   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Employees will also be expected to cooperate in an investigation of violations. In addition, 
any employee who is convicted of a felony, whether related to these rules or not, should also 
report that fact.  
 
All cases of questionable activity involving the code or other potentially improper actions 
will be reviewed for appropriate action, discipline, or corrective steps. Whenever possible, 
the company will keep confidential the identity of employees about or against whom 
allegations of violations are brought, unless or until it has been determined that a violation 
has occurred. Similarly, whenever possible, the company will keep confidential the identity of 
anyone reporting a possible violation. Reprisal against any employee who has, in good faith, 
reported a violation or suspected violation is strictly prohibited. 
 
All employees are required to notify the company within five (5) days of any conviction of 
any criminal statute violation occurring on the job. In addition, any employee who is 
convicted of a felony, whether related to these rules or not, should report that fact.  
 
Discipline 
Violation of this code can  result in serious consequences for the company, its image, 
credibility, and the confidence of its customers, and can include substantial fines and 
restrictions on future operations, as well as the possibility of fines and prison sentences for 
individual employees. Therefore, it is necessary that the company ensure that there will be no 
violations. Employees should recognize that it is in their best interest, as well as the 
company’s, to follow this code carefully. 
 
The amount of any money involved in a violation might be immaterial in assessing the 
seriousness of a violation since, in some cases, heavy penalties might be assessed against the 
company for a violation involving a relatively small amount of money, or no money. 
 
Disciplinary action should be coordinated with the appropriate Human Resources 
representatives. The overall seriousness of the matter will be considered in setting the 
disciplinary action to be taken against an individual employee. Such action, which might be 
reviewed with the appropriate Human Resources organization, might include: 
• Reprimand 
• Probation 
• Suspension 
• Reduction in salary 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.765 
• Demotion 
• Combination of the above 
• Dismissal 
 
In addition, individual cases might involve: 
• Reimbursement of losses or damages 
• Referral for criminal prosecution or civil action 
• Combination of the above 
 
Disciplinary action might also be taken against supervisors or executives who condone, 
permit, or have knowledge of illegal or unethical conduct by those reporting to them and do 
not take corrective action. Disciplinary action might also be taken against employees who 
make false statements in connection with investigations of violations of this code.  
 
The company in its sole discretion will determine the disciplinary action appropriate to a 
given matter. The listing of possible actions is informative only and does not bind the 
company to follow any particular disciplinary steps, process, or procedure. 
 
The company’s rules and regulations regarding proper employee conduct will not be waived 
in any respect. Violation is cause for disciplinary action, including dismissal. All employees 
will be held to the standards of conduct described in this booklet. 
 
The company never has and never will authorize any employee to commit an act that 
violates this code or to direct a subordinate to do so. With that understood, it is not possible 
to justify commission of such an act by saying someone directed it in higher management.  
 
Compliance Letter and Conflict of Interest Questionnaire 
Annually, all officers of the company will represent in writing that there are no violations of 
this code known to the officer, after the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if such violations 
have been committed, to disclose such violations in a format to be specified.  
 
Annually, each employee will review the Code of Business Ethics and Conduct, sign the 
Code’s Acknowledgment form, and complete and sign the Conflict of Interest 
Questionnaire. If the employee’s circumstances  change at any time, a new Conflict of 
Interest Questionnaire or letter of explanation must be completed. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.766   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The Code of Business Ethics and Conduct Acknowledgment form should be signed and 
given to your supervisor for inclusion in your personnel file. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.767 
 COMPANY NAME, INC. 
 
Code of Conduct Compliance Questionnaire  
 
Managerial employees are being asked to complete this Compliance Questionnaire. 
COMPANY NAME, Inc. and its subsidiaries are committed to providing a workplace where 
employees can and do act responsibly and ethically. The COMPANY NAME, Inc.  Code of 
Conduct sets out specific standards of conduct that should govern our behavior toward our 
fellow employees, suppliers, and customers. Please answer each of the following questions 
and, if necessary, provide an explanation. For any “yes” response, please explain in the extra space 
provided on the last page. 
 
Conflict of Interest 
 
1.  During fiscal 20XX, did you receive, or are you aware of anyone who received, from any person 
or company doing business with your employer any loan, gift, trip, gratuity, or other payment 
that did or could cause prejudice toward or obligation to the giver, or could be perceived by 
others as creating an obligation to the giver? (Note: Each item, or the total of items from a single vendor 
with a value of more than $50 must be reported, except that you do not need to report loans made by financial 
institutions on normal and customary terms, common  stock dividends, or insurance policy payments).  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
2.  In fiscal 20XX, did you participate in or influence, or are you aware of anyone who participated 
in or influenced, any transaction between your employer and another entity in which they or any 
member of their family had a direct or indirect financial interest?  
 
  ? Yes  ?  No  
 
3.  In fiscal 20XX, did you have a material financial interest in or hold a position of influence with, 
or are you aware of anyone who had a material financial interest in or held a position of influence 
with, any business which furnishes goods or services to your employer? ( Note: The term material 
financial interest means someone who by virtue of their stock ownership or monetary interest in a company is 
able to direct or to influence business decisions, or a commissioned sales representative; position of influence  
means someone holding an influential position such as a sole  proprietor, partner, member of a board of directors, 
an executive, or a manager.)  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.768   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
4.  For fiscal 20XX, did you use, or are you aware of anyone who used, company assets or other 
resources (including funds, equipment, supplies, or personnel) for purposes other than company 
business or company-sponsored activities?   
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
5. During fiscal 20XX, did you receive, or are you aware of anyone who received, gifts or 
entertainment from individuals or organizations having dealings with the Company, including 
but not necessarily limited to loans, any form of cash gratuities, private or personal discounts not 
sanctioned by the Company, or remuneration or service related to illegal activities?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
6. During fiscal 20XX, did you accept, or are you aware of anyone who accepted, any consideration 
or special favors from suppliers or potential suppliers that in fact or appearance could be deemed 
a bribe, kickback, or reward given to influence your business judgment?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
7. Were you involved in, or are you aware of any employee who was involved in, a conflict of 
interest situation during fiscal year 20XX?   
 
 ? Yes  ?  No   
 
8. I have read the attached Conflict of Interest Policy Statement which is set forth in the 
COMPANY NAME Inc.  [and Subsidiaries] Code of Conduct and Compliance Program. 
Accordingly, I have listed below all relationships and outside activities that require disclosure 
under the policy. I have also listed names, addresses, and the nature of the relationships of all 
persons or entities doing business with my employer from whom I or any member of my 
immediate family has received, directly or indirectly, cash or a gift of more than nominal value 
($50) during the fiscal year ended May 31, 20XX. (If there are no persons or entities to be listed, so 
indicate by writing “NONE” in the first space provided below.)  
 
Name of Person /Entity Nature of Relationship/Outside Activity 
 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.769 
Political 
 
9. In fiscal 20XX, did you receive, or are you aware of anyone who received, any payments from 
your employer for the purpose of making a contribution to any political party, candidate, or 
election committee?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
Securities Trading  
 
10.  Did you buy or sell, or are you aware of anyone who may have bought and/or sold, stock based 
on confidential information, or communicated confidential information to influence 
COMPANY NAME, Inc.  stock transactions?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No 
 
Financial Integrity  
 
11. Are you aware of any entries made in the books and records of your employer in fiscal 20XX 
that you believe are false or intentionally misleading?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No 
 
12. Are you aware of any assets, liabilities, or transactions that you believe were improperly omitted 
from the books of your company in fiscal 20XX?   
 
 ? Yes  ?  No 
 
13.  In fiscal 20XX, are you aware of anyone seeking to influence any government official (including 
foreign officials) or government employee, or individual doing business with your company, by 
offering money, goods, or services in return for some special consideration?  
  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.770   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Other 
 
14.  Are you aware of any incident involving your employer that you feel constituted non-compliance 
with laws, regulations, policies, guidelines, procedures, or ethical principles, other than those 
matters referred to in other questions or incidents that have already been reported? ( Note: If you 
prefer to report an incident or violation anonymously, please answer this question “N O” and contact a member of 
the Ethics Committee or call the Confidential Ethics Hotline.)  
 
  ? Yes  ?  No 
 
15.  Please provide any explanations for “yes” responses. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
16.  In the space below, please provide any suggestions you may have for improving the Code of 
Conduct and Compliance Program.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ __ 
Printed Name 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ __  
Signature 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ __   
Date 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.771 
 
 COMPANY NAME, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES 
 
 Employee Company/Subsidiary Location  
   
 
 
 
 
Code of Conduct and Conflict of Interest Employee Certification 
 
I have read the COMPANY NAME, Inc.  and Subsidiaries Code of Conduct and 
Compliance Program. 
 
• I understand that the standards and policies in that Code of Conduct represent the 
policies of COMPANY NAME, Inc.  and its subsidiaries, and that violating those 
standards and policies, or any legal and regulatory requirements applicable to my job, 
may result in penalties set forth in the Code of Conduct or other appropriate sanction. 
 
• I understand that there are several sources within the company, including the Ethics 
Committee, that I can consult if I have questions concerning the meaning or application 
of the Code of Conduct or relevant legal and regulatory requirements. 
 
• I understand that it is my responsibility to disclose to an Ethics Officer, a member of the 
COMPANY NAME, Inc.  Operations Audit Department, a member of the Ethics 
Committee, or the Company’s Ethics Hotline any situation that might reasonably appear 
to be a violation of the Code of Conduct. 
 
• I have read the attached Conflict of Interest Policy Statement which is set forth in the 
COMPANY NAME, Inc.  and Subsidiaries Code of Conduct and Compliance Program. 
Accordingly, I have listed below all relationships and outside activities that require 
disclosure under the policy. I have also listed names, addresses, and the nature of the 
relationships of all persons or entities doing business with my employer from whom I or 
any member of my immediate family has received, directly or indirectly, cash or a gift of 
more than nominal value ($50) during the fiscal year ended May 31, 20XX. (If there are no 
persons or entities to be listed, so indicate by writing “NONE” in the first space provided below.) 
  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.772   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Name of Person/Entity Address Nature of Business/Relationship 
   
   
 
• I am not aware of any exceptions to standards and policies in the Code of Conduct 
except: (if none, so indicate by writing “NONE.”) 
 
 
  
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Signature of Employee Date
  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.801 



:


fraud prevent program
fraud prevent requir a system of rule which in their aggreg minim the
likelihood of fraud occur while maxim the possibl of detect ani fraudul
activ that mai transpir the potenti of be caught most often persuad like
perpetr not to commit the fraud becaus of thi principl the exist of a thorough
control system is essenti to fraud prevent
respons for fraud prevent
vicari or imput liabil
corpor and other organ can be held liabl for crimin act commit as a
matter of organiz polici fortun most organ do not expressli set out to
break the law howev corpor and other organ mai also be held liabl for the
crimin act of their employe if those act ar done in the cours and scope of their employ
and for the ostens purpos of benefit the corpor an employe act ar consid to be
in the cours and scope of employ if the employe ha actual author or appar author
to engag in those act appar author mean that a third parti would reason believ
the employe is author to perform the act on behalf of the compani therefor an
organ could be held liabl for someth an employe doe on behalf of the
organ even if the employe is not author to perform that act
an organ will not be vicari liabl for the act of an employe unless the
employe act for the ostens purpos of benefit the corpor thi doe not mean
the corpor ha to receiv an actual benefit from the illeg act of it employe all that
is requir is that the employe intend to benefit the corpor
a compani cannot seek to avoid vicari liabil for the act of it employe by simpli
claim that it did not know what wa go on legal speak an organ is
deem to have knowledg of all fact known by it offic and employe that is if the
govern can prove that an offic or employe knew of conduct that rais a question as
to the compani liabil and the govern ca n show that the compani willfulli fail to
act to correct the situat then the compani mai be held liabl even if senior manag
had no knowledg or suspicion of the wrongdo
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4702 2011 fraud examin manual
in addit the evolv legal principl of consciou avoid allow the govern to
prove the employ had knowledg of a particular fact which establish liabil by show
that the employ knew there wa a high probabl the fact exist and conscious avoid
confirm the fact employ cannot simpli turn a blind ey when there is reason to
believ that there mai be crimin conduct within the organ if step ar not taken to
deter the activ the compani itself mai be found liabl
the corpor can be held crimin respons even if those in manag had no knowledg or
particip in the underli crimin event and even if there were specif polici or
instruct prohibit the activ undertaken by the employe the act of ani employe
from the lowest clerk to the ceo can imput liabil upon a corpor in fact a
corpor can be crimin respons for the collect knowledg of sever of it employe
even if no singl employe intend to commit an offens thu the combin of vicari
or imput corpor crimin liabil and the sentenc guidelin for organ creat
an extraordinari risk for corpor todai
respons and liabil of a corpor director and offic
although mani compani do not realiz it the current legal environ impos a
respons on compani to ferret out employe misconduct and to deal with ani known
or suspect instanc of misconduct with effici and decis measur
first the doctrin of account suggest that offic and director awar of potenti
illeg conduct by senior employe mai be liabl for ani recurr of similar misconduct and
mai have an oblig to halt and cure ani continu effect of the initi misconduct
second the corpor sentenc guidelin which ar discuss in more detail below
provid stiff penalti for corpor that fail to take voluntari action to redress appar
misconduct by senior employe
third the privat secur litig reform act of 1995 now requir as a matter of
statut that independ auditor look for and assess manag respons to indic
of fraud or other potenti illeg where the corpor doe not have a histori of
respond to indic of wrongdo the auditor mai not be abl to reach a conclus
that the compani took appropri and prompt action in respons to indic of fraud
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4703
fourth the delawar court of chanceri in in re caremark internationa l inc deriv litig
698 a2d 959 del ch 1996 state that in it view a director duti of care includ a duti to
attempt in good faith to ensur corpor inform and report system exist these
system must be reason design to provid senior manag and the board of director
with time accur inform that would permit them to reach inform judgment
concern the corpor complianc with law and it busi perform
the court in caremark also state that the failur to creat an adequ complianc system
under some circumst could render a director liabl for loss caus by noncompli
with applic legal standard therefor director should make sure that their compani
have a corpor complianc plan in place to detect misconduct and deal with it effect
the director should then monitor the compani adher to the complianc program
do so will help the corpor avoid fine under the sentenc guidelin and help
prevent individu liabil on the part of the director and offic
the treadwai commiss
the nation commiss on fraudul financi report commonli known as the
treadwai commiss wa establish in 1987 with the purpos of defin the
respons of the auditor in prevent and detect fraud the commiss wa form
by the major profession audit organizationsth american institut of cpa the
institut of intern auditor and the nation associ of account the treadwai
commiss made sever major recommend that in combin with other
measur ar design to reduc the probabl of fraud in financi report
a mandatori independ audit committe made up of outsid director
a written charter that set forth the duti and respons of the audit committe
the audit committe should have adequ resourc and author to carri out it
respons
the audit committe should be inform vigil and effect
coso recommend
the committe of sponsor organ wa form to support the implement of
the treadwai commiss in 1992 the committe issu intern controlintegr
framework thi report wa a collabor effort of the american account associ
the american institut of cpa the financi execut institut the institut of intern
auditor and the institut of manag account the report is meant to appli to all
entiti public and privat regardless of size
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4704 2011 fraud examin manual
the coso report complement treadwai recommend to the sec that public
compani manag report includ an acknowledg for respons for intern
control and an assess of effect in meet those respons the report
provid the follow definit
intern control is a broadli defin process design to provid reason assur regard the
achiev of object in the follow categori
reliabl of financi report
effect and effici of oper
complianc with applic law and regul
coso also identifi five interrel compon of intern control the effect of
intern control can be determin from an assess of whether these five compon ar
in place and function effect the five compon ar control environ risk
assess control activ inform and commun and monitor
control environ
the control environ set the moral tone of an organ influenc the control
conscious of the organ and provid a foundat for all other control
compon thi compon take into account whether manag and employe within
the organ exhibit integr in their activ
coso envis that upper manag will be respons for the control environ of
organ employe look to manag for guidanc in most busi affair and
organiz ethic ar no differ it is import for upper manag to oper in an
ethic manner and it is equal import for employe to view manag in a posit
light manag must set an appropri moral to ne for the oper of an organ
in addit to mere set a good exampl howev coso suggest that upper
manag take direct control of an organ effort at intern control thi idea
should be regularli reinforc within the organ there ar sever action that
manag can take to establish the proper control environ for an organ
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4705
these includ
the establish of a code of ethic for the organ the code should be dissemin to all
employe and everi new employe should be requir to read and sign it the code
should also be dissemin to contractor who do work on behalf of the organ
under certain circumst compani mai face liabil due to the action of
independ contractor it is therefor veri import to explain the organ
standard to ani outsid parti with whom the organ conduct busi
care screen of job applic on of the easiest wai to establish a strong moral tone
for an organ is to hire moral sound employe too often the hire process is
conduct in a slipshod manner where permit by law organ should conduct
thorough background check on all new employe especi manag and those
employe handl sensit financi function in addit it is import to conduct
thorough interview with applic to ensur that thei have adequ skill to perform
the duti that will be requir of them
proper assign of author and respons in addit to hire qualifi ethic
employe it is import to put these peopl in situat where thei ar abl to thrive
without resort to uneth conduct organ should provid employe with
welldefin job descript and perform goal perform goal should be
routin review to ensur that thei do not set unrealist standard train should
be provid on a consist basi to ensur that employe maintain the skill to perform
effect regular train on ethic will also help employe identifi potenti troubl
spot and avoid get caught in compromis situat final manag should
quickli determin where defici in an employe conduct exist and work with the
employe to fix the problem
effect disciplinari measur no control environ will be effect unless there is
consist disciplin for ethic violat consist disciplin requir a welldefin
set of sanction for violat and strict adher to the prescrib disciplinari
measur if on employe is punish for an act and anoth employe is not punish
for a similar act the moral forc of the compani ethic polici will be diminish the
level of disciplin must be suffici to deter violat it mai also be advis to
reward ethic conduct thi will reinforc the import of organiz ethic in the
ey of employe
risk assess
risk assess involv an entiti identif and assess of the risk involv in
achiev organiz object thi compon involv tailor ethic polici or
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4706 2011 fraud examin manual
complianc program to the natur of the organ busi accord to coso risk
assess is a threestep process
set object for the organ manag should establish mission statement or similar
express of organiz object these statement must take into account the
natur of the organ busi the industri in which the organ oper
and the polit and econom environ in which it oper as well as the
organ resourc and goal in state it goal the organ should establish
measur criteria so that progress can be measur goal should not be so lofti that
thei cannot be reach consid the organ resourc and environ in
set object input from all level of manag should be sought onc an
appropri statement of object is establish it should be commun to
all employe
analyz potenti risk of violat coso divid risk into two categori extern risk
and intern risk extern risk includ thing like increas competit chang in
technolog shift econom condit and new legisl intern risk ar factor
such as personnel chang avail of fund for organiz project new
oper system and the develop of new product
develop a strategi to manag risk organ should identifi and be prepar to react to
ani extern or intern risk thi mean develop control that ar tailor to the
inher risk of the organ busi and establish set polici for deal
with violat
control activ
control activ ar the polici and procedur that enforc manag direct
manag should set forth polici and procedur guidelin in a manual that is issu to
employe a person or person should be design to keep statement of polici
updat and to make sure thei ar properli dissemin all control activ should be
close monitor by manag and chang should be made where control failur ar
identifi consist with the risk analysi compon when a control failur is identifi
the risk of addit failur should be consid in redesign control
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4707
inform and commun
the inform and commun compon relat to the exchang of inform in a wai
that allow employe to carri out their respons organ should work to
identifi pertin inform and see that it is deliv to those who need it most a
proper inform system will accomplish the follow
assimil import financi oper and complianc inform thi inform should
be drawn from both intern and extern sourc mean manag mai have to go
outsid the organiz structur to identifi pertin inform there should be a
mean of screen incom inform so that pertin inform is maintain
but unnecessari inform is not allow to clog channel of commun
exampl of pertin inform includ fact on organiz perform
market condit competitor program econom chang and legisl or
regulatori chang
pass on pertin informat ion to those who need it manag should provid time
inform to employe to help them carri out their duti more effect import
fact should be commun in readili usabl form it is also import to
commun the import of observ control manag should help employe
understand their own role in the intern control system and make it clear that intern
control have a high prioriti
provid for upstream commun commun in an organ should flow
in all direct employe should be provid with clear channel for report
suspect control violat provis should be made for employe to make
anonym report in order to avoid fear of retali which can have a chill effect
on upstream commun a similar report mechan for custom and other
extern parti should be in place seriou effort should be made to follow up on
these commun
monitor
monitor is the process that assess the qualiti of a control environ over time thi
compon should includ regular evalu of the entir control system it also requir
the ongo monitor of daytodai activ by manag and employe thi mai
involv review the accuraci of financi inform or verifi inventori suppli
equip and other organ asset final organ should conduct
independ evalu of their intern control system an effect monitor system
should provid for the free flow of upstream commun as discuss under the
inform and commun compon
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4708 2011 fraud examin manual
implement an effect complianc and ethic program under the corpor sentenc guidelin
to review the unit state sentenc commiss began a studi of sanction for
corpor wrongdo in 1988 after three year of studi and hear on mai 1 1991 the
ussc submit it propos guidelin for sentenc organ to congress the
introductori commentari to the guidelin clearli state that thei ar design to provid
incent for organ to maintain intern mechan for prevent detect and
report crimin conduct among other thing the guidelin suggest a substanti
reduct of fine for organ that have effect complianc program see the
chapter on organiz crime for more in format about how penalti ar calcul
under the guidelin
the unit state sentenc commiss promulg modif to the exist
provis of chapter 8 deal with effect complianc and ethic program for busi
organ that becam effect novemb 1 2004 these provis contain in
section 8b21 narrowli tailor the criteria for complianc and ethic program therebi
provid organ with guidanc in establish and maintain effect program for
detect and prevent intern illeg activ as well as mitig sentenc culpabl
under the guidelin if a convict organ ha an effect complianc program in
place at the time of the offens the sentenc judg will consid the organ act of
due dilig in try to prevent the illeg when decid whether to increas or mitig
the sentenc the guidelin defin effect complianc program as on that is reason
design implement and enforc so that it gener will be effect in prevent and
detect crimin conduct
in april 2010 howev the us sentenc commiss modifi the sentenc guidelin
for organ especi as thei relat to complianc program the most signific
chang under the modifi sentenc guidelin for organ concern the sentenc
reduct credit for have an effect complianc program befor the guidelin were
modifi organ were disqualifi from receiv a reduct in sentenc for
maintain an effect complianc program if a highlevel person wa involv with the
fraudul activ under the modifi guidelin howev involv of a highlevel
person is no longer an automat bar from effect complianc program credit but the
amend impos sever condit to receiv a reduct under these circumst
includ a direct report requir to the govern author board or audit
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4709
committe the chang will becom effect on novemb 1 2010 bar ani
congression modif or reject
as provid by the guidelin to have an effect complianc and ethic program the
organ shall
exercis due dilig to prevent and detect crimin conduct
otherwis promot an organiz cultur that encourag ethic conduct and a
commit to complianc with the law
the guidelin further requir that such a complianc and ethic program be reason
design implement and enforc so that it is gener effect in prevent and
detect crimin conduct howev thi section further provid that the failur to prevent
or detect the offens in question doe not necessarili mean that the program is ineffect
in design such a program certain factor must be consid by each organ
1 applic industri size and practic an organ failur to incorpor and
follow industri practic or the standard call for by ani applic govern
regul weigh against a find that the program is effect
2 size of the organizationlarg organ ar expect to devot more formal
oper and greater resourc to meet the requir than ar small
organ for exampl smaller organ mai us avail personnel rather
than emploi separ staff to carri out ethic and complianc
3 recurr of similar misconduct the recurr of a similar event creat doubt as to
whether the organ took reason step to meet the requir
to meet the two requir of due dilig and promot of an ethic cultur section
8b21 b set forth the seven factor that ar minim requir for such a program to be
consid effect
1 the organ must have establish standard and procedur to prevent and detect
crimin conduct
2 item 2 ha three specif subpart
a the organ govern author shall be knowledg about the content and
oper of the complianc and ethic program and shall exercis reason
oversight with respect to implement and effect of the complianc and
ethic program
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4710 2011 fraud examin manual
b highlevel personnel shall ensur that the organ ha an effect complianc
and ethic program and specif individu within the organ shall be
assign overal respons for the complianc and ethic program
c specif individu within the organ shall be deleg daytodai
oper respons for the complianc and ethic program these individu
shall report period to highlevel personnel and as appropri to the govern
author or a subgroup thereof on the effect of the program it is also
requir that these specif individu be given adequ resourc and author to
accomplish their respons and be given direct access to the govern
author
3 the organ shall us reason effort not to includ within the substanti
author personnel ani individu whom the organ knew or should have known
ha engag in illeg activ or other conduct inconsist with an effect
complianc and ethic program
4 item 4 ha two subpart
a the organ shall take reason step to commun period and in a
practic manner it standard and procedur and other aspect of the complianc
and ethic program to the individu refer to in subpart b below by conduct
effect train program and otherwis dissemin inform appropri to
such individu respect role and respons
b the individu refer to in subpart a abov ar the 1 member of the govern
author 2 highlevel personnel 3 substanti author personnel 4 the
organ employe and as appropri the 5 organ agent
5 the organ shall take reason step to accomplish the follow
a ensur that the organ complianc and ethic program is follow includ
monitor and audit to detect crimin conduct
b evalu period the effect of the organ complianc and ethic
program
c have and public a system which mai includ mechan that allow for
anonym or confidenti wherebi the organ employe and agent
mai report or seek guidanc regard potenti or actual crimin conduct without
fear of retali
6 the organ complianc and ethic program shall be promot and enforc
consist throughout the organ through a appropri incent to
perform in accord with the program and b appropri disciplinari measur for
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4711
engag in crimin conduct and for fail to take reason step to prevent or detect
crimin conduct
7 after crimin conduct ha been detect the organ shall take reason step to
respond appropri to the crimin conduct and to prevent further similar crimin
conduct includ make ani necessari modif to the organ complianc
and ethic program
the follow ar some tip and suggest for develop a complianc and ethic program
that compli with these seven requir
1 establish standard
the first step is to establish standard and procedur that ar reason capabl of
prevent and detect crimin conduct on should start by produc a clear statement
of manag philosophi thi statement will serv as the backbon of all complianc
procedur thi is similar to the coso requir that manag must set the ethic
tone for the organ
organ should draft clear concis complianc standard that ar consist with
manag ethic polici and ar relev to busi oper a sampl corpor
complianc program is includ later in thi section it should provid a framework from
which fraud examin can build complianc program tailor to their own organ
2 assign responsisbl
the guidelin requir that the compani gove rning author shall be knowledg about
the content and oper of the complianc and ethic program and shall exercis
reason oversight with respect to the implement and effect of the program
govern author is defin as the board of director or if the organ doe not have a
board of director the highestlevel govern bodi of the organ
it is also requir that highlevel personnel shall ensur that the compani ha an effect
program and that specif individu within thi group be assign the overal respons
for the program
highlevel personnel ar those who have subst antial control over the organ or who
have a substanti role in the make of polici within the organ specif exampl of
highlevel personnel includ
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4712 2011 fraud examin manual
director
execut offic
individu in charg of major busi or function unit of the organ
individu with substanti ownership interest in the organ
audit committe
if a board of director exist the board must be knowledg about the complianc
program and overse it implement accordingli it is prefer for the board of
director or on of the board committe to control the organ complianc
program for instanc mani compani place their complianc program under the control
of audit committe there ar three princip benefit to thi practic
the involv of the board of director lend an air of author to the complianc
program it clearli identifi the program as a matter of compani polici
the involv of a board committe provid oversight to the oper of the
program by personnel who ar not involv in the daytodai oper of the program
effort to implement an effect complianc program can be document in the
committe minut thi document can prove us if the compani ever ha to
defend it action and seek mitig of a crimin fine
a member of the board should also be a member of the audit committe thi will help
ensur that the board is knowledg about the content and oper of the program
although the board and the offic mai deleg the daytodai oper respons
for the program to other individu such as a complianc offic and hi staff these
individu must report period to the board or other highlevel personnel regard the
effect of the program thei must also have suffici author to ensur that
standard ar strictli adher to as well as adequ resourc to implement and monitor the
program
3 due dilig in hire
the guidelin requir that the organ us reason effort not to includ within
the substanti author personnel of the organ ani individu whom the organ
knew or should have known through the exercis of due dilig ha engag in illeg
activ or other conduct inconsist with an effect complianc and ethic program
substanti author personnel is defin as individu who exercis a substanti measur of
discret in act on behalf of an organ the term includ highlevel personnel of
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4713
the organ individu who exercis substanti supervisori author such as a plant
manag or a sale manag and ani other individu who although not a part of an
organ manag nevertheless exercis substanti discret when act within
the scope of their author such as an individu with author in an organ to
negoti or set price level or an individu author to negoti or approv signific
contract whether an individu fall within thi categori must be determin on a casebi
case basi
like coso the guidelin requir that organi zation hire ethic employe thi requir
care screen of applic thorough background check where permit by law and
effect monitor of the perform of current employe although the guidelin onli
requir such screen for substanti author personnel it is recommend that such
screen be adopt for all employe
4 commun the polici
the corpor complianc polici should be commun to everyon who can potenti
bind a corpor through their own misconduct thi includ the follow
board of director
execut offic and director
manag and supervisor
lowlevel employe
independ contractor
note in particular that organ can be held liabl for the act of independ contractor
if the contractor is act for the benefit of the organ it is therefor import to
distribut copi of the complianc program to contractor as well as employe
train employe
as requir by the sentenc guidelin organ must conduct effect train
program organ ar also requir to period and appropri commun the
program complianc requir and procedur to all employe affect by the program
includ upperlevel personnel these program should be design to inform employe
about the compani stanc on corpor complia nce thei should also inform employe
about what kind of act and omiss ar prohibit by the law and by the organ the
train should be design to help employe identifi and avoid situat that could lead to
crimin conduct common train techniqu includ
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4714 2011 fraud examin manual
lectur
train film
interact workshop
computerbas cours
employe should be train to understand the organ ethic polici thei
should also be train to identifi potenti compromis situat and learn how to
avoid them thi train should be tailor to the natur of the organ busi
take into account the extern and intern risk that ar inher in that busi train
should also includ a review of statut and regul that ar particularli applic to
the organ
train should not be a onetim event simpli hand out a copi of the compani
complianc polici at the begin of an employe tenur is insuffici organ
should stress complianc by regularli emphas their standard to all personnel for
exampl mani compani dissemin a copi of their ethic polici everi six month along
with employe paycheck
5 achiev complianc
an organ is requir to take reason measur to ensur program complianc
through monitor audit period evalu the program effect and have
a public report system wherebi employe and agent mai retain anonym or
confidenti when report or seek guidanc regard actual or potenti illeg
conduct without fear of retribut these includ such thing as proactiv fraud detect
and hotlin which ar discuss in more detail in the next section
6 disciplinari action
enforc a complianc program mean adher to a system of disciplinari action for rule
breaker employe must know that if thei violat the compani complianc polici thei will
be punish the opportun to commit fraud is psycholog more accept when
employe believ fraud normal goe undetect and unprosecut new employe should
be advis of the complianc program at the time of hire and should sign an annual statement
acknowledg their understand of it the rang of possibl punish for violat of
the polici should be spell out these mai includ
reprimand
probat
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4715
suspens
reduct in salari
demot
reimburs of loss of damag
dismiss
referr for crimin prosecut or civil action
a combin of the abov
in addit the guidelin recommend the disciplin of individu who ar respons for
fail to detect offens
if a complianc program is not enforc it is noth more than a paper tiger there ar two
purpos to ani complianc program the first is to prevent crimin conduct the second is
to mitig ani potenti fine for crimin conduct by show that the organ is
dedic to prevent illeg activ if an organ doe not enforc it complianc
program it chanc of mitig fine ar nil therefor organ should adher to
welldefin procedur when investig potenti violat and when disciplin
individu for offens the organ effort should be document so that it can
prove that it made everi effort to enforc complianc for everi alleg of an offens the
compani should maintain
an account of the alleg offens
a descript of the step taken to investig the alleg
a descript of the action taken by the organ in respons to the violat
note howev that the guidelin also requir that the organ promot the complianc
and ethic program through appropri incent that encourag employe to perform in
accord with the program such incent can includ reward for report ethic concern
or misconduct or reward for idea for new or innov detect and monitor method
7 appropri respons
after detect of an offens the organ must take all reason step to appropri
respond to thi offens and to prevent further similar offensesinclud modifi it
program and administ appropri disciplin for the individu respons for the offens
and those who fail to detect it when a control failur is identifi chang mai be necessari
both coso and the guidelin requir organ to identifi the weak in the control
system and make modif to prevent similar failur in the futur the guidelin requir
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4716 2011 fraud examin manual
that organ explain the modif thei have made and demonstr why thei will
be effect
the propos amend clarifi subsect 8b21b7 ad an applic note to
provid guidanc on what action qualifi as rea sonabl step for the purpos of thi
subsect first the propos note state that if the crimin conduct ha an identifi
victim the organ should take reason step to provid restitut and otherwis
remedi the harm result from the crimin conduct 1 it provid that other proper respons
includ selfreport and cooper with author second the propos note provid
that the organ should apprais and if need alter it complianc program to guarante
that the complianc program is more product final the propos note provid that if
an organ decid to alter it complianc program it mai take the ad step of retain
an autonom monitor to guarante suffici apprais and applic of the chang
period assess
the guidelin also requir that the organ period assess the risk that crimin
conduct will occur and modifi it action and it complianc and ethic program accordingli in
do so the organ should assess the follow
the natur and serious of crimin conduct that could occur
the likelihood that certain crimin conduct mai occur becaus of the natur of the
organ busi
the prior histori of the organ which mai indic the type of crimin conduct
that the compani should be try to prevent
moreov the propos amend add an applic note that clarifi the requir
that organ conduct period assess the note provid that an organ as
part of a period assess should monitor the natur and oper of the organ
with regard to particular ethic and complianc function 2
relat of coso and corpor sentenc guidelin
the guidelin and co o focu on the develop of a stronger control system the
guidelin contain explicit requir for an effect control program coso doe not
mandat specif action it onli provid illustr of what constitut a strong control
1 sentenc guidelin for unit state court 75 fed reg at 3535
2 sentenc guidelin for unit state court 75 fed reg at 3535
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4717
system the seven minimum requir of the guidelin ar cover within the coso
system the follow tabl summar the relat between the compon of the two
pronounc
compon coso guidelin
control environ
managemenst set the ethic tone
lead by action such as
reward ethic conduct while
punish uneth action
sanction for know toler
or condon improp conduct
reward for cooper and
contrit
due dilig requir
upper manag oversight of
complianc program
integr and ethic
valu
code of ethic
mechan to encourag
employe report
code of ethic
addit report mechan
human resourc hire those who demonstr
integr
consist disciplin
nondeleg of author to
those with crimin tendenc
consist disciplin
risk assess object relat to oper
financi report and
complianc
identif and analysi of
relev risk
a strategi to manag risk
incent to maintain intern
control
identif of industryspecif
risk
control activ polici and procedur to help
ensur that manag
direct ar follow
standard and procedur capabl
of reduc the prospect of
crimin conduct
determin of modif
need to prevent futur problem
inform and
commun
the identif captur and
commun of pertin
inform in an appropri
format and time frame
effect commun of
standard and procedur to all
employe and other agent
requir train and distribut
of public
establish of addit
report mechan such as
hotlin or helplin
monitorin g ongo assess of the
intern control system
util of monitor and
audit system design to
detect crimin conduct
period evalu of program
effect
fiorelli roonei coso and the feder sentenc guidelin intern auditor april 1997
sampl corpor complianc polici
a sampl corpor complianc polici is includ at the end of thi chapter
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4718 2011 fraud examin manual
procedur to prevent fraud
the follow ar exampl of procedur that can be implement into a complianc
program that ar specif design to detect and prevent fraud
proactiv fraud polici
proactiv fraud polici ar gener from the top of the oper a proactiv polici mean
that the organ will aggress seek out possibl fraudul conduct instead of
wait for instanc to come to their attent thi can be accomplish by sever mean
includ the us of analyt review fraud assess question enforc of
mandatori vacat job rotat and surpris audit where possibl
us of analyt review
much intern fraud is discov as a result of analyt review to uncov such fraud and
defalc thei must materi impact the financi statement auditor should be
especi mind of the follow trend
increas expens
increas cost of sale
increas receivablesdecreas cash
increas inventori
increas salesdecreas cash
increas return and allow
increas sale discount
fraud assess question
fraud assess question is a nonaccusatori interview techniqu us as a part of a normal
audit see the investig section of the fraud examin manual for further detail it
oper on the theori that employe attitud ar a good indic of potenti problem
and that on of the most effect wai to deal with fraud is to ask about it
below ar some suggest question that can be ask as a part of the normal audit note
that the question here begin with the gener and proce to the specif
part of my duti as an auditor is to find fraud wast and abus do you understand that
do you think fraud is a problem for busi in gener
do you think thi compani ha ani particular problem with fraud
ha anyon ever ask you to do anyth that you felt wa illeg or uneth
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4719
if you felt that there wa a problem in the compani with respect to fraud what would
you do
do you have ani indic that there is fraud occur in the compani now
enforc of mandatori vacat
mani intern fraud requir manual intervent and ar therefor discov when the
perpetr is awai on vacat the enforc of mandatori vacat will aid in the
prevent of some fraud
job rotat
some fraud ar detect dure sick or unexpect absenc of the perpetr becaus
thei requir continu manual intervent
exampl
a manag who embezzl 16 million from hi compani said if the compani had
coupl a twoweek vacat with four week of rotat to anoth job function my
embezzl would have been imposs to cover up hi fraud last three year
surpris audit where possibl
all too mani fraud perpetr know when auditor ar come and therefor have time to
alter destroi or misplac record and other evid a proactiv fraud polici involv
us the techniqu of surpris audit as much as possibl it might have a signific
deterr effect
manag oversight
it is most common for employe who steal to us the proce for lifestyl improv
some exampl includ more expens car extravag vacat expens cloth new
or remodel home expens recreat properti and outsid invest manag
should be educ to be observ of these sign
exampl
discoveri of a 97000 embezzlem ent that occur over a two year period result when
an observ manag ask the intern auditor to examin the respons of a seven
year veteran of the compani the manag no tice that thi femal employe had begun
wear design cloth and make a big deal about it and wa drive a new bmw
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4720 2011 fraud examin manual
the manag wa also awar of the fact that thi employe had no outsid incom that
might explain the upgrad in lifestyl
increas the percept of detect
most expert agre that it is much easier to prevent than detect fraud to prevent fraud we
should understand someth about the mind of the potenti perpetr increas the
percept of detect might be the most effect fraud prevent method control for
exampl do littl good in forestal theft and fraud if those at risk do not know of the
presenc of possibl detect in the audit profess thi mean let employe
manag and execut know that auditor ar activ seek out inform concern
intern theft thi can be accomplish in sever wai
employe educ
each entiti should have some polici for educ manag execut and employe
about fraud thi can be done as a part of employe orient or it can be accomplish
through memoranda train program and other intercompani commun method
the goal is to make other within the compani your ey and ear
ani educ effort should be posit and not accusatori illeg conduct in ani form
eventu cost everyon in the compani through lost profit advers public and
decreas moral and product these fact should be emphas in train
minim employe pressur
pressur such as financi hardship or famili problem can be especi difficult to
detect in employe compani can take step to assist an employe who might be have
difficult time
opendoor polici
if employe and other can speak freeli mani manag will understand the pressur and
might be abl to elimin them befor thei becom acut
exampl
the control of a small frui tpack compani in california stole 112000 from the
compani when ask why he said nobodi at the compani ever talk to me especi
the owner thei were unfair thei talk do wn to me and thei we re rude thei deserv
everyth thei got
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4721
employe support program
mani progress compani and agenc have realiz the benefit of employe support
program some kind of support program includ alcohol and drug assist and
counsel for gambl abort marit problem and financi difficulti
manag climat
if the style of manag is conduct by object measur rather than by subject
measur then employe will not manufactur or imagin the perform criteria
emploi by manag in addit it is obviou that manag that is perceiv to be
dishonest will beget dishonest employe
exampl
jim a loan offic for a mortgag bank receiv hi primari compens base on the total
volum of loan measur by dollar he wa abl to put on the book each year dollar
volum wa the onli criteria for the compens in addit the loan offic were all in
competit with each other for the high volum award of the year the pressur to earn more
than hi fellow offic becam more acut each year
when the mortgag compani wa close down most of jim loan were in default becaus
jim perceiv that hi job perform wa base sole on volum no attent wa paid to
the qualiti of the loan in fact it wa discov er that on sever occas jim coerc the
loan process depart to close loan even though all the requir had not been
complet
exampl
a larg fast food chain lost 200000 when on of it buyer got involv with a supplier
the compani decid to notifi all of it vendor of the compani polici prohibit the give
of anyth of valu to influenc a purchas decis two vendor call in with complaint
about competitor result in the discoveri of two other fraud total an addit
360000
monitor system
both the guidelin and sarbanesoxlei specif mention the import of have a
report system for employe and agent of the organ to report crimin conduct
confidenti hotlin ar on of the best wai for an organ to monitor complianc
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4722 2011 fraud examin manual
report program
each employe in the compani should know where to report suspici uneth or illeg
behavior a report program should emphas that
fraud wast and abus occur in nearli all compani
such conduct cost the compani job and profit
the compani activ encourag ani employe with inform to come forward
the employe can come forward and provid inform anonym and without
fear of recrimin for goodfaith report
there is an exact method for report ie a telephon number name or other
inform
the report need not be made to on immedi superior
hotlin
hotlin have prove to be a veri effect report mechan howev most hotlin
report do not result in fraud case at the feder level publish report indic that about
five percent of hotlin call result in seriou alleg with care screen of call and
proper handl spuriou complaint can be effect weed out there ar three gener
type of hotlin the advantag and disadvantag of each ar summar below
part time inhous
these hotlin ar assign to an employe with other duti an audit or secur depart
usual staff an inhous hotlin when the employe is out a record take call the main
advantag is cost the main disadvantag is that the hotlin is not staf fulltim which can
discourag call also some peopl might be reluct to report to the compani
full time inhous
a fulltim inhous hotlin mai be feasibl depend on the compani size the advantag
is that peopl can make report at ani time dai or night and talk to a person the
disadvantag is cost and like the parttim line some peopl might be reluct to report
directli to the compani
third parti
an outsid compani that special in servic of thi type most often staff a thirdparti
hotlin the advantag ar cost effici and anonym a few ar staf around the
clock and will provid the inform immedi to the client subscrib thei also
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4723
provid anonym to those who might be more comfort with it their disadvantag is
that the oper is beyond the compani control
reward
some compani have a polici of reward inform that lead to the recoveri of
merchandis properti or monei other offer reward upon the crimin convict of the
person involv if a reward polici exist strict criteria should establish reward payment
and such propos polici should be review and approv by counsel the amount of
reward paid by compani vari from fix fee to a percentag of the recoveri studi
indic that reward should not exce a few thousand dollar
fraud prevent standard under sarbanesoxlei
the sarbanesoxlei act sox set forth a number of prevent measur public compani
must take to help reduc the threat of fraud the act as a whole is discuss in detail in the
law section of the fraud examin manual here we will cover onli the portion of sox
that directli relat to fraud prevent
audit committe respons
on of the kei to effect fraud prevent is assign highlevel personnel respons
for fraud prevent effort thi signal to employe that fraud is a seriou matter and it
help ensur that fraud prevent issu will receiv consider at the highest level of
the compani sox mandat that audit committe for publicli trade compani be
directli respons for two kei compon of an effect fraud prevent program
outsid audit and intern report mechan it also establish requir for the
composit of audit committe to ensur that thei ar capabl of carri out
their duti
overse audit
section 301 of the act requir the audit committe for everi publicli trade compani to be
directli respons for hire pai and overse the work of the compani outsid
auditor auditor must report directli to the audit committe and the committe is
respons for resolv disput between auditor and the compani manag
section 204 of sox requir outsid auditor to report certain inform to the audit
committe includ ani altern account treatment within gaap that have been
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4724 2011 fraud examin manual
discuss with manag the effect of us those altern treatment and the
treatment prefer by the auditor thi is design to give the audit committe a warn
in the event that manag ha us question or overli aggress account in the
prepar of the compani financi statement
receiv complaint
section 301 also specifi that audit committe must establish procedur for receiv and
deal with complaint and anonym employe tip regard irregular in the
compani account method intern control or audit matter
composit of the audit committe
the act also set forth certain requir regard the composit of audit committe
under section 301 everi member of the audit committe must also be a member of the
compani board of director which ensur that the committe will have suffici
author within the compani to carri out it duti furthermor section 407 of the act
requir everi public compani to disclos in it sec report whether at least on member of
the audit committe is a financi expert and if not to explain the reason why financi
expert ar defin by sox as person who through educ and profession experi
possess the follow 1 an understand of gener accept account principl and
financi statement 2 experi in prepar ing or audit financi statement of
compar compani and in account for estim accrual and reserv in those
compani 3 experi with intern control and 4 an understand of audit
committe function
final section 301 expressli state that audit committe must be given suffici author
and fund to hire attornei and other advisor necessari to carri out their duti
manag respons
sarbanesoxlei also place a number of requir on manag ement relat to fraud
prevent it make manag directli respons for intern control requir
compani to establish code of ethic for their senior financi offic and requir ceo
and cfo to person certifi their compani financi report
manag respons for intern control
intern control ar among the most import aspect of ani fraud prevent program
section 404 of sox requir each annual report file with the sec to contain an intern
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4725
control report that 1 state manag re sponsibl for establish and maintain an
adequ intern control structur and 2 contain an assess of the effect of the
intern control structur and procedur of the compani for financi report
manag intern control assess must be attest to and report on by the
compani outsid auditor
code of ethic for senior financi offic
in order to have an effect antifraud program organ must set clear standard for
conduct it is also critic to establish an ethic tone at the top of an organ to serv as
a guid and exampl for employe sarbanesoxlei address both of these issu by
requir publicli trade compani to disclos in their period report whether thei have
adopt a code of ethic for their senior financi offic and if not to explain their
reason sox also requir compani to make an immedi disclosur ani time there is a
chang in the code of ethic or a waiver for a senior financi offic
certif oblig
as part of an effort to elimin financi statement fraud sarbanesoxlei requir ceo
and cfo of publicli trade compani to person certifi their compani annual and
quarterli sec file there ar two categori of offic certif requir by sox
crimin certif which ar contain in section 906 of the act and civil certif
which ar contain in section 302
crimin certif
under section 906 all period file with the sec must be accompani by a statement
which certifi that the report fulli compli with the sec report requir and that
the inform in the report fairli present in all materi respect the financi condit
and result of oper of the compani thi statement must be sign by both the ceo
and cfo these certif ar known as crimin certif becaus the act
impos crimin penalti for violat of thi section includ fine of up to 1 million
and imprison of up to ten year
civil certif
section 302 requir that the ceo and cfo certifi the follow six item in everi annual
and quarterli report
thei have person review the report
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4726 2011 fraud examin manual
base on their knowledg the report doe not contain ani materi misstat that
would render the financi mislead
base on their knowledg the financi inform in the report fairli present in
all materi respect the financi condit result of oper and cash flow of
the compani
thei ar respons for design maintain and evalu the compani
intern control thei have design the control to ensur that thei receiv materi
inform about the compani thei have evalu the control within 90 dai prior to
the report and thei have present their conclus about the effect of the
control in the report
thei have disclos to the auditor and the audit committe ani materi weak in
the control and ani fraud whether materi or not that involv manag or other
employe who have a signific role in the compani intern control
thei have indic in the report whether there have been signific chang in the
compani intern control includ ani correct action with regard to signific
defici and materi weak
impact of certif oblig
sarbanesoxlei requir ceo and cfo to take person respons for their
compani financi statement thei cannot deleg their respons to their
subordin and then claim ignor when fraud is discov if the financi includ
fraudul report then the senior financi offic mai be held individu civilli liabl
for the misstat
the fairli present standard of item 3 is broader than what is requir by gaap it
essenti requir the ceo and cfo to certi fy that the compani ha select appropri
account polici ha properli appli those account standard and ha disclos
financi inform that reflect the underli transact of the compani
item 4 requir senior financi offic to take an activ role in the design and mainten
of their compani intern control it not onli requir the ceo and cfo to certifi that
thei ar respons for control but also that thei have evalu their control within 90
dai prior to their quarterli or annual report thi effect requir compani to
continu reevalu their control structur item 5 requir the ceo and cfo to report
ani materi weak in their compani control along with ani fraud involv
manag whether it is materi or not
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4727
the overal effect of these certif requir is to forc ceo and cfo to take an
activ role in the antifraud effort of their compani make intern control and fraud
prevent a high prioriti
whistleblow protect
a kei to ani fraud prevent program is the establish of a mechan by which fraud
can be report as wa state abov section 301 of sarbanesoxlei requir audit
committe to establish mechan for receiv complaint about irregular in a
compani account audit or intern control system
in order to protect those who make such report sox establish broad protect for
corpor whistleblow section 806 of the act creat civil liabil for publicli trade
compani that retali against employe who provid inform or assist in the
investig of secur fraud penalti for violat thi section includ reinstat
back pai with interest and compens for special damag such as litig cost and
attornei fee
section 1107 make it a crime to retali against a person for provid truth inform
relat to the commiss or possibl commiss of ani feder offens thi section
offer much broader protect than the civil whistleblow protect afford under
section 806 the whistleblow protect under section 1107 cover all individu not just
employe of publicli trade compani thei also protect individu who provid
inform about ani feder offens not just secur fraud vi olat of section 1107 ar
punish by fine of up to 250000 and up to ten year in prison for individu
corpor can be fine up to 500000
fraud prevent requir for extern auditor
attest to intern control
as wa state abov section 404 of sarbanesoxlei requir a compani auditor to attest
to and report on manag assess of in ternal control in each annual report file
with the sec in addit each audit report must describ the scope of the auditor test
of the compani intern control structur the audit report must includ an evalu of
whether the compani intern control ar accept and a descript of materi
weak in the control structur or ani materi noncompli with control
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4728 2011 fraud examin manual
restrict on nonaudit activ
in order to address concern about potenti conflict of interest that can aris when public
account firm receiv consult fee and other compens for nonaudit servic
from their audit client sarbanesoxlei establish a list of activ that public account
firm ar now prohibit from perform on behalf of their audit client the list includ
most consult and expert servic although tax servic ar still permiss if thei ar
approv in advanc by the audit committe
fraud prevent polici
anoth import element of an overal fraud prevent program is a written fraud polici
that specif spell out who in an organ handl vari fraud matter under
differ circumst
fraud polici object
a fraud prevent program will entail object veri similar to those of intern control
accord to the institut of intern auditor standard for the profession practic of
intern audit the primari object for manag to achiev proper intern control
includ reason assur that
financi and oper inform is accur and reliabl
polici procedur plan law and regul ar compli with
asset ar safeguard against loss and theft
resourc ar us econom and effici
establish programoper goal and object ar met
a fraud prevent polici with the abovement goal is the first step toward effect
fraud deterr
sell fraud prevent to manag
manag might not support fraud prevent for on of sever reason
manag concern ar often on area other than audit or fraud thei dont typic
understand that fraud is hidden and that loss go undetect thei also might refus to
believ that their own worker ar capabl of steal even when studi suggest a third
of us might do such a thing
becaus of the hidden natur of fraud manag ar understand reluct to believ
in the presenc of fraud and if on employe is caught commit fraud manag
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4729
might too often claim that thi is an isol problem and not worth addit
consider manag must understand that when instanc of fraud ar detect
it is too late to do anyth about them
manag sometim unreason feel that bring up the issu will alien the
work forc thi problem can be address by remind manag that the rankandfil worker
appreci work for an honest compani it is also help to point
out to manag what the loss might be
mani auditor complain that manag doe not adequ support fraud prevent
effort that is larg for two reason either thei believ that fraud is not realli a problem
in the compani or thei believ that even address the subject ha a neg impact in
either scenario it is difficult for the auditor to break down manag builtin resist
to deal with fraud prevent some of the follow suggest might be help in
sell fraud prevent to manag
the impact on the bottom line
on of the best wai to sell manag on fraud prevent is by show the impact on
the bottom line fraud impact net sale dollar for dollar for exampl if a compani net 20
percent on sale thei must sell five item at regular price to recov loss from the theft of
on item fraud can be veri expens
the impact of public
mani corpor execut ar more sensit to advers public than almost ani other
issu certainli on wai to convinc manag of the logic of fraud prevent is to
point out that neg public even in small case can have a devast impact on the
bottom line thi neg impact can be elimin or reduc by a proactiv fraud
prevent program
on of the more signific exampl of advers public can be demonstr in the ef
hutton case as on might recal 20 or so execut of ef hutton particip in a kite
scheme in the late 1980 the fraud itself wa insignific to the bottom line but it
result impact wa devast to ef hutton which eventu sold out thi situat
pointedli illustr that insignific fraud can have a veri signific impact
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4730 2011 fraud examin manual
write the fraud polici
compani often have an ethic polici that set forth in detail what is expect in the ethic
climat of the compani still other compani have a fraud polici that specif spell out
who handl fraud matter under what circumst the compon of a fraud polici will
differ from compani to compani mani fraud polici have some of the follow element
polici statement
the polici statement set forth that manag is respons for fraud and each member
of the manag team should be familiar with the type of signal present within hi scope
of respons the polici statement also design who is in charg of investig
suspect irregular
scope of polici
thi area of the fraud polici statement cover what constitut an irregular and the fact
that the polici cover everyon from manag to worker
action constitut fraud
thi area set forth in detail what action constitut fraudul conduct thi is import as
it give manag the legal ground to investig and punish violat the action list
can includ
ani dishonest or fraudul act
forgeri or alter of document
misappl of fund or asset
improprieti with respect to report financi transact
profit on insid knowledg
disclos secur transact to other
accept gift from vendor
destruct or disappear of record or asset
ani similar or relat irregular
nonfraud irregular
thi section cover alleg of person improprieti or irregular and state that thei
should be resolv by manag and not an auditor
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4731
investig respons
thi part deal with who will investig suspect irregular as well as to whom these
irregular will be report manag law enforc or legal counsel
confidenti
under thi section the confidenti natur of the investig is set forth it state that the
investig will not be disclos to outsid except as requir
author for investig
thi delin that whoever is in charg of the investig ha the author to take
control of and examin record
report procedur
thi part state that anyon suspect fraud should report it and not attempt an
investig it also state that manag and other should not make statement
regard the alleg guilt of the perpetr
termin
thi section state that ani recommend to termin employe should be review by
counsel and manag
commun the fraud polici
it obvious doe littl good to have a fraud or ethic polici if it is not commun to the
employe thi commun can be accomplish in sever wai again the
commun of the polici should be present in a posit nonaccusatori manner
orientationannu train
dure initi employe orient the fraud polici should be discuss thi is the first
opportun the compani ha to make it point and it should be made thoroughli
remind employe via annual onlin or live train mai reinforc the polici and
manag expect that it be follow
memoranda
an interoffic memorandum from the chief execut offic detail the fraud polici is a
good idea onc again the polici should con centrat on the posit aspect of work for
an ethic compani
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4732 2011 fraud examin manual
poster
some compani might wish to us poster displai in common area howev thi
should be carefulli consid as some employe might object to such tactic
employe moral
if an employe is properli instruct commun of a fraud polici can have a posit
impact on moral honest worker want to work for an honest compani a fraud polici
help set the proper tone
quizzesgam
game mai be a fun and inform wai to reinforc and commun the fraud polici in an
organ quizz with prize mai also be us to reward those who demonstr
awar of the polici
legal consider
mani compani have learn that it is best to spell out specif unaccept conduct if the
type of conduct that is consid unaccept is not accur detail there might be
legal problem in discharg a dishonest employe check with your counsel regard ani
legal consider with respect to a fraud polici on of the most import legal
consider is to ensur everyon and everi alleg is handl in a uniform manner a
sampl fraud polici is contain at the end of the chapter
ethic program
a written ethic polici is an excel method by which manag can object
commun it philosophi and develop a success ethic program the polici should be
dissemin among both new and old employe addition some compani have
found it effect to share the ethic polici with their vendor
in most cultur the major of peopl share the same valu thei agre on what is good
and bad what is right and wrong and what is moral and immor although all will not hold
the same set of valu the social valu of the major will affect the belief and behavior
of all peopl
the collect of a person belief and moral make up a set of principl known as ethic
ethic ar the judgment about right and wrong or more specif a person moral
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4733
oblig to societi that determin a person action determin ethic right and
wrong is complic by the fact that moral standard and gener accept social
behavior chang with time in addit differ group in the same societi mai have
conflict idea of right and wrong these valu and ethic of an individu ar reflect in
their action as employe there ar four factor that gener affect the ethic decis
of employe
the law and other govern regul
industri and organiz ethic code
social pressur
tension between person standard and organiz need
employe ethic whatev thei mai be influ nce a wide rang of organiz decis
and action
a common fallaci in discuss about ethic is if it legal it ethic a common defens to
charg of uneth behavior is to invok the law thi legalist approach to ethic
mistakenli impli that action that ar not explicitli prohibit by the law ar ethic the
main error in thi approach is that legal standard do not establish ethic principl
although abid by the law is a part of ethic behavior law themselv do not describ
how an ethic person should behav on can be dishonest unprincipl untrustworthi
unfair and uncar without break the law ethic peopl measur their conduct by basic
principl rather than rule thu in make person or occup decis the law is
onli the minimum threshold in determin what is legal possibl and doe not address
how peopl should behav ethic
origin of ethic
there ar theori that state that by the time on becom an adult and enter the work
place a basic code of ethic is alreadi in place ethic charact is hardwir into the
person befor or dure adolesc by thi theori if a person did not learn to be
ethic in childhood there is a slim chanc that he will act ethic as an adult
an oppos theori hold that oper valu that guid behavior ar not form until
earli adulthood and even after that thei ar subject to chang until on ha to make
seriou bind decis it is not necessari to act accord to on belief by thi theori
as long as individu have the capac to reflect and make valu judgment thei can modifi
their person ethic and chang their behavior
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4734 2011 fraud examin manual
busi ethic program reli on the valid of the latter theori with the hope that adult
behavior can be affect or modifi ethic program ar design to steer employe in the
right direct
ethic current place in busi
the declin in public attitud about busi in recent year ha reinforc the import
of ethic in the workplac although there seem to be a further deterior of public
confid substanti endeavor have been made by organ with respect to busi
ethic these initi includ adopt of code of conduct introduct of ethic into
employe and manag train and the establish of ethic and complianc offic
corpor ethic initi have acceler over the last decad due in part to the impact of
the us feder sentenc guidelin for organ these guidelin can multipli or
mitig potenti devast penalti for errant corpor depend on their
attempt to prevent such misconduct with effect complianc program
ethic program develop
identifi kei organiz characterist and issu is a start to the develop of an
ethic program these item includ
understand of why good peopl can commit uneth act
defin currenta well as desiredorganiz valu
determin if organiz valu have been properli commun
produc written ethic polici procedur or structur
ascertain how board member stockhold manag employe and ani other
pertin member of the organ defin success
determin if ethic is a leadership issu in the organ
with a good understand of the abovement issu a more effect ethic program
can be built the follow 12 compon ar necessari to develop implement and
manag a comprehens ethic program
focu on ethic leadership
vision statement
valu statement
code of ethic
design ethic offici
ethic task forc or committe
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4735
ethic commun strategi
ethic train
ethic help and fraud report telephon line
ethic behavior reward and sanction
comprehens system to monitor and track ethic data
period evalu of ethic effort and data
a sampl of a typic code of busi ethic and an annual complianc questionnair ar
provid at the end of thi chapter
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4736 2011 fraud examin manual
sampl corpor complianc program 3
i scope and implement
thi corpor complianc program comp lianc program appli to corpor
headquart and to all group oper divis and unit of and to all employe
and agent of compani whose function or respons involv complianc with
law regul or standard of conduct applic to the oper or practic of the
corpor in the unit state or abroad
ii standard of conduct
a compani s standard of conduct for employe complianc with applic law and
regul ar set forth in the busi ethic polici and the employe handbook
for nonexempt employe employe handbook which mai be revis and
supplement from time to time
b with the prior approv of compani manag the complianc coordin shall
as mai appear necessari from time to time revis and supplement the standard of
conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and the employe handbook
c the complianc coordin shall from time to time distribut to relev group
of employe materi incorpor by refer into the busi ethic polici
such as the hima code of ethic with respect to deal with health care
provid profession and institut
iii role of the complianc coordin
a the complianc coordin shall have overal respons 1 to overse
complianc with the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and
the employe handbook and with the complianc procedur establish by or
under the complianc program and 2 to ensur the proper function of the
complianc program
b the complianc coordin shall confer gener with manag about matter
relat to the complianc program includ all matter that under the complianc
program the complianc coordin is requir to report to the regulatori affair
committe of the board of director under xib of the complianc program
c the complianc coordin shall monitor develop relat to complianc
with applic law regul and standard of conduct and shall from time to
3 sourc bnaacca complianc manual prevent of corpor liabil pp 1900411 publish by
the bureau of nation affair inc 8003721033 httpwwwbnacom
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4737
time distribut to particular employe or group of employe memoranda new
articl or other inform materi that explain complianc requir
report chang in requir or industri standard highlight the import of
complianc or ar otherwis relev to their complianc respons
d the complianc coordin andor the corpor complianc audit director shall
review on a continu basi the corpor intern procedur for prevent
violat of law and shall creat a compendium of such procedur includ
1 procedur for review of propos product label promot materi and
advertis materi
2 procedur for obtain opinion of counsel on propos transact or
activ that mai rais question under the antitrust law or other law
3 procedur for review by regulatori affair profession of product test
product modif introduct of new product and other matter that mai
rais regulatori issu
4 procedur for time prepar and submiss of disclosur and report
requir by law
5 intern and extern program
e the complianc coordin shall 1 report to and meet with manag as
necessari and appropri with respect to ani defici identifi or
improv need in the complianc program and 2 report to and meet with
the regulatori affair committe of the board of director as requir by xib of
thi complianc program
f the complianc coordin shall see to it that all report of suspect misconduct
or improprieti relat to compani oper or practic ar promptli thoroughli
and properli investig in accord with a standard oper procedur
approv by manag and that where appropri disciplinari sanction ar
impos in accord with ix of thi complianc program
g the complianc coordin shall discharg the respons assign to him by
or under thi complianc program
h the complianc coordin shall take such other action as ar necessari and
appropri to implement and improv the complianc program
i is design as the complianc coordin
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4738 2011 fraud examin manual
iv deleg of author
a it is the polici of compani that substanti discretionari author shall not be
deleg to individu who the corpor know or through the exercis of
dilig could know have a propens to engag in illeg activ in particular
substanti discretionari author shall be deleg onli to individu who the
corpor is confid will not engag in illeg activ
b the complianc coordin shall at least annual review the deleg of
discretionari author within the corpor the check balanc and control
applic to such deleg discretionari author and the perform and
background of the person exercis such author to determin whether ani
current deleg violat corpor polici in conduct such review the
complianc coordin mai reli on inform in personnel file on the result of
corpor audit on the opinion of manag and supervisor on consult with
the corpor independ outsid auditor on survei of person outsid the
corpor who deal with the corpor and on other avail inform at
least annual the complianc coordin shall report in write to the chief
execut offic the result of that review the complianc coordin shall
recommend to manag ani need action
c the complianc coordin and the personnel depart shall from time to time
jointli review the corpor procedur includ background and refer
check and criteria for fill whether by new hire or by promot from within
posit involv substanti discret so as to ensur that onli person of
integr ar select for such posit the complianc coordin and the
personnel depart shall recommend to manag ani need action
v commun of standard and procedur to employe
a the complianc coordin shall ensur and subject to b at least annual shall
certifi in write to the chief execut offic that
1 everi offic and everi kei employe as determin by the complianc
coordin of the corpor ha within the preced twelv month
acknowledg to the complianc coordin in write that he ha review
and understand the busi ethic polici
2 everi employe of the corpor whose function or respons involv
complianc with law regul or standard of conduct applic to the
oper or practic of the corpor other than offic and kei
employe ha within the preced twelv month acknowledg to the
complianc coordin in write that he ha review and understand the
provis of the employe handbook that relat to standard of conduct
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4739
3 everi employe whose function or respons involv complianc with law
regul or standard of conduct applic to the oper or practic of
the corpor who wa newli hire by compani within the preced twelv
month ha within thirti dai from the commenc of employ with
compani a receiv the busi ethic polici or employe handbook as
applic and b acknowledg to the complianc coordin in write that
he ha review and understand the provis of the busi ethic polici or
employe handbook that relat to standard of conduct as applic
b if the complianc coordin cannot truthfulli make the certif requir by
a he shall certifi to the extent the fact permit shall identifi the employe as to
whom the requir certif cannot be given and shall state the reason to the
extent known why the requir of a13 as applic have not been
satisfi with respect to those employe and what measur will be taken promptli
to satisfi those paragraph as applic with respect to those employe
c the complianc coordin shall maintain record support the certif
call for by a
d the complianc coordin shall caus to be post in promin place
access in the aggreg to all compani employe whose function and
respons involv complianc with law regul or standard of conduct
applic to the oper or practic of the corpor a notic that
1 state compani s commit to compli with all applic law and regul
and the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and the
employe handbook
2 design the complianc coordin or a designe of the complianc
coordin to receiv ani report of misconduct or improprieti relat to
compani s oper or practic of whic h ani employe mai have knowledg
whether commit by an employe of compani an employe of anoth
compani or organ an employe of a government agenc or ani
other person
3 state that no employe will suffer ani penalti or retribut for good faith
report of ani suspect misconduct or improprieti
4 state that report of misconduct or improprieti mai be anonym
5 state that report of misconduct or improprieti mai be made directli to a
govern agenc
6 state that compani will investig all such report and that ani compani
employe found to have engag in misconduct will receiv prompt and
appropri disciplin up to and includ dismiss
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4740 2011 fraud examin manual
7 state that the complianc coordin or designe with telephon number is
avail for consult on ani question a compani employe mai have
concern the applic to compani s oper or practic of ani law
regul or standard of conduct or ani other matter relat to compani s
complianc program
e the complianc coordin shall in consult and coordin with other unit
of the corpor arrang for complianc train session for all employe whose
function or respons involv complianc with law regul or standard
of conduct applic to the oper or practic of the corpor each such
session shall includ a present of some aspect or aspect of the law
regul and standard of conduct applic to the employe who attend the
session everi such employe shall attend at least on such session dure each
twelv month of employ with compani special session shall be held as
necessari and conveni for new employe the complianc coordin shall at
least annual certifi to the chief execut offic that 1 everi such employe ha
attend at least on such complianc train session within the preced twelv
month or 2 that all but certain identifi employe have attend at least on
such session the reason why the identifi employe have not attend on and
the measur that will be taken to ensur that those employe promptli attend such
a session
f each supervisor shall annual certifi to the complianc coordin in write that
he ha person
1 discuss with each employe under hi immedi supervis the standard of
conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici or the employe handbook as
applic
2 inform each employe that strict complianc with such standard of conduct is
a condit of employ
3 inform each such employe that compani will take disciplinari action
includ dismiss as appropri for violat of such standard of conduct
g the complianc coordin shall maintain a file of such certif and shall
report at least annual to manag with respect to complianc with thi
provis of the complianc program
h the complianc coordin and the personnel depart shall jointli develop
and implement test or other method to measur the effect of the
commun of standard and procedur to employe the complianc
coordin and the personnel depart shall report the result of such test or
measur to manag
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4741
vi monitor audit and report
a monitor
1 the complianc coordin shall by memorandum at least annual advis all
employe with supervisori respons of their duti to monitor all activ of
their subordin in the cours of their employ with compani to ensur
that those activ ar conduct in complianc with all applic law
regul and standard of conduct
2 each supervisor shall sign a copi of the memorandum refer to in 1 and
return it to the complianc coordin who shall maintain a file of such
memoranda the complianc coordin shall at least annual report to
manag with respect to complia nce with thi provis of the
complianc program
b audit
1 the corpor complianc audit director shall be respons for the conduct
of intern nonfinanci audit to promot complianc with applic law
regul and standard of conduct other than those relat to financi
matter
2 the chief financi offic of the compani shall be respons for the conduct
of intern financi audit to promot complianc with applic law
regul and standard of conduct relat to financi matter
3 manag shall arrang for the conduct of annual audit by independ
outsid auditor to promot complianc with applic law regul and
standard of conduct both financi and nonfinanci
4 copi of all intern and outsid audit report relat to complianc
with law regul or standard of conduct whether financi or non
financi shall be provid to the complianc coordin and to the audit
committe or the regulatori affair committe of the board whichev is the
appropri recipi
c report
1 the complianc coordin shall establish and overse a report system in
which
a ani employe mai report to the complianc coordin or a designe of
the complianc coordin ani suspect misconduct or improprieti
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4742 2011 fraud examin manual
relat to compani s oper or practic whether commit by an
employe of compani an employe of anoth compani or organ an
employe of a govern agenc or other person
b no employe will suffer ani penalti or retribut for good faith report of
ani suspect misconduct or improprieti
c ani report of misconduct or improprieti mai be anonym
2 the complianc coordin shall at least annual commun to all compani
employe the polici of the corpor that ani employe who learn of an
appar violat of law regul or uneth conduct relat to the
busi or activ of the corpor shall report such violat or conduct to
the complianc coordin or a designe of the complianc coordin and
mai do so anonym
3 at least annual the complianc coordin shall report to manag and
to the regulatori affair committe of the board on the function of the
report system
vii debar individu
a it is the polici of compani that the corpor shall not knowingli emploi or retain
as a consult with or without pai ani individu who is publicli list by a feder
agenc as debar suspend or otherwis inelig for feder program
b to carri out it polici the corpor shall make reason inquiri into the statu
of ani potenti employe or consult such reason inquiri shall includ review
of the gener servic administr list of parti exclud from feder
procur program and inform on debar impos by ani other relev
feder agenc
c the corpor polici doe not requir the corpor to termin the
employ or consult of individu who becom suspend or ar propos
for debar dure their employ or consult with the corpor the
corpor shall howev remov such employe or consult from
respons for or involv with government busi until the resolut of
such suspens or propos debar
d if such employe or consult is debar hi employ or consult with the
corpor shall be termin
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4743
viii busi deal with debar individu and entiti and employe and consult charg with or convict of crime
a debar individu and entiti
1 it is the polici of compani that it shall not knowingli form a contract with
purchas from or enter into ani busi relationship with ani individu or
busi entiti that is publicli list by a feder agenc as debar suspend
or propos for debar other than 1 sale by the corpor in the
ordinari cours of busi and 2 purchas by the corpor in the ordinari
cours of busi of good or servic that ar not specif to the corpor
medic devic oper regul by the us food and drug administr
unless there is a compel reason to do so
2 the corpor shall make reason inquiri as to the statu of ani potenti
busi partner whose relationship to the corpor would not be within the
scope of a1 or a2 such reason inquiri shall includ review of the
gener servic administr list of parti exclud from feder
procur program and review of inform on debar impos by
ani other relev feder agenc
3 in the case of ani decis to proce with a busi relationship not within the
scope of a1 or a2 and permiss under a sole due to a compel
reason the decis and the compel reason shall be document by the
complianc coordin
b individu charg with or convict of offens relat to
government busi
1 if ani employe or consult of the corpor is charg by indict or
inform with crimin offens the corpor shall remov that employe
or consult immedi from respons for or involv with matter
relat to the corpor busi
2 if the employe or consult is convict of an offens relat to the
compani busi hi employ or consult with the corpor shall
be termin
3 with respect to ani person convict of a feder offens relat to the
busi or oper of compani the corpor shall have and enforc the
follow polici
a all busi relat under the corpor control with such person shall
be termin and such person shall not be reemploi or further retain
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4744 2011 fraud examin manual
by the corpor in ani capac thi provis doe not appli to ani
relationship involv the hold of ani type of secur
b no such person nor ani other person affili with such person shall share
ani offic space or storag space or ani build or comput system with
the corpor
c no such person shall be permit to enter the premis of the corpor
except as requir by law
ix disciplin
a it is the polici of compani that the standard of conduct set forth in the busi
ethic polici and in the employe handbook shall be consist enforc through
appropri disciplinari mechan disciplinari action mai be up to and includ
dismiss and mai extend as appropri to individu respons for the failur to
prevent detect or report an offens
b the complianc coordin shall in consult with manag and
supervisor as appropri establish and administ a companywid disciplinari
system includ written disciplinari case the system shall provid for the make
of disciplinari decis by appropri compani offici in consult with the
complianc coordin
c the complianc coordin shall maintain record of all disciplinari action taken
for violat of the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and
in the employe handbook
d the complianc coordin shall at least annual report to manag in
write on the disciplinari system
x respons to violat
a it is a polici of compani that if a violat of ani applic law regul or
standard of conduct relat to the busi of the corpor is detect the
corpor shall take all reason step to respond appropri to the violat
and to prevent further similar violat includ ani modif to thi
complianc program it is the polici of compani that if compani learn that ani
statement previous made by compani to ani govern agenc is fals or
incorrect in ani materi respect compani shall voluntarili and promptli after
appropri preliminari investig report the matter to the govern agenc it
is also the polici of compani that if compani learn of a violat of ani applic
law or regul that is not known to the govern agenc but is like to be of
interest to that agenc compani shall voluntarili and promptli after appropri
investig report the matter to that agenc
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4745
b ani employe of the corpor who learn of a violat of the type refer to in
a shall report it to the complianc coor dinat or designe of the complianc
coordin although it is prefer that ani such report be made by an employe
who identifi himself so that the matter mai be investig promptli and
thoroughli an employe mai make such a report anonym failur to report
such a violat known to an employe mai itself be a basi for disciplinari action
c whenev the complianc coordin receiv inform regard a possibl
violat of ani applic law or regul the complianc coordin shall take
appropri step to examin inform and conduct the investig necessari to
determin whether an actual violat ha occur the complianc coordin
shall recommend to manag an appropri cours of action and manag
shall render a time decis with respect to such recommend the complianc
coordin shall prepar a memorandum reflect the inform develop the
recommend made and the manag decis render and thi
memorandum shall promptli be furnish to the audit committe of the board
xi role of the regulatori affair committe of the board of director
a the regulatori affair committe shall be respons for review and suggest
to manag ani necessari improv in
1 the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and the
employe handbook
2 the complianc program gener
b the regulatori affair committe shall at least annual
1 receiv a written report from and meet with the complianc coordin with
respect to the complianc program gener includ
a the complianc coordin review of deleg of author within
the corpor
b the certif requir by va of thi program and employe
familiar with the corpor standard of conduct gener
c the certif requir by vd of thi program the complianc
commun and train gener includ their effect
d the certif requir by ve of thi program the complianc by
supervisor with via2 of thi program and the particip of
supervisor in thi program gener
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4746 2011 fraud examin manual
e the result of intern and ani extern audit whether financi or non
financi relat to complianc with law regul or standard of
conduct
f the report system requir by vic of thi program
g the disciplinari system requir by ix of thi program
2 discuss with manag the complianc program and the report of the
complianc coordin
3 report to the board of director with respect to the report of the complianc
coordin and the committe meet with the complianc coordin
and manag and with respect to the complianc program gener
c at each meet of the regulatori affair committe the complianc coordin
shall report to the committe ani and all recommend made by the complianc
coordin to manag and decis by manag under xc of thi
program sinc the last meet of the committe
d the regulatori affair committe shall adopt a standard oper procedur for
the perform of it respons under thi complianc program
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4747
sampl fraud polici
background
the corpor fraud polici is establish to facilit the develop
of control that will aid in the detect and prevent of fraud
against abc corpor it is the intent of abc corpor to
promot consist organiz behavior by provid guidelin
and assign respons for the develop of control and the
conduct of investig
scope of polici
thi polici appli to ani irregular or suspect irregular
involv employe as well as sharehold consult vendor
contractor outsid agenc do busi with employe of such
agenc andor ani other parti with a busi relationship with
abc corpor also call the compani
ani investig activ requir will be conduct without regard
to the suspect wrongdoer length of servic positiontitl or
relationship to the compani
polici
manag is respons for the detect and prevent of fraud
misappropri and other irregular fraud is defin as the
intent fals represent or conceal of a materi fact for
the purpos of induc anoth to act upon it to hi injuri each
member of the manag team will be familiar with the type of
improprieti that might occur within hi area of respons and
be alert for ani indic of irregular
ani irregular that is detect or suspect must be report
immedi to the director of who coordin all
investig with the legal depart and other affect area
both intern and extern
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4748 2011 fraud examin manual
action constitut fraud
the term defalc misappropri and other fiscal irregular refer
to but ar not limit to
ani dishonest or fraudul act
misappropri of fund secur suppli or other asset
improprieti in the handl or report of monei or financi
transact
profit as a result of insid knowledg of compani activ
disclos confidenti and proprietari inform to outsid
parti
disclos to other person secur activ engag in or
contempl by the compani
accept or seek anyth of materi valu from contractor
vendor or person provid servicesmateri to the
compani except gift less than 50 in valu
destruct remov or inappropri us of record furnitur
fixtur and equip
ani similar or relat irregular
other irregular
irregular concern an employe moral ethic or behavior
conduct should be resolv by department manag and the
employe relat unit of human resourc rather than the
unit
if there is ani question as to whether an action constitut fraud con
tact the director of for guidanc
investig respons
the unit ha the primari respons for the
investig of all suspect fraudul act as defin in the polici
if the investig substanti that fraudul activ have oc
cur the unit will issu report to appropri
design personnel and if appropri to the board of director
through the audit committe
decis to prosecut or refer the examin result to the
appropri law enforc andor regulatori agenc for
independ investig will be made in conjunct with legal
counsel and senior manag as will final decis on disposit
of the case
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4749
confidenti
the unit treat all inform receiv
confidenti ani employe who suspect dishonest or fraudul
activ will notifi the unit immedi and should
not attempt to person conduct invest igat or interviewsinterrog
relat to ani suspect fraudul act see report
procedur section below
investig result will not be disclos or discuss with anyon other
than those who have a legitim need to know thi is import in
order to avoid damag the reput of person suspect but
subsequ found innoc of wrong conduct and to protect
the compani from potenti civil liabil
author for investig suspect fraud
member of the investig unit will have
free and unrestrict access to all compani record and
premis whether own or rent
the author to examin copi andor remov all or ani
portion of the content of file desk cabinet and other
storag facil on the premis without prior knowledg or
consent of ani individu who might us or have custodi of ani
such item or facil when it is within the scope of their
investig
report procedur
great care must be taken in the investig of suspect impropri
eti or irregular so as to avoid mistaken accus or alert
suspect individu that an investig is under wai
an employe who discov or suspect fraudul activ will
contact the unit immedi the employe or other
complain mai remain anonym all inquiri concern the
activ under investig from the suspect individu hi
attornei or repres or ani other inquir should be direct
to the investig unit or the legal depart no inform
concern the statu of an investig will be given out the
proper respons to ani inquiri is i am not at liberti to discuss
thi matter under no circumst should ani refer be made to
the alleg the crime t he fraud the forgeri the
misappropri or ani other specif refer
the report individu should be inform of the follow
do not contact the suspect individu in an effort to
determin fact or demand restitut
do not discuss the case fact suspicion or alleg with
anyon unless specif ask to do so by the legal
depart or unit
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4750 2011 fraud examin manual
act in good faith
anyon report ani irregular that is detect or suspect
must be act in good faith and have reason ground for
believ the inform provid alleg made malici
or with knowledg of their falsiti will not be toler peopl
make such alleg mai be subject to institut disciplinari
action andor legal action by the individu accus of fraudul
conduct
whistleblow
protect
employe of abc corpor mai not retali against a
whistleblow for report an activ which that person believ
to be fraudul or dishonest with the intent or effect of advers
affect the term or condit of employ includ but
not limit to threat of physic harm dismiss transfer to an
undesir job assign demot suspens or impact on
salari or wage a whistleblow is defin as an employe who
inform a manag supervisor or director of
about an activ which that person believ to be fraudul or
dishonest
whistleblow who believ that thei have been retali against
mai file a written complaint with the director of
ani complaint of retali will be promptli investig by the
and appropri remedi measur will be taken if
alleg of retali ar proven thi protect from
retali is not intend to prohibit manag or supervisor from
take action includ disciplinari action in the usual scope of
their duti and base on valid performancerel factor thi
protect against retali is not intend to prohibit manag
from take action includ disciplinari action in the usual scope
of their duti and on the basi of valid performancerel
factor
termin
if an investig result in a recommend to termin an
individu the recommend will be review for approv by the
design repres from human resourc and the legal
depart and if necessari by outsid counsel befor ani such
action is taken the unit doe not have the author
to termin an employe the decis to termin an employe is
made by the employe manag should the
unit believ the manag decis inappropri for the fact
present the fact will be present to execut level manag
for a decis
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4751
administr
the director of is respons for the administr
revis interpret and applic of thi polici the polici will
be review annual and revis as need
approv
ceosenior vice presidentexecut date
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4752 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud polici decis matrix
investig intern financeexecut line risk legal public employe
action requir unit audit account mgmt mgmt mgmt relat relat
1 control to prevent fraud
2 incid report
3 investig of fraud
4 referr to law enforc
5 recoveri of moni due to fraud
6 recommend to prevent fraud
7 intern control review
8 handl case of a sensit natur
9 publicitypress releas
10 civil litig
11 correct actionrecommend
to prevent recurr
12 monitor recoveri
13 proactiv fraud audit
14 fraud educationtrain
15 risk analysi of area of vulner
16 case analysi
17 hotlin
18 ethicslin
p primari respons s secondari respons sr share respons
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4753
sampl code of busi ethic and conduct
introduct
thi section reaffirm the import of high standard of busi conduct adher to
thi code of busi ethic and conduct by all employe is the onli sure wai we can
merit the confid and support of the public
mani of us came from a cultur that provid answer or direct for almost everi
situat possibl manag our busi wa not so complex the dilemma we face
were for the most part simpl make our choic rel easi we would probabl all
agre that manag in todai environ is not so simpl
thi code ha been prepar as a work guid and not as a technic legal document thu
emphasi is on breviti and readabl rather than provid an allinclus answer to
specif question for exampl the term employe is us in it broadest sens and refer to
everi offic and employe of the compani and it subsidiari the word law refer to
law regul order etc
in observ of thi code as in other busi conduct there is no substitut for common
sens each employe should appli thi code with common sens and the attitud of seek
full complianc with the letter and spirit of the rule present
it is incumb upon you as an employe of the compani to perform satisfactorili and to
follow our polici and compli with our rule as thei ar issu or modifi from time
to time
these polici and rule ar necessari to effect manag the busi and meet the ever
chang need of the marketplac good perform and complianc with busi rule
lead to success both ar crucial sinc our abil to provid you with career opportun
depend total upon our success in the marketplac nonetheless chang in our economi
our market and our technolog ar inevit inde career opportun will vari
between the individu compani for these reason we cannot contract or even impli that
your employ will continu for ani particular period of time while you might termin
your employ at ani time with or without caus we reserv that same right thi
relationship might not be modifi except in write sign by an appropri repres
of the compani
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4754 2011 fraud examin manual
thi code of busi ethic and conduct is a gener guid to accept and appropri
behavior at the compani and you ar expect to compli with it content howev it doe
not contain all of the detail inform you will need dure the cours of your
employ noth contain in thi code or in other commun creat or impli
an employ contract or term of employ we ar commit to review our
polici continu thu thi code might be modifi or revis from time to time
you should familiar yourself with thi code so that you might readili distinguish ani
propos or act that would constitut a violat each employe is respons for hi
action violat can result in disciplinari action includ dismiss and crimin
prosecut there will be no repris against an employe who in good faith report a
violat or suspect violat
the absenc of a specif guidelin practic or instruct cover a particular situat
doe not reliev an employe from exercis the highest ethic standard applic to
the circumst
if ani employe ha doubt regard a question situat that might aris that
employe should immedi consult hi supervisor or a higherlevel manag
competit and antitrust
fair competit
the compani support competit base on qualiti servic and price we will conduct our
affair honestli directli and fairli to compli with the antitrust law and our polici of fair
competit employe
must never discuss with competitor ani matter directli involv in competit
between us and the competitor eg sale price market strategi market share and
sale polici
must never agre with a competitor to restrict competit by fix price alloc
market or other mean
must not arbitrarili refus to deal with or purchas good and servic from other
simpli becaus thei ar competitor in other respect
must not requir other to bui from us befor we will bui from them
must not requir custom to take from us a servic thei dont want just so thei can get
on thei do want
must never engag in industri espionag or commerci briberi
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4755
must be accur and truth in all deal with custom and be care to accur
repres the qualiti featur and avail of compani product and servic
complianc with law and regulatori order
the applic law and regulatori order of everi jurisdict in which the compani
oper must be follow each employe is charg with the respons of acquir
suffici knowledg of the law and order relat to hi duti in order to recogn
potenti danger and to know when to seek legal advic
in particular when deal with public offici employe must adher to the highest ethic
standard of busi conduct when we seek the resolut of regulatori or polit issu
affect the compani interest we must do so sole on the basi of merit and pursuant to
proper procedur in deal with such offici employe mai not offer provid or
solicit directli or indirectli ani special treatment or favor in return for anyth of
econom valu or the promis or expect of futur valu or gain in addit there shall
be no entertain of employe of the us govern
foreign corrupt practic act
no employe will engag in activ that might involv the employe or the compani in a
violat of the foreign corrupt practic act of 1977 the foreign corrupt practic act
requir that the compani book and record accur and fairli reflect all transact
and that we maintain a system of intern control that transact conform to
manag author and that the account record ar accur no employe
will fals report transact or fail to report the exist of fals transact in the
account record employe certifi the correct of record includ voucher or
bill should have reason knowledg that the inform is correct and proper
under the act it is also a feder crime for ani us busi enterpris to offer a gift
payment or bribe or anyth els of valu whether directli or indirectli to ani foreign
offici foreign polit parti or parti offici or candid for foreign polit offic for the
purpos of influenc an offici act or decis or seek influenc with a foreign
govern in order to obtain retain or direct busi to the compani or to ani person
even if the payment is legal in the host countri it is forbidden by the act and violat
us law
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4756 2011 fraud examin manual
conflict of interest
there ar sever situat that could give rise to a conflict of interest the most common
ar accept gift from supplier employ by anoth compani ownership of a
signific part of anoth compani or busi close or famili relationship with outsid
supplier and commun with competitor a potenti conflict of interest exist for
employe who make decis in their job that would allow them to give prefer or
favor to a custom in exchang for anyth of person benefit to themselv or their
friend and famili
such situat could interfer with an employe abil to make judgment sole in the
compani best interest
gift and entertain
definit of gift
gift ar item and servic of valu that ar given to ani outsid parti but do not includ
item describ below
normal busi entertain item such as meal and beverag ar not to be
consid gift
item of minim valu given in connect with sale campaign and promot or
employe servic safeti or retir award ar not to be consid gift for purpos
of thi code
contribut or donat to recogn charit and nonprofit organ ar not
consid gift
item or servic with a total valu under 100 per year ar exclud
definit of supplier
supplier includ not onli vendor providin g servic and materi to the compani but
also consult financi institut advisor and ani person or institut that doe
busi with the compani
gift
no employe or member of hi immedi famili shall solicit or accept from an actual or
prospect custom or supplier ani compens advanc loan except from establish
financi institut on the same basi as other custom gift entertain or other
favor that ar of more than token valu or that the employe would not normal be in a
posit to reciproc under normal expens account procedur
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4757
under no circumst should a gift or entertain be accept that would influenc the
employe judgment in particular employe must avoid ani interest in or benefit from ani
supplier that could reason caus them to favor that supplier over other it is a violat
of the code for ani employe to solicit or encourag a supplier to give ani item or servic to
the employe regardless of it valu no matter how small our supplier will retain their
confid in the object and integr of our compani onli if each employe strictli
observ thi guidelin
report gift
an employe who receiv or whose famili member receiv an unsolicit gift
prohibit by these guidelin should report it to hi supervisor and either return it to
the person make the gift or in the case of a perish gift give it to a nonprofit
charit organ
discount
an employe might accept discount on a person purchas of the supplier or custom
product onli if such discount do not affect the compani purchas price and ar gener
offer to other have a similar busi relationship with the supplier or custom
busi meet
entertain and servic offer by a supplier or custom mai be accept by an
employe when thei ar associ with a busi meet and the supplier or custom
provid them to other as a normal part of it busi exampl of such entertain
and servic ar transport to and from the supplier or custom place of busi
hospit suit golf out lodg at the supplier or custom place of busi and
busi lunch and dinner for busi visitor to the supplier or custom locat
the servic should gener be of the type normal us by the compani employe and
allow under the applic compani expens account
outsid employ
employe must not be emploi outsid the compani
in ani busi that compet with or provid servic to the compani or it
subsidiari
in a manner that would affect their object in carri out their compani
respons
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4758 2011 fraud examin manual
where the outsid employ would conflict with schedul hour includ overtim
or the perform of the compani assign employe must not us compani
time materi inform or other asset in connect with outsid employ
relationship with supplier and custom
busi transact must be enter into sole for the best interest of the compani no
employe can directli or indirectli benefit from hi posit as an employe or from ani
sale purchas or other activ of the compani employe should avoid situat
involv a conflict or the appear of conflict between duti to the compani and
selfinterest
no employe who deal with individu or organ do or seek to do busi
with the compani or who make recommend with respect to such deal should
serv as an offic director employe or consult
own a substanti interest in ani competitor of the compani or ani organ do
or seek to do busi with the compani substanti interest mean an econom
interest that might influenc or reason be thought to influenc judgment or action
but shall not includ an invest repres less than 1 percent of a class of
outstand secur of a publicli held corpor everi employe must complet the
conflict of interest questionnair includ with thi book
in addit no employe who deal with individu or organ do or seek to
do busi with the compani or who make recommend with respect to such
deal might
have ani other direct or indirect person interest in ani busi transact with the
compani other than customari employe purchas of compani product and servic
as consum and transact where the interest aris sole by reason of the employe
relationship or that of a holder of secur
provid telecommun or inform servic or equip either directli
or as a resel in a manner that would place the object or integr of the compani
in question
our polici is that employe will not do busi ness on behalf of the compani with a close
person friend or rel howev recogn that these transact do occur thei must
be report on the conflict of interest questionnair
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4759
thi polici is applic equal to the member of the immedi famili of each employe
which normal includ your spous children and their spous and the father mother
sister and brother of yourself and your household
employ of rel
rel of employe will not be emploi on a perman or temporari basi by the
compani where the rel directli report to the employe or the employe exercis ani
direct influenc with respect to the rel hire placement promot evalu
or pai
confidenti inform and privaci of commun
confidenti inform
confidenti inform includ all inform whether technic busi financi or
otherwis concern the compani which the compani treat as confidenti or secret
andor which is not avail or is not made avail publicli it also includ ani privat
inform of or relat to custom record fellow employe other person or other
compani and nation secur inform obtain by virtu of the employe posit
compani polici and variou law protect the integr of the compani confidenti
inform which must not be divulg except in strict accord with establish
compani polici and procedur the oblig not to divulg confidenti compani
inform is in effect even though materi might not be specif identifi as
confidenti and the oblig exist dure and continu after employ with
the compani
a few exampl of prohibit conduct ar
sell or otherwis us divulg or transmit confidenti compani inform
us confidenti compani inform to knowingli convert a compani busi
opportun for person us
us confidenti compani inform to acquir real estat that the employe know
is of interest to the compani
us divulg or transmit confidenti compani inform in the cours of
outsid employ or other relationship or ani succeed employ or other
relationship at ani time
trade in the compani stock or the stock of ani compani base on inform that
ha not been disclos to the public or divulg such inform to other so that thei
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4760 2011 fraud examin manual
might trade in such stock insid trade is prohibit by compani polici and feder
and state law
employe shall not seek out accept or us ani confidenti compani inform of or
from a competitor of the compani in particular should we hire an employe who
previous work for a competitor we must neither accept nor solicit confidenti
inform concern that competitor from our employe
classifi nation secur inform
onli employe with proper govern clearanc and a need to know have access to
classifi nation secur inform govern regul outlin in compani
instruct for safeguard must be follow disclos such inform without
author even after leav employ is a violat of law and thi code
advers inform about employe have govern clearanc must be report to the
secur or law depart repres have respons for clearanc
compani asset
cash and bank account
all cash and bank account transact must be handl so as to avoid ani question or
suspicion of improprieti all cash transact must be record in the compani book
of account
all account of compani fund except author imprest fund shall be establish and
maintain in the name of the compani or on of it subsidiari and might be open or
close onli on the author of the compani board of director imprest fund must be
maintain in the name of the custodian and the custodian is wholli respons for these
fund all cash receiv shall be promptli record and deposit in a compani or
subsidiari bank account no fund shall be maintain in the form of cash except
author petti cash and no compani shall maintain an anonym number account at
ani bank payment into number bank account by the compani might leav that
compani open to suspicion of particip in a possibl improp transact therefor
no disburs of ani natur might be made into number bank account or other
account not clearli identifi to the compani as to their ownership
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4761
no payment can be made in cash currenc other than regular approv cash payrol and
normal disburs from petti cash support by sign receipt or other appropri
document further corpor check shall not be written to cash bearer or
similar design
compani asset and transact
complianc with prescrib account procedur is requir at all time employe
have control over compani asset and transact ar expect to handl them with the
strictest integr and ensur that all transact ar execut in accord with
manag author all transact shall be accur and fairli record in
reason detail in the compani account record
employe ar person account for compani fund over which thei have control
employe who spend compani fund should ensur that the compani receiv good valu
in return and must maintain accur record of such expenditur employe who approv
or certifi the correct of a bill or voucher should know that the purchas and amount ar
proper and correct obtain or creat fals invoic or other mislead
document or the invent or us of fictiti sale purchas servic loan entiti
or other financi arrang is prohibit
employe must pai for person telephon call and us except to the extent that
specif defin benefit program or allow otherwis provid
expens reimburs
expens actual incur by an employe in perform compani busi must be
document on expens report in accord with compani procedur in prepar
expens report employe should review these procedur for the document in order
to be reimburs for busi expens
compani credit card
compani credit card ar provid to employe for conveni in conduct compani
busi no person expens can be charg on compani credit card except as
specif author by compani procedur ani charg person expens must be paid
promptli by the employe compani credit card should not be us to avoid prepar
document for direct payment to vendor where allow by local law charg on
compani credit card for which a properli approv expens report ha not been receiv at
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4762 2011 fraud examin manual
the time of an employe termin of employ might be deduct from the
employe last paycheck the compani will pursu repay by the employe of ani
amount it ha to pai on the employe behalf
softwar and comput
computer inform and comput softwar appear intang but thei ar valuabl
asset of the compani and must be protect from misus theft fraud loss and
unauthor us or dispos just as ani other compani properti
us of mainfram comput must be custom servic or job relat employe cannot
access compani record of ani kind for their person us misappropri of comput
space time or softwar includ but is not limit to us a comput to creat or run
unauthor job oper a comput in an unauthor mode or intention caus
ani kind of oper failur
person comput can be us for companysanct educ program as well as
person us incident to compani busi us with the permiss of your supervisor
howev person us cannot be allow for person financi gain
it is also understood that person comput will occasion be us at home with the
permiss of your supervisor
polit contribut
feder law and mani state law prohibit contribut by corpor to polit parti or
candid the term polit contribut includ in addit to direct cash contribut
the donat of properti or servic and the purchas of ticket to fundrais event
employe can make direct contribut of their own monei but such contribut ar
not reimburs in addit employe can make contribut to a companysponsor
polit action committe
where corpor polit contribut ar legal in connect with state local or foreign
elect such contribut shall be made onli from fund alloc for that purpos and
with the written approv of the presid of the compani make the contribut the
amount of contribut made shall be subject to intercompani alloc
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4763
it is improp for an employe to us hi posit within the compani to solicit polit
contribut from anoth employe for the purpos of support a polit candid or
influenc legisl it is also improp for an employe to make a polit contribut in
the name of the compani
employe conduct
conduct on compani busi
dishonest or illeg activ on compani premis or while on compani busi will not
be condon and can result in disciplinari action includ dismiss and crimin
prosecut the follow illustr activ that ar against compani polici and
that will not be toler on compani premis in compani vehicl or while engag in
compani busi
consumpt and storag of alcohol beverag except where legal licens or
author by an offic of the compani
the us of control substanc such as drug or alcohol the unlaw manufactur
distribut dispens possess transfer sale purchas or us of a
control substanc
drive vehicl or oper compani equip while under the influenc of alcohol
or control substanc
illeg bet or gambl
carri weapon of ani sort on compani premis in compani vehicl or while on
compani busi even employe with permit or licens cannot carri weapon on
compani properti or while on compani busi
the compani reserv the right to inspect ani properti that might be us by employe for
the storag of their person effect thi includ desk locker and vehicl own by the
compani it is a violat of compani polici to store ani contraband illeg drug toxic
materi or weapon on compani properti
report violat
all employe ar respons for complianc with these rule standard and principl in
the area of ethic legal and proprieti each employe ha an oblig to the compani
that transcend normal report relationship employe should be alert to possibl
violat of the code anywher in the compani and ar encourag to report such
violat promptli report should be made to the employe supervisor the appropri
secur audit or legal depart personnel or elsewher as the circumst dictat
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4764 2011 fraud examin manual
employe will also be expect to cooper in an investig of violat in addit
ani employe who is convict of a feloni whether relat to these rule or not should also
report that fact
all case of question activ involv the code or other potenti improp action
will be review for appropri action disciplin or correct step whenev possibl
the compani will keep confidenti the ident of employe about or against whom
alleg of violat ar brought unless or until it ha been determin that a violat
ha occur similarli whenev possibl the compani will keep confidenti the ident of
anyon report a possibl violat repris against ani employe who ha in good faith
report a violat or suspect violat is strictli prohibit
all employe ar requir to notifi the compani within five 5 dai of ani convict of
ani crimin statut violat occur on the job in addit ani employe who is
convict of a feloni whether relat to these rule or not should report that fact
disciplin
violat of thi code can result in seriou consequ for the compani it imag
credibl and the confid of it custom and can includ substanti fine and
restrict on futur oper as well as the possibl of fine and prison sentenc for
individu employe therefor it is necessari that the compani ensur that there will be no
violat employe should recogn that it is in their best interest as well as the
compani to follow thi code carefulli
the amount of ani monei involv in a violat might be immateri in assess the
serious of a violat sinc in some case heavi penalti might be assess against the
compani for a violat involv a rel small amount of monei or no monei
disciplinari action should be coordin with the appropri human resourc
repres the overal serious of the matter will be consid in set the
disciplinari action to be taken against an individu employe such action which might be
review with the appropri human resourc organ might includ
reprimand
probat
suspens
reduct in salari
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4765
demot
combin of the abov
dismiss
in addit individu case might involv
reimburs of loss or damag
referr for crimin prosecut or civil action
combin of the abov
disciplinari action might also be taken against supervisor or execut who condon
permit or have knowledg of illeg or uneth conduct by those report to them and do
not take correct action disciplinari action might also be taken against employe who
make fals statement in connect with investig of violat of thi code
the compani in it sole discret will determin the disciplinari action appropri to a
given matter the list of possibl action is inform onli and doe not bind the
compani to follow ani particular disciplinari step process or procedur
the compani rule and regul regard proper employe conduct will not be waiv
in ani respect violat is caus for disciplinari action includ dismiss all employe
will be held to the standard of conduct describ in thi booklet
the compani never ha and never will author ani employe to commit an act that
violat thi code or to direct a subordin to do so with that understood it is not possibl
to justifi commiss of such an act by sai someon direct it in higher manag
complianc letter and conflict of interest questionnair
annual all offic of the compani will repres in write that there ar no violat of
thi code known to the offic after the exercis of reason dilig or if such violat
have been commit to disclos such violat in a format to be specifi
annual each employe will review the code of busi ethic and conduct sign the
code acknowledg form and complet and sign the conflict of interest
questionnair if the employe circumst chang at ani time a new conflict of
interest questionnair or letter of explan must be complet
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4766 2011 fraud examin manual
the code of busi ethic and conduct acknowledg form should be sign and
given to your supervisor for inclus in your personnel file
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4767
compani name inc
code of conduct complianc questionnair
manageri employe ar be ask to complet thi complianc questionnair
compani name inc and it subsidiari ar commit to provid a workplac where
employe can and do act respons and ethic the compani name inc code of
conduct set out specif standard of conduct that should govern our behavior toward our
fellow employe supplier and custom pleas answer each of the follow question
and if necessari provid an explan for ani ye respons pleas explain in the extra space
provid on the last page
conflict of interest
1 dure fiscal 20xx did you receiv or ar you awar of anyon who receiv from ani person
or compani do busi with your employ ani loan gift trip gratuiti or other payment
that did or could caus prejudic toward or oblig to the giver or could be perceiv by
other as creat an oblig to the giver note each item or the total of item from a singl vendor
with a valu of more than 50 must be report except that you do not need to report loan made by financi
institut on normal and customari term common stock dividend or insur polici payment
ye no
2 in fiscal 20xx did you particip in or influenc or ar you awar of anyon who particip
in or influenc ani transact between your employ and anoth entiti in which thei or ani
member of their famili had a direct or indirect financi interest
ye no
3 in fiscal 20xx did you have a materi financi interest in or hold a posit of influenc with
or ar you awar of anyon who had a materi financi interest in or held a posit of influenc
with ani busi which furnish good or servic to your employ note the term materi
financi interest mean someon who by virtu of their stock ownership or monetari interest in a compani is
abl to direct or to influenc busi decis or a commiss sale repres posit of influenc
mean someon hold an influenti posit such as a sole proprietor partner member of a board of director
an execut or a manag
ye no
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4768 2011 fraud examin manual
4 for fiscal 20xx did you us or ar you awar of anyon who us compani asset or other
resourc includ fund equip suppli or personnel for purpos other than compani
busi or companysponsor activ
ye no
5 dure fiscal 20xx did you receiv or ar you awar of anyon who receiv gift or
entertain from individu or organ have deal with the compani includ
but not necessarili limit to loan ani form of cash gratuiti privat or person discount not
sanction by the compani or remuner or servic relat to illeg activ
ye no
6 dure fiscal 20xx did you accept or ar you awar of anyon who accept ani consider
or special favor from supplier or potenti supplier that in fact or appear could be deem
a bribe kickback or reward given to influenc your busi judgment
ye no
7 were you involv in or ar you awar of ani employe who wa involv in a conflict of
interest situat dure fiscal year 20xx
ye no
8 i have read the attach conflict of interest polici statement which is set forth in the
compani name inc and subsidiari code of conduct and complianc program
accordingli i have list below all relationship and outsid activ that requir disclosur
under the polici i have also list name address and the natur of the relationship of all
person or entiti do busi with my employ from whom i or ani member of my
immedi famili ha receiv directli or indirectli cash or a gift of more than nomin valu
50 dure the fiscal year end mai 31 20xx if there ar no person or entiti to be list so
indic by write none in the first space provid below
name of person entiti natur of relationshipoutsid activ
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4769
polit
9 in fiscal 20xx did you receiv or ar you awar of anyon who receiv ani payment from
your employ for the purpos of make a contribut to ani polit parti candid or
elect committe
ye no
secur trade
10 did you bui or sell or ar you awar of anyon who mai have bought andor sold stock base
on confidenti inform or commun confidenti inform to influenc
compani name inc stock transact
ye no
financi integr
11 ar you awar of ani entri made in the book and record of your employ in fiscal 20xx
that you believ ar fals or intention mislead
ye no
12 ar you awar of ani asset liabil or transact that you believ were improperli omit
from the book of your compani in fiscal 20xx
ye no
13 in fiscal 20xx ar you awar of anyon seek to influenc ani govern offici includ
foreign offici or govern employe or individu do busi with your compani by
offer monei good or servic in return for some special consider
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4770 2011 fraud examin manual
other
14 ar you awar of ani incid involv your employ that you feel constitut noncompli
with law regul polici guidelin procedur or ethic principl other than those
matter refer to in other question or incid that have alreadi been report note if you
prefer to report an incid or violat anonym pleas answer thi question n o and contact a member of
the ethic committe or call the confidenti ethic hotlin
ye no
15 pleas provid ani explan for ye respons
16 in the space below pleas provid ani suggest you mai have for improv the code of
conduct and complianc program
print name
signatur
date
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4771
compani name inc and subsidiari
employe companysubsidiari locat
code of conduct and conflict of interest employe certif
i have read the compani name inc and subsidiari code of conduct and
complianc program
i understand that the standard and polici in that code of conduct repres the
polici of compani name inc and it subsidiari and that violat those
standard and polici or ani legal and regulatori requir applic to my job
mai result in penalti set forth in the code of conduct or other appropri sanction
i understand that there ar sever sourc within the compani includ the ethic
committe that i can consult if i have question concern the mean or applic
of the code of conduct or relev legal and regulatori requir
i understand that it is my respons to disclos to an ethic offic a member of the
compani name inc oper audit depart a member of the ethic
committe or the compani ethic hotlin ani situat that might reason appear
to be a violat of the code of conduct
i have read the attach conflict of interest polici statement which is set forth in the
compani name inc and subsidiari code of conduct and complianc program
accordingli i have list below all relationship and outsid activ that requir
disclosur under the polici i have also list name address and the natur of the
relationship of all person or entiti do busi with my employ from whom i or
ani member of my immedi famili ha receiv directli or indirectli cash or a gift of
more than nomin valu 50 dure the fiscal year end mai 31 20xx if there ar no
person or entiti to be list so indic by write none in the first space provid below
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4772 2011 fraud examin manual
name of personent address natur of businessrelationship
i am not awar of ani except to standard and polici in the code of conduct
except if none so indic by write none
signatur of employe date
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4801
