2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Responsibility for Fraud Prevention


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Responsibility for Fraud Prevention 
 
Vicarious or Imputed Liability 
Corporations and other organizations can be held liable for criminal acts committed as a 
matter of organizational policy. Fortunately, most organizations do not expressly set out to 
break the law. However, corporations and other organizations may also be held liable for the 
criminal acts of their employees if those acts are done in the course and scope of their employment 
and for the ostensible purpose of benefiting the corporation. An employee’s acts are considered to be 
in the course and scope of employment if the employee has actual authority  or apparent authority  
to engage in those acts. Apparent authority means that a third party would reasonably believe 
the employee is authorized to perform the act on behalf of the company. Therefore, an 
organization could be held liable for something an employee does on behalf of the 
organization even if the employee is not authorized to perform that act.  
 
An organization will not be vicariously liable for the acts of an employee unless the 
employee acted for the ostensible purpose of benefiting the corporation. This does not mean 
the corporation has to receive an actual benefit from the illegal acts of its employee. All that 
is required is that the employee intended  to benefit the corporation. 
 
A company cannot seek to avoid vicarious liability for the acts of its employees by simply 
claiming that it did not know what was going on. Legally speaking, an organization is 
deemed to have knowledge of all facts known by its officers and employees. That is, if the 
government can prove that an officer or employee knew of conduct that raised a question as 
to the company’s liability, and the government ca n show that the company willfully failed to 
act to correct the situation, then the company may be held liable, even if senior management 
had no knowledge or suspicion of the wrongdoing.  
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.702   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
In addition, the evolving legal principle of “conscious avoidance” allows the government to 
prove the employer had knowledge of a particular fact, which establishes liability by showing 
that the employer knew there was a high probability the fact existed and consciously avoided 
confirming the fact. Employers cannot simply turn a blind eye when there is reason to 
believe that there may be criminal conduct within the organization. If steps are not taken to 
deter the activity, the company itself may be found liable.  
 
The corporation can be held criminally responsible even if those in management had no knowledge or 
participation  in the underlying criminal events and even if there were specific policies or 
instructions prohibiting the activity undertaken by the employees. The acts of any employee, 
from the lowest clerk to the CEO, can impute liability upon a corporation. In fact, a 
corporation can be criminally responsible for the collective knowledge  of several of its employees 
even if no single employee intended to commit an offense. Thus, the combination of vicarious 
or imputed corporate criminal liability and the Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations creates 
an extraordinary risk for corporations today. 
 
Responsibility (and Liability) of a Corporation’s Directors and Officers 
Although many companies do not realize it, the current legal environment imposes a 
responsibility on companies to ferret out employee misconduct and to deal with any known 
or suspected instances of misconduct with efficient and decisive measures. 
 
First, the doctrine of accountability suggests that officers and directors aware of potentially 
illegal conduct by senior employees may be liable for any recurrence of similar misconduct, and 
may have an obligation to halt and cure any continuing effects of the initial misconduct. 
 
Second, the Corporate Sentencing Guidelines, which are discussed in more detail below, 
provide stiff penalties for corporations that fail to take voluntary action to redress apparent 
misconduct by senior employees. 
 
Third, the Private Securities Litigation Reform  Act of 1995 now requires, as a matter of 
statute, that independent auditors look for, and assess, management’s response to indications 
of fraud or other potential illegality. Where the corporation does not have a history of 
responding to indications of wrongdoing, the auditors may not be able to reach a conclusion 
that the company took appropriate and prompt action in response to indications of fraud. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.703  
Fourth, the Delaware Court of Chancery in In re Caremark Internationa l, Inc. Derivative Litigation, 
698 A.2d 959 (Del Ch. 1996), stated that, in its view, a director’s duty of care includes a duty to 
attempt in good faith to ensure corporate information and reporting systems exist. These 
systems must be reasonably designed to provide senior management and the board of directors 
with timely, accurate information that would permit them to reach informed judgments 
concerning the corporation’s compliance with law and its business performance. 
 
The court in Caremark  also stated that the failure to create an adequate compliance system, 
under some circumstances, could render a director liable for losses caused by non-compliance 
with applicable legal standards. Therefore, directors should make sure that their companies 
have a corporate compliance plan in place to detect misconduct and deal with it effectively. 
The directors should then monitor the company’s adherence to the compliance program. 
Doing so will help the corporation avoid fines under the Sentencing Guidelines and help 
prevent individual liability on the part of the directors and officers. 
 
The Treadway Commission 
The National Commission on Fraudulent Financial Reporting (commonly known as the 
Treadway Commission) was established in 1987 with the purpose of defining the 
responsibility of the auditor in preventing and detecting fraud. The commission was formed 
by the major professional auditing organizations—the American Institute of CPAs, the 
Institute of Internal Auditors, and the National Association of Accountants. The Treadway 
Commission made several major recommendations that, in combination with other 
measures, are designed to reduce the probability of fraud in financial reports: 
• A mandatory independent audit committee  made up of outside directors 
• A written charter that sets forth the duties and responsibilities of the audit committee  
• The audit committee should have adequate resources and authority  to carry out its 
responsibilities 
• The audit committee should be informed, vigilant, and effective 
 
COSO Recommendations 
The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations was formed to support the implementation of 
the Treadway Commission. In 1992, the Committee issued Internal Control—Integrated 
Framework. This report was a collaborative effort of  the American Accounting Association, 
the American Institute of CPAs, the Financial Executives Institute, the Institute of Internal 
Auditors, and the Institute of Management Accountants. The report is meant to apply to all 
entities, public and private, regardless of size.  
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.704   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The COSO report complements Treadway’s recommendation to the SEC that public 
companies’ management reports include an acknowledgment for responsibility  for internal 
controls and an assessment of effectiveness in meeting those responsibilities. The report 
provided the following definition: 
 
Internal Control is a broadly defined process … designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
achievement of objectives in the following categories:  
? Reliability of financial reporting 
? Effectiveness and efficiency of operations  
? Compliance with applicable laws and regulations 
 
COSO also identified five interrelated components of internal control. The effectiveness of 
internal controls can be determined from an assessment of whether these five components are 
in place and functioning effectively. The five components are control environment, risk 
assessment, control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. 
 
Control Environment 
The control environment  sets the moral tone of an organization, influencing the control 
consciousness of the organization and providing a foundation for all other control 
components. This component takes into account whether managers and employees within 
the organization exhibit integrity in their activities.  
 
COSO envisions that upper management will be  responsible for the control environment of 
organizations. Employees look to management for guidance in most business affairs, and 
organizational ethics are no different. It is important for upper management to operate in an 
ethical manner, and it is equally important for employees to view management in a positive 
light. Managers must set an appropriate moral to ne for the operations of an organization.  
 
In addition to merely setting a good example, however, COSO suggests that upper 
management take direct control of an organization’s efforts at internal controls. This idea 
should be regularly reinforced within the organization. There are several actions that 
management can take to establish the proper control environment for an organization. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.705  
These include:  
• The establishment of a code of ethics for the organization. The code should be disseminated to all 
employees and every new employee should be required to read and sign it. The code 
should also be disseminated to contractors who do work on behalf of the organization. 
Under certain circumstances, companies may face liability due to the actions of 
independent contractors. It is therefore very important to explain the organization’s 
standards to any outside party with whom the organization conducts business.  
• Careful screening of job applicants. One of the easiest ways to establish a strong moral tone 
for an organization is to hire morally sound employees. Too often, the hiring process is 
conducted in a slipshod manner. Where permitted by law, organizations should conduct 
thorough background checks on all new employees, especially managers and those 
employees handling sensitive financial functions. In addition, it is important to conduct 
thorough interviews with applicants to ensure that they have adequate skills to perform 
the duties that will be required of them.  
• Proper assignment of authority and responsibility. In addition to hiring qualified, ethical 
employees, it is important to put these people in situations where they are able to thrive 
without resorting to unethical conduct. Organizations should provide employees with 
well-defined job descriptions and performance goals. Performance goals should be 
routinely reviewed to ensure that they do not set unrealistic standards. Training should 
be provided on a consistent basis to ensure that employees maintain the skills to perform 
effectively. Regular training on ethics will also help employees identify potential trouble 
spots and avoid getting caught in compromising situations. Finally, management should 
quickly determine where deficiencies in an employee’s conduct exist and work with the 
employee to fix the problem.  
• Effective disciplinary measures. No control environment will be effective unless there is 
consistent discipline for ethical violations. Consistent discipline requires a well-defined 
set of sanctions for violations, and strict adherence to the prescribed disciplinary 
measures. If one employee is punished for an act and another employee is not punished 
for a similar act, the moral force of the company’s ethics policy will be diminished. The 
levels of discipline must be sufficient to deter violations. It may also be advisable to 
reward ethical conduct. This will reinforce the importance of organizational ethics in the 
eyes of employees.  
 
Risk Assessment  
Risk assessment  involves an entity’s identification and assessment of the risks involved in 
achieving organizational objectives. This component involves tailoring ethics policies or 
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.706   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
compliance programs to the nature of the organization’s business. According to COSO, risk 
assessment is a three-step process: 
• Set objectives for the organization. Management should establish mission statements or similar 
expressions of organizational objectives. These statements must take into account the 
nature of the organization’s business, the industry in which the organization operates, 
and the political and economic environment in which it operates, as well as the 
organization’s resources and goals. In stating its goals, the organization should establish 
measurable criteria so that progress can be measured. Goals should not be so lofty that 
they cannot be reached considering the organization’s resources and environment. In 
setting objectives, input from all levels of management should be sought. Once an 
appropriate statement of objectives is established, it should be communicated to  
all employees.  
• Analyze potential risks of violations. COSO divides risks into two categories: external risks 
and internal risks. External risks include things like increased competition, changes in 
technology, shifting economic conditions, and new legislation. Internal risks are factors 
such as personnel changes, availability of funds for organizational projects, new 
operating systems, and the development of new products.  
• Develop a strategy to manage risks. Organizations should identify and be prepared to react to 
any external or internal risk. This means developing controls that are tailored to the 
inherent risks of the organization’s business and establishing set policies for dealing  
with violations.  
 
Control Activities  
Control activities  are the policies and procedures that enforce management’s directives. 
Management should set forth policy and procedure guidelines in a manual that is issued to 
employees. A person or persons should be designated to keep statements of policies 
updated and to make sure they are properly disseminated. All control activities should be 
closely monitored by management, and changes should be made where control failures are 
identified. Consistent with the risk analysis component, when a control failure is identified, 
the risk of additional failures should be considered in redesigning controls.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.707  
Information and Communication 
The information and communication  component relates to the exchange of information in a way 
that allows employees to carry out their responsibilities. Organizations should work to 
identify pertinent information and see that it is delivered to those who need it most. A 
proper information system will accomplish the following: 
• Assimilate important financial, operational, and compliance information. This information should 
be drawn from both internal and external sources, meaning management may have to go 
outside the organizational structure to identify pertinent information. There should be a 
means of screening incoming information so that pertinent information is maintained 
but unnecessary information is not allowed to clog channels of communication. 
Examples of pertinent information include facts on organizational performance,  
market conditions, competitor programs, economic changes, and legislative or  
regulatory changes. 
• Pass on pertinent informat ion to those who need it. Management should provide timely 
information to employees to help them carry out their duties more effectively. Important 
facts should be communicated in readily usable form. It is also important to 
communicate the importance of observing controls. Management should help employees 
understand their own roles in the internal control system and make it clear that internal 
controls have a high priority.  
• Provide for upstream communication. Communication in an organization should flow  
in all directions. Employees should be provided with clear channels for reporting 
suspected control violations. Provisions should be made for employees to make 
anonymous reports in order to avoid fears of retaliation, which can have a chilling effect 
on upstream communication. A similar reporting mechanism for customers and other 
external parties should be in place. Serious efforts should be made to follow up on  
these communications.  
 
Monitoring 
Monitoring is the process that assesses the quality of a control environment over time. This 
component should include regular evaluations of the entire control system. It also requires 
the ongoing monitoring of day-to-day activities by managers and employees. This may 
involve reviewing the accuracy of financial information, or verifying inventories, supplies, 
equipment, and other organization assets. Finally, organizations should conduct 
independent evaluations of their internal control systems. An effective monitoring system 
should provide for the free flow of upstream communication as discussed under the 
information and communication component.  
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.708   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     



:


respons for fraud prevent
vicari or imput liabil
corpor and other organ can be held liabl for crimin act commit as a
matter of organiz polici fortun most organ do not expressli set out to
break the law howev corpor and other organ mai also be held liabl for the
crimin act of their employe if those act ar done in the cours and scope of their employ
and for the ostens purpos of benefit the corpor an employe act ar consid to be
in the cours and scope of employ if the employe ha actual author or appar author
to engag in those act appar author mean that a third parti would reason believ
the employe is author to perform the act on behalf of the compani therefor an
organ could be held liabl for someth an employe doe on behalf of the
organ even if the employe is not author to perform that act
an organ will not be vicari liabl for the act of an employe unless the
employe act for the ostens purpos of benefit the corpor thi doe not mean
the corpor ha to receiv an actual benefit from the illeg act of it employe all that
is requir is that the employe intend to benefit the corpor
a compani cannot seek to avoid vicari liabil for the act of it employe by simpli
claim that it did not know what wa go on legal speak an organ is
deem to have knowledg of all fact known by it offic and employe that is if the
govern can prove that an offic or employe knew of conduct that rais a question as
to the compani liabil and the govern ca n show that the compani willfulli fail to
act to correct the situat then the compani mai be held liabl even if senior manag
had no knowledg or suspicion of the wrongdo
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4702 2011 fraud examin manual
in addit the evolv legal principl of consciou avoid allow the govern to
prove the employ had knowledg of a particular fact which establish liabil by show
that the employ knew there wa a high probabl the fact exist and conscious avoid
confirm the fact employ cannot simpli turn a blind ey when there is reason to
believ that there mai be crimin conduct within the organ if step ar not taken to
deter the activ the compani itself mai be found liabl
the corpor can be held crimin respons even if those in manag had no knowledg or
particip in the underli crimin event and even if there were specif polici or
instruct prohibit the activ undertaken by the employe the act of ani employe
from the lowest clerk to the ceo can imput liabil upon a corpor in fact a
corpor can be crimin respons for the collect knowledg of sever of it employe
even if no singl employe intend to commit an offens thu the combin of vicari
or imput corpor crimin liabil and the sentenc guidelin for organ creat
an extraordinari risk for corpor todai
respons and liabil of a corpor director and offic
although mani compani do not realiz it the current legal environ impos a
respons on compani to ferret out employe misconduct and to deal with ani known
or suspect instanc of misconduct with effici and decis measur
first the doctrin of account suggest that offic and director awar of potenti
illeg conduct by senior employe mai be liabl for ani recurr of similar misconduct and
mai have an oblig to halt and cure ani continu effect of the initi misconduct
second the corpor sentenc guidelin which ar discuss in more detail below
provid stiff penalti for corpor that fail to take voluntari action to redress appar
misconduct by senior employe
third the privat secur litig reform act of 1995 now requir as a matter of
statut that independ auditor look for and assess manag respons to indic
of fraud or other potenti illeg where the corpor doe not have a histori of
respond to indic of wrongdo the auditor mai not be abl to reach a conclus
that the compani took appropri and prompt action in respons to indic of fraud
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4703
fourth the delawar court of chanceri in in re caremark internationa l inc deriv litig
698 a2d 959 del ch 1996 state that in it view a director duti of care includ a duti to
attempt in good faith to ensur corpor inform and report system exist these
system must be reason design to provid senior manag and the board of director
with time accur inform that would permit them to reach inform judgment
concern the corpor complianc with law and it busi perform
the court in caremark also state that the failur to creat an adequ complianc system
under some circumst could render a director liabl for loss caus by noncompli
with applic legal standard therefor director should make sure that their compani
have a corpor complianc plan in place to detect misconduct and deal with it effect
the director should then monitor the compani adher to the complianc program
do so will help the corpor avoid fine under the sentenc guidelin and help
prevent individu liabil on the part of the director and offic
the treadwai commiss
the nation commiss on fraudul financi report commonli known as the
treadwai commiss wa establish in 1987 with the purpos of defin the
respons of the auditor in prevent and detect fraud the commiss wa form
by the major profession audit organizationsth american institut of cpa the
institut of intern auditor and the nation associ of account the treadwai
commiss made sever major recommend that in combin with other
measur ar design to reduc the probabl of fraud in financi report
a mandatori independ audit committe made up of outsid director
a written charter that set forth the duti and respons of the audit committe
the audit committe should have adequ resourc and author to carri out it
respons
the audit committe should be inform vigil and effect
coso recommend
the committe of sponsor organ wa form to support the implement of
the treadwai commiss in 1992 the committe issu intern controlintegr
framework thi report wa a collabor effort of the american account associ
the american institut of cpa the financi execut institut the institut of intern
auditor and the institut of manag account the report is meant to appli to all
entiti public and privat regardless of size
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4704 2011 fraud examin manual
the coso report complement treadwai recommend to the sec that public
compani manag report includ an acknowledg for respons for intern
control and an assess of effect in meet those respons the report
provid the follow definit
intern control is a broadli defin process design to provid reason assur regard the
achiev of object in the follow categori
reliabl of financi report
effect and effici of oper
complianc with applic law and regul
coso also identifi five interrel compon of intern control the effect of
intern control can be determin from an assess of whether these five compon ar
in place and function effect the five compon ar control environ risk
assess control activ inform and commun and monitor
control environ
the control environ set the moral tone of an organ influenc the control
conscious of the organ and provid a foundat for all other control
compon thi compon take into account whether manag and employe within
the organ exhibit integr in their activ
coso envis that upper manag will be respons for the control environ of
organ employe look to manag for guidanc in most busi affair and
organiz ethic ar no differ it is import for upper manag to oper in an
ethic manner and it is equal import for employe to view manag in a posit
light manag must set an appropri moral to ne for the oper of an organ
in addit to mere set a good exampl howev coso suggest that upper
manag take direct control of an organ effort at intern control thi idea
should be regularli reinforc within the organ there ar sever action that
manag can take to establish the proper control environ for an organ
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4705
these includ
the establish of a code of ethic for the organ the code should be dissemin to all
employe and everi new employe should be requir to read and sign it the code
should also be dissemin to contractor who do work on behalf of the organ
under certain circumst compani mai face liabil due to the action of
independ contractor it is therefor veri import to explain the organ
standard to ani outsid parti with whom the organ conduct busi
care screen of job applic on of the easiest wai to establish a strong moral tone
for an organ is to hire moral sound employe too often the hire process is
conduct in a slipshod manner where permit by law organ should conduct
thorough background check on all new employe especi manag and those
employe handl sensit financi function in addit it is import to conduct
thorough interview with applic to ensur that thei have adequ skill to perform
the duti that will be requir of them
proper assign of author and respons in addit to hire qualifi ethic
employe it is import to put these peopl in situat where thei ar abl to thrive
without resort to uneth conduct organ should provid employe with
welldefin job descript and perform goal perform goal should be
routin review to ensur that thei do not set unrealist standard train should
be provid on a consist basi to ensur that employe maintain the skill to perform
effect regular train on ethic will also help employe identifi potenti troubl
spot and avoid get caught in compromis situat final manag should
quickli determin where defici in an employe conduct exist and work with the
employe to fix the problem
effect disciplinari measur no control environ will be effect unless there is
consist disciplin for ethic violat consist disciplin requir a welldefin
set of sanction for violat and strict adher to the prescrib disciplinari
measur if on employe is punish for an act and anoth employe is not punish
for a similar act the moral forc of the compani ethic polici will be diminish the
level of disciplin must be suffici to deter violat it mai also be advis to
reward ethic conduct thi will reinforc the import of organiz ethic in the
ey of employe
risk assess
risk assess involv an entiti identif and assess of the risk involv in
achiev organiz object thi compon involv tailor ethic polici or
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4706 2011 fraud examin manual
complianc program to the natur of the organ busi accord to coso risk
assess is a threestep process
set object for the organ manag should establish mission statement or similar
express of organiz object these statement must take into account the
natur of the organ busi the industri in which the organ oper
and the polit and econom environ in which it oper as well as the
organ resourc and goal in state it goal the organ should establish
measur criteria so that progress can be measur goal should not be so lofti that
thei cannot be reach consid the organ resourc and environ in
set object input from all level of manag should be sought onc an
appropri statement of object is establish it should be commun to
all employe
analyz potenti risk of violat coso divid risk into two categori extern risk
and intern risk extern risk includ thing like increas competit chang in
technolog shift econom condit and new legisl intern risk ar factor
such as personnel chang avail of fund for organiz project new
oper system and the develop of new product
develop a strategi to manag risk organ should identifi and be prepar to react to
ani extern or intern risk thi mean develop control that ar tailor to the
inher risk of the organ busi and establish set polici for deal
with violat
control activ
control activ ar the polici and procedur that enforc manag direct
manag should set forth polici and procedur guidelin in a manual that is issu to
employe a person or person should be design to keep statement of polici
updat and to make sure thei ar properli dissemin all control activ should be
close monitor by manag and chang should be made where control failur ar
identifi consist with the risk analysi compon when a control failur is identifi
the risk of addit failur should be consid in redesign control
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4707
inform and commun
the inform and commun compon relat to the exchang of inform in a wai
that allow employe to carri out their respons organ should work to
identifi pertin inform and see that it is deliv to those who need it most a
proper inform system will accomplish the follow
assimil import financi oper and complianc inform thi inform should
be drawn from both intern and extern sourc mean manag mai have to go
outsid the organiz structur to identifi pertin inform there should be a
mean of screen incom inform so that pertin inform is maintain
but unnecessari inform is not allow to clog channel of commun
exampl of pertin inform includ fact on organiz perform
market condit competitor program econom chang and legisl or
regulatori chang
pass on pertin informat ion to those who need it manag should provid time
inform to employe to help them carri out their duti more effect import
fact should be commun in readili usabl form it is also import to
commun the import of observ control manag should help employe
understand their own role in the intern control system and make it clear that intern
control have a high prioriti
provid for upstream commun commun in an organ should flow
in all direct employe should be provid with clear channel for report
suspect control violat provis should be made for employe to make
anonym report in order to avoid fear of retali which can have a chill effect
on upstream commun a similar report mechan for custom and other
extern parti should be in place seriou effort should be made to follow up on
these commun
monitor
monitor is the process that assess the qualiti of a control environ over time thi
compon should includ regular evalu of the entir control system it also requir
the ongo monitor of daytodai activ by manag and employe thi mai
involv review the accuraci of financi inform or verifi inventori suppli
equip and other organ asset final organ should conduct
independ evalu of their intern control system an effect monitor system
should provid for the free flow of upstream commun as discuss under the
inform and commun compon
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4708 2011 fraud examin manual
