2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Procedures to Prevent Fraud


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Procedures to Prevent Fraud 
The following are examples of procedures that can be implemented into a compliance 
program that are specifically designed to detect and prevent fraud. 
 
Proactive Fraud Policies 
Proactive fraud policies  are generated from the top of the operation. A proactive policy means 
that the organization will aggressively seek out possible fraudulent conduct, instead of 
waiting for instances to come to their attention. This can be accomplished by several means, 
including the use of analytical review, fraud assessment questioning, enforcement of 
mandatory vacations, job rotation, and surprise audits where possible.  
 
Use of Analytical Review 
Much internal fraud is discovered as a result of analytical review. To uncover such fraud and 
defalcations, they must materially impact the financial statements. Auditors should be 
especially mindful of the following trends: 
• Increasing expenses 
• Increasing cost of sales 
• Increasing receivables/decreasing cash 
• Increasing inventories 
• Increasing sales/decreasing cash 
• Increasing returns and allowances 
• Increasing sales discounts 
 
Fraud Assessment Questioning 
Fraud assessment questioning  is a non-accusatory interview technique used as a part of a normal 
audit. See the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  for further details. It 
operates on the theory that employees’ attitudes are a good indicator of potential problems, 
and that one of the most effective ways to deal with fraud is to ask about it. 
 
Below are some suggested questions that can be asked as a part of the normal audit. Note 
that the questions here begin with the general and proceed to the specific.  
• Part of my duty as an auditor is to find fraud, waste, and abuse. Do you understand that? 
• Do you think fraud is a problem for business in general? 
• Do you think this company has any particular problem with fraud? 
• Has anyone ever asked you to do anything that you felt was illegal or unethical? 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.719  
• If you felt that there was a problem in the company with respect to fraud, what would 
you do? 
• Do you have any indication that there is fraud occurring in the company now? 
 
Enforcement of Mandatory Vacations 
Many internal frauds require manual intervention, and are therefore discovered when the 
perpetrator is away on vacation. The enforcement of mandatory vacations will aid in the 
prevention of some frauds.  
 
Job Rotation 
Some frauds are detected during sickness or unexpected absences of the perpetrator because 
they require continuous, manual intervention. 
 
EXAMPLE  
A manager who embezzled $1.6 million from  his company said, “If the company had 
coupled a two-week vacation with four weeks of rotation to another job function, my 
embezzlement would have been impossible to cover up.” His fraud lasted three years. 
 
Surprise Audits Where Possible 
All too many fraud perpetrators know when auditors are coming, and therefore have time to 
alter, destroy, or misplace records and other evidence. A proactive fraud policy involves 
using the technique of surprise audits as much as possible. It might have a significant 
deterrent effect. 
 
Management Oversight 
It is most common for employees who steal to use the proceeds for lifestyle improvements. 
Some examples include more expensive cars, extravagant vacations, expensive clothing, new 
or remodeled homes, expensive recreational property, and outside investments. Managers 
should be educated to be observant of these signs.  
 
EXAMPLE  
Discovery of a $97,000 embezzlem ent that occurred over a two- year period resulted when 
an observant manager asked the internal auditors  to examine the responsibilities of a seven-
 year veteran of the company. The manager no ticed that this female employee had begun 
wearing designer clothes (and making a big deal about it), and was driving a new BMW. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.720   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The manager was also aware of the fact that  this employee had no outside income that 
might explain the upgrade in lifestyle. 
 
Increasing the Perception of Detection 
Most experts agree that it is much easier to prevent than detect fraud. To prevent fraud, we 
should understand something about the mind of the potential perpetrator. Increasing the 
perception of detection might be the most effective fraud prevention method. Controls, for 
example, do little good in forestalling theft and fraud, if those at risk do not know of the 
presence of possible detection. In the audit profession, this means letting employees, 
managers, and executives know that auditors are actively seeking out information concerning 
internal theft. This can be accomplished in several ways. 
 
Employee Education 
Each entity should have some policy for educating managers, executives, and employees 
about fraud. This can be done as a part of employee orientation, or it can be accomplished 
through memoranda, training programs, and other intercompany communication methods. 
The goal is to make others within the company your eyes and ears. 
 
Any education effort should be positive and not accusatory. Illegal conduct in any form 
eventually costs everyone in the company through lost profits, adverse publicity, and 
decreased morale and productivity. These facts should be emphasized in training. 
 
Minimize Employee Pressures 
Pressures, such as financial hardship or family problems, can be especially difficult to  
detect in employees. Companies can take steps to assist an employee who might be having 
difficult times. 
 
Open-Door Policies 
If employees and others can speak freely, many managers will understand the pressures and 
might be able to eliminate them before they become acute. 
 
EXAMPLE  
The controller of a small frui t-packing company in California stole $112,000 from the 
company. When asked why, he said, “Nobody at the company ever talked to me, especially 
the owners. They were unfair. They talked do wn to me, and they we re rude. They deserve 
everything they got.” 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.721  
Employee Support Programs 
Many progressive companies and agencies have realized the benefit of employee support 
programs. Some kinds of support programs include alcohol and drug assistance, and 
counseling for gambling, abortion, marital problems, and financial difficulties. 
 
Management Climate 
If the style of management is conducted by objective measures rather than by subjective 
measures, then employees will not manufacture or imagine the performance criteria 
employed by management. In addition, it is obvious that management that is perceived to be 
dishonest will beget dishonest employees. 
 
EXAMPLE  
Jim, a loan officer for a mortgage bank, received his primary compensation based on the total 
volume of loans (measured by dollars) he was able to put on the books each year. Dollar 
volume was the only criteria for the compensation. In addition, the loan officers were all in 
competition with each other for the high volume  award of the year. The pressure to earn more 
than his fellow officers became more acute each year. 
 
When the mortgage company was closed down, most of Jim’s loans were in default. Because 
Jim perceived that his job performance was based solely on volume, no attention was paid to 
the quality of the loans. In fact, it was discov ered that on several occasions, Jim coerced the 
loan processing department to close loans, even though all the requirements had not been 
completed. 
 
EXAMPLE  
A large fast food chain lost $200,000 when one of its buyers got involved with a supplier. 
The company decided to notify all of its vendors of the company’s policy prohibiting the giving 
of anything of value to influence a purchasing decision. Two vendors called in with complaints 
about competitors, resulting in the discovery of two other frauds totaling an additional 
$360,000. 
 
Monitoring Systems 
Both the Guidelines and Sarbanes-Oxley specifically mention the importance of having a 
reporting system for employees and agents of the organization to report criminal conduct. 
Confidential hotlines are one of the best ways for an organization to monitor compliance.  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.722   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Reporting Programs 
Each employee in the company should know where to report suspicious, unethical, or illegal 
behavior. A reporting program should emphasize that: 
• Fraud, waste, and abuse occur in nearly all companies. 
• Such conduct costs the company jobs and profits. 
• The company actively encourages any employee with information to come forward. 
• The employee can come forward and provide information anonymously and without 
fear of recrimination for good-faith reporting. 
• There is an exact method for reporting (i.e., a telephone number, name, or other 
information). 
• The report need not be made to one’s immediate superiors. 
 
Hotlines 
Hotlines have proved to be a very effective reporting mechanism. However, most hotline 
reports do not result in fraud cases. At the federal level, published reports indicate that about 
five percent of hotline calls result in serious allegations. With careful screening of calls and 
proper handling, spurious complaints can be effectively weeded out. There are three general 
types of hotlines. The advantages and disadvantages of each are summarized below. 
 
PART TIME, IN-HOUSE 
These hotlines are assigned to an employee with other duties. An audit or security department 
usually staffs an in-house hotline. When the employee is out, a recorder takes calls. The main 
advantage is cost. The main disadvantage is that the hotline is not staffed full-time, which can 
discourage calls. Also, some people might be reluctant to report to the company.  
 
FULL TIME, IN-HOUSE 
A full-time, in-house hotline may be feasible depending on the company size. The advantage 
is that people can make reports at any time, day or night, and talk to a person. The 
disadvantage is cost, and like the part-time line, some people might be reluctant to report 
directly to the company.  
 
THIRD PARTY 
An outside company that specializes in services of this type most often staffs a third-party 
hotline. The advantages are cost, efficiency, and anonymity. A few are staffed around the 
clock, and will provide the information immediately to the client subscriber. They also 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.723  
provide anonymity to those who might be more comfortable with it. Their disadvantage is 
that the operation is beyond the company’s control. 
 
Rewards 
Some companies have a policy of rewarding information that leads to the recovery of 
merchandise, property, or money. Others offer rewards upon the criminal conviction of the 
person(s) involved. If a reward policy exists, strict criteria should establish reward payments, 
and such proposed policies should be reviewed and approved by counsel. The amount of 
reward paid by companies varies from fixed fees to a percentage of the recovery. Studies 
indicate that rewards should not exceed a few thousand dollars.  
 
 



:


procedur to prevent fraud
the follow ar exampl of procedur that can be implement into a complianc
program that ar specif design to detect and prevent fraud
proactiv fraud polici
proactiv fraud polici ar gener from the top of the oper a proactiv polici mean
that the organ will aggress seek out possibl fraudul conduct instead of
wait for instanc to come to their attent thi can be accomplish by sever mean
includ the us of analyt review fraud assess question enforc of
mandatori vacat job rotat and surpris audit where possibl
us of analyt review
much intern fraud is discov as a result of analyt review to uncov such fraud and
defalc thei must materi impact the financi statement auditor should be
especi mind of the follow trend
increas expens
increas cost of sale
increas receivablesdecreas cash
increas inventori
increas salesdecreas cash
increas return and allow
increas sale discount
fraud assess question
fraud assess question is a nonaccusatori interview techniqu us as a part of a normal
audit see the investig section of the fraud examin manual for further detail it
oper on the theori that employe attitud ar a good indic of potenti problem
and that on of the most effect wai to deal with fraud is to ask about it
below ar some suggest question that can be ask as a part of the normal audit note
that the question here begin with the gener and proce to the specif
part of my duti as an auditor is to find fraud wast and abus do you understand that
do you think fraud is a problem for busi in gener
do you think thi compani ha ani particular problem with fraud
ha anyon ever ask you to do anyth that you felt wa illeg or uneth
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4719
if you felt that there wa a problem in the compani with respect to fraud what would
you do
do you have ani indic that there is fraud occur in the compani now
enforc of mandatori vacat
mani intern fraud requir manual intervent and ar therefor discov when the
perpetr is awai on vacat the enforc of mandatori vacat will aid in the
prevent of some fraud
job rotat
some fraud ar detect dure sick or unexpect absenc of the perpetr becaus
thei requir continu manual intervent
exampl
a manag who embezzl 16 million from hi compani said if the compani had
coupl a twoweek vacat with four week of rotat to anoth job function my
embezzl would have been imposs to cover up hi fraud last three year
surpris audit where possibl
all too mani fraud perpetr know when auditor ar come and therefor have time to
alter destroi or misplac record and other evid a proactiv fraud polici involv
us the techniqu of surpris audit as much as possibl it might have a signific
deterr effect
manag oversight
it is most common for employe who steal to us the proce for lifestyl improv
some exampl includ more expens car extravag vacat expens cloth new
or remodel home expens recreat properti and outsid invest manag
should be educ to be observ of these sign
exampl
discoveri of a 97000 embezzlem ent that occur over a two year period result when
an observ manag ask the intern auditor to examin the respons of a seven
year veteran of the compani the manag no tice that thi femal employe had begun
wear design cloth and make a big deal about it and wa drive a new bmw
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4720 2011 fraud examin manual
the manag wa also awar of the fact that thi employe had no outsid incom that
might explain the upgrad in lifestyl
increas the percept of detect
most expert agre that it is much easier to prevent than detect fraud to prevent fraud we
should understand someth about the mind of the potenti perpetr increas the
percept of detect might be the most effect fraud prevent method control for
exampl do littl good in forestal theft and fraud if those at risk do not know of the
presenc of possibl detect in the audit profess thi mean let employe
manag and execut know that auditor ar activ seek out inform concern
intern theft thi can be accomplish in sever wai
employe educ
each entiti should have some polici for educ manag execut and employe
about fraud thi can be done as a part of employe orient or it can be accomplish
through memoranda train program and other intercompani commun method
the goal is to make other within the compani your ey and ear
ani educ effort should be posit and not accusatori illeg conduct in ani form
eventu cost everyon in the compani through lost profit advers public and
decreas moral and product these fact should be emphas in train
minim employe pressur
pressur such as financi hardship or famili problem can be especi difficult to
detect in employe compani can take step to assist an employe who might be have
difficult time
opendoor polici
if employe and other can speak freeli mani manag will understand the pressur and
might be abl to elimin them befor thei becom acut
exampl
the control of a small frui tpack compani in california stole 112000 from the
compani when ask why he said nobodi at the compani ever talk to me especi
the owner thei were unfair thei talk do wn to me and thei we re rude thei deserv
everyth thei got
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4721
employe support program
mani progress compani and agenc have realiz the benefit of employe support
program some kind of support program includ alcohol and drug assist and
counsel for gambl abort marit problem and financi difficulti
manag climat
if the style of manag is conduct by object measur rather than by subject
measur then employe will not manufactur or imagin the perform criteria
emploi by manag in addit it is obviou that manag that is perceiv to be
dishonest will beget dishonest employe
exampl
jim a loan offic for a mortgag bank receiv hi primari compens base on the total
volum of loan measur by dollar he wa abl to put on the book each year dollar
volum wa the onli criteria for the compens in addit the loan offic were all in
competit with each other for the high volum award of the year the pressur to earn more
than hi fellow offic becam more acut each year
when the mortgag compani wa close down most of jim loan were in default becaus
jim perceiv that hi job perform wa base sole on volum no attent wa paid to
the qualiti of the loan in fact it wa discov er that on sever occas jim coerc the
loan process depart to close loan even though all the requir had not been
complet
exampl
a larg fast food chain lost 200000 when on of it buyer got involv with a supplier
the compani decid to notifi all of it vendor of the compani polici prohibit the give
of anyth of valu to influenc a purchas decis two vendor call in with complaint
about competitor result in the discoveri of two other fraud total an addit
360000
monitor system
both the guidelin and sarbanesoxlei specif mention the import of have a
report system for employe and agent of the organ to report crimin conduct
confidenti hotlin ar on of the best wai for an organ to monitor complianc
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4722 2011 fraud examin manual
report program
each employe in the compani should know where to report suspici uneth or illeg
behavior a report program should emphas that
fraud wast and abus occur in nearli all compani
such conduct cost the compani job and profit
the compani activ encourag ani employe with inform to come forward
the employe can come forward and provid inform anonym and without
fear of recrimin for goodfaith report
there is an exact method for report ie a telephon number name or other
inform
the report need not be made to on immedi superior
hotlin
hotlin have prove to be a veri effect report mechan howev most hotlin
report do not result in fraud case at the feder level publish report indic that about
five percent of hotlin call result in seriou alleg with care screen of call and
proper handl spuriou complaint can be effect weed out there ar three gener
type of hotlin the advantag and disadvantag of each ar summar below
part time inhous
these hotlin ar assign to an employe with other duti an audit or secur depart
usual staff an inhous hotlin when the employe is out a record take call the main
advantag is cost the main disadvantag is that the hotlin is not staf fulltim which can
discourag call also some peopl might be reluct to report to the compani
full time inhous
a fulltim inhous hotlin mai be feasibl depend on the compani size the advantag
is that peopl can make report at ani time dai or night and talk to a person the
disadvantag is cost and like the parttim line some peopl might be reluct to report
directli to the compani
third parti
an outsid compani that special in servic of thi type most often staff a thirdparti
hotlin the advantag ar cost effici and anonym a few ar staf around the
clock and will provid the inform immedi to the client subscrib thei also
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4723
provid anonym to those who might be more comfort with it their disadvantag is
that the oper is beyond the compani control
reward
some compani have a polici of reward inform that lead to the recoveri of
merchandis properti or monei other offer reward upon the crimin convict of the
person involv if a reward polici exist strict criteria should establish reward payment
and such propos polici should be review and approv by counsel the amount of
reward paid by compani vari from fix fee to a percentag of the recoveri studi
indic that reward should not exce a few thousand dollar
