2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Procedures to Prevent Fraud/Hotlines


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Hotlines 
Hotlines have proved to be a very effective reporting mechanism. However, most hotline 
reports do not result in fraud cases. At the federal level, published reports indicate that about 
five percent of hotline calls result in serious allegations. With careful screening of calls and 
proper handling, spurious complaints can be effectively weeded out. There are three general 
types of hotlines. The advantages and disadvantages of each are summarized below. 
 
PART TIME, IN-HOUSE 
These hotlines are assigned to an employee with other duties. An audit or security department 
usually staffs an in-house hotline. When the employee is out, a recorder takes calls. The main 
advantage is cost. The main disadvantage is that the hotline is not staffed full-time, which can 
discourage calls. Also, some people might be reluctant to report to the company.  
 
FULL TIME, IN-HOUSE 
A full-time, in-house hotline may be feasible depending on the company size. The advantage 
is that people can make reports at any time, day or night, and talk to a person. The 
disadvantage is cost, and like the part-time line, some people might be reluctant to report 
directly to the company.  
 
THIRD PARTY 
An outside company that specializes in services of this type most often staffs a third-party 
hotline. The advantages are cost, efficiency, and anonymity. A few are staffed around the 
clock, and will provide the information immediately to the client subscriber. They also 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.723  
provide anonymity to those who might be more comfortable with it. Their disadvantage is 
that the operation is beyond the company’s control. 
 



:


hotlin
hotlin have prove to be a veri effect report mechan howev most hotlin
report do not result in fraud case at the feder level publish report indic that about
five percent of hotlin call result in seriou alleg with care screen of call and
proper handl spuriou complaint can be effect weed out there ar three gener
type of hotlin the advantag and disadvantag of each ar summar below
part time inhous
these hotlin ar assign to an employe with other duti an audit or secur depart
usual staff an inhous hotlin when the employe is out a record take call the main
advantag is cost the main disadvantag is that the hotlin is not staf fulltim which can
discourag call also some peopl might be reluct to report to the compani
full time inhous
a fulltim inhous hotlin mai be feasibl depend on the compani size the advantag
is that peopl can make report at ani time dai or night and talk to a person the
disadvantag is cost and like the parttim line some peopl might be reluct to report
directli to the compani
third parti
an outsid compani that special in servic of thi type most often staff a thirdparti
hotlin the advantag ar cost effici and anonym a few ar staf around the
clock and will provid the inform immedi to the client subscrib thei also
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4723
provid anonym to those who might be more comfort with it their disadvantag is
that the oper is beyond the compani control
