2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Fraud Prevention Policy


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Fraud Prevention Policy 
Another important element of an overall fraud prevention program is a written fraud policy 
that specifically spells out who in an organization handles varying fraud matters under 
differing circumstances.  
 
Fraud Policy Objectives 
A fraud prevention program will entail objectives very similar to those of internal control. 
According to the Institute of Internal Auditors’ Standards for the Professional Practice of 
Internal Auditing, the primary objectives for management to achieve proper internal controls 
include reasonable assurance that: 
• Financial and operating information is accurate and reliable. 
• Policies, procedures, plans, laws, and regulations are complied with. 
• Assets are safeguarded against loss and theft. 
• Resources are used economically and efficiently. 
• Established program/operating goals and objectives are met. 
 
A fraud prevention policy with the above-mentioned goals is the first step toward effective 
fraud deterrence.  
 
Selling Fraud Prevention to Management 
Management might not support fraud prevention for one of several reasons: 
• Management’s concerns are often on areas other than audit or fraud. They don’t typically 
understand that fraud is hidden and that losses go undetected. They also might refuse to 
believe that their own workers are capable of stealing even when studies suggest a third 
of us might do such a thing. 
• Because of the hidden nature of fraud, managers are understandably reluctant to believe 
in the presence of fraud. And if one employee is caught committing fraud, management 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.729  
might too often claim that this is an isolated problem and not worth additional 
consideration. Management must understand that when instances of fraud are detected, 
it is too late to do anything about them.  
• Management sometimes unreasonably feels that  bringing up the issue will alienate the 
work force. This problem can be addressed by reminding management that the rank-and-file workers 
appreciate working for an honest company. It is also helpful to point 
out to management what the losses might be. 
 
Many auditors complain that management does not adequately support fraud prevention 
efforts. That is largely for two reasons: either they believe that fraud is not really a problem 
in the company or they believe that even addressing the subject has a negative impact. In 
either scenario, it is difficult for the auditor to break down management’s built-in resistance 
to dealing with fraud prevention. Some of the following suggestions might be helpful in 
“selling” fraud prevention to management.  
 
The Impact on the Bottom Line 
One of the best ways to sell management on fraud prevention is by showing the impact on 
the bottom line. Fraud impacts net sales dollar for dollar. For example, if a company nets 20 
percent on sales, they must sell five items at regular prices to recover losses from the theft of 
one item. Fraud can be very expensive.  
 
The Impact of Publicity 
Many corporate executives are more sensitive to adverse publicity than almost any other 
issue. Certainly, one way to convince management of the logic of fraud prevention is to 
point out that negative publicity, even in small cases, can have a devastating impact on the 
bottom line. This negative impact can be eliminated or reduced by a proactive fraud 
prevention program.  
 
One of the more significant examples of adverse publicity can be demonstrated in the E.F. 
Hutton case. As one might recall, 20 or so executives of E.F. Hutton participated in a kiting 
scheme in the late 1980s. The fraud itself was insignificant to the bottom line, but its 
resulting impact was devastating to E.F. Hutton, which eventually sold out. This situation 
pointedly illustrates that insignificant fraud can have a very significant impact.  
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.730   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Writing the Fraud Policy 
Companies often have an ethics policy that sets forth in detail what is expected in the ethical 
climate of the company. Still other companies have a fraud policy that specifically spells out 
who handles fraud matters under what circumstances. The components of a fraud policy will 
differ from company to company. Many fraud policies have some of the following elements.  
 
Policy Statement 
The policy statement sets forth that management is responsible for fraud, and each member 
of the management team should be familiar with the types of signals present within his scope 
of responsibilities. The policy statement also designates who is in charge of investigating 
suspected irregularities.  
 
Scope of Policy 
This area of the fraud policy statement covers what constitutes an irregularity and the fact 
that the policy covers everyone from management to workers.  
 
Actions Constituting Fraud 
This area sets forth in detail what actions constitute fraudulent conduct. This is important as 
it gives management the legal grounds to investigate and punish violators. The actions listed 
can include: 
• Any dishonest or fraudulent act 
• Forgery or alteration of documents 
• Misapplication of funds or assets 
• Impropriety with respect to reporting financial transactions 
• Profiting on insider knowledge 
• Disclosing securities transactions to others 
• Accepting gifts from vendors 
• Destruction or disappearance of records or assets 
• Any similar or related irregularity 
 
Non-fraud Irregularities 
This section covers allegations of personal improprieties or irregularities and states that they 
should be resolved by management and not an auditor. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.731  
Investigation Responsibilities 
This part deals with who will investigate suspected irregularities, as well as to whom these 
irregularities will be reported (management, law enforcement, or legal counsel). 
 
Confidentiality 
Under this section, the confidential nature of the investigation is set forth. It states that the 
investigation will not be disclosed to outsiders except as required.  
 
Authorization for Investigation 
This delineates that whoever is in charge of the investigation has the authority to take 
control of and examine records.  
 
Reporting Procedures 
This part states that anyone suspecting fraud should report it and not attempt an 
investigation. It also states that management and others should not make statements 
regarding the alleged guilt of the perpetrator. 
 
Termination  
This section states that any recommendations to terminate employees should be reviewed by 
counsel and management. 
 
Communicating the Fraud Policy 
It obviously does little good to have a fraud or ethics policy if it is not communicated to the 
employees. This communication can be accomplished in several ways. Again, the 
communication of the policy should be presented in a positive, non-accusatory manner. 
 
Orientation/Annual Training 
During initial employee orientation, the fraud policy should be discussed. This is the first 
opportunity the company has to make its point, and it should be made thoroughly. 
Reminding employees via annual online or live training may reinforce the policy and 
management’s expectations that it be followed. 
 
Memoranda 
An interoffice memorandum from the chief executive officer detailing the fraud policy is a 
good idea. Once again, the policy should con centrate on the positive aspects of working for 
an ethical company.  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.732   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Posters  
Some companies might wish to use posters displayed in common areas. However, this 
should be carefully considered, as some employees might object to such tactics.  
 
Employee Morale 
If an employee is properly instructed, communication of a fraud policy can have a positive 
impact on morale. Honest workers want to work for an honest company. A fraud policy 
helps set the proper tone.  
 
Quizzes/Games 
Games may be a fun and informal way to reinforce and communicate the fraud policy in an 
organization. Quizzes with prizes may also  be used to reward those who demonstrate 
awareness of the policy. 
 
Legal Considerations 
Many companies have learned that it is best to spell out specific unacceptable conduct. If the 
type of conduct that is considered unacceptable is not accurately detailed, there might be 
legal problems in discharging a dishonest employee. Check with your counsel regarding any 
legal considerations with respect to a fraud policy. One of the most important legal 
considerations is to ensure everyone and every allegation is handled in a uniform manner. A 
sample fraud policy is contained at the end of the chapter. 
 
 



:


fraud prevent polici
anoth import element of an overal fraud prevent program is a written fraud polici
that specif spell out who in an organ handl vari fraud matter under
differ circumst
fraud polici object
a fraud prevent program will entail object veri similar to those of intern control
accord to the institut of intern auditor standard for the profession practic of
intern audit the primari object for manag to achiev proper intern control
includ reason assur that
financi and oper inform is accur and reliabl
polici procedur plan law and regul ar compli with
asset ar safeguard against loss and theft
resourc ar us econom and effici
establish programoper goal and object ar met
a fraud prevent polici with the abovement goal is the first step toward effect
fraud deterr
sell fraud prevent to manag
manag might not support fraud prevent for on of sever reason
manag concern ar often on area other than audit or fraud thei dont typic
understand that fraud is hidden and that loss go undetect thei also might refus to
believ that their own worker ar capabl of steal even when studi suggest a third
of us might do such a thing
becaus of the hidden natur of fraud manag ar understand reluct to believ
in the presenc of fraud and if on employe is caught commit fraud manag
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4729
might too often claim that thi is an isol problem and not worth addit
consider manag must understand that when instanc of fraud ar detect
it is too late to do anyth about them
manag sometim unreason feel that bring up the issu will alien the
work forc thi problem can be address by remind manag that the rankandfil worker
appreci work for an honest compani it is also help to point
out to manag what the loss might be
mani auditor complain that manag doe not adequ support fraud prevent
effort that is larg for two reason either thei believ that fraud is not realli a problem
in the compani or thei believ that even address the subject ha a neg impact in
either scenario it is difficult for the auditor to break down manag builtin resist
to deal with fraud prevent some of the follow suggest might be help in
sell fraud prevent to manag
the impact on the bottom line
on of the best wai to sell manag on fraud prevent is by show the impact on
the bottom line fraud impact net sale dollar for dollar for exampl if a compani net 20
percent on sale thei must sell five item at regular price to recov loss from the theft of
on item fraud can be veri expens
the impact of public
mani corpor execut ar more sensit to advers public than almost ani other
issu certainli on wai to convinc manag of the logic of fraud prevent is to
point out that neg public even in small case can have a devast impact on the
bottom line thi neg impact can be elimin or reduc by a proactiv fraud
prevent program
on of the more signific exampl of advers public can be demonstr in the ef
hutton case as on might recal 20 or so execut of ef hutton particip in a kite
scheme in the late 1980 the fraud itself wa insignific to the bottom line but it
result impact wa devast to ef hutton which eventu sold out thi situat
pointedli illustr that insignific fraud can have a veri signific impact
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4730 2011 fraud examin manual
write the fraud polici
compani often have an ethic polici that set forth in detail what is expect in the ethic
climat of the compani still other compani have a fraud polici that specif spell out
who handl fraud matter under what circumst the compon of a fraud polici will
differ from compani to compani mani fraud polici have some of the follow element
polici statement
the polici statement set forth that manag is respons for fraud and each member
of the manag team should be familiar with the type of signal present within hi scope
of respons the polici statement also design who is in charg of investig
suspect irregular
scope of polici
thi area of the fraud polici statement cover what constitut an irregular and the fact
that the polici cover everyon from manag to worker
action constitut fraud
thi area set forth in detail what action constitut fraudul conduct thi is import as
it give manag the legal ground to investig and punish violat the action list
can includ
ani dishonest or fraudul act
forgeri or alter of document
misappl of fund or asset
improprieti with respect to report financi transact
profit on insid knowledg
disclos secur transact to other
accept gift from vendor
destruct or disappear of record or asset
ani similar or relat irregular
nonfraud irregular
thi section cover alleg of person improprieti or irregular and state that thei
should be resolv by manag and not an auditor
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4731
investig respons
thi part deal with who will investig suspect irregular as well as to whom these
irregular will be report manag law enforc or legal counsel
confidenti
under thi section the confidenti natur of the investig is set forth it state that the
investig will not be disclos to outsid except as requir
author for investig
thi delin that whoever is in charg of the investig ha the author to take
control of and examin record
report procedur
thi part state that anyon suspect fraud should report it and not attempt an
investig it also state that manag and other should not make statement
regard the alleg guilt of the perpetr
termin
thi section state that ani recommend to termin employe should be review by
counsel and manag
commun the fraud polici
it obvious doe littl good to have a fraud or ethic polici if it is not commun to the
employe thi commun can be accomplish in sever wai again the
commun of the polici should be present in a posit nonaccusatori manner
orientationannu train
dure initi employe orient the fraud polici should be discuss thi is the first
opportun the compani ha to make it point and it should be made thoroughli
remind employe via annual onlin or live train mai reinforc the polici and
manag expect that it be follow
memoranda
an interoffic memorandum from the chief execut offic detail the fraud polici is a
good idea onc again the polici should con centrat on the posit aspect of work for
an ethic compani
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4732 2011 fraud examin manual
poster
some compani might wish to us poster displai in common area howev thi
should be carefulli consid as some employe might object to such tactic
employe moral
if an employe is properli instruct commun of a fraud polici can have a posit
impact on moral honest worker want to work for an honest compani a fraud polici
help set the proper tone
quizzesgam
game mai be a fun and inform wai to reinforc and commun the fraud polici in an
organ quizz with prize mai also be us to reward those who demonstr
awar of the polici
legal consider
mani compani have learn that it is best to spell out specif unaccept conduct if the
type of conduct that is consid unaccept is not accur detail there might be
legal problem in discharg a dishonest employe check with your counsel regard ani
legal consider with respect to a fraud polici on of the most import legal
consider is to ensur everyon and everi alleg is handl in a uniform manner a
sampl fraud polici is contain at the end of the chapter
