2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Ethics Programs


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Ethics Programs 
A written ethics policy is an excellent method by which management can objectively 
communicate its philosophy and develop a successful ethics program. The policy should be 
disseminated among both new and old employees. Additionally, some companies have 
found it effective to share the ethics policy with their vendors. 
 
In most cultures, the majority of people share the same values. They agree on what is good 
and bad, what is right and wrong, and what is moral and immoral. Although all will not hold 
the same set of values, the social values of the majority will affect the beliefs and behaviors 
of all people.  
 
The collection of a person’s beliefs and morals makes up a set of principles known as ethics. 
Ethics are the judgments about right and wrong or, more specifically, a person’s moral 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.733  
obligations to society that determine a person’s actions. Determining ethical rights and 
wrongs is complicated by the fact that moral standards and generally accepted social 
behavior change with time. In addition, different groups in the same society may have 
conflicting ideas of right and wrong. These values and ethics of an individual are reflected in 
their actions as employees. There are four factors that generally affect the ethical decisions  
of employees: 
• The law and other government regulations 
• Industry and organizational ethical codes 
• Social pressures 
• Tension between personal standards and organizational needs 
 
Employees’ ethics, whatever they may be, influe nce a wide range of organizational decisions 
and actions.  
 
A common fallacy in discussions about ethics is If it’s legal, it’s ethical. A common defense to 
charges of unethical behavior is to invoke the law. This legalistic approach to ethics 
mistakenly implies that actions that are not explicitly prohibited by the law are ethical. The 
main error in this approach is that legal standards do not establish ethical principles. 
Although abiding by the law is a part of ethical behavior, laws themselves do not describe 
how an ethical person should behave. One can be dishonest, unprincipled, untrustworthy, 
unfair, and uncaring without breaking the law. Ethical people measure their conduct by basic 
principles rather than rules. Thus, in making personal or occupational decisions, the law is 
only the minimum threshold in determining what is legally possible, and does not address 
how people should behave ethically. 
 
Origins of Ethics 
There are theories that state that by the time one becomes an adult and enters the work-
 place, a basic code of ethics is already in place. Ethical character is hardwired into the 
personality before or during adolescence. By this theory, if a person did not learn to be 
ethical in childhood, there is a slim chance that he will act ethically as an adult.  
 
An opposing theory holds that operational values that guide behavior are not formed until 
early adulthood and, even after that, they are subject to change. Until one has to make 
serious, binding decisions, it is not necessary to act according to one’s beliefs. By this theory, 
as long as individuals have the capacity to reflect and make value judgments, they can modify 
their personal ethics and change their behavior.  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.734   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Business ethics programs rely on the validity of the latter theory. With the hope that adult 
behavior can be affected or modified, ethics programs are designed to steer employees in the 
right direction.  
 
Ethics’ Current Place in Business 
The decline in public attitudes about business in recent years has reinforced the importance 
of ethics in the workplace. Although there seems to be a further deterioration of public 
confidence, substantial endeavors have been made by organizations with respect to business 
ethics. These initiatives include adoption of codes of conduct, introduction of ethics into 
employee and management training, and the establishment of ethics and compliance offices.  
 
Corporate ethics initiatives have accelerated over the last decade due in part to the impact of 
the U.S. Federal Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations. These Guidelines can multiply or 
mitigate potentially devastating penalties for errant corporations, depending on their 
attempts to prevent such misconduct with effective compliance programs.  
 
Ethics Program Development 
Identifying key organizational characteristics and issues is a start to the development of an 
ethics program. These items include: 
• Understanding of why good people can commit unethical acts 
• Defining current—as well as desired—organizational values 
• Determining if organizational values have been properly communicated 
• Producing written ethics policies, procedures, or structures 
• Ascertaining how board members, stockholders, management, employees, and any other 
pertinent members of the organization define success 
• Determining if ethics is a leadership issue in the organization 
 
With a good understanding of the above-mentioned issues, a more effective ethics program 
can be built. The following 12 components are necessary to develop, implement, and 
manage a comprehensive ethics program: 
• Focus on ethical leadership 
• Vision statement 
• Values statement 
• Code of ethics 
• Designated ethics official 
• Ethics task force or committee 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.735  
• Ethics communication strategy 
• Ethics training 
• Ethics help and fraud report telephone line 
• Ethical behavior rewards and sanctions 
• Comprehensive system to monitor and track ethics data 
• Periodic evaluation of ethics efforts and data 
 
A sample of a typical Code of Business Ethics and an Annual Compliance Questionnaire are 
provided at the end of this chapter. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.736   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     



:


ethic program
a written ethic polici is an excel method by which manag can object
commun it philosophi and develop a success ethic program the polici should be
dissemin among both new and old employe addition some compani have
found it effect to share the ethic polici with their vendor
in most cultur the major of peopl share the same valu thei agre on what is good
and bad what is right and wrong and what is moral and immor although all will not hold
the same set of valu the social valu of the major will affect the belief and behavior
of all peopl
the collect of a person belief and moral make up a set of principl known as ethic
ethic ar the judgment about right and wrong or more specif a person moral
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4733
oblig to societi that determin a person action determin ethic right and
wrong is complic by the fact that moral standard and gener accept social
behavior chang with time in addit differ group in the same societi mai have
conflict idea of right and wrong these valu and ethic of an individu ar reflect in
their action as employe there ar four factor that gener affect the ethic decis
of employe
the law and other govern regul
industri and organiz ethic code
social pressur
tension between person standard and organiz need
employe ethic whatev thei mai be influ nce a wide rang of organiz decis
and action
a common fallaci in discuss about ethic is if it legal it ethic a common defens to
charg of uneth behavior is to invok the law thi legalist approach to ethic
mistakenli impli that action that ar not explicitli prohibit by the law ar ethic the
main error in thi approach is that legal standard do not establish ethic principl
although abid by the law is a part of ethic behavior law themselv do not describ
how an ethic person should behav on can be dishonest unprincipl untrustworthi
unfair and uncar without break the law ethic peopl measur their conduct by basic
principl rather than rule thu in make person or occup decis the law is
onli the minimum threshold in determin what is legal possibl and doe not address
how peopl should behav ethic
origin of ethic
there ar theori that state that by the time on becom an adult and enter the work
place a basic code of ethic is alreadi in place ethic charact is hardwir into the
person befor or dure adolesc by thi theori if a person did not learn to be
ethic in childhood there is a slim chanc that he will act ethic as an adult
an oppos theori hold that oper valu that guid behavior ar not form until
earli adulthood and even after that thei ar subject to chang until on ha to make
seriou bind decis it is not necessari to act accord to on belief by thi theori
as long as individu have the capac to reflect and make valu judgment thei can modifi
their person ethic and chang their behavior
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4734 2011 fraud examin manual
busi ethic program reli on the valid of the latter theori with the hope that adult
behavior can be affect or modifi ethic program ar design to steer employe in the
right direct
ethic current place in busi
the declin in public attitud about busi in recent year ha reinforc the import
of ethic in the workplac although there seem to be a further deterior of public
confid substanti endeavor have been made by organ with respect to busi
ethic these initi includ adopt of code of conduct introduct of ethic into
employe and manag train and the establish of ethic and complianc offic
corpor ethic initi have acceler over the last decad due in part to the impact of
the us feder sentenc guidelin for organ these guidelin can multipli or
mitig potenti devast penalti for errant corpor depend on their
attempt to prevent such misconduct with effect complianc program
ethic program develop
identifi kei organiz characterist and issu is a start to the develop of an
ethic program these item includ
understand of why good peopl can commit uneth act
defin currenta well as desiredorganiz valu
determin if organiz valu have been properli commun
produc written ethic polici procedur or structur
ascertain how board member stockhold manag employe and ani other
pertin member of the organ defin success
determin if ethic is a leadership issu in the organ
with a good understand of the abovement issu a more effect ethic program
can be built the follow 12 compon ar necessari to develop implement and
manag a comprehens ethic program
focu on ethic leadership
vision statement
valu statement
code of ethic
design ethic offici
ethic task forc or committe
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4735
ethic commun strategi
ethic train
ethic help and fraud report telephon line
ethic behavior reward and sanction
comprehens system to monitor and track ethic data
period evalu of ethic effort and data
a sampl of a typic code of busi ethic and an annual complianc questionnair ar
provid at the end of thi chapter
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4736 2011 fraud examin manual
