2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Sample Corporate Compliance Program


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Sample Corporate Compliance Program 3  
 
I. SCOPE AND IMPLEMENTATION 
 
This Corporate Compliance Program (“comp liance program”) applies to corporate 
headquarters and to all groups, operating divisions, and units of, and to all employees 
and agents of, (company)  whose functions or responsibilities involve compliance with 
laws, regulations, or standards of conduct applicable to the operations or practices of the 
Corporation, in the United States or abroad. 
 
II. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT 
 
A. (Company) ’s standards of conduct for employee compliance with applicable laws and 
regulations are set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the Employee Handbook 
for Nonexempt Employees (“Employee Handbook”), which may be revised and 
supplemented from time to time. 
 
B. With the prior approval of (company)  management, the Compliance Coordinator shall, 
as may appear necessary from time to time, revise and supplement the standards of 
conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the Employee Handbook. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall, from time to time, distribute to relevant groups 
of employees materials incorporated by reference into the Business Ethics Policy, 
such as the HIMA Code of Ethics with respect to dealings with health care 
providers, professionals, and institutions. 
 
III. ROLE OF THE COMPLIANCE COORDINATOR 
 
A. The Compliance Coordinator shall have overall responsibility (1) to oversee 
compliance with the standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and 
the Employee Handbook, and with the compliance procedures established by or 
under the compliance program, and (2) to ensure the proper functioning of the 
compliance program. 
 
B. The Compliance Coordinator shall confer generally with Management about matters 
relating to the compliance program, including all matters that, under the compliance 
program, the Compliance Coordinator is required to report to the Regulatory Affairs 
Committee of the Board of Directors under ¶ XI.B of the compliance program. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall monitor developments relating to compliance 
with applicable laws, regulations, and standards of conduct, and, shall, from time to 
                                                 
3 Source: BNA/ACCA Compliance Manual:  Prevention of Corporate Liability, pp. 1900:4-11. Published by 
The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc. (800-372-1033) <http://www.bna.com> 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.737  
time, distribute to particular employees or groups of employees memoranda, news 
articles, or other informational materials that explain compliance requirements, 
report changes in requirements or industry standards, highlight the importance of 
compliance, or are otherwise relevant to their compliance responsibilities. 
 
D. The Compliance Coordinator and/or the Corporate Compliance Audit Director shall 
review, on a continuing basis, the Corporation’s internal procedures for preventing 
violations of law and shall create a compendium of such procedures, including: 
 
1. Procedures for review of proposed product labeling, promotional materials, and 
advertising materials 
 
2. Procedures for obtaining opinions of counsel on proposed transactions or 
activities that may raise questions under the anti-trust laws or other laws 
 
3. Procedures for review by regulatory affairs professionals of product testing, 
product modifications, introduction of new products, and other matters that may 
raise regulatory issues 
 
4. Procedures for timely preparation and submission of disclosures and reports 
required by law 
  
5. Internal and external programs 
 
E. The Compliance Coordinator shall (1) report to and meet with Management, as 
necessary and appropriate, with respect to any deficiencies identified or 
improvements needed in the compliance program, and (2) report to and meet with 
the Regulatory Affairs Committee of the Board of Directors as required by ¶ XI.B of 
this compliance program. 
 
F. The Compliance Coordinator shall see to it that all reports of suspected misconduct 
or impropriety relating to (company)  operations or practices are promptly, thoroughly, 
and properly investigated in accordance with a Standard Operating Procedure 
approved by Management; and that, where appropriate, disciplinary sanctions are 
imposed in accordance with ¶ IX of this compliance program. 
 
G. The Compliance Coordinator shall discharge the responsibilities assigned to him by 
or under this compliance program. 
 
H. The Compliance Coordinator shall take such other actions as are necessary and 
appropriate to implement and improve the compliance program. 
 
I.  ___________________________ is designated as the Compliance Coordinator. 
  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.738   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
IV.  DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY  
 
A. It is the policy of (company)  that substantial discretionary authority shall not be 
delegated to individuals who the Corporation knows, or through the exercise of 
diligence could know, have a propensity to engage in illegal activities. In particular, 
substantial discretionary authority shall be delegated only to individuals who the 
Corporation is confident will not engage in illegal activities. 
 
B. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, review the delegations of 
discretionary authority within the Corporation, the checks, balances, and controls 
applicable to such delegated discretionary authority, and the performance and 
background of the persons exercising such authority to determine whether any 
current delegation violates corporate policy. In conducting such review, the 
Compliance Coordinator may rely on information in personnel files, on the results of 
corporate audits, on the opinions of managers and supervisors, on consultation with 
the Corporation’s independent outside auditors, on surveys of persons outside the 
Corporation who deal with the Corporation, and on other available information. At 
least annually, the Compliance Coordinator shall report in writing to the Chief 
Executive Officer the results of that review. The Compliance Coordinator shall 
recommend to Management any needed actions. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator and the Personnel Department shall from time to time 
jointly review the Corporation’s procedures (including background and reference 
checks) and criteria for filling (whether by new hiring or by promotion from within) 
positions involving substantial discretion, so as to ensure that only persons of 
integrity are selected for such positions. The Compliance Coordinator and the 
Personnel Department shall recommend to Management any needed actions. 
 
V. COMMUNICATION OF STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES TO EMPLOYEES 
 
A. The Compliance Coordinator shall ensure, and, subject to ¶ B, at least annually shall 
certify in writing to the Chief Executive Officer, that: 
 
1. Every officer and every key employee (as determined by the Compliance 
Coordinator) of the Corporation has, within the preceding twelve months, 
acknowledged to the Compliance Coordinator in writing that he has reviewed 
and understands the Business Ethics Policy. 
 
2. Every employee of the Corporation whose function or responsibilities involve 
compliance with laws, regulations, or standards of conduct applicable to the 
operations or practices of the Corporation (other than officers and key 
employees) has, within the preceding twelve months, acknowledged to the 
Compliance Coordinator in writing that he has reviewed and understands the 
provisions of the Employee Handbook that relate to standards of conduct. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.739  
3. Every employee whose function or responsibilities involve compliance with laws, 
regulations, or standards of conduct applicable to the operations or practices of 
the Corporation who was newly hired by (company)  within the preceding twelve 
months has, within thirty days from the commencement of employment with 
(company)  (a), received the Business Ethics Policy or Employee Handbook, as 
applicable, and (b) acknowledged to the Compliance Coordinator in writing that 
he has reviewed and understands the provisions of the Business Ethics Policy or 
Employee Handbook that relate to standards of conduct, as applicable. 
 
B. If the Compliance Coordinator cannot truthfully make the certifications required by 
¶ A, he shall certify to the extent the facts permit, shall identify the employees as to 
whom the required certification cannot be given, and shall state the reasons (to the 
extent known) why the requirements of ¶ A.1-3, as applicable, have not been 
satisfied with respect to those employees, and what measure will be taken promptly 
to satisfy those paragraphs, as applicable, with respect to those employees. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall maintain records supporting the certifications 
called for by ¶ A. 
 
D. The Compliance Coordinator shall cause to be posted in prominent places 
accessible, in the aggregate, to all ( company)  employees whose functions and 
responsibilities involve compliance with laws, regulations, or standards of conduct 
applicable to the operations or practices of the Corporation, a Notice that: 
 
1. States ( company) ’s commitment to comply with all applicable laws and regulations 
and the standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the 
Employee Handbook 
 
2. Designates the Compliance Coordinators (or a designee of the Compliance 
Coordinator) to receive any reports of misconduct or impropriety relating to 
(company) ’s operations or practices of whic h any employees may have knowledge, 
whether committed by an employee of (company), an employee of another 
company or organization, an employee of a governmental agency, or any  
other person 
 
3. States that no employee will suffer any penalty or retribution for good faith 
reporting of any suspected misconduct or impropriety 
 
4. States that reports of misconduct or impropriety may be anonymous 
 
5. States that reports of misconduct or impropriety may be made directly to a 
government agency 
 
6. States that ( company)  will investigate all such reports, and that any (company)  
employee found to have engaged in misconduct will receive prompt and 
appropriate discipline, up to and including dismissal 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.740   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
7. States that the Compliance Coordinator or designee (with telephone number) is 
available for consultation on any question a ( company)  employee may have 
concerning the application to ( company) ’s operations or practices of any law, 
regulation, or standard of conduct or any other matter relating to (company) ’s 
compliance program. 
 
E. The Compliance Coordinator shall, in consultation and coordination with other units 
of the Corporation, arrange for compliance training sessions for all employees whose 
functions or responsibilities involve compliance with laws, regulations, or standards 
of conduct applicable to the operations or practices of the Corporation. Each such 
session shall include a presentation of some aspect or aspects of the laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct applicable to the employees who attend the 
session. Every such employee shall attend at least one such session during each 
twelve months of employment with ( company). Special sessions shall be held, as 
necessary and convenient, for new employees. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at 
least annually, certify to the Chief Executive Officer that (1) every such employee has 
attended at least one such compliance training session within the preceding twelve 
months, or (2) that all but certain identified employees have attended at least one 
such session, the reasons why the identified employees have not attended one, and 
the measures that will be taken to ensure that those employees promptly attend such 
a session. 
 
F. Each supervisor shall annually certify to the Compliance Coordinator in writing that 
he has personally: 
 
1. Discussed with each employee under his immediate supervision the standards of 
conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy or the Employee Handbook, as 
applicable 
 
2. Informed each employee that strict compliance with such standards of conduct is 
a condition of employment 
 
3. Informed each such employee that (company) will take disciplinary action, 
including dismissal as appropriate, for violation of such standards of conduct 
 
G. The Compliance Coordinator shall maintain a file of such certifications, and shall 
report, at least annually, to Management with respect to compliance with this 
provision of the compliance program. 
 
H. The Compliance Coordinator and the Personnel Department shall jointly develop 
and implement tests or other methods to measure the effectiveness of the 
communications of standards and procedures to employees. The Compliance 
Coordinator and the Personnel Department shall report the results of such tests or 
measures to Management. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.741  
VI. MONITORING, AUDITING, AND REPORTING 
 
A. Monitoring 
 
1. The Compliance Coordinator shall, by memorandum, at least annually advise all 
employees with supervisory responsibility of their duty to monitor all activities of 
their subordinates in the course of their employment with ( company)  to ensure 
that those activities are conducted in compliance with all applicable laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct. 
    
2. Each supervisor shall sign a copy of the memorandum referred to in ¶ 1 and 
return it to the Compliance Coordinator, who shall maintain a file of such 
memoranda. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, report to 
Management with respect to complia nce with this provision of the  
compliance program.  
 
B. Auditing 
 
1. The Corporate Compliance Audit Director shall be responsible for the conduct 
of internal non-financial audits to promote compliance with applicable laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct (other than those relating to financial 
matters). 
 
2. The Chief Financial Officer of the Company shall be responsible for the conduct 
of internal financial audits to promote compliance with applicable laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct relating to financial matters. 
 
3. Management shall arrange for the conduct of annual audits by independent 
outside auditors to promote compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and 
standards of conduct, both financial and non-financial. 
 
4. Copies of all internal and outside audit reports relating to compliance  
with laws, regulations, or standards of conduct (whether financial or non-
 financial) shall be provided to the Compliance Coordinator and to the Audit 
Committee or the Regulatory Affairs [Committee] of the Board, whichever is the 
appropriate recipient. 
 
C. Reporting 
 
1. The Compliance Coordinator shall establish and oversee a reporting system in 
which: 
 
a. Any employee may report to the Compliance Coordinator (or a designee of 
the Compliance Coordinator) any suspected misconduct or impropriety 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.742   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
relating to (company) ’s operations or practices, whether committed by an 
employee of (company), an employee of another company or organization, an 
employee of a government agency, or other person. 
 
b. No employee will suffer any penalty or retribution for good faith reporting of 
any suspected misconduct or impropriety. 
 
c. Any report of misconduct or impropriety may be anonymous. 
 
2. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, communicate to all (company)  
employees the policy of the Corporation that any employee who learns of an 
apparent violation of law, regulations, or unethical conduct relating to the 
business or activities of the Corporation shall report such violation or conduct to 
the Compliance Coordinator (or a designee of the Compliance Coordinator), and 
may do so anonymously. 
 
3. At least annually, the Compliance Coordinator shall report to Management and 
to the Regulatory Affairs Committee of the Board on the functioning of the 
reporting system. 
 
VII. DEBARRED INDIVIDUALS 
 
A. It is the policy of (company)  that the Corporation shall not knowingly employ or retain 
as a consultant, with or without pay, any individual who is publicly listed by a federal 
agency as debarred, suspended, or otherwise ineligible for federal programs. 
 
B. To carry out its policy, the Corporation shall make reasonable inquiry into the status 
of any potential employee or consultant. Such reasonable inquiry shall include review 
of the General Services Administration’s List of Parties Excluded from Federal 
Procurement Programs and information on debarments imposed by any other relevant 
 federal agency. 
 
C. The Corporation’s policy does not require the Corporation to terminate the 
employment or consultancy of individuals who become suspended, or are proposed 
for debarment during their employment or consultancy with the Corporation. The 
Corporation shall, however, remove such employees or consultants from 
responsibility for, or involvement with, governmental business until the resolution of 
such suspension or proposed debarment. 
 
D. If such employee or consultant is debarred, his employment or consultancy with the 
Corporation shall be terminated. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.743  
VIII. BUSINESS DEALINGS WITH DEBARRED INDIVIDUALS AND ENTITIES, AND EMPLOYEES AND CONSULTANTS CHARGED WITH OR CONVICTED OF CRIMES 
 
A. Debarred individuals and entities 
 
1. It is the policy of (company)  that it shall not knowingly form a contract with, 
purchase from, or enter into any business relationship with, any individual or 
business entity that is publicly listed by a federal agency as debarred, suspended, 
or proposed for debarment, other than (1) sales by the Corporation in the 
ordinary course of business and (2) purchases by the Corporation in the ordinary 
course of business of goods or services that are not specific to the Corporation’s 
medical device operations regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 
unless there is a compelling reason to do so.  
 
2. The Corporation shall make reasonable inquiry as to the status of any potential 
business partner whose relationship to the Corporation would not be within the 
scope of ¶ A(1) or ¶ A(2). Such reasonable inquiry shall include review of the 
General Services Administration’s List  of Parties Excluded from Federal 
Procurement Programs and review of information on debarments imposed by 
any other relevant federal agency. 
 
3. In the case of any decision to proceed with a business relationship not within the 
scope of ¶ A(1) or ¶ A(2) and permissible under ¶ A solely due to a compelling 
reason, the decision and the compelling reason shall be documented by the 
Compliance Coordinator. 
 
B. Individuals charged with or convicted of offenses relating to  
governmental business 
 
1. If any employee or consultant of the Corporation is charged by Indictment or 
Information with criminal offense, the Corporation shall remove that employee 
or consultant immediately from responsibility for, or involvement with, matters 
relating to the Corporation’s business. 
 
2. If the employee or consultant is convicted of an offense relating to the 
Company’s business, his employment or consultancy with the Corporation shall 
be terminated. 
 
3. With respect to any person convicted of a federal offense relating to the  
business or operations of (company), the Corporation shall have and enforce the 
following policies: 
 
a. All business relations under the Corporation’s control with such person shall 
be terminated, and such person shall not be re-employed or further retained 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.744   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
by the Corporation in any capacity. This provision does not apply to any 
relationship involving the holding of any type of securities. 
 
b. No such person, nor any other person affiliated with such person, shall share 
any office space or storage space, or any building or computer system, with 
the Corporation. 
 
c. No such person shall be permitted to enter the premises of the Corporation, 
except as required by law. 
 
IX. DISCIPLINE 
 
A. It is the policy of (company)  that the standards of conduct set forth in the Business 
Ethics Policy and in the Employee handbook shall be consistently enforced through 
appropriate disciplinary mechanisms. Disciplinary actions may be up to and including 
dismissal, and may extend, as appropriate, to individuals responsible for the failure to 
prevent, detect, or report an offense. 
 
B. The Compliance Coordinator shall, in consultation with Management and 
supervisors as appropriate, establish and administer a company-wide disciplinary 
system, including written disciplinary cases. The system shall provide for the making 
of disciplinary decisions by appropriate company officials in consultation with the 
Compliance Coordinator. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall maintain records of all disciplinary actions taken 
for violation of the standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and 
in the Employee Handbook. 
 
D. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, report to Management in 
writing on the disciplinary system. 
 
X. RESPONSE TO VIOLATIONS 
 
A. It is a policy of (company)  that, if a violation of any applicable law, regulation, or 
standard of conduct relating to the business of the Corporation is detected, the 
Corporation shall take all reasonable steps to respond appropriately to the violation 
and to prevent further similar violations, including any modifications to this 
compliance program. It is the policy of (company)  that if ( company)  learns that any 
statement previously made by ( company)  to any government agency is false or 
incorrect in any material respect, ( company)  shall voluntarily and promptly (after 
appropriate preliminary investigation) report the matter to the government agency. It 
is also the policy of (company)  that if (company)  learns of a violation of any applicable 
law or regulation that is not known to the government agency but is likely to be of 
interest to that agency, (company)  shall voluntarily and promptly (after appropriate 
investigation) report the matter to that agency. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.745  
B. Any employee of the Corporation who learns of a violation of the type referred to in 
¶ A shall report it to the Compliance Coor dinator (or designee of the Compliance 
Coordinator). Although it is preferable that any such report be made by an employee 
who identifies himself so that the matter may be investigated promptly and 
thoroughly, an employee may make such a report anonymously. Failure to report 
such a violation known to an employee may, itself, be a basis for disciplinary action. 
 
C. Whenever the Compliance Coordinator receives information regarding a possible 
violation of any applicable law or regulation, the Compliance Coordinator shall take 
appropriate steps to examine information and conduct the investigation necessary to 
determine whether an actual violation has occurred. The Compliance Coordinator 
shall recommend to Management an appropriate course of action, and Management 
shall render a timely decision with respect to such recommendation. The Compliance 
Coordinator shall prepare a memorandum reflecting the information developed, the 
recommendation made, and the Management decision rendered, and this 
memorandum shall promptly be furnished to the Audit Committee of the Board. 
 
XI. ROLE OF THE REGULATORY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
A. The Regulatory Affairs Committee shall be responsible for reviewing and suggesting 
to Management any necessary improvements in: 
 
1. The standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the 
Employee Handbook 
 
2. The compliance program generally 
 
B. The Regulatory Affairs Committee shall, at least annually: 
 
1. Receive a written report from, and meet with, the Compliance Coordinator with 
respect to the compliance program generally, including: 
 
a. The Compliance Coordinator’s review of  delegations of authority within  
the Corporation 
 
b. The certifications required by ¶ V.A of this program, and employee 
familiarity with the corporate standards of conduct generally 
 
c. The certifications required by ¶ V.D of this program, the compliance 
communications and training generally, including their effectiveness 
 
d. The certifications required by ¶ V.E of this program, the compliance by 
supervisors with ¶ VI.A.2 of this program, and the participation of 
supervisors in this program generally 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.746   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
e. The results of internal and any external audits (whether financial or non-
 financial) relating to compliance with laws, regulations, or standards of 
conduct 
 
f. The reporting system required by ¶ VI.C of this program 
 
g. The disciplinary system required by ¶ IX of this program 
 
2. Discuss with Management the compliance program and the report of the 
Compliance Coordinator. 
 
3. Report to the Board of Directors with respect to the report of the Compliance 
Coordinator and the Committee’s meetings with the Compliance Coordinator 
and Management, and with respect to the compliance program generally. 
 
C. At each meeting of the Regulatory Affairs Committee, the Compliance Coordinator 
shall report to the Committee any and all recommendations made by the Compliance 
Coordinator to Management, and decisions by Management, under ¶ X.C of this 
program since the last meeting of the Committee. 
 
D. The Regulatory Affairs Committee shall adopt a standard operating procedure for 
the performance of its responsibilities under this compliance program. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.747  



:


sampl corpor complianc program 3
i scope and implement
thi corpor complianc program comp lianc program appli to corpor
headquart and to all group oper divis and unit of and to all employe
and agent of compani whose function or respons involv complianc with
law regul or standard of conduct applic to the oper or practic of the
corpor in the unit state or abroad
ii standard of conduct
a compani s standard of conduct for employe complianc with applic law and
regul ar set forth in the busi ethic polici and the employe handbook
for nonexempt employe employe handbook which mai be revis and
supplement from time to time
b with the prior approv of compani manag the complianc coordin shall
as mai appear necessari from time to time revis and supplement the standard of
conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and the employe handbook
c the complianc coordin shall from time to time distribut to relev group
of employe materi incorpor by refer into the busi ethic polici
such as the hima code of ethic with respect to deal with health care
provid profession and institut
iii role of the complianc coordin
a the complianc coordin shall have overal respons 1 to overse
complianc with the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and
the employe handbook and with the complianc procedur establish by or
under the complianc program and 2 to ensur the proper function of the
complianc program
b the complianc coordin shall confer gener with manag about matter
relat to the complianc program includ all matter that under the complianc
program the complianc coordin is requir to report to the regulatori affair
committe of the board of director under xib of the complianc program
c the complianc coordin shall monitor develop relat to complianc
with applic law regul and standard of conduct and shall from time to
3 sourc bnaacca complianc manual prevent of corpor liabil pp 1900411 publish by
the bureau of nation affair inc 8003721033 httpwwwbnacom
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4737
time distribut to particular employe or group of employe memoranda new
articl or other inform materi that explain complianc requir
report chang in requir or industri standard highlight the import of
complianc or ar otherwis relev to their complianc respons
d the complianc coordin andor the corpor complianc audit director shall
review on a continu basi the corpor intern procedur for prevent
violat of law and shall creat a compendium of such procedur includ
1 procedur for review of propos product label promot materi and
advertis materi
2 procedur for obtain opinion of counsel on propos transact or
activ that mai rais question under the antitrust law or other law
3 procedur for review by regulatori affair profession of product test
product modif introduct of new product and other matter that mai
rais regulatori issu
4 procedur for time prepar and submiss of disclosur and report
requir by law
5 intern and extern program
e the complianc coordin shall 1 report to and meet with manag as
necessari and appropri with respect to ani defici identifi or
improv need in the complianc program and 2 report to and meet with
the regulatori affair committe of the board of director as requir by xib of
thi complianc program
f the complianc coordin shall see to it that all report of suspect misconduct
or improprieti relat to compani oper or practic ar promptli thoroughli
and properli investig in accord with a standard oper procedur
approv by manag and that where appropri disciplinari sanction ar
impos in accord with ix of thi complianc program
g the complianc coordin shall discharg the respons assign to him by
or under thi complianc program
h the complianc coordin shall take such other action as ar necessari and
appropri to implement and improv the complianc program
i is design as the complianc coordin
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4738 2011 fraud examin manual
iv deleg of author
a it is the polici of compani that substanti discretionari author shall not be
deleg to individu who the corpor know or through the exercis of
dilig could know have a propens to engag in illeg activ in particular
substanti discretionari author shall be deleg onli to individu who the
corpor is confid will not engag in illeg activ
b the complianc coordin shall at least annual review the deleg of
discretionari author within the corpor the check balanc and control
applic to such deleg discretionari author and the perform and
background of the person exercis such author to determin whether ani
current deleg violat corpor polici in conduct such review the
complianc coordin mai reli on inform in personnel file on the result of
corpor audit on the opinion of manag and supervisor on consult with
the corpor independ outsid auditor on survei of person outsid the
corpor who deal with the corpor and on other avail inform at
least annual the complianc coordin shall report in write to the chief
execut offic the result of that review the complianc coordin shall
recommend to manag ani need action
c the complianc coordin and the personnel depart shall from time to time
jointli review the corpor procedur includ background and refer
check and criteria for fill whether by new hire or by promot from within
posit involv substanti discret so as to ensur that onli person of
integr ar select for such posit the complianc coordin and the
personnel depart shall recommend to manag ani need action
v commun of standard and procedur to employe
a the complianc coordin shall ensur and subject to b at least annual shall
certifi in write to the chief execut offic that
1 everi offic and everi kei employe as determin by the complianc
coordin of the corpor ha within the preced twelv month
acknowledg to the complianc coordin in write that he ha review
and understand the busi ethic polici
2 everi employe of the corpor whose function or respons involv
complianc with law regul or standard of conduct applic to the
oper or practic of the corpor other than offic and kei
employe ha within the preced twelv month acknowledg to the
complianc coordin in write that he ha review and understand the
provis of the employe handbook that relat to standard of conduct
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4739
3 everi employe whose function or respons involv complianc with law
regul or standard of conduct applic to the oper or practic of
the corpor who wa newli hire by compani within the preced twelv
month ha within thirti dai from the commenc of employ with
compani a receiv the busi ethic polici or employe handbook as
applic and b acknowledg to the complianc coordin in write that
he ha review and understand the provis of the busi ethic polici or
employe handbook that relat to standard of conduct as applic
b if the complianc coordin cannot truthfulli make the certif requir by
a he shall certifi to the extent the fact permit shall identifi the employe as to
whom the requir certif cannot be given and shall state the reason to the
extent known why the requir of a13 as applic have not been
satisfi with respect to those employe and what measur will be taken promptli
to satisfi those paragraph as applic with respect to those employe
c the complianc coordin shall maintain record support the certif
call for by a
d the complianc coordin shall caus to be post in promin place
access in the aggreg to all compani employe whose function and
respons involv complianc with law regul or standard of conduct
applic to the oper or practic of the corpor a notic that
1 state compani s commit to compli with all applic law and regul
and the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and the
employe handbook
2 design the complianc coordin or a designe of the complianc
coordin to receiv ani report of misconduct or improprieti relat to
compani s oper or practic of whic h ani employe mai have knowledg
whether commit by an employe of compani an employe of anoth
compani or organ an employe of a government agenc or ani
other person
3 state that no employe will suffer ani penalti or retribut for good faith
report of ani suspect misconduct or improprieti
4 state that report of misconduct or improprieti mai be anonym
5 state that report of misconduct or improprieti mai be made directli to a
govern agenc
6 state that compani will investig all such report and that ani compani
employe found to have engag in misconduct will receiv prompt and
appropri disciplin up to and includ dismiss
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4740 2011 fraud examin manual
7 state that the complianc coordin or designe with telephon number is
avail for consult on ani question a compani employe mai have
concern the applic to compani s oper or practic of ani law
regul or standard of conduct or ani other matter relat to compani s
complianc program
e the complianc coordin shall in consult and coordin with other unit
of the corpor arrang for complianc train session for all employe whose
function or respons involv complianc with law regul or standard
of conduct applic to the oper or practic of the corpor each such
session shall includ a present of some aspect or aspect of the law
regul and standard of conduct applic to the employe who attend the
session everi such employe shall attend at least on such session dure each
twelv month of employ with compani special session shall be held as
necessari and conveni for new employe the complianc coordin shall at
least annual certifi to the chief execut offic that 1 everi such employe ha
attend at least on such complianc train session within the preced twelv
month or 2 that all but certain identifi employe have attend at least on
such session the reason why the identifi employe have not attend on and
the measur that will be taken to ensur that those employe promptli attend such
a session
f each supervisor shall annual certifi to the complianc coordin in write that
he ha person
1 discuss with each employe under hi immedi supervis the standard of
conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici or the employe handbook as
applic
2 inform each employe that strict complianc with such standard of conduct is
a condit of employ
3 inform each such employe that compani will take disciplinari action
includ dismiss as appropri for violat of such standard of conduct
g the complianc coordin shall maintain a file of such certif and shall
report at least annual to manag with respect to complianc with thi
provis of the complianc program
h the complianc coordin and the personnel depart shall jointli develop
and implement test or other method to measur the effect of the
commun of standard and procedur to employe the complianc
coordin and the personnel depart shall report the result of such test or
measur to manag
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4741
vi monitor audit and report
a monitor
1 the complianc coordin shall by memorandum at least annual advis all
employe with supervisori respons of their duti to monitor all activ of
their subordin in the cours of their employ with compani to ensur
that those activ ar conduct in complianc with all applic law
regul and standard of conduct
2 each supervisor shall sign a copi of the memorandum refer to in 1 and
return it to the complianc coordin who shall maintain a file of such
memoranda the complianc coordin shall at least annual report to
manag with respect to complia nce with thi provis of the
complianc program
b audit
1 the corpor complianc audit director shall be respons for the conduct
of intern nonfinanci audit to promot complianc with applic law
regul and standard of conduct other than those relat to financi
matter
2 the chief financi offic of the compani shall be respons for the conduct
of intern financi audit to promot complianc with applic law
regul and standard of conduct relat to financi matter
3 manag shall arrang for the conduct of annual audit by independ
outsid auditor to promot complianc with applic law regul and
standard of conduct both financi and nonfinanci
4 copi of all intern and outsid audit report relat to complianc
with law regul or standard of conduct whether financi or non
financi shall be provid to the complianc coordin and to the audit
committe or the regulatori affair committe of the board whichev is the
appropri recipi
c report
1 the complianc coordin shall establish and overse a report system in
which
a ani employe mai report to the complianc coordin or a designe of
the complianc coordin ani suspect misconduct or improprieti
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4742 2011 fraud examin manual
relat to compani s oper or practic whether commit by an
employe of compani an employe of anoth compani or organ an
employe of a govern agenc or other person
b no employe will suffer ani penalti or retribut for good faith report of
ani suspect misconduct or improprieti
c ani report of misconduct or improprieti mai be anonym
2 the complianc coordin shall at least annual commun to all compani
employe the polici of the corpor that ani employe who learn of an
appar violat of law regul or uneth conduct relat to the
busi or activ of the corpor shall report such violat or conduct to
the complianc coordin or a designe of the complianc coordin and
mai do so anonym
3 at least annual the complianc coordin shall report to manag and
to the regulatori affair committe of the board on the function of the
report system
vii debar individu
a it is the polici of compani that the corpor shall not knowingli emploi or retain
as a consult with or without pai ani individu who is publicli list by a feder
agenc as debar suspend or otherwis inelig for feder program
b to carri out it polici the corpor shall make reason inquiri into the statu
of ani potenti employe or consult such reason inquiri shall includ review
of the gener servic administr list of parti exclud from feder
procur program and inform on debar impos by ani other relev
feder agenc
c the corpor polici doe not requir the corpor to termin the
employ or consult of individu who becom suspend or ar propos
for debar dure their employ or consult with the corpor the
corpor shall howev remov such employe or consult from
respons for or involv with government busi until the resolut of
such suspens or propos debar
d if such employe or consult is debar hi employ or consult with the
corpor shall be termin
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4743
viii busi deal with debar individu and entiti and employe and consult charg with or convict of crime
a debar individu and entiti
1 it is the polici of compani that it shall not knowingli form a contract with
purchas from or enter into ani busi relationship with ani individu or
busi entiti that is publicli list by a feder agenc as debar suspend
or propos for debar other than 1 sale by the corpor in the
ordinari cours of busi and 2 purchas by the corpor in the ordinari
cours of busi of good or servic that ar not specif to the corpor
medic devic oper regul by the us food and drug administr
unless there is a compel reason to do so
2 the corpor shall make reason inquiri as to the statu of ani potenti
busi partner whose relationship to the corpor would not be within the
scope of a1 or a2 such reason inquiri shall includ review of the
gener servic administr list of parti exclud from feder
procur program and review of inform on debar impos by
ani other relev feder agenc
3 in the case of ani decis to proce with a busi relationship not within the
scope of a1 or a2 and permiss under a sole due to a compel
reason the decis and the compel reason shall be document by the
complianc coordin
b individu charg with or convict of offens relat to
government busi
1 if ani employe or consult of the corpor is charg by indict or
inform with crimin offens the corpor shall remov that employe
or consult immedi from respons for or involv with matter
relat to the corpor busi
2 if the employe or consult is convict of an offens relat to the
compani busi hi employ or consult with the corpor shall
be termin
3 with respect to ani person convict of a feder offens relat to the
busi or oper of compani the corpor shall have and enforc the
follow polici
a all busi relat under the corpor control with such person shall
be termin and such person shall not be reemploi or further retain
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4744 2011 fraud examin manual
by the corpor in ani capac thi provis doe not appli to ani
relationship involv the hold of ani type of secur
b no such person nor ani other person affili with such person shall share
ani offic space or storag space or ani build or comput system with
the corpor
c no such person shall be permit to enter the premis of the corpor
except as requir by law
ix disciplin
a it is the polici of compani that the standard of conduct set forth in the busi
ethic polici and in the employe handbook shall be consist enforc through
appropri disciplinari mechan disciplinari action mai be up to and includ
dismiss and mai extend as appropri to individu respons for the failur to
prevent detect or report an offens
b the complianc coordin shall in consult with manag and
supervisor as appropri establish and administ a companywid disciplinari
system includ written disciplinari case the system shall provid for the make
of disciplinari decis by appropri compani offici in consult with the
complianc coordin
c the complianc coordin shall maintain record of all disciplinari action taken
for violat of the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and
in the employe handbook
d the complianc coordin shall at least annual report to manag in
write on the disciplinari system
x respons to violat
a it is a polici of compani that if a violat of ani applic law regul or
standard of conduct relat to the busi of the corpor is detect the
corpor shall take all reason step to respond appropri to the violat
and to prevent further similar violat includ ani modif to thi
complianc program it is the polici of compani that if compani learn that ani
statement previous made by compani to ani govern agenc is fals or
incorrect in ani materi respect compani shall voluntarili and promptli after
appropri preliminari investig report the matter to the govern agenc it
is also the polici of compani that if compani learn of a violat of ani applic
law or regul that is not known to the govern agenc but is like to be of
interest to that agenc compani shall voluntarili and promptli after appropri
investig report the matter to that agenc
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4745
b ani employe of the corpor who learn of a violat of the type refer to in
a shall report it to the complianc coor dinat or designe of the complianc
coordin although it is prefer that ani such report be made by an employe
who identifi himself so that the matter mai be investig promptli and
thoroughli an employe mai make such a report anonym failur to report
such a violat known to an employe mai itself be a basi for disciplinari action
c whenev the complianc coordin receiv inform regard a possibl
violat of ani applic law or regul the complianc coordin shall take
appropri step to examin inform and conduct the investig necessari to
determin whether an actual violat ha occur the complianc coordin
shall recommend to manag an appropri cours of action and manag
shall render a time decis with respect to such recommend the complianc
coordin shall prepar a memorandum reflect the inform develop the
recommend made and the manag decis render and thi
memorandum shall promptli be furnish to the audit committe of the board
xi role of the regulatori affair committe of the board of director
a the regulatori affair committe shall be respons for review and suggest
to manag ani necessari improv in
1 the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and the
employe handbook
2 the complianc program gener
b the regulatori affair committe shall at least annual
1 receiv a written report from and meet with the complianc coordin with
respect to the complianc program gener includ
a the complianc coordin review of deleg of author within
the corpor
b the certif requir by va of thi program and employe
familiar with the corpor standard of conduct gener
c the certif requir by vd of thi program the complianc
commun and train gener includ their effect
d the certif requir by ve of thi program the complianc by
supervisor with via2 of thi program and the particip of
supervisor in thi program gener
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4746 2011 fraud examin manual
e the result of intern and ani extern audit whether financi or non
financi relat to complianc with law regul or standard of
conduct
f the report system requir by vic of thi program
g the disciplinari system requir by ix of thi program
2 discuss with manag the complianc program and the report of the
complianc coordin
3 report to the board of director with respect to the report of the complianc
coordin and the committe meet with the complianc coordin
and manag and with respect to the complianc program gener
c at each meet of the regulatori affair committe the complianc coordin
shall report to the committe ani and all recommend made by the complianc
coordin to manag and decis by manag under xc of thi
program sinc the last meet of the committe
d the regulatori affair committe shall adopt a standard oper procedur for
the perform of it respons under thi complianc program
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4747
