2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Sample Code of Business Ethics and Conduct


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Sample Code of Business Ethics and Conduct 
 
Introduction 
This section reaffirms the importance of high standards of business conduct. Adherence to 
this Code of Business Ethics and Conduct by all employees is the only sure way we can 
merit the confidence and support of the public. 
 
Many of us came from a culture that provided answers or direction for almost every 
situation possible. Managing our business was not so complex; the dilemmas we faced 
were — for the most part — simple, making our choices relatively easy. We would probably all 
agree that managing in today’s environment is not so simple. 
 
This code has been prepared as a working guide and not as a technical legal document. Thus, 
emphasis is on brevity and readability rather than providing an all-inclusive answer to 
specific questions. For example, the term employee  is used in its broadest sense and refers to 
every officer and employee of the company and its subsidiaries. The word “law” refers to 
laws, regulations, orders, etc. 
 
In observance of this code, as in other business conduct, there is no substitute for common 
sense. Each employee should apply this code with common sense and the attitude of seeking 
full compliance with the letter and spirit of the rules presented. 
 
It is incumbent upon you, as an employee of the company, to perform satisfactorily and to 
follow our policies and comply with our rules as they are issued or modified from time  
to time. 
 
These policies and rules are necessary to effectively manage the business and meet the ever-
 changing needs of the marketplace. Good performance and compliance with business rules 
lead to success. Both are crucial since our ability to provide you with career opportunities 
depends totally upon our success in the marketplace. Nonetheless, changes in our economy, 
our markets, and our technology are inevitable. Indeed, career opportunities will vary 
between the individual companies. For these reasons, we cannot contract or even imply that 
your employment will continue for any particular period of time. While you might terminate 
your employment at any time, with or without cause, we reserve that same right. This 
relationship might not be modified, except in writing signed by an appropriate representative 
of the company. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.754   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
This Code of Business Ethics and Conduct is a general guide to acceptable and appropriate 
behavior at the company, and you are expected to comply with its contents; however, it does 
not contain all of the detailed information you will need during the course of your 
employment. Nothing contained in this code or in other communications creates or implies 
an employment contract or term of employment. We are committed to reviewing our 
policies continually. Thus, this code might be modified or revised from time to time. 
 
You should familiarize yourself with this code so that you might readily distinguish any 
proposal or act that would constitute a violation. Each employee is responsible for his 
actions. Violations can result in disciplinary action, including dismissal and criminal 
prosecution. There will be no reprisal against an employee who in good faith reported a 
violation or suspected violation. 
 
The absence of a specific guideline practice or instruction covering a particular situation  
does not relieve an employee from exercising the highest ethical standards applicable to  
the circumstances. 
 
If any employee has doubts regarding a questionable situation that might arise, that 
employee should immediately consult his supervisor or a higher-level manager. 
 
Competition and Anti-Trust 
Fair Competition 
The company supports competition based on quality, service, and price. We will conduct our 
affairs honestly, directly, and fairly. To comply with the anti-trust laws and our policy of fair 
competition, employees: 
• Must never discuss with competitors any matter directly involved in competition 
between us and the competitor (e.g., sales price, marketing strategies, market shares, and 
sales policies) 
• Must never agree with a competitor to restrict competition by fixing prices, allocating 
markets, or other means 
• Must not arbitrarily refuse to deal with or  purchase goods and services from others 
simply because they are competitors in other respects 
• Must not require others to buy from us before we will buy from them 
• Must not require customers to take from us a service they don’t want just so they can get 
one they do want 
• Must never engage in industrial  espionage or commercial bribery 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.755 
• Must be accurate and truthful in all dealings with customers and be careful to accurately 
represent the quality, features, and availability of company products and services 
 
Compliance with Laws and Regulatory Orders 
The applicable laws and regulatory orders of every jurisdiction in which the company 
operates must be followed. Each employee is charged with the responsibility of acquiring 
sufficient knowledge of the laws and orders relating to his duties in order to recognize 
potential dangers and to know when to seek legal advice. 
 
In particular, when dealing with public officials, employees must adhere to the highest ethical 
standards of business conduct. When we seek the resolution of regulatory or political issues 
affecting the company’s interests, we must do so solely on the basis of merit and pursuant to 
proper procedures in dealing with such officials. Employees may not offer, provide, or 
solicit, directly or indirectly, any special treatment or favor in return for anything of 
economic value or the promise or expectation of future value or gain. In addition, there shall 
be no entertaining of employees of the U.S. Government. 
 
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
No employee will engage in activity that might involve the employee or the company in a 
violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977. The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
requires that the company’s books and records accurately and fairly reflect all transactions 
and that we maintain a system of internal controls; that transactions conform to 
management’s authorizations; and that the accounting records are accurate. No employee 
will falsely report transactions or fail to report the existence of false transactions in the 
accounting records. Employees certifying the correctness of records, including vouchers or 
bills, should have reasonable knowledge that the information is correct and proper. 
 
Under the Act, it is also a federal crime for any U.S. business enterprise to offer a gift, 
payment, or bribe, or anything else of value, whether directly or indirectly, to any foreign 
official, foreign political party or party official, or candidate for foreign political office for the 
purpose of influencing an official act or decision, or seeking influence with a foreign 
government in order to obtain, retain, or direct business to the company or to any person. 
Even if the payment is legal in the host country, it is forbidden by the Act and violates  
U.S. law. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.756   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Conflicts of Interest 
There are several situations that could give rise to a conflict of interest. The most common 
are accepting gifts from suppliers, employment by another company, ownership of a 
significant part of another company or business, close or family relationships with outside 
suppliers, and communications with competitors. A potential conflict of interest exists for 
employees who make decisions in their jobs that would allow them to give preference or 
favor to a customer in exchange for anything of personal benefit to themselves or their 
friends and families. 
 
Such situations could interfere with an employee’s ability to make judgments solely in the 
company’s best interest. 
 
Gifts and Entertainment 
DEFINITION OF GIFTS 
Gifts are items and services of value that are given to any outside parties, but do not include 
items described below. 
• Normal business entertainment items, such as meals and beverages, are not to be 
considered gifts. 
• Items of minimal value, given in connection with sales campaigns and promotions or 
employee service, safety, or retirement awards are not to be considered gifts for purposes 
of this code. 
• Contributions or donations to recognized charitable and nonprofit organizations are not 
considered gifts. 
• Items or services with a total value under $100 per year are excluded. 
 
DEFINITION OF SUPPLIER 
“Supplier” includes not only vendors providin g services and material to the company, but 
also consultants, financial institutions, advisors, and any person or institution that does 
business with the company. 
 
GIFTS  
No employee or member of his immediate family shall solicit or accept from an actual or 
prospective customer or supplier any compensation, advance loans (except from established 
financial institutions on the same basis as other customers), gifts, entertainment, or other 
favors that are of more than token value or that the employee would not normally be in a 
position to reciprocate under normal expense account procedures. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.757 
Under no circumstances should a gift or entertainment be accepted that would influence the 
employee’s judgment. In particular, employees must avoid any interest in or benefit from any 
supplier that could reasonably cause them to favor that supplier over others. It is a violation 
of the code for any employee to solicit or encourage a supplier to give any item or service to 
the employee regardless of its value, no matter how small. Our suppliers will retain their 
confidence in the objectivity and integrity of our company only if each employee strictly 
observes this guideline. 
 
REPORTING GIFTS  
An employee who receives, or whose family member receives, an unsolicited gift  
prohibited by these guidelines should report it to his supervisor and either return it to  
the person making the gift or, in the case of a perishable gift, give it to a nonprofit  
charitable organization.  
 
DISCOUNTS 
An employee might accept discounts on a personal purchase of the supplier’s or customer’s 
products only if such discounts do not affect the company’s purchase price and are generally 
offered to others having a similar business relationship with the supplier or customer.  
 
BUSINESS MEETINGS  
Entertainment and services offered by a supplier or customer may be accepted by an 
employee when they are associated with a business meeting and the supplier or customer 
provides them to others as a normal part of its business. Examples of such entertainment 
and services are transportation to and from the supplier’s or customer’s place of business, 
hospitality suites, golf outings, lodging at the supplier’s or customer’s place of business, and 
business lunches and dinners for business visitors to the supplier’s or customer’s location. 
The services should generally be of the type normally used by the company’s employees and 
allowable under the applicable company’s expense account.  
 
Outside Employment 
Employees must not be employed outside the company: 
• In any business that competes with or provides services to the company or its 
subsidiaries  
• In a manner that would affect their objectivity in carrying out their company 
responsibilities  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.758   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Where the outside employment would conflict with scheduled hours, including overtime, 
or the performance of the company assignments; employees must not use company 
time, materials, information, or other assets in connection with outside employment 
 
Relationships with Suppliers and Customers 
Business transactions must be entered into solely for the best interests of the company. No 
employee can, directly or indirectly, benefit from his position as an employee or from any 
sale, purchase, or other activity of the company. Employees should avoid situations 
involving a conflict or the appearance of conflict between duty to the company and  
self-interest.  
 
No employee who deals with individuals or organizations doing or seeking to do business 
with the company, or who makes recommendations with respect to such dealings, should: 
• Serve as an officer, director, employee, or consultant. 
• Own a substantial interest in any competitor of the company, or any organization doing 
or seeking to do business with the company. Substantial interest means an economic 
interest that might influence or reasonably be thought to influence judgment or action, 
but shall not include an investment representing less than 1 percent of a class of 
outstanding securities of a publicly held corporation. Every employee must complete the 
Conflict of Interest Questionnaire included with this book.  
 
In addition, no employee who deals with individuals or organizations doing or seeking to  
do business with the company, or who makes recommendations with respect to such 
dealings, might: 
• Have any other direct or indirect personal interest in any business transactions with the 
company (other than customary employee purchases of company products and services 
as consumers and transactions where the interest arises solely by reason of the employee 
relationship or that of a holder of securities). 
• Provide telecommunications or information service or equipment, either directly  
or as a reseller, in a manner that would place the objectivity or integrity of the company 
in question. 
 
Our policy is that employees will not do busi ness on behalf of the company with a close 
personal friend or relative; however, recognizing that these transactions do occur, they must 
be reported on the Conflict of Interest Questionnaire. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.759 
This policy is applicable equally to the members of the immediate family of each employee, 
which normally includes your spouse, children and their spouses, and the father, mother, 
sisters, and brothers of yourself and your household. 
 
Employment of Relatives 
Relatives of employees will not be employed on a permanent or temporary basis by the 
company where the relative directly reports to the employee or the employee exercises any 
direct influence with respect to the relative’s hiring, placement, promotions, evaluations,  
or pay.  
 
Confidential Information and Privacy of Communications 
Confidential Information 
Confidential information includes all information, whether technical, business, financial, or 
otherwise concerning the company, which the company treats as confidential or secret 
and/or which is not available or is not made available publicly. It also includes any private 
information of, or relating to, customer records, fellow employees, other persons or other 
companies, and national security information obtained by virtue of the employee’s position.  
 
Company policy and various laws protect the integrity of the company’s confidential 
information, which must not be divulged except in strict accordance with established 
company policies and procedures. The obligation not to divulge confidential company 
information is in effect even though material might not be specifically identified as 
confidential, and the obligation exists during and continues after employment with  
the company.  
 
A few examples of prohibited conduct are:  
• Selling or otherwise using, divulging, or transmitting confidential company information  
• Using confidential company information to knowingly convert a company business 
opportunity for personal use 
• Using confidential company information to acquire real estate that the employee knows 
is of interest to the company  
• Using, divulging, or transmitting confidential company information in the course of 
outside employment or other relationship, or any succeeding employment or other 
relationship at any time 
• Trading in the company stocks, or the stocks of any company, based on information that 
has not been disclosed to the public or divulging such information to others so that they 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.760   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
might trade in such stock. Insider trading is prohibited by company policy and federal 
and state law. 
 
Employees shall not seek out, accept, or use any confidential company information of or 
from a competitor of the company. In particular, should we hire an employee who 
previously worked for a competitor, we must neither accept nor solicit confidential 
information concerning that competitor from our employee.  
 
Classified National Security Information 
Only employees with proper government clearance and a need to know have access to 
classified national security information. Government regulations outlined in company 
instructions for safeguarding must be followed. Disclosing such information, without 
authorization, even after leaving employment, is a violation of law and this code.  
 
Adverse information about employees having government clearance must be reported to the 
Security or Law Departments’ representatives having responsibility for clearances.  
 
Company Assets 
Cash and Bank Accounts 
All cash and bank account transactions must be handled so as to avoid any question or 
suspicion of impropriety. All cash transactions must be recorded in the company’s books  
of account.  
 
All accounts of company funds, except authorized imprest funds, shall be established and 
maintained in the name of the company or one of its subsidiaries and might be opened or 
closed only on the authority of the company’s Board of Directors. Imprest funds must be 
maintained in the name of the custodian and the custodian is wholly responsible for these 
funds. All cash received shall be promptly recorded and deposited in a company or 
subsidiary bank account. No funds shall be maintained in the form of cash, except 
authorized petty cash, and no company shall maintain an anonymous (numbered) account at 
any bank. Payments into numbered bank accounts by the company might leave that 
company open to suspicion of participation in a possibly improper transaction. Therefore, 
no disbursements of any nature might be made into numbered bank accounts or other 
accounts not clearly identified to the company as to their ownership.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.761 
No payments can be made in cash (currency) other than regular, approved cash payrolls and 
normal disbursements from petty cash supported by signed receipts or other appropriate 
documentation. Further, corporate checks shall not be written to “cash,” “bearer,” or  
similar designations.  
 
Company Assets and Transactions 
Compliance with prescribed accounting procedures is required at all times. Employees 
having control over company assets and transactions are expected to handle them with the 
strictest integrity and ensure that all transactions are executed in accordance with 
management’s authorization. All transactions shall be accurately and fairly recorded in 
reasonable detail in the company’s accounting records.  
 
Employees are personally accountable for company funds over which they have control. 
Employees who spend company funds should ensure that the company receives good value 
in return and must maintain accurate records of such expenditures. Employees who approve 
or certify the correctness of a bill or voucher should know that the purchase and amount are 
proper and correct. Obtaining or creating “false” invoices or other misleading 
documentation or the invention or use of fictitious sales, purchases, services, loans, entities, 
or other financial arrangements is prohibited.  
 
Employees must pay for personal telephone calls and use, except to the extent that 
specifically defined benefit programs or allowances otherwise provide.  
 
Expense Reimbursement 
Expenses actually incurred by an employee in performing company business must be 
documented on expense reports in accordance with company procedures. In preparing 
expense reports, employees should review these procedures for the documentation in order 
to be reimbursed for business expenses.  
 
Company Credit Card 
Company credit cards are provided to employees for convenience in conducting company 
business. No personal expenses can be charged on company credit cards except as 
specifically authorized by company procedures. Any charged personal expenses must be paid 
promptly by the employee. Company credit cards should not be used to avoid preparing 
documentation for direct payment to vendors. Where allowed by local law, charges on 
company credit cards for which a properly approved expense report has not been received at 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.762   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
the time of an employee’s termination of employment might be deducted from the 
employee’s last paycheck. The company will pursue repayment by the employee of any 
amounts it has to pay on the employee’s behalf.  
 
Software and Computers 
Computerized information and computer software appear intangible, but they are valuable 
assets of the company and must be protected from misuse, theft, fraud, loss, and 
unauthorized use or disposal, just as any other company property. 
  
Use of mainframe computers must be customer service or job related. Employees cannot 
access company records of any kind for their personal use. Misappropriation of computer 
space, time, or software includes, but is not limited to, using a computer to create or run 
unauthorized jobs, operating a computer in an unauthorized mode, or intentionally causing 
any kind of operational failure. 
 
Personal computers can be used for company-sanctioned education programs as well as 
personal use incidental to company business use with the permission of your supervisor. 
However, personal use cannot be allowed for personal financial gain. 
 
It is also understood that personal computers will occasionally be used at home with the 
permission of your supervisor.  
 
Political Contributions 
Federal law and many state laws prohibit contributions by corporations to political parties or 
candidates. The term political contributions  includes, in addition to direct cash contributions, 
the donation of property or services, and the purchases of tickets to fundraising events. 
Employees can make direct contributions of their own money, but such contributions are 
not reimbursable. In addition, employees can make contributions to a company-sponsored 
Political Action Committee. 
 
Where corporate political contributions are legal in connection with state, local, or foreign 
elections, such contributions shall be made only from funds allocated for that purpose, and 
with the written approval of the president of the company making the contribution. The 
amounts of contributions made shall be subject to inter-company allocation.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.763 
It is improper for an employee to use his position within the company to solicit political 
contributions from another employee for the purpose of supporting a political candidate or 
influencing legislation. It is also improper for an employee to make a political contribution in 
the name of the company. 
 
Employee Conduct 
Conduct on Company Business 
Dishonest or illegal activities on company premises or while on company business will not 
be condoned and can result in disciplinary action, including dismissal and criminal 
prosecution. The following illustrates activities that are against company policy, and  
that will not be tolerated on company premises, in company vehicles, or while engaged in 
company business: 
• Consumption and storage of alcoholic beverages, except where legally licensed or 
authorized by an officer of the company 
• The use of controlled substances, such as drugs or alcohol; the unlawful manufacture, 
distribution, dispensation, possession, transfer, sale, purchase, or use of a  
controlled substance 
• Driving vehicles or operating company equipment while under the influence of alcohol 
or controlled substances 
• Illegal betting or gambling 
• Carrying weapons of any sort on company premises, in company vehicles, or while on 
company business; even employees with permits or licenses cannot carry weapons on 
company property or while on company business 
 
The company reserves the right to inspect any property that might be used by employees for 
the storage of their personal effects. This includes desks, lockers, and vehicles owned by the 
company. It is a violation of company policy to store any contraband, illegal drugs, toxic 
materials, or weapons on company property.  
 
Reporting Violations  
All employees are responsible for compliance with these rules, standards, and principles. In 
the area of ethics, legality, and propriety, each employee has an obligation to the company 
that transcends normal reporting relationships. Employees should be alert to possible 
violations of the code anywhere in the company and are encouraged to report such 
violations promptly. Reports should be made to the employee’s supervisor, the appropriate 
security, audit, or legal department personnel, or elsewhere as the circumstance dictates. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.764   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Employees will also be expected to cooperate in an investigation of violations. In addition, 
any employee who is convicted of a felony, whether related to these rules or not, should also 
report that fact.  
 
All cases of questionable activity involving the code or other potentially improper actions 
will be reviewed for appropriate action, discipline, or corrective steps. Whenever possible, 
the company will keep confidential the identity of employees about or against whom 
allegations of violations are brought, unless or until it has been determined that a violation 
has occurred. Similarly, whenever possible, the company will keep confidential the identity of 
anyone reporting a possible violation. Reprisal against any employee who has, in good faith, 
reported a violation or suspected violation is strictly prohibited. 
 
All employees are required to notify the company within five (5) days of any conviction of 
any criminal statute violation occurring on the job. In addition, any employee who is 
convicted of a felony, whether related to these rules or not, should report that fact.  
 
Discipline 
Violation of this code can  result in serious consequences for the company, its image, 
credibility, and the confidence of its customers, and can include substantial fines and 
restrictions on future operations, as well as the possibility of fines and prison sentences for 
individual employees. Therefore, it is necessary that the company ensure that there will be no 
violations. Employees should recognize that it is in their best interest, as well as the 
company’s, to follow this code carefully. 
 
The amount of any money involved in a violation might be immaterial in assessing the 
seriousness of a violation since, in some cases, heavy penalties might be assessed against the 
company for a violation involving a relatively small amount of money, or no money. 
 
Disciplinary action should be coordinated with the appropriate Human Resources 
representatives. The overall seriousness of the matter will be considered in setting the 
disciplinary action to be taken against an individual employee. Such action, which might be 
reviewed with the appropriate Human Resources organization, might include: 
• Reprimand 
• Probation 
• Suspension 
• Reduction in salary 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.765 
• Demotion 
• Combination of the above 
• Dismissal 
 
In addition, individual cases might involve: 
• Reimbursement of losses or damages 
• Referral for criminal prosecution or civil action 
• Combination of the above 
 
Disciplinary action might also be taken against supervisors or executives who condone, 
permit, or have knowledge of illegal or unethical conduct by those reporting to them and do 
not take corrective action. Disciplinary action might also be taken against employees who 
make false statements in connection with investigations of violations of this code.  
 
The company in its sole discretion will determine the disciplinary action appropriate to a 
given matter. The listing of possible actions is informative only and does not bind the 
company to follow any particular disciplinary steps, process, or procedure. 
 
The company’s rules and regulations regarding proper employee conduct will not be waived 
in any respect. Violation is cause for disciplinary action, including dismissal. All employees 
will be held to the standards of conduct described in this booklet. 
 
The company never has and never will authorize any employee to commit an act that 
violates this code or to direct a subordinate to do so. With that understood, it is not possible 
to justify commission of such an act by saying someone directed it in higher management.  
 
Compliance Letter and Conflict of Interest Questionnaire 
Annually, all officers of the company will represent in writing that there are no violations of 
this code known to the officer, after the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if such violations 
have been committed, to disclose such violations in a format to be specified.  
 
Annually, each employee will review the Code of Business Ethics and Conduct, sign the 
Code’s Acknowledgment form, and complete and sign the Conflict of Interest 
Questionnaire. If the employee’s circumstances  change at any time, a new Conflict of 
Interest Questionnaire or letter of explanation must be completed. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.766   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The Code of Business Ethics and Conduct Acknowledgment form should be signed and 
given to your supervisor for inclusion in your personnel file. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.767 
 COMPANY NAME, INC. 
 
Code of Conduct Compliance Questionnaire  
 
Managerial employees are being asked to complete this Compliance Questionnaire. 
COMPANY NAME, Inc. and its subsidiaries are committed to providing a workplace where 
employees can and do act responsibly and ethically. The COMPANY NAME, Inc.  Code of 
Conduct sets out specific standards of conduct that should govern our behavior toward our 
fellow employees, suppliers, and customers. Please answer each of the following questions 
and, if necessary, provide an explanation. For any “yes” response, please explain in the extra space 
provided on the last page. 
 
Conflict of Interest 
 
1.  During fiscal 20XX, did you receive, or are you aware of anyone who received, from any person 
or company doing business with your employer any loan, gift, trip, gratuity, or other payment 
that did or could cause prejudice toward or obligation to the giver, or could be perceived by 
others as creating an obligation to the giver? (Note: Each item, or the total of items from a single vendor 
with a value of more than $50 must be reported, except that you do not need to report loans made by financial 
institutions on normal and customary terms, common  stock dividends, or insurance policy payments).  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
2.  In fiscal 20XX, did you participate in or influence, or are you aware of anyone who participated 
in or influenced, any transaction between your employer and another entity in which they or any 
member of their family had a direct or indirect financial interest?  
 
  ? Yes  ?  No  
 
3.  In fiscal 20XX, did you have a material financial interest in or hold a position of influence with, 
or are you aware of anyone who had a material financial interest in or held a position of influence 
with, any business which furnishes goods or services to your employer? ( Note: The term material 
financial interest means someone who by virtue of their stock ownership or monetary interest in a company is 
able to direct or to influence business decisions, or a commissioned sales representative; position of influence  
means someone holding an influential position such as a sole  proprietor, partner, member of a board of directors, 
an executive, or a manager.)  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.768   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
4.  For fiscal 20XX, did you use, or are you aware of anyone who used, company assets or other 
resources (including funds, equipment, supplies, or personnel) for purposes other than company 
business or company-sponsored activities?   
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
5. During fiscal 20XX, did you receive, or are you aware of anyone who received, gifts or 
entertainment from individuals or organizations having dealings with the Company, including 
but not necessarily limited to loans, any form of cash gratuities, private or personal discounts not 
sanctioned by the Company, or remuneration or service related to illegal activities?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
6. During fiscal 20XX, did you accept, or are you aware of anyone who accepted, any consideration 
or special favors from suppliers or potential suppliers that in fact or appearance could be deemed 
a bribe, kickback, or reward given to influence your business judgment?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
7. Were you involved in, or are you aware of any employee who was involved in, a conflict of 
interest situation during fiscal year 20XX?   
 
 ? Yes  ?  No   
 
8. I have read the attached Conflict of Interest Policy Statement which is set forth in the 
COMPANY NAME Inc.  [and Subsidiaries] Code of Conduct and Compliance Program. 
Accordingly, I have listed below all relationships and outside activities that require disclosure 
under the policy. I have also listed names, addresses, and the nature of the relationships of all 
persons or entities doing business with my employer from whom I or any member of my 
immediate family has received, directly or indirectly, cash or a gift of more than nominal value 
($50) during the fiscal year ended May 31, 20XX. (If there are no persons or entities to be listed, so 
indicate by writing “NONE” in the first space provided below.)  
 
Name of Person /Entity Nature of Relationship/Outside Activity 
 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.769 
Political 
 
9. In fiscal 20XX, did you receive, or are you aware of anyone who received, any payments from 
your employer for the purpose of making a contribution to any political party, candidate, or 
election committee?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
Securities Trading  
 
10.  Did you buy or sell, or are you aware of anyone who may have bought and/or sold, stock based 
on confidential information, or communicated confidential information to influence 
COMPANY NAME, Inc.  stock transactions?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No 
 
Financial Integrity  
 
11. Are you aware of any entries made in the books and records of your employer in fiscal 20XX 
that you believe are false or intentionally misleading?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No 
 
12. Are you aware of any assets, liabilities, or transactions that you believe were improperly omitted 
from the books of your company in fiscal 20XX?   
 
 ? Yes  ?  No 
 
13.  In fiscal 20XX, are you aware of anyone seeking to influence any government official (including 
foreign officials) or government employee, or individual doing business with your company, by 
offering money, goods, or services in return for some special consideration?  
  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.770   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Other 
 
14.  Are you aware of any incident involving your employer that you feel constituted non-compliance 
with laws, regulations, policies, guidelines, procedures, or ethical principles, other than those 
matters referred to in other questions or incidents that have already been reported? ( Note: If you 
prefer to report an incident or violation anonymously, please answer this question “N O” and contact a member of 
the Ethics Committee or call the Confidential Ethics Hotline.)  
 
  ? Yes  ?  No 
 
15.  Please provide any explanations for “yes” responses. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
16.  In the space below, please provide any suggestions you may have for improving the Code of 
Conduct and Compliance Program.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ __ 
Printed Name 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ __  
Signature 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ __   
Date 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.771 
 
 COMPANY NAME, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES 
 
 Employee Company/Subsidiary Location  
   
 
 
 
 
Code of Conduct and Conflict of Interest Employee Certification 
 
I have read the COMPANY NAME, Inc.  and Subsidiaries Code of Conduct and 
Compliance Program. 
 
• I understand that the standards and policies in that Code of Conduct represent the 
policies of COMPANY NAME, Inc.  and its subsidiaries, and that violating those 
standards and policies, or any legal and regulatory requirements applicable to my job, 
may result in penalties set forth in the Code of Conduct or other appropriate sanction. 
 
• I understand that there are several sources within the company, including the Ethics 
Committee, that I can consult if I have questions concerning the meaning or application 
of the Code of Conduct or relevant legal and regulatory requirements. 
 
• I understand that it is my responsibility to disclose to an Ethics Officer, a member of the 
COMPANY NAME, Inc.  Operations Audit Department, a member of the Ethics 
Committee, or the Company’s Ethics Hotline any situation that might reasonably appear 
to be a violation of the Code of Conduct. 
 
• I have read the attached Conflict of Interest Policy Statement which is set forth in the 
COMPANY NAME, Inc.  and Subsidiaries Code of Conduct and Compliance Program. 
Accordingly, I have listed below all relationships and outside activities that require 
disclosure under the policy. I have also listed names, addresses, and the nature of the 
relationships of all persons or entities doing business with my employer from whom I or 
any member of my immediate family has received, directly or indirectly, cash or a gift of 
more than nominal value ($50) during the fiscal year ended May 31, 20XX. (If there are no 
persons or entities to be listed, so indicate by writing “NONE” in the first space provided below.) 
  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.772   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Name of Person/Entity Address Nature of Business/Relationship 
   
   
 
• I am not aware of any exceptions to standards and policies in the Code of Conduct 
except: (if none, so indicate by writing “NONE.”) 
 
 
  
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Signature of Employee Date
  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.801 



:


sampl code of busi ethic and conduct
introduct
thi section reaffirm the import of high standard of busi conduct adher to
thi code of busi ethic and conduct by all employe is the onli sure wai we can
merit the confid and support of the public
mani of us came from a cultur that provid answer or direct for almost everi
situat possibl manag our busi wa not so complex the dilemma we face
were for the most part simpl make our choic rel easi we would probabl all
agre that manag in todai environ is not so simpl
thi code ha been prepar as a work guid and not as a technic legal document thu
emphasi is on breviti and readabl rather than provid an allinclus answer to
specif question for exampl the term employe is us in it broadest sens and refer to
everi offic and employe of the compani and it subsidiari the word law refer to
law regul order etc
in observ of thi code as in other busi conduct there is no substitut for common
sens each employe should appli thi code with common sens and the attitud of seek
full complianc with the letter and spirit of the rule present
it is incumb upon you as an employe of the compani to perform satisfactorili and to
follow our polici and compli with our rule as thei ar issu or modifi from time
to time
these polici and rule ar necessari to effect manag the busi and meet the ever
chang need of the marketplac good perform and complianc with busi rule
lead to success both ar crucial sinc our abil to provid you with career opportun
depend total upon our success in the marketplac nonetheless chang in our economi
our market and our technolog ar inevit inde career opportun will vari
between the individu compani for these reason we cannot contract or even impli that
your employ will continu for ani particular period of time while you might termin
your employ at ani time with or without caus we reserv that same right thi
relationship might not be modifi except in write sign by an appropri repres
of the compani
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4754 2011 fraud examin manual
thi code of busi ethic and conduct is a gener guid to accept and appropri
behavior at the compani and you ar expect to compli with it content howev it doe
not contain all of the detail inform you will need dure the cours of your
employ noth contain in thi code or in other commun creat or impli
an employ contract or term of employ we ar commit to review our
polici continu thu thi code might be modifi or revis from time to time
you should familiar yourself with thi code so that you might readili distinguish ani
propos or act that would constitut a violat each employe is respons for hi
action violat can result in disciplinari action includ dismiss and crimin
prosecut there will be no repris against an employe who in good faith report a
violat or suspect violat
the absenc of a specif guidelin practic or instruct cover a particular situat
doe not reliev an employe from exercis the highest ethic standard applic to
the circumst
if ani employe ha doubt regard a question situat that might aris that
employe should immedi consult hi supervisor or a higherlevel manag
competit and antitrust
fair competit
the compani support competit base on qualiti servic and price we will conduct our
affair honestli directli and fairli to compli with the antitrust law and our polici of fair
competit employe
must never discuss with competitor ani matter directli involv in competit
between us and the competitor eg sale price market strategi market share and
sale polici
must never agre with a competitor to restrict competit by fix price alloc
market or other mean
must not arbitrarili refus to deal with or purchas good and servic from other
simpli becaus thei ar competitor in other respect
must not requir other to bui from us befor we will bui from them
must not requir custom to take from us a servic thei dont want just so thei can get
on thei do want
must never engag in industri espionag or commerci briberi
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4755
must be accur and truth in all deal with custom and be care to accur
repres the qualiti featur and avail of compani product and servic
complianc with law and regulatori order
the applic law and regulatori order of everi jurisdict in which the compani
oper must be follow each employe is charg with the respons of acquir
suffici knowledg of the law and order relat to hi duti in order to recogn
potenti danger and to know when to seek legal advic
in particular when deal with public offici employe must adher to the highest ethic
standard of busi conduct when we seek the resolut of regulatori or polit issu
affect the compani interest we must do so sole on the basi of merit and pursuant to
proper procedur in deal with such offici employe mai not offer provid or
solicit directli or indirectli ani special treatment or favor in return for anyth of
econom valu or the promis or expect of futur valu or gain in addit there shall
be no entertain of employe of the us govern
foreign corrupt practic act
no employe will engag in activ that might involv the employe or the compani in a
violat of the foreign corrupt practic act of 1977 the foreign corrupt practic act
requir that the compani book and record accur and fairli reflect all transact
and that we maintain a system of intern control that transact conform to
manag author and that the account record ar accur no employe
will fals report transact or fail to report the exist of fals transact in the
account record employe certifi the correct of record includ voucher or
bill should have reason knowledg that the inform is correct and proper
under the act it is also a feder crime for ani us busi enterpris to offer a gift
payment or bribe or anyth els of valu whether directli or indirectli to ani foreign
offici foreign polit parti or parti offici or candid for foreign polit offic for the
purpos of influenc an offici act or decis or seek influenc with a foreign
govern in order to obtain retain or direct busi to the compani or to ani person
even if the payment is legal in the host countri it is forbidden by the act and violat
us law
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4756 2011 fraud examin manual
conflict of interest
there ar sever situat that could give rise to a conflict of interest the most common
ar accept gift from supplier employ by anoth compani ownership of a
signific part of anoth compani or busi close or famili relationship with outsid
supplier and commun with competitor a potenti conflict of interest exist for
employe who make decis in their job that would allow them to give prefer or
favor to a custom in exchang for anyth of person benefit to themselv or their
friend and famili
such situat could interfer with an employe abil to make judgment sole in the
compani best interest
gift and entertain
definit of gift
gift ar item and servic of valu that ar given to ani outsid parti but do not includ
item describ below
normal busi entertain item such as meal and beverag ar not to be
consid gift
item of minim valu given in connect with sale campaign and promot or
employe servic safeti or retir award ar not to be consid gift for purpos
of thi code
contribut or donat to recogn charit and nonprofit organ ar not
consid gift
item or servic with a total valu under 100 per year ar exclud
definit of supplier
supplier includ not onli vendor providin g servic and materi to the compani but
also consult financi institut advisor and ani person or institut that doe
busi with the compani
gift
no employe or member of hi immedi famili shall solicit or accept from an actual or
prospect custom or supplier ani compens advanc loan except from establish
financi institut on the same basi as other custom gift entertain or other
favor that ar of more than token valu or that the employe would not normal be in a
posit to reciproc under normal expens account procedur
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4757
under no circumst should a gift or entertain be accept that would influenc the
employe judgment in particular employe must avoid ani interest in or benefit from ani
supplier that could reason caus them to favor that supplier over other it is a violat
of the code for ani employe to solicit or encourag a supplier to give ani item or servic to
the employe regardless of it valu no matter how small our supplier will retain their
confid in the object and integr of our compani onli if each employe strictli
observ thi guidelin
report gift
an employe who receiv or whose famili member receiv an unsolicit gift
prohibit by these guidelin should report it to hi supervisor and either return it to
the person make the gift or in the case of a perish gift give it to a nonprofit
charit organ
discount
an employe might accept discount on a person purchas of the supplier or custom
product onli if such discount do not affect the compani purchas price and ar gener
offer to other have a similar busi relationship with the supplier or custom
busi meet
entertain and servic offer by a supplier or custom mai be accept by an
employe when thei ar associ with a busi meet and the supplier or custom
provid them to other as a normal part of it busi exampl of such entertain
and servic ar transport to and from the supplier or custom place of busi
hospit suit golf out lodg at the supplier or custom place of busi and
busi lunch and dinner for busi visitor to the supplier or custom locat
the servic should gener be of the type normal us by the compani employe and
allow under the applic compani expens account
outsid employ
employe must not be emploi outsid the compani
in ani busi that compet with or provid servic to the compani or it
subsidiari
in a manner that would affect their object in carri out their compani
respons
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4758 2011 fraud examin manual
where the outsid employ would conflict with schedul hour includ overtim
or the perform of the compani assign employe must not us compani
time materi inform or other asset in connect with outsid employ
relationship with supplier and custom
busi transact must be enter into sole for the best interest of the compani no
employe can directli or indirectli benefit from hi posit as an employe or from ani
sale purchas or other activ of the compani employe should avoid situat
involv a conflict or the appear of conflict between duti to the compani and
selfinterest
no employe who deal with individu or organ do or seek to do busi
with the compani or who make recommend with respect to such deal should
serv as an offic director employe or consult
own a substanti interest in ani competitor of the compani or ani organ do
or seek to do busi with the compani substanti interest mean an econom
interest that might influenc or reason be thought to influenc judgment or action
but shall not includ an invest repres less than 1 percent of a class of
outstand secur of a publicli held corpor everi employe must complet the
conflict of interest questionnair includ with thi book
in addit no employe who deal with individu or organ do or seek to
do busi with the compani or who make recommend with respect to such
deal might
have ani other direct or indirect person interest in ani busi transact with the
compani other than customari employe purchas of compani product and servic
as consum and transact where the interest aris sole by reason of the employe
relationship or that of a holder of secur
provid telecommun or inform servic or equip either directli
or as a resel in a manner that would place the object or integr of the compani
in question
our polici is that employe will not do busi ness on behalf of the compani with a close
person friend or rel howev recogn that these transact do occur thei must
be report on the conflict of interest questionnair
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4759
thi polici is applic equal to the member of the immedi famili of each employe
which normal includ your spous children and their spous and the father mother
sister and brother of yourself and your household
employ of rel
rel of employe will not be emploi on a perman or temporari basi by the
compani where the rel directli report to the employe or the employe exercis ani
direct influenc with respect to the rel hire placement promot evalu
or pai
confidenti inform and privaci of commun
confidenti inform
confidenti inform includ all inform whether technic busi financi or
otherwis concern the compani which the compani treat as confidenti or secret
andor which is not avail or is not made avail publicli it also includ ani privat
inform of or relat to custom record fellow employe other person or other
compani and nation secur inform obtain by virtu of the employe posit
compani polici and variou law protect the integr of the compani confidenti
inform which must not be divulg except in strict accord with establish
compani polici and procedur the oblig not to divulg confidenti compani
inform is in effect even though materi might not be specif identifi as
confidenti and the oblig exist dure and continu after employ with
the compani
a few exampl of prohibit conduct ar
sell or otherwis us divulg or transmit confidenti compani inform
us confidenti compani inform to knowingli convert a compani busi
opportun for person us
us confidenti compani inform to acquir real estat that the employe know
is of interest to the compani
us divulg or transmit confidenti compani inform in the cours of
outsid employ or other relationship or ani succeed employ or other
relationship at ani time
trade in the compani stock or the stock of ani compani base on inform that
ha not been disclos to the public or divulg such inform to other so that thei
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4760 2011 fraud examin manual
might trade in such stock insid trade is prohibit by compani polici and feder
and state law
employe shall not seek out accept or us ani confidenti compani inform of or
from a competitor of the compani in particular should we hire an employe who
previous work for a competitor we must neither accept nor solicit confidenti
inform concern that competitor from our employe
classifi nation secur inform
onli employe with proper govern clearanc and a need to know have access to
classifi nation secur inform govern regul outlin in compani
instruct for safeguard must be follow disclos such inform without
author even after leav employ is a violat of law and thi code
advers inform about employe have govern clearanc must be report to the
secur or law depart repres have respons for clearanc
compani asset
cash and bank account
all cash and bank account transact must be handl so as to avoid ani question or
suspicion of improprieti all cash transact must be record in the compani book
of account
all account of compani fund except author imprest fund shall be establish and
maintain in the name of the compani or on of it subsidiari and might be open or
close onli on the author of the compani board of director imprest fund must be
maintain in the name of the custodian and the custodian is wholli respons for these
fund all cash receiv shall be promptli record and deposit in a compani or
subsidiari bank account no fund shall be maintain in the form of cash except
author petti cash and no compani shall maintain an anonym number account at
ani bank payment into number bank account by the compani might leav that
compani open to suspicion of particip in a possibl improp transact therefor
no disburs of ani natur might be made into number bank account or other
account not clearli identifi to the compani as to their ownership
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4761
no payment can be made in cash currenc other than regular approv cash payrol and
normal disburs from petti cash support by sign receipt or other appropri
document further corpor check shall not be written to cash bearer or
similar design
compani asset and transact
complianc with prescrib account procedur is requir at all time employe
have control over compani asset and transact ar expect to handl them with the
strictest integr and ensur that all transact ar execut in accord with
manag author all transact shall be accur and fairli record in
reason detail in the compani account record
employe ar person account for compani fund over which thei have control
employe who spend compani fund should ensur that the compani receiv good valu
in return and must maintain accur record of such expenditur employe who approv
or certifi the correct of a bill or voucher should know that the purchas and amount ar
proper and correct obtain or creat fals invoic or other mislead
document or the invent or us of fictiti sale purchas servic loan entiti
or other financi arrang is prohibit
employe must pai for person telephon call and us except to the extent that
specif defin benefit program or allow otherwis provid
expens reimburs
expens actual incur by an employe in perform compani busi must be
document on expens report in accord with compani procedur in prepar
expens report employe should review these procedur for the document in order
to be reimburs for busi expens
compani credit card
compani credit card ar provid to employe for conveni in conduct compani
busi no person expens can be charg on compani credit card except as
specif author by compani procedur ani charg person expens must be paid
promptli by the employe compani credit card should not be us to avoid prepar
document for direct payment to vendor where allow by local law charg on
compani credit card for which a properli approv expens report ha not been receiv at
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4762 2011 fraud examin manual
the time of an employe termin of employ might be deduct from the
employe last paycheck the compani will pursu repay by the employe of ani
amount it ha to pai on the employe behalf
softwar and comput
computer inform and comput softwar appear intang but thei ar valuabl
asset of the compani and must be protect from misus theft fraud loss and
unauthor us or dispos just as ani other compani properti
us of mainfram comput must be custom servic or job relat employe cannot
access compani record of ani kind for their person us misappropri of comput
space time or softwar includ but is not limit to us a comput to creat or run
unauthor job oper a comput in an unauthor mode or intention caus
ani kind of oper failur
person comput can be us for companysanct educ program as well as
person us incident to compani busi us with the permiss of your supervisor
howev person us cannot be allow for person financi gain
it is also understood that person comput will occasion be us at home with the
permiss of your supervisor
polit contribut
feder law and mani state law prohibit contribut by corpor to polit parti or
candid the term polit contribut includ in addit to direct cash contribut
the donat of properti or servic and the purchas of ticket to fundrais event
employe can make direct contribut of their own monei but such contribut ar
not reimburs in addit employe can make contribut to a companysponsor
polit action committe
where corpor polit contribut ar legal in connect with state local or foreign
elect such contribut shall be made onli from fund alloc for that purpos and
with the written approv of the presid of the compani make the contribut the
amount of contribut made shall be subject to intercompani alloc
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4763
it is improp for an employe to us hi posit within the compani to solicit polit
contribut from anoth employe for the purpos of support a polit candid or
influenc legisl it is also improp for an employe to make a polit contribut in
the name of the compani
employe conduct
conduct on compani busi
dishonest or illeg activ on compani premis or while on compani busi will not
be condon and can result in disciplinari action includ dismiss and crimin
prosecut the follow illustr activ that ar against compani polici and
that will not be toler on compani premis in compani vehicl or while engag in
compani busi
consumpt and storag of alcohol beverag except where legal licens or
author by an offic of the compani
the us of control substanc such as drug or alcohol the unlaw manufactur
distribut dispens possess transfer sale purchas or us of a
control substanc
drive vehicl or oper compani equip while under the influenc of alcohol
or control substanc
illeg bet or gambl
carri weapon of ani sort on compani premis in compani vehicl or while on
compani busi even employe with permit or licens cannot carri weapon on
compani properti or while on compani busi
the compani reserv the right to inspect ani properti that might be us by employe for
the storag of their person effect thi includ desk locker and vehicl own by the
compani it is a violat of compani polici to store ani contraband illeg drug toxic
materi or weapon on compani properti
report violat
all employe ar respons for complianc with these rule standard and principl in
the area of ethic legal and proprieti each employe ha an oblig to the compani
that transcend normal report relationship employe should be alert to possibl
violat of the code anywher in the compani and ar encourag to report such
violat promptli report should be made to the employe supervisor the appropri
secur audit or legal depart personnel or elsewher as the circumst dictat
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4764 2011 fraud examin manual
employe will also be expect to cooper in an investig of violat in addit
ani employe who is convict of a feloni whether relat to these rule or not should also
report that fact
all case of question activ involv the code or other potenti improp action
will be review for appropri action disciplin or correct step whenev possibl
the compani will keep confidenti the ident of employe about or against whom
alleg of violat ar brought unless or until it ha been determin that a violat
ha occur similarli whenev possibl the compani will keep confidenti the ident of
anyon report a possibl violat repris against ani employe who ha in good faith
report a violat or suspect violat is strictli prohibit
all employe ar requir to notifi the compani within five 5 dai of ani convict of
ani crimin statut violat occur on the job in addit ani employe who is
convict of a feloni whether relat to these rule or not should report that fact
disciplin
violat of thi code can result in seriou consequ for the compani it imag
credibl and the confid of it custom and can includ substanti fine and
restrict on futur oper as well as the possibl of fine and prison sentenc for
individu employe therefor it is necessari that the compani ensur that there will be no
violat employe should recogn that it is in their best interest as well as the
compani to follow thi code carefulli
the amount of ani monei involv in a violat might be immateri in assess the
serious of a violat sinc in some case heavi penalti might be assess against the
compani for a violat involv a rel small amount of monei or no monei
disciplinari action should be coordin with the appropri human resourc
repres the overal serious of the matter will be consid in set the
disciplinari action to be taken against an individu employe such action which might be
review with the appropri human resourc organ might includ
reprimand
probat
suspens
reduct in salari
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4765
demot
combin of the abov
dismiss
in addit individu case might involv
reimburs of loss or damag
referr for crimin prosecut or civil action
combin of the abov
disciplinari action might also be taken against supervisor or execut who condon
permit or have knowledg of illeg or uneth conduct by those report to them and do
not take correct action disciplinari action might also be taken against employe who
make fals statement in connect with investig of violat of thi code
the compani in it sole discret will determin the disciplinari action appropri to a
given matter the list of possibl action is inform onli and doe not bind the
compani to follow ani particular disciplinari step process or procedur
the compani rule and regul regard proper employe conduct will not be waiv
in ani respect violat is caus for disciplinari action includ dismiss all employe
will be held to the standard of conduct describ in thi booklet
the compani never ha and never will author ani employe to commit an act that
violat thi code or to direct a subordin to do so with that understood it is not possibl
to justifi commiss of such an act by sai someon direct it in higher manag
complianc letter and conflict of interest questionnair
annual all offic of the compani will repres in write that there ar no violat of
thi code known to the offic after the exercis of reason dilig or if such violat
have been commit to disclos such violat in a format to be specifi
annual each employe will review the code of busi ethic and conduct sign the
code acknowledg form and complet and sign the conflict of interest
questionnair if the employe circumst chang at ani time a new conflict of
interest questionnair or letter of explan must be complet
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4766 2011 fraud examin manual
the code of busi ethic and conduct acknowledg form should be sign and
given to your supervisor for inclus in your personnel file
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4767
compani name inc
code of conduct complianc questionnair
manageri employe ar be ask to complet thi complianc questionnair
compani name inc and it subsidiari ar commit to provid a workplac where
employe can and do act respons and ethic the compani name inc code of
conduct set out specif standard of conduct that should govern our behavior toward our
fellow employe supplier and custom pleas answer each of the follow question
and if necessari provid an explan for ani ye respons pleas explain in the extra space
provid on the last page
conflict of interest
1 dure fiscal 20xx did you receiv or ar you awar of anyon who receiv from ani person
or compani do busi with your employ ani loan gift trip gratuiti or other payment
that did or could caus prejudic toward or oblig to the giver or could be perceiv by
other as creat an oblig to the giver note each item or the total of item from a singl vendor
with a valu of more than 50 must be report except that you do not need to report loan made by financi
institut on normal and customari term common stock dividend or insur polici payment
ye no
2 in fiscal 20xx did you particip in or influenc or ar you awar of anyon who particip
in or influenc ani transact between your employ and anoth entiti in which thei or ani
member of their famili had a direct or indirect financi interest
ye no
3 in fiscal 20xx did you have a materi financi interest in or hold a posit of influenc with
or ar you awar of anyon who had a materi financi interest in or held a posit of influenc
with ani busi which furnish good or servic to your employ note the term materi
financi interest mean someon who by virtu of their stock ownership or monetari interest in a compani is
abl to direct or to influenc busi decis or a commiss sale repres posit of influenc
mean someon hold an influenti posit such as a sole proprietor partner member of a board of director
an execut or a manag
ye no
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4768 2011 fraud examin manual
4 for fiscal 20xx did you us or ar you awar of anyon who us compani asset or other
resourc includ fund equip suppli or personnel for purpos other than compani
busi or companysponsor activ
ye no
5 dure fiscal 20xx did you receiv or ar you awar of anyon who receiv gift or
entertain from individu or organ have deal with the compani includ
but not necessarili limit to loan ani form of cash gratuiti privat or person discount not
sanction by the compani or remuner or servic relat to illeg activ
ye no
6 dure fiscal 20xx did you accept or ar you awar of anyon who accept ani consider
or special favor from supplier or potenti supplier that in fact or appear could be deem
a bribe kickback or reward given to influenc your busi judgment
ye no
7 were you involv in or ar you awar of ani employe who wa involv in a conflict of
interest situat dure fiscal year 20xx
ye no
8 i have read the attach conflict of interest polici statement which is set forth in the
compani name inc and subsidiari code of conduct and complianc program
accordingli i have list below all relationship and outsid activ that requir disclosur
under the polici i have also list name address and the natur of the relationship of all
person or entiti do busi with my employ from whom i or ani member of my
immedi famili ha receiv directli or indirectli cash or a gift of more than nomin valu
50 dure the fiscal year end mai 31 20xx if there ar no person or entiti to be list so
indic by write none in the first space provid below
name of person entiti natur of relationshipoutsid activ
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4769
polit
9 in fiscal 20xx did you receiv or ar you awar of anyon who receiv ani payment from
your employ for the purpos of make a contribut to ani polit parti candid or
elect committe
ye no
secur trade
10 did you bui or sell or ar you awar of anyon who mai have bought andor sold stock base
on confidenti inform or commun confidenti inform to influenc
compani name inc stock transact
ye no
financi integr
11 ar you awar of ani entri made in the book and record of your employ in fiscal 20xx
that you believ ar fals or intention mislead
ye no
12 ar you awar of ani asset liabil or transact that you believ were improperli omit
from the book of your compani in fiscal 20xx
ye no
13 in fiscal 20xx ar you awar of anyon seek to influenc ani govern offici includ
foreign offici or govern employe or individu do busi with your compani by
offer monei good or servic in return for some special consider
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4770 2011 fraud examin manual
other
14 ar you awar of ani incid involv your employ that you feel constitut noncompli
with law regul polici guidelin procedur or ethic principl other than those
matter refer to in other question or incid that have alreadi been report note if you
prefer to report an incid or violat anonym pleas answer thi question n o and contact a member of
the ethic committe or call the confidenti ethic hotlin
ye no
15 pleas provid ani explan for ye respons
16 in the space below pleas provid ani suggest you mai have for improv the code of
conduct and complianc program
print name
signatur
date
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4771
compani name inc and subsidiari
employe companysubsidiari locat
code of conduct and conflict of interest employe certif
i have read the compani name inc and subsidiari code of conduct and
complianc program
i understand that the standard and polici in that code of conduct repres the
polici of compani name inc and it subsidiari and that violat those
standard and polici or ani legal and regulatori requir applic to my job
mai result in penalti set forth in the code of conduct or other appropri sanction
i understand that there ar sever sourc within the compani includ the ethic
committe that i can consult if i have question concern the mean or applic
of the code of conduct or relev legal and regulatori requir
i understand that it is my respons to disclos to an ethic offic a member of the
compani name inc oper audit depart a member of the ethic
committe or the compani ethic hotlin ani situat that might reason appear
to be a violat of the code of conduct
i have read the attach conflict of interest polici statement which is set forth in the
compani name inc and subsidiari code of conduct and complianc program
accordingli i have list below all relationship and outsid activ that requir
disclosur under the polici i have also list name address and the natur of the
relationship of all person or entiti do busi with my employ from whom i or
ani member of my immedi famili ha receiv directli or indirectli cash or a gift of
more than nomin valu 50 dure the fiscal year end mai 31 20xx if there ar no
person or entiti to be list so indic by write none in the first space provid below
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4772 2011 fraud examin manual
name of personent address natur of businessrelationship
i am not awar of ani except to standard and polici in the code of conduct
except if none so indic by write none
signatur of employe date
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4801
