2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Commitment to Professionalism and Diligence/Professional Admission Standards


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Professional Admission Standards  
The most highly esteemed professions, and some occupations that are merely regulated, 
govern admission to their ranks by qualifications contained in state law. If legal recognition 
is considered a requisite of a profession, then the number of “professions” is quite large, 
ranging from doctors of medicine to barbers. Some professions (such as Certified Internal 
Auditor or Certified Fraud Examiner) are not regulated by state or federal statutes. Many 
groups have the status of “profession” without the benefit of licensing laws, and the fraud 
examiner profession is one of these.  
 
Certification examinations are offered in many professions, such as law, medicine, real  
estate, insurance, finance, accounting management, public accounting, and internal auditing. 
The Uniform CFE Examination and certification is part of professional recognition for 
fraud examiners.  
 
Experience is required for many, but not all, professional licenses and certifications. 
Experience of one or two years is required in most states for the CPA certificate. Experience 
is required to obtain the Certified Internal Auditor designation. Designation as a Certified 
Fraud Examiner requires at least two years of experience in combination with other 
qualifications. 
 



:


profession admiss standard
the most highli esteem profess and some occup that ar mere regul
govern admiss to their rank by qualif contain in state law if legal recognit
is consid a requisit of a profess then the number of profess is quit larg
rang from doctor of medicin to barber some profess such as certifi intern
auditor or certifi fraud examin ar not regul by state or feder statut mani
group have the statu of profess without the benefit of licens law and the fraud
examin profess is on of these
certif examin ar offer in mani profess such as law medicin real
estat insur financ account manag public account and intern audit
the uniform cfe examin and certif is part of profession recognit for
fraud examin
experi is requir for mani but not all profession licens and certif
experi of on or two year is requir in most state for the cpa certif experi
is requir to obtain the certifi intern auditor design design as a certifi
fraud examin requir at least two year of experi in combin with other
qualif
