2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Court Orders and Testimony


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Court Orders and Testimony 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner will comply with lawful orders of the courts, and will testify 
to matters truthfully and wi thout bias or prejudice. 
 
The essence of this rule is truth-telling. The part about complying with lawful orders of the 
courts is a direction not to flee from a summons or subpoena issued by a court. Even 
though the rule specifies “courts,” it is reasonable to extend it to other agencies that have 
the legal power to issue such orders (such as Congressional committees, grand juries, 
special prosecutors, and quasi-judicial administrative agencies). Sometimes, legal counsel 
might devise stratagems to avoid immediate service of (or attention to) a summons. Fraud 
examiners can listen to such legal advice, but they also must weigh it against their own 
knowledge of proper and legal behavior. In some cases, a second legal opinion might be 
advisable. The fraud examiner could be on shaky grounds with a defense of “my lawyer 
told me to hide” when accused of obstruction of justice. (The lawyer might be in the cell 
next door.)  
 
Truthful testimony often presents strategic problems. A fraud examiner, even one who is an 
attorney, should always be represented by counsel in a courtroom, deposition, or other 
testimony setting. The lawyer’s own saying is : “An attorney who represents himself has a 
fool for a client.” Counsel is invaluable for protecting a fraud examiner witness from 
improper questioning.  
 
When testimony is sought in examination or cross-examination, a Certified Fraud Examiner 
should always respond to the questions that are asked—no more and no less. The attorney 
conducting the examination has the responsibility to ask the right questions, and the fraud 
examiner’s counsel has the responsibility to object to misleading, improper, or irrelevant 
questions. The fraud examiner’s counsel also has the obligation to correct any problems with 
the cross-examination. A “helpful” fraud exam iner who tries to embellish the answers with 
additional material might offend the court or do unintentional harm to the case being made 
for one party or the other. Of course, a fraud examiner may invoke his own Constitutional 
rights, upon the advice of counsel.  
 
Answers should always be delivered without bias or prejudice. It is the lawyer’s job to be 
biased and prejudiced—in the context of the ad versary judicial system—establishing the case 
for his own client or for the government. The greatest danger for delivering biased or 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1012   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
prejudicial testimony exists when the broad question is: “Tell the court about your findings 
in your fraud examination.” This is an open- ended invitation to spill the beans. If counsel 
does not object, the Certified Fraud Examiner is in the spotlight. However, responding to 
such an invitation amounts to delivering a report, and the next rule in the Certified Fraud 
Examiner Code of Professional Ethics can be used as a guide.  
 
 



:


court order and testimoni
a certifi fraud examin will compli with law order of the court and will testifi
to matter truthfulli and wi thout bia or prejudic
the essenc of thi rule is truthtel the part about compli with law order of the
court is a direct not to flee from a summon or subpoena issu by a court even
though the rule specifi court it is reason to extend it to other agenc that have
the legal power to issu such order such as congression committe grand juri
special prosecutor and quasijudici administr agenc sometim legal counsel
might devis stratagem to avoid immedi servic of or attent to a summon fraud
examin can listen to such legal advic but thei also must weigh it against their own
knowledg of proper and legal behavior in some case a second legal opinion might be
advis the fraud examin could be on shaki ground with a defens of my lawyer
told me to hide when accus of obstruct of justic the lawyer might be in the cell
next door
truth testimoni often present strateg problem a fraud examin even on who is an
attornei should alwai be repres by counsel in a courtroom deposit or other
testimoni set the lawyer own sai is an attornei who repres himself ha a
fool for a client counsel is invalu for protect a fraud examin wit from
improp question
when testimoni is sought in examin or crossexamin a certifi fraud examin
should alwai respond to the question that ar askedno more and no less the attornei
conduct the examin ha the respons to ask the right question and the fraud
examin counsel ha the respons to object to mislead improp or irrelev
question the fraud examin counsel also ha the oblig to correct ani problem with
the crossexamin a help fraud exam iner who tri to embellish the answer with
addit materi might offend the court or do unintent harm to the case be made
for on parti or the other of cours a fraud examin mai invok hi own constitut
right upon the advic of counsel
answer should alwai be deliv without bia or prejudic it is the lawyer job to be
bias and prejudicedin the context of the ad versari judici systemestablish the case
for hi own client or for the govern the greatest danger for deliv bias or
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41012 2011 fraud examin manual
prejudici testimoni exist when the broad question is tell the court about your find
in your fraud examin thi is an open end invit to spill the bean if counsel
doe not object the certifi fraud examin is in the spotlight howev respond to
such an invit amount to deliv a report and the next rule in the certifi fraud
examin code of profession ethic can be us as a guid
