2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Complete Reporting of Material Matters


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Complete Reporting of Material Matters 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall reveal all ma terial matters discovered during the course 
of an examination which, if omitted, could cause a distortion of the facts. 
 
In its simplicity, this rule demands full and fair reporting of the findings made in 
investigations. The two words — material and distortion — are key concepts.  
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1020   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Evidence and conclusions are material if knowledge of them would affect clients’ decisions 
based on a Certified Fraud Examiner’s report. Materiality  is a user-oriented concept. If 
matters omitted from a report were known to the users, and their own perceptions and 
conclusions would be different in light of this knowledge, the omitted information is 
material. Certified Fraud Examiners are placed in the difficult position of determining not 
what they themselves consider important and material, but rather what they think users will 
consider important and material. They need to project a decision-making process onto the 
users instead of simply being introspective.  
 
Therefore, it is very important for Certified Fraud Examiners to learn directly from clients 
and employers the type of information they consider important. Nothing is gained by playing 
a guessing game. A Certified Fraud Examiner should obtain as good an understanding as 
possible of the users’ interests, the information desired, the level of detail needed, and other 
aspects of the users’ needs.  
 
The “distortion of facts” in the rule is cited in reference to omissions. Distortion is clearly 
related to the concept of materiality and users’ decisions. It could likewise refer to the 
matters included in a report. A subtle stretching of the facts to make them look as if they 
support a preconceived conclusion would be a distortion that could cause users to undertake 
inappropriate actions. Sometimes the evidence to support a definitive conclusion or 
recommendation is simply not obtainable—the evidence is missing or depends upon future 
events, for example. The Certified Fraud Examiner’s obligation is to avoid rushing to 
judgment. When matters are not clear, the Certified Fraud Examiner’s report should stress 
the tentative nature of the evidence and withhold judgment. To jump to conclusions could 
be considered a distortion of facts.  
 
 



:


complet report of materi matter
a certifi fraud examin shall reveal all ma terial matter discov dure the cours
of an examin which if omit could caus a distort of the fact
in it simplic thi rule demand full and fair report of the find made in
investig the two word materi and distort ar kei concept
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41020 2011 fraud examin manual
evid and conclus ar materi if knowledg of them would affect client decis
base on a certifi fraud examin report materi is a userori concept if
matter omit from a report were known to the user and their own percept and
conclus would be differ in light of thi knowledg the omit inform is
materi certifi fraud examin ar place in the difficult posit of determin not
what thei themselv consid import and materi but rather what thei think user will
consid import and materi thei need to project a decisionmak process onto the
user instead of simpli be introspect
therefor it is veri import for certifi fraud examin to learn directli from client
and employ the type of inform thei consid import noth is gain by plai
a guess game a certifi fraud examin should obtain as good an understand as
possibl of the user interest the inform desir the level of detail need and other
aspect of the user need
the distort of fact in the rule is cite in refer to omiss distort is clearli
relat to the concept of materi and user decis it could likewis refer to the
matter includ in a report a subtl stretch of the fact to make them look as if thei
support a preconceiv conclus would be a distort that could caus user to undertak
inappropri action sometim the evid to support a definit conclus or
recommend is simpli not obtainableth evid is miss or depend upon futur
event for exampl the certifi fraud examin oblig is to avoid rush to
judgment when matter ar not clear the certifi fraud examin report should stress
the tent natur of the evid and withhold judgment to jump to conclus could
be consid a distort of fact
