2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR/Why People Obey the Law/Voluntary Compliance


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Voluntary Compliance 
Voluntary compliance matters only to the extent to which it produces obedience that goes 
beyond self-interest, measured by most of us by reward and punishment. A normative 
speeder, for instance, will accept being a few minutes late to his appointment in order to 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.111  
obey the speed limit, thus making the roads safer for everyone. A normative employee will 
accept a salary freeze and not steal from the company to make up for the raise he was 
promised. In other words, these people will act against their own best interests if they feel 
compliance with the rule is of greater moral import.  
 
Of course government authorities recognize that without the good will of the public, they 
could not function. Their aim must be to maximize compliance and minimize hostility 
toward laws, while gaining legitimacy in the eyes of the public. Any leader who wants to 
effectively govern must have legitimacy with his subordinates. The same is true for 
employers, managers, teachers, and army sergeants. Otherwise, compliance will not occur. 
 
Due to its significant social impact, social scientists and politicians have found legitimacy to 
be an issue of major concern. It is seen as a reservoir of loyalty from which leaders can draw. 
Opinion polls on the public’s attitude toward the law and the government are really about 
public confidence in the government’s legitimacy. If the public does not have confidence in 
the legal system, obedience to laws is unlikely. 
 
Studies show that both children and adults feel a strong obligation to obey the law. Whether 
we can attribute this to their normative values or the legitimacy of the authorities is the real 
question. Naturally, those who view the authorities as legitimate are more likely to comply. 
This leads to the conclusion that normative support of the system results in compliant 
behavior. 
 



:


voluntari complianc
voluntari complianc matter onli to the extent to which it produc obedi that goe
beyond selfinterest measur by most of us by reward and punish a norm
speeder for instanc will accept be a few minut late to hi appoint in order to
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4111
obei the speed limit thu make the road safer for everyon a norm employe will
accept a salari freez and not steal from the compani to make up for the rais he wa
promis in other word these peopl will act against their own best interest if thei feel
complianc with the rule is of greater moral import
of cours govern author recogn that without the good will of the public thei
could not function their aim must be to maxim complianc and minim hostil
toward law while gain legitimaci in the ey of the public ani leader who want to
effect govern must have legitimaci with hi subordin the same is true for
employ manag teacher and armi sergeant otherwis complianc will not occur
due to it signific social impact social scientist and politician have found legitimaci to
be an issu of major concern it is seen as a reservoir of loyalti from which leader can draw
opinion poll on the public attitud toward the law and the govern ar realli about
public confid in the govern legitimaci if the public doe not have confid in
the legal system obedi to law is unlik
studi show that both children and adult feel a strong oblig to obei the law whether
we can attribut thi to their norm valu or the legitimaci of the author is the real
question natur those who view the author as legitim ar more like to compli
thi lead to the conclus that norm support of the system result in compliant
behavior
