2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR/Why People Obey the Law/Implications of the Chicago Study


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Implications of the Chicago Study 
Authorities do not take compliance with the law for granted. They often find that occasional 
noncompliance must be tolerated. Sometimes noncompliance is so widespread that it casts 
doubt upon the effectiveness and validity of the law itself. Prohibition, for example, was 
widely and often openly violated before its repeal. The results of the study suggest that 
normative values are more influential upon compliance than the reward and punishment 
approach. This is consistent with Skinner’s behavioral theories discussed previously. 
 
Again, the study shows that people have a high level of normative commitment to abide by 
the law. Most participants felt that breaking the law was morally wrong and that laws 
should be obeyed even when one does not agree with them—the “my country, right or 
wrong” approach. Authorities who can tap into  and encourage those views will of course 
inspire compliance. Employees who have a strong sense of loyalty to their employer will 
not violate company policies because such acts would be a betrayal to the company. 
 



:


implic of the chicago studi
author do not take complianc with the law for grant thei often find that occasion
noncompli must be toler sometim noncompli is so widespread that it cast
doubt upon the effect and valid of the law itself prohibit for exampl wa
wide and often openli violat befor it repeal the result of the studi suggest that
norm valu ar more influenti upon complianc than the reward and punish
approach thi is consist with skinner behavior theori discuss previous
again the studi show that peopl have a high level of norm commit to abid by
the law most particip felt that break the law wa moral wrong and that law
should be obei even when on doe not agre with themth my countri right or
wrong approach author who can tap into and encourag those view will of cours
inspir complianc employe who have a strong sens of loyalti to their employ will
not violat compani polici becaus such act would be a betray to the compani
