2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR/Why People Obey the Law/The Psychological Variables


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


The Psychological Variables 
The Chicago Study was designed to gauge the gap between citizens’ concerns for favorable 
outcomes and procedural fairness. It also measures the extent to which fairness influences 
reactions to experience. The experience in question is of the everyday, average-citizen 
variety—the type of encounter most of us have  with authorities over relatively minor 
matters. Participants reported calling the police for a number of reasons: accidents, 
disturbances, suspicious activities, and crimes against property or violent crimes. The 
majority of callers felt it was important for the police to solve their problem, whether it was 
serious or not. 
 
Police response time was satisfactory to most respondents. Only 15 percent felt that the 
police did not respond quickly enough. Nearly 70 percent knew what actions the police had 
taken to solve the problem, and almost two-thirds of those said that the police settled the 
situation. The 43 percent who said that the police failed to solve their problem admitted that 
they did do everything they could. All in all, 71 percent said they were satisfied with the 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.114   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
outcome of their call. Most respondents also  felt that they were treated quite well by the 
police. Eighty-six percent expressed overall satisfaction with their politeness, concern for 
their rights, propriety, attentiveness, honesty, and willingness to consider their opinions. 
 
Respondents who were stopped by the police naturally had less magnanimous feelings 
toward them. Still, 73 percent of those who received tickets for minor offenses considered 
the outcome fair, acknowledging that the ticket was deserved.  
 
Satisfaction levels of participants who had to go to court were similarly high: 80 percent 
considered their treatment fair. However, 36 percent stated that they believed the judge 
could have reached a better outcome. Overall, though, participants were content with these 
elements of our justice system. 
 



:


the psycholog variabl
the chicago studi wa design to gaug the gap between citizen concern for favor
outcom and procedur fair it also measur the extent to which fair influenc
reaction to experi the experi in question is of the everydai averagecitizen
varietyth type of encount most of us have with author over rel minor
matter particip report call the polic for a number of reason accid
disturb suspici activ and crime against properti or violent crime the
major of caller felt it wa import for the polic to solv their problem whether it wa
seriou or not
polic respons time wa satisfactori to most respond onli 15 percent felt that the
polic did not respond quickli enough nearli 70 percent knew what action the polic had
taken to solv the problem and almost twothird of those said that the polic settl the
situat the 43 percent who said that the polic fail to solv their problem admit that
thei did do everyth thei could all in all 71 percent said thei were satisfi with the
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4114 2011 fraud examin manual
outcom of their call most respond also felt that thei were treat quit well by the
polic eightysix percent express overal satisfact with their polit concern for
their right proprieti attent honesti and willing to consid their opinion
respond who were stop by the polic natur had less magnanim feel
toward them still 73 percent of those who receiv ticket for minor offens consid
the outcom fair acknowledg that the ticket wa deserv
satisfact level of particip who had to go to court were similarli high 80 percent
consid their treatment fair howev 36 percent state that thei believ the judg
could have reach a better outcom overal though particip were content with these
element of our justic system
