2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/THEORIES OF CRIME CAUSATION/Social Process Theories/Theory of Differential Association


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Theory of Differential Association 
The theory of differential association is undoubtedly the best-known among all explanations 
offered in the United States to account for crime, though it too has been widely criticized on 
the grounds that it is just about impossible to test. 
 
The theory first appeared as a systematic formulation in 1939 in the third edition of Edwin 
H. Sutherland’s Principles of Criminology. Later, Sutherland would make his best-known 
contribution to criminology by coining the phrase white-collar crime  and writing a 
monograph on the subject. Sutherland was particularly interested in fraud committed by 
the elite upper-world business executive, either against shareholders or the public. 
Sutherland said, “General Motors does not have  an inferiority complex, United States Steel 
does not suffer from an unresolved Oedipus problem, and the DuPonts do not desire to 
return to the womb. The assumption that an offender may have such pathological 
distortion of the intellect or the emotions seems to me absurd, and if it is absurd regarding 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.207  
the crimes of businessmen, it is equally absurd regarding the crimes of persons in the 
economic lower classes.” 1 
 
The theory of differential association begins by asserting that criminal behavior is learned. 
Explicating that idea, Sutherland specifies as a second point that criminal behavior is learned 
in interaction with other persons in a process of communication. If individuals acquiring 
criminal habits or propensities were exposed to situations, circumstances, and interactions 
totally of a criminal nature, it would be relatively easy to comprehend how this process of 
communication operates. In view of the enormous variation in standards and personalities to 
which any individual in our society is exposed, it becomes exceedingly difficult to discern 
those critical elements that induce criminal behavior without the intervention of some 
additional principle. 
 
Sutherland’s third point is that criminal beha vior is acquired through participation within 
intimate personal groups. This particular stress suggests that the roots of crime must be 
sought in the socializing experiences of the individual. Unfortunately, the process of 
socialization is far from being adequately understood. Sutherland’s fourth point indicates 
that the criminal learning process includes not only techniques of committing crime, but also 
the shaping of motives, drives, rationalizations, and attitudes. Crime techniques often 
involve a high degree of skill; picking pockets (and not getting caught) demands considerable 
adroitness, and being a successful prostitute demands knowing how to hustle customers, 
collect money, buy police protection, and deal with a drunken or violent john. 
 
Fifth, Sutherland narrows his focus by indicating the kinds of pressures that move the 
learning process in the direction of acceptance of illegal pursuits. Careful to keep within the 
legal definitions of behavior, Sutherland stipulates that the specific direction of motives and 
drives is learned from definitions of the legal codes as favorable or unfavorable. 
 
And sixth, he sets out his core point by establishing the principle of “differential 
association.” According to this postulate, a person becomes a criminal because of an excess 
of definitions favorable to violation of the law over definitions unfavorable to violation of 
the law. Then, as a means of demonstrating with greater clarity the character of associations 
that have a subsequent effect on behavior, Sutherland states his seventh point— that 
differential association may vary in frequency, duration, priority, and intensity. But there is 
                                                 
1 Quoted in Geis, Gilbert. On White-collar Crime.  (Lexington: Lexington Books, 1982). 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.208   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
no suggestion regarding which of these elements is apt to be more important than the 
others. Frequent contacts may promote feelings of boredom and indifference; one intense 
experience may overwhelm all prior learning, or it may not. The axiom hardly helps us much 
in unraveling the causal contents of crime. 
 
Sutherland’s eighth point concerns the nature of  learning and, again, is primarily a didactic 
statement of common behavioral science understanding rather than a contribution that 
moves the theory very far forward: learning criminal and delinquent behavior, Sutherland 
asserts, involves all the mechanisms that are involved in any other learning. The key problem 
is not that Sutherland is wrong; it is that he casts into the spotlight a theoretical problem that 
has plagued students of human behavior since time immemorial. If crime is to be 
understood as learned like anything else—say, basketball skills, cooking, patriotism, and 
flirting—then any theory that can unravel its in gredients will at the same time have to set 
before us an understanding of all human action. Sutherland’s propositions can hardly 
pretend to approach so stunning an intellectual achievement, and in this respect, can be 
regarded as extraordinarily overambitious or, perhaps, simplistic. 
 
As his next to last proposition, Sutherland stresses that learning differs from pure 
imitation. His last point is a worthwhile reminder that while criminal behavior is an 
expression of general needs and values, it is not explained by these general needs and 
values because noncriminal behavior is an expression of the same needs and values. This 
injunction indicates that the generalizations sometimes employed to account for crime? 
such as the view that people steal because they crave esteem or are greedy, or kill because 
they are unhappy?have little scientific merit. People, both criminals and noncriminals, are 
motivated by much the same needs and values. They become or do not become criminals 
on the basis of their unique responses to common drives for prestige, happiness, success, 
power, wealth, and numerous other human aspirations. An individual may feel a pressing 
need for money and take an extra weekend job pumping gas, or try to borrow from a 
friend, or shrug his shoulders and figure that this time he’ll do without. Another person, 
feeling the same need, may hold up a fast food outlet. 
 



:


theori of differenti associ
the theori of differenti associ is undoubtedli the bestknown among all explan
offer in the unit state to account for crime though it too ha been wide critic on
the ground that it is just about imposs to test
the theori first appear as a systemat formul in 1939 in the third edit of edwin
h sutherland principl of criminolog later sutherland would make hi bestknown
contribut to criminolog by coin the phrase whitecollar crime and write a
monograph on the subject sutherland wa particularli interest in fraud commit by
the elit upperworld busi execut either against sharehold or the public
sutherland said gener motor doe not have an inferior complex unit state steel
doe not suffer from an unresolv oedipu problem and the dupont do not desir to
return to the womb the assumpt that an offend mai have such patholog
distort of the intellect or the emot seem to me absurd and if it is absurd regard
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4207
the crime of businessmen it is equal absurd regard the crime of person in the
econom lower class 1
the theori of differenti associ begin by assert that crimin behavior is learn
explic that idea sutherland specifi as a second point that crimin behavior is learn
in interact with other person in a process of commun if individu acquir
crimin habit or propens were expos to situat circumst and interact
total of a crimin natur it would be rel easi to comprehend how thi process of
commun oper in view of the enorm variat in standard and person to
which ani individu in our societi is expos it becom exceedingli difficult to discern
those critic element that induc crimin behavior without the intervent of some
addit principl
sutherland third point is that crimin beha vior is acquir through particip within
intim person group thi particular stress suggest that the root of crime must be
sought in the social experi of the individu unfortun the process of
social is far from be adequ understood sutherland fourth point indic
that the crimin learn process includ not onli techniqu of commit crime but also
the shape of motiv drive ration and attitud crime techniqu often
involv a high degre of skill pick pocket and not get caught demand consider
adroit and be a success prostitut demand know how to hustl custom
collect monei bui polic protect and deal with a drunken or violent john
fifth sutherland narrow hi focu by indic the kind of pressur that move the
learn process in the direct of accept of illeg pursuit care to keep within the
legal definit of behavior sutherland stipul that the specif direct of motiv and
drive is learn from definit of the legal code as favor or unfavor
and sixth he set out hi core point by establish the principl of differenti
associ accord to thi postul a person becom a crimin becaus of an excess
of definit favor to violat of the law over definit unfavor to violat of
the law then as a mean of demonstr with greater clariti the charact of associ
that have a subsequ effect on behavior sutherland state hi seventh point that
differenti associ mai vari in frequenc durat prioriti and intens but there is
1 quot in gei gilbert on whitecollar crime lexington lexington book 1982
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4208 2011 fraud examin manual
no suggest regard which of these element is apt to be more import than the
other frequent contact mai promot feel of boredom and indiffer on intens
experi mai overwhelm all prior learn or it mai not the axiom hardli help us much
in unravel the causal content of crime
sutherland eighth point concern the natur of learn and again is primarili a didact
statement of common behavior scienc understand rather than a contribut that
move the theori veri far forward learn crimin and delinqu behavior sutherland
assert involv all the mechan that ar involv in ani other learn the kei problem
is not that sutherland is wrong it is that he cast into the spotlight a theoret problem that
ha plagu student of human behavior sinc time immemori if crime is to be
understood as learn like anyth elsesai basketbal skill cook patriot and
flirtingthen ani theori that can unravel it in gredient will at the same time have to set
befor us an understand of all human action sutherland proposit can hardli
pretend to approach so stun an intellectu achiev and in thi respect can be
regard as extraordinarili overambiti or perhap simplist
as hi next to last proposit sutherland stress that learn differ from pure
imit hi last point is a worthwhil remind that while crimin behavior is an
express of gener need and valu it is not explain by these gener need and
valu becaus noncrimin behavior is an express of the same need and valu thi
injunct indic that the gener sometim emploi to account for crime
such as the view that peopl steal becaus thei crave esteem or ar greedi or kill becaus
thei ar unhappyhav littl scientif merit peopl both crimin and noncrimin ar
motiv by much the same need and valu thei becom or do not becom crimin
on the basi of their uniqu respons to common drive for prestig happi success
power wealth and numer other human aspir an individu mai feel a press
need for monei and take an extra weekend job pump ga or try to borrow from a
friend or shrug hi shoulder and figur that thi time hell do without anoth person
feel the same need mai hold up a fast food outlet
