2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Financial Statement Fraud Schemes 
Fraud in financial statements typically takes the form of: 
• Overstated assets or revenue 
• Understated liabilities and expenses 
 
Overstating assets and revenues falsely reflects a financially stronger company by inclusion 
of fictitious asset costs or artificial revenues. Understated liabilities and expenses are shown 
through exclusion of costs or financial obligations. Both methods result in increased equity 
and net worth for the company. This manipulation results in increased earnings per share or 
partnership profit interests, or a more stable picture of the company’s true situation.  
 
However, in government contracts, just the opposite may be true: 
• Assets and revenues are understated. 
• Liabilities and expenses are overstated. 
 
Why? As explained by government auditors, entities may rely on understated revenues or 
overstated expenses to get more money for a project or contract. However, such schemes 
are by far the minority of financial statement fraud cases. 
 
To demonstrate the over- and understatements typically used to fraudulently enhance the 
financial statements, the schemes have been divided into five classes. Because the maintenance 
of financial records involves a double-entry system, fraudulent accounting entries always affect 
at least two accounts and, therefore, at least two categories on the financial statements. While 
the areas described below reflect their financial statement classifications, keep in mind that the 
other side of the fraudulent transaction exists elsewhere. It is common for schemes to involve 
a combination of several methods. The five classifications of financial statement schemes are: 
• Fictitious revenues 
• Timing differences  
• Improper asset valuations 
• Concealed liabilities and expenses 
• Improper disclosures 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.310                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


financi statement fraud scheme
fraud in financi statement typic take the form of
overst asset or revenu
underst liabil and expens
overst asset and revenu fals reflect a financi stronger compani by inclus
of fictiti asset cost or artifici revenu underst liabil and expens ar shown
through exclus of cost or financi oblig both method result in increas equiti
and net worth for the compani thi manipul result in increas earn per share or
partnership profit interest or a more stabl pictur of the compani true situat
howev in govern contract just the opposit mai be true
asset and revenu ar underst
liabil and expens ar overst
why as explain by govern auditor entiti mai reli on underst revenu or
overst expens to get more monei for a project or contract howev such scheme
ar by far the minor of financi statement fraud case
to demonstr the over and understat typic us to fraudul enhanc the
financi statement the scheme have been divid into five class becaus the mainten
of financi record involv a doubleentri system fraudul account entri alwai affect
at least two account and therefor at least two categori on the financi statement while
the area describ below reflect their financi statement classif keep in mind that the
other side of the fraudul transact exist elsewher it is common for scheme to involv
a combin of sever method the five classif of financi statement scheme ar
fictiti revenu
time differ
improp asset valuat
conceal liabil and expens
improp disclosur
financi statement fraud financi transact
1310 2011 fraud examin manual
