2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Fraud Schemes/Liability/Expense Omissions


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Liability/Expense Omissions  
The preferred and easiest method of concealing liabilities or expenses is to simply fail to 
record them. Multi-million-dollar judgments ag ainst a company from a recent court decision 
might be conveniently ignored. Vendor invoices might be thrown away or stuffed into 
drawers rather than posted into the accounts payable system, thereby increasing reported 
earnings by the full amount of the invoices. In a retail environment, debit memos might be 
created for chargebacks to vendors, supposedly to claim permitted rebates or allowances but 
sometimes solely to create additional income. Whether or not these items are properly 
recorded in a subsequent accounting period does not change the fraudulent nature of the 
current financial statements. 
 
Often, perpetrators of liability and expense omissions believe they can conceal their frauds in 
future periods. They frequently plan to compensate for their omitted liabilities with visions 
of other income sources such as profits from future price increases. 
 
Just as they are easy to conceal, omitted lia bilities are probably one of the most difficult 
schemes to uncover. A thorough review of all post-financial-statement-date transactions, 
such as accounts payable increases and decreases, can aid in the discovery of omitted 
liabilities in financial statements, as can a computerized analysis of expense records. 
Additionally, if the auditor requested and was granted unrestricted access to the client’s files, 
a physical search could turn up concealed invoices and unposted liabilities. Probing 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.323 
interviews of accounts payable and other personnel can reveal unrecorded or delayed items 
too.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In July 2002, the SEC filed suit in the United States Dis trict Court for the Southern 
District of New York, charging major cable television producer Adelphia Communications 
Corporation (“the Company” or “Adelphia”); its founder John J. Rigas; his three sons, 
Timothy J. Rigas, Michael J. Rigas, and James P. Rigas; and two senior executives at 
Adelphia, James R. Brown and Michael C. Mulcahey, in one of the most extensive 
financial frauds ever to take place at a public company. The SEC charged that Adelphia, 
at the direction of the individual defendants (1) fraudulently excluded over $2.3 billion in 
liabilities from its consolidated financial statements by hiding them in off balance sheet 
affiliates; (2) falsified operations statistics and inflated Adelphia’s earnings to meet Wall 
Street’s expectations; and (3) concealed rampant self-dealing by the Rigas Family, 
including the undisclosed use of corporate fu nds for Rigas Family stock purchases and the 
acquisition of luxury condominiums in New York and elsewhere. 
 
With respect to the concealed liabilities, the complaint alleged that between mid-1999 and 
the end of 2001, John J. Rigas, Timothy J. Ri gas, Michael J. Rigas, James P. Rigas, and 
James R. Brown, with the assistance of Michael C. Mulcahey, caused Adelphia to 
fraudulently exclude from the Company’s a nnual and quarterly consolidated financial 
statements over $2.3 billion in bank debt by deliberately shifting those liabilities onto the 
books of Adelphia’s off balance sheet, unconsolidated affiliates. Failure to record this debt 
violated GAAP requirements and precipitated a series of misrepresentations about those 
liabilities by Adelphia and the defendants, including the creation of (1) sham transactions 
backed by fictitious documents to give the false appearance that Adelphia had actually 
repaid debts when, in truth, it had simply shi fted them to unconsoli dated Rigas-controlled 
entities, and (2) misleading financial statements  by giving the false impression through the 
use of footnotes that liabilities listed in the Company’s financials included all outstanding 
bank debt. 
 
In November 2002, in exchange for his testimony against the Rigas men, James Brown 
was released from prosecution by  consenting to an entry of a permanent injunction against 
him for federal securities law violations. Additionally, Brown has been permanently barred 
from becoming an officer or director of a public corporation.  
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.324                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In July 2004, after a three-month trial, a federal jury convicted John and Timothy Rigas of 
conspiracy, securities fraud, and bank fraud. John Rigas received a 15-year prison sentence 
and was fined $2,300, and Timothy Rigas was sentenced to 20 years in prison. James 
Rigas was never criminally charged by the Court. In November 2005, Michael Rigas 
pleaded guilty to a charge of making a false entry in a financial record. 
 
In April 2005, the SEC filed permanent injunctions against John, Timothy, Michael, 
and James Rigas, as well as James Brown, Michael Mulcahey, and Adelphia 
Communications Corporation. The defendants were charged with violating anti-fraud, 
periodic reporting, record keep ing, and internal control provisions of federal securities laws. 
In addition, the Rigas family members were barred from ever holding officer or director 
positions in a public company.  
 



:


liabilityexpens omiss
the prefer and easiest method of conceal liabil or expens is to simpli fail to
record them multimilliondollar judgment ag ainst a compani from a recent court decis
might be conveni ignor vendor invoic might be thrown awai or stuf into
drawer rather than post into the account payabl system therebi increas report
earn by the full amount of the invoic in a retail environ debit memo might be
creat for chargeback to vendor supposedli to claim permit rebat or allow but
sometim sole to creat addit incom whether or not these item ar properli
record in a subsequ account period doe not chang the fraudul natur of the
current financi statement
often perpetr of liabil and expens omiss believ thei can conceal their fraud in
futur period thei frequent plan to compens for their omit liabil with vision
of other incom sourc such as profit from futur price increas
just as thei ar easi to conceal omit lia biliti ar probabl on of the most difficult
scheme to uncov a thorough review of all postfinancialstatementd transact
such as account payabl increas and decreas can aid in the discoveri of omit
liabil in financi statement as can a computer analysi of expens record
addition if the auditor request and wa grant unrestrict access to the client file
a physic search could turn up conceal invoic and unpost liabil probe
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1323
interview of account payabl and other personnel can reveal unrecord or delai item
too
exampl
in juli 2002 the sec file suit in the unit state di trict court for the southern
district of new york charg major cabl televis produc adelphia commun
corpor the compani or adelphia it founder john j riga hi three son
timothi j riga michael j riga and jame p riga and two senior execut at
adelphia jame r brown and michael c mulcahei in on of the most extens
financi fraud ever to take place at a public compani the sec charg that adelphia
at the direct of the individu defend 1 fraudul exclud over 23 billion in
liabil from it consolid financi statement by hide them in off balanc sheet
affili 2 falsifi oper statist and inflat adelphia earn to meet wall
street expect and 3 conceal rampant selfdeal by the riga famili
includ the undisclos us of corpor fu nd for riga famili stock purchas and the
acquisit of luxuri condominium in new york and elsewher
with respect to the conceal liabil the complaint alleg that between mid1999 and
the end of 2001 john j riga timothi j ri ga michael j riga jame p riga and
jame r brown with the assist of michael c mulcahei caus adelphia to
fraudul exclud from the compani a nnual and quarterli consolid financi
statement over 23 billion in bank debt by deliber shift those liabil onto the
book of adelphia off balanc sheet unconsolid affili failur to record thi debt
violat gaap requir and precipit a seri of misrepresent about those
liabil by adelphia and the defend includ the creation of 1 sham transact
back by fictiti document to give the fals appear that adelphia had actual
repaid debt when in truth it had simpli shi fted them to unconsoli date rigascontrol
entiti and 2 mislead financi statement by give the fals impress through the
us of footnot that liabil list in the compani financi includ all outstand
bank debt
in novemb 2002 in exchang for hi testimoni against the riga men jame brown
wa releas from prosecut by consent to an entri of a perman injunct against
him for feder secur law violat addition brown ha been perman bar
from becom an offic or director of a public corpor
financi statement fraud financi transact
1324 2011 fraud examin manual
in juli 2004 after a threemonth trial a feder juri convict john and timothi riga of
conspiraci secur fraud and bank fraud john riga receiv a 15year prison sentenc
and wa fine 2300 and timothi riga wa sentenc to 20 year in prison jame
riga wa never crimin charg by the court in novemb 2005 michael riga
plead guilti to a charg of make a fals entri in a financi record
in april 2005 the sec file perman injunct against john timothi michael
and jame riga as well as jame brown michael mulcahei and adelphia
commun corpor the defend were charg with violat antifraud
period report record keep ing and intern control provis of feder secur law
in addit the riga famili member were bar from ever hold offic or director
posit in a public compani
