2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Fraud Schemes/What Red Flags Are Associated with Improper Disclosures?


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


What Red Flags Are Associated with Improper Disclosures? 
• Domination of management by a single person or small group (in a nonowner-managed 
business) without compensating controls. 
• Ineffective board of directors or audit committee oversight over the financial reporting 
process and internal control. 
• Ineffective communication, implementation, support, or enforcement of the entity’s 
values or ethical standards by management or the communication of inappropriate 
values or ethical standards. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.331 
• Rapid growth or unusual profitability, especially compared to that of other companies in 
the same industry. 
• Significant, unusual, or highly complex transactions, especially those close to a period’s 
end that pose difficult “substance over form” questions. 
• Significant related-party transactions not in the ordinary course of business or with 
related entities either not audited or audited by a different firm. 
• Significant bank accounts or subsidiary or branch operations in tax-haven jurisdictions 
for which there appears to be no clear business justification. 
• Overly complex organizational structure invo lving unusual legal entities or managerial 
lines of authority. 
• Known history of violations of securities la ws or other laws and regulations, or claims 
against the entity, its senior management, or board members alleging fraud or violations 
of laws and regulations. 
• Recurring attempts by management to justify marginal or inappropriate accounting on 
the basis of materiality. 
• Formal or informal restrictions on the auditor that inappropriately limit access to people 
or information, or limit the ability of the auditor to communicate effectively with the 
board of directors or audit committee. 
 
 



:


what red flag ar associ with improp disclosur
domin of manag by a singl person or small group in a nonownermanag
busi without compens control
ineffect board of director or audit committe oversight over the financi report
process and intern control
ineffect commun implement support or enforc of the entiti
valu or ethic standard by manag or the commun of inappropri
valu or ethic standard
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1331
rapid growth or unusu profit especi compar to that of other compani in
the same industri
signific unusu or highli complex transact especi those close to a period
end that pose difficult substanc over form question
signific relatedparti transact not in the ordinari cours of busi or with
relat entiti either not audit or audit by a differ firm
signific bank account or subsidiari or branch oper in taxhaven jurisdict
for which there appear to be no clear busi justif
overli complex organiz structur invo lving unusu legal entiti or manageri
line of author
known histori of violat of secur la ws or other law and regul or claim
against the entiti it senior manag or board member alleg fraud or violat
of law and regul
recur attempt by manag to justifi margin or inappropri account on
the basi of materi
formal or inform restrict on the auditor that inappropri limit access to peopl
or inform or limit the abil of the auditor to commun effect with the
board of director or audit committe
