2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/What Red Flags Are Associated with Financial Statement Fraud Generally?


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


What Red Flags Are Associated with Financial Statement Fraud Generally? 
Red flags associated with particular financial statement fraud schemes have been discussed 
above. There are many red flags associated with financial statement fraud generally. An 
extensive list of such red flags can be found in an appendix to AU section 316, Consideration 
of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit, where they are called “risk factors.” Some red flags 
indicate increased vulnerability to financial statement fraud; others indicate a greater 
likelihood that financial statement fraud has occurred. 
 
Some of the more significant red flags listed in AU section 316 are: 
• Domination of management by a single person or small group (in a nonowner-managed 
business) without compensating controls. 
• Profitability or trend level expectations of investment analysts, institutional investors, 
significant creditors, or other external parties (particularly expectations that are unduly 
aggressive or unrealistic), including expectations created by management in, for example, 
overly optimistic press releases or annual report messages. 
• Ineffective communication, implementation, support, or enforcement of the entity’s 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.332                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
values or ethical standards by management, or the communication of inappropriate 
values or ethical standards.  
• Recurring negative cash flows from operations or an inability to generate positive cash 
flows from operations while reporting earnings and earnings growth. 
• Rapid growth or unusual profitability, especially compared to that of other companies in 
the same industry. 
• Significant, unusual, or highly complex transactions, especially those close to a period’s 
end that pose difficult “substance over form” questions. 
• Significant related-party transactions not in the ordinary course of business or with 
related entities not audited or audited by another firm. 
• Recurring attempts by management to justify marginal or inappropriate accounting on 
the basis of materiality. 
• Formal or informal restrictions on the auditor that inappropriately limit access to people 
or information, or limit the ability of the auditor to communicate effectively with those 
charged with governance. 
 
 



:


what red flag ar associ with financi statement fraud gener
red flag associ with particular financi statement fraud scheme have been discuss
abov there ar mani red flag associ with financi statement fraud gener an
extens list of such red flag can be found in an appendix to au section 316 consider
of fraud in a financi statement audit where thei ar call risk factor some red flag
indic increas vulner to financi statement fraud other indic a greater
likelihood that financi statement fraud ha occur
some of the more signific red flag list in au section 316 ar
domin of manag by a singl person or small group in a nonownermanag
busi without compens control
profit or trend level expect of invest analyst institut investor
signific creditor or other extern parti particularli expect that ar unduli
aggress or unrealist includ expect creat by manag in for exampl
overli optimist press releas or annual report messag
ineffect commun implement support or enforc of the entiti
financi statement fraud financi transact
1332 2011 fraud examin manual
valu or ethic standard by manag or the commun of inappropri
valu or ethic standard
recur neg cash flow from oper or an inabl to gener posit cash
flow from oper while report earn and earn growth
rapid growth or unusu profit especi compar to that of other compani in
the same industri
signific unusu or highli complex transact especi those close to a period
end that pose difficult substanc over form question
signific relatedparti transact not in the ordinari cours of busi or with
relat entiti not audit or audit by anoth firm
recur attempt by manag to justifi margin or inappropri account on
the basi of materi
formal or inform restrict on the auditor that inappropri limit access to peopl
or inform or limit the abil of the auditor to commun effect with those
charg with govern
