2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Analysis/Percentage Analysis — Horizontal and Vertical


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Percentage Analysis — Horizontal and Vertical  
There are traditionally two methods of percentage analysis of financial statements. Vertical 
analysis  is a technique for analyzing the relationships between the items on an income 
statement, balance sheet, or statement of cash flows by expressing components as 
percentages. This method is often referred to as “common sizing” financial statements. In 
the vertical analysis of an income statement, net sales is assigned 100 percent. For a balance 
sheet, total assets is assigned 100 percent on the asset side, and total liabilities and equity is 
expressed as 100 percent. All other items in each of the sections are expressed as a 
percentage of these numbers. 
 
Horizontal analysis  is a technique for analyzing the percentage change in individual financial 
statement items from one period to the next. The first period in the analysis is considered 
the base period, and the changes in the subsequent period are computed as a percentage of 
the base period. If more than two periods are presented, each period’s changes are computed 
as a percentage of the preceding period. As is the case with vertical analysis, this technique 
will not work for small, immaterial frauds.  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.336                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The following is an example of financial statements that are analyzed by both horizontal and 
vertical analysis: 
 
 
 



:


percentag analysi horizont and vertic
there ar tradition two method of percentag analysi of financi statement vertic
analysi is a techniqu for analyz the relationship between the item on an incom
statement balanc sheet or statement of cash flow by express compon as
percentag thi method is often refer to as common size financi statement in
the vertic analysi of an incom statement net sale is assign 100 percent for a balanc
sheet total asset is assign 100 percent on the asset side and total liabil and equiti is
express as 100 percent all other item in each of the section ar express as a
percentag of these number
horizont analysi is a techniqu for analyz the percentag chang in individu financi
statement item from on period to the next the first period in the analysi is consid
the base period and the chang in the subsequ period ar comput as a percentag of
the base period if more than two period ar present each period chang ar comput
as a percentag of the preced period as is the case with vertic analysi thi techniqu
will not work for small immateri fraud
financi statement fraud financi transact
1336 2011 fraud examin manual
the follow is an exampl of financi statement that ar analyz by both horizont and
vertic analysi
