2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Interviews in Fraudulent Financial Statement Cases/Interviewing Techniques


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Interviewing Techniques 
Situations in which accountants are tempted to misstate financial statements most often 
involve pressure connected with financial performance. The following is a fictitious 
conversation between upper managers of a corporation. The example shows how the 
pressure to commit financial statement fraud can greatly influence accounting personnel. 
 
CFO: (To CEO) “Boss, it looks like we will not have a good year financially. We told 
the shareholders (or bank) that our earnings would be $4 a share, and it looks like we’ll 
be very lucky to even make $3.” 
 
CEO: “Well, what are we going to do about it? If we miss the earnings projections (or 
don’t get the loan) our gooses will be cooked; we’ll both lose our jobs. We must get those 
earnings up to where they should be.” 
 
CFO: “What do you mean?” 
 
CEO: “What I mean is that it is your job to bring in the numbers. You’re going to have 
to find a way to get them up. I’m sure we can probably make up the difference next year, 
but for now, you get our earnings/assets/equity up however you have to. All financial 
statements are essentially estimates anyhow. So you figure out how to ‘estimate’ the numbers 
more in our favor. I don’t know how to do it, and I don’t want you to tell me. But get it 
done.” 
 
The CFO faces a dilemma: cook the books or lose his job. The actions of the CFO are very 
hard to predict. If he steps over the edge, chances are he will need to enlist the aid of 
accounting and clerical personnel to carry out the details, even if these employees do not 
know what they are actually doing. For example, the CFO might tell the chief accountant to 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.343 
book certain receivables and income, which would produce the needed effect—pumping up 
the equity. Such a scheme might only be apparent to the real insiders.  
 
In order to detect financial statement frauds through interviews, management and key 
support staff must be interviewed. Fraud examiners and auditors (collectively referred to as 
“examiners”) must consider many import ant issues when conducting interviews. One 
important issue examiners should keep in mind when conducting interviews is that there is 
generally no liability in asking questions in which they have a legitimate interest, no matter 
how insulting the questions might be to the respondents. Examiners, therefore, have the 
legal right to be fearless in asking questions, as long as the questions are asked privately and 
under reasonable circumstances. This legal right doesn’t extend to accusations—only to 
questions. “Are you still cooking the books?” is an accusation, whereas, “Are you cooking 
the books?” is a question. It is important to know the difference and to frame questions 
accordingly.  
 
Examiners should also be sure to interview only one person at a time. Groups of people 
should not be interviewed together because members tend to influence each other. The 
interviews should always be conducted under private conditions, which permit the 
respondent to answer candidly. 
 
It is important that examiners aim to be nonthreatening in their interview approaches. The 
less threatening the interviewer appears, the less reluctant the respondent will be to answer 
questions. An interviewer should not be judgmental or show surprise or disgust; such actions 
can inhibit the flow of information.  
 
Examiners should warm up respondents thoroughly before asking sensitive questions. It is 
best to obtain all of the procedural information and information pertaining to internal 
controls prior to discussing fraud. Fraud should usually be the last thing covered in an 
interview.  
 
In order to reduce the possibility of offending respondents, examiners can explain the nature 
of their interests before asking sensitive questions. For example, an examiner can say “As you 
know, as an auditor, I am required to actively look  for fraud. This means I must ask you some direct 
questions about the subject. Do you understand?” Then, after obtaining a positive response, the 
examiner can proceed to ask questions about fraud. It is best to ask the least difficult 
questions first. 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.344                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Another approach examiners can take to make tough interview questions more palatable is 
to phrase them hypothetically, especially during the beginning of the interview. For example, 
rather than asking a chief financial officer, “Have you committed fraud?” an examiner can 
say to the executive, “Suppose someone in the po sition of chief financial officer decided to 
pump up the financials. How would he do it?” The latter question is far more likely to illicit 
specific information than the former. Later in the interview, the executive should be asked 
specifically if he has committed the fraud. The examiner can say something along the lines of 
“My professional responsibilities require me to ask you one particularly sensitive direct 
question. Have you committed fraud or other illegal acts against the company?” The vast 
majority of respondents will answer “No” to  such a question without hesitation, whether 
they have or not; however, simply asking the question places the examiner in a much more 
favorable position if attacked professionally for not detecting a fraud. 
 



:


interview techniqu
situat in which account ar tempt to misstat financi statement most often
involv pressur connect with financi perform the follow is a fictiti
convers between upper manag of a corpor the exampl show how the
pressur to commit financi statement fraud can greatli influenc account personnel
cfo to ceo boss it look like we will not have a good year financi we told
the sharehold or bank that our earn would be 4 a share and it look like well
be veri lucki to even make 3
ceo well what ar we go to do about it if we miss the earn project or
dont get the loan our goos will be cook well both lose our job we must get those
earn up to where thei should be
cfo what do you mean
ceo what i mean is that it is your job to bring in the number your go to have
to find a wai to get them up im sure we can probabl make up the differ next year
but for now you get our earningsassetsequ up howev you have to all financi
statement ar essenti estim anyhow so you figur out how to estim the number
more in our favor i dont know how to do it and i dont want you to tell me but get it
done
the cfo face a dilemma cook the book or lose hi job the action of the cfo ar veri
hard to predict if he step over the edg chanc ar he will need to enlist the aid of
account and cleric personnel to carri out the detail even if these employe do not
know what thei ar actual do for exampl the cfo might tell the chief account to
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1343
book certain receiv and incom which would produc the need effectpump up
the equiti such a scheme might onli be appar to the real insid
in order to detect financi statement fraud through interview manag and kei
support staff must be interview fraud examin and auditor collect refer to as
examin must consid mani import ant issu when conduct interview on
import issu examin should keep in mind when conduct interview is that there is
gener no liabil in ask question in which thei have a legitim interest no matter
how insult the question might be to the respond examin therefor have the
legal right to be fearless in ask question as long as the question ar ask privat and
under reason circumst thi legal right doesnt extend to accusationsonli to
question ar you still cook the book is an accus wherea ar you cook
the book is a question it is import to know the differ and to frame question
accordingli
examin should also be sure to interview onli on person at a time group of peopl
should not be interview togeth becaus member tend to influenc each other the
interview should alwai be conduct under privat condit which permit the
respond to answer candidli
it is import that examin aim to be nonthreaten in their interview approach the
less threaten the interview appear the less reluct the respond will be to answer
question an interview should not be judgment or show surpris or disgust such action
can inhibit the flow of inform
examin should warm up respond thoroughli befor ask sensit question it is
best to obtain all of the procedur inform and inform pertain to intern
control prior to discuss fraud fraud should usual be the last thing cover in an
interview
in order to reduc the possibl of offend respond examin can explain the natur
of their interest befor ask sensit question for exampl an examin can sai as you
know as an auditor i am requir to activ look for fraud thi mean i must ask you some direct
question about the subject do you understand then after obtain a posit respons the
examin can proce to ask question about fraud it is best to ask the least difficult
question first
financi statement fraud financi transact
1344 2011 fraud examin manual
anoth approach examin can take to make tough interview question more palat is
to phrase them hypothet especi dure the begin of the interview for exampl
rather than ask a chief financi offic have you commit fraud an examin can
sai to the execut suppos someon in the po sition of chief financi offic decid to
pump up the financi how would he do it the latter question is far more like to illicit
specif inform than the former later in the interview the execut should be ask
specif if he ha commit the fraud the examin can sai someth along the line of
my profession respons requir me to ask you on particularli sensit direct
question have you commit fraud or other illeg act against the compani the vast
major of respond will answer no to such a question without hesit whether
thei have or not howev simpli ask the question place the examin in a much more
favor posit if attack profession for not detect a fraud
