2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Interviews in Fraudulent Financial Statement Cases/The Interview/THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
Generally, the CEO should be interviewed first in any proactive or reactive fraud situation. 
There are several good reasons for this approach. First of all, the auditor or fraud examiner 
must have a thorough understanding with management as to what his responsibilities in this 
area are. Second, it is unwise to conduct sensitive inquiries within any organization without 
first advising the CEO. If he learns from some other source that you are making discreet 
fraud-related inquiries without telling him, he is more likely to misunderstand your objectives 
and take the inquiry as a personal affront. Third, if there is any significant cooking of the 
books, the CEO is almost always involved. The fraud-related questions you should ask in 
connection with a regular audit should include, at a minimum, the following. Note how the 
questions are for “set up” purposes. 
 
1. Mr. CEO, as you know, we are required to assess the risk that material fraud exists in every company, 
not just yours. This is sort of a sensitive area for everyone, but our professional responsibilities dictate 
that we address this area. Do you understand? (Wait for an affirmative response before proceeding). 
 
2. Do you have any reason to believe that material fraud is being committed at any level within the 
organization? 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.345 
3. Mr. CEO, one trend in fraud is that small frauds  are committed by employees with little authority, 
which means that the largest ones are usually committed with the knowledge of upper management. Do 
you understand that? (Wait for an affirmative response before proceeding.) 
 
4. Because of that, we are required to at least look at the possibility that all CEOs, including you, might 
commit significant fraud against customers, investors,  or shareholders. Do you understand our situation? 
(Wait for an affirmative response.) 
 
5. So during this audit (examination) we need to ask direct questions ab out this subject to you and your 
staff. As a matter of fact, we will at least discuss the possibility of fraud with every employee we talk with 
in connection with this audit (exa mination). Do you have any problem with that? (Wait for a negative 
response. If the CEO protests, satisfy his objections. If he cannot be satisfied, assess the risk of whether 
the CEO is attempting to obstruct the audit or examination.) 
 
6. First, let’s look at your CFO. Can you think of a reason he might have to get back at you or the 
company by committing fraud? 
 
7. Has the CFO ever asked you to approve any financial transaction  you thought might be improper or 
illegal?   
 
8. Do you know whether the CFO has any outside business interests that might conflict with his duties 
here? 
 
9. Does the CFO employ any friends or relatives in the company? (Look for possible conflicts or sweetheart 
deals.) 
 
10.  What information do you have about the CFO’s lifestyle? (Look for expensive homes, cars, toys, and 
habits.) 
 
11.  What is your general impression of how the CFO gets along with his staff? (Look for abuses of 
authority, etc., that would motivate employees di rectly below the CFO to participate in fraud.) 
 
12.  How do you think fraud in your company compares with others in the same industry? 
 
13.  Of course, Mr. CEO, I must ask you many of the same questions about yourself. Is there any reason 
that anyone below you might claim you are committing fraud against the company? 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.346                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
14.  I must also ask you some personal financial quest ions. Do you have any problem with this? (Wait for 
negative response.) 
 
15.  Please give me a current estimate of your personal asset s, liabilities, income, and expenses. (List) What 
percentage of your net worth is tied directly to this  company? (Look for highly leveraged individuals whose 
company holdings are a significant portion of their net worth.) 
 
16.  Are you currently experiencing any personal financial problems? (Look for lawsuits, liens, judgments, or 
other indicators.)    
 
17.  Do you have friends or relatives working for this  company? (Look for conflicts of interest.) 
 
18.  Do you have friends or relatives working for major suppliers or vendors to this company? (Look for 
conflicts of interest.) 
 
19.  Do you own any portion of a company that does business  with this organization? (Look for conflicts of 
interest.) 
 
20.  Hypothetically, if you wanted to pump up your company’s profits, what would be the easiest way to do it? 
 
21.  As I said, we will be required to ask many questions of your staff. Is there any reason why someone who 
works for you would say you are at  risk to commit significant fraud against the company or its 
shareholders? 
 
22.  Mr. CEO, this is the last question, and it should be obvious why I have to ask it. Have you committed 
fraud or other illegal acts against the company? (Do not apologize for asking the question; it’s your job.)     
 



:


the chief execut offic
gener the ceo should be interview first in ani proactiv or reactiv fraud situat
there ar sever good reason for thi approach first of all the auditor or fraud examin
must have a thorough understand with manag as to what hi respons in thi
area ar second it is unwis to conduct sensit inquiri within ani organ without
first advis the ceo if he learn from some other sourc that you ar make discreet
fraudrel inquiri without tell him he is more like to misunderstand your object
and take the inquiri as a person affront third if there is ani signific cook of the
book the ceo is almost alwai involv the fraudrel question you should ask in
connect with a regular audit should includ at a minimum the follow note how the
question ar for set up purpos
1 mr ceo as you know we ar requir to assess the risk that materi fraud exist in everi compani
not just your thi is sort of a sensit area for everyon but our profession respons dictat
that we address thi area do you understand wait for an affirm respons befor proceed
2 do you have ani reason to believ that materi fraud is be commit at ani level within the
organ
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1345
3 mr ceo on trend in fraud is that small fraud ar commit by employe with littl author
which mean that the largest on ar usual commit with the knowledg of upper manag do
you understand that wait for an affirm respons befor proceed
4 becaus of that we ar requir to at least look at the possibl that all ceo includ you might
commit signific fraud against custom investor or sharehold do you understand our situat
wait for an affirm respons
5 so dure thi audit examin we need to ask direct question ab out thi subject to you and your
staff as a matter of fact we will at least discuss the possibl of fraud with everi employe we talk with
in connect with thi audit exa minat do you have ani problem with that wait for a neg
respons if the ceo protest satisfi hi object if he cannot be satisfi assess the risk of whether
the ceo is attempt to obstruct the audit or examin
6 first let look at your cfo can you think of a reason he might have to get back at you or the
compani by commit fraud
7 ha the cfo ever ask you to approv ani financi transact you thought might be improp or
illeg
8 do you know whether the cfo ha ani outsid busi interest that might conflict with hi duti
here
9 doe the cfo emploi ani friend or rel in the compani look for possibl conflict or sweetheart
deal
10 what inform do you have about the cfo lifestyl look for expens home car toi and
habit
11 what is your gener impress of how the cfo get along with hi staff look for abus of
author etc that would motiv employe di rectli below the cfo to particip in fraud
12 how do you think fraud in your compani compar with other in the same industri
13 of cours mr ceo i must ask you mani of the same question about yourself is there ani reason
that anyon below you might claim you ar commit fraud against the compani
financi statement fraud financi transact
1346 2011 fraud examin manual
14 i must also ask you some person financi quest ion do you have ani problem with thi wait for
neg respons
15 pleas give me a current estim of your person asset s liabil incom and expens list what
percentag of your net worth is ti directli to thi compani look for highli leverag individu whose
compani hold ar a signific portion of their net worth
16 ar you current experienc ani person financi problem look for lawsuit lien judgment or
other indic
17 do you have friend or rel work for thi compani look for conflict of interest
18 do you have friend or rel work for major supplier or vendor to thi compani look for
conflict of interest
19 do you own ani portion of a compani that doe busi with thi organ look for conflict of
interest
20 hypothet if you want to pump up your compani profit what would be the easiest wai to do it
21 as i said we will be requir to ask mani question of your staff is there ani reason why someon who
work for you would sai you ar at risk to commit signific fraud against the compani or it
sharehold
22 mr ceo thi is the last question and it should be obviou why i have to ask it have you commit
fraud or other illeg act against the compani do not apolog for ask the question it your job
