2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Interviews in Fraudulent Financial Statement Cases/The Interview/THE ACCOUNTING STAFF


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


THE ACCOUNTING STAFF 
If a financial statement fraud has been ordered by the CFO, he will either do the actual dirty 
work himself or get his staff to do it. In some cases, the staff will understand the big picture, 
but in most situations, the employee is told only what he needs to know. It is uncommon for 
a CFO to share with a lower staff person the fact that he is cooking the books.  
 
As a result, the examiner generally must complete his audit work before beginning the 
interviews of the accounting staff. This will allow specific transactions to be discussed with 
the people who actually entered them into the company’s records. For example, all thorough 
audits will examine the major journal entries. Frequently, these journal entries will be ordered 
by the CFO, but actually entered by a staff member. There would generally be no record of 
the CFO requesting the entry, so this fact must be established through interviews.  
 
Interviews of the accounting staff will allow sufficient examination of procedures and 
controls over assets. After these questions are answered, you can generally pursue the line of 
inquiry suggested above for the CEO’s assistant. 
 
It should be noted that there are similarities and differences in the questions asked of the 
CEO, the CFO, and their staffs. In the case of the CEO and the CFO, both were specifically 
asked if they had committed fraud against the company, albeit in a nice way. The staffers 
were not asked that specific question.  
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.350                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The reasoning is this: significant financial statement fraud, as we have stated, generally 
originates with one or both of these two executives. Staffers have less motivation to engage 
in financial statement fraud, and are, therefore, at less risk to do so. They are also less likely 
to have the financial authority to enter transactions into the books without higher approval.  
 
So absent any specific information to the contrary, asking the employees point blank if they 
have committed fraud is less likely to produce information and more likely to offend them. 
But with the CFO and the CEO, asking the direct question will add measurably to the 
prevention of fraud. There are few defenses to not asking the question, other than the 
specter of embarrassing the executives you are auditing. That will, of course, sound pretty 
weak in a court of law where you are fighting for your professional life.  
 
 



:


the account staff
if a financi statement fraud ha been order by the cfo he will either do the actual dirti
work himself or get hi staff to do it in some case the staff will understand the big pictur
but in most situat the employe is told onli what he need to know it is uncommon for
a cfo to share with a lower staff person the fact that he is cook the book
as a result the examin gener must complet hi audit work befor begin the
interview of the account staff thi will allow specif transact to be discuss with
the peopl who actual enter them into the compani record for exampl all thorough
audit will examin the major journal entri frequent these journal entri will be order
by the cfo but actual enter by a staff member there would gener be no record of
the cfo request the entri so thi fact must be establish through interview
interview of the account staff will allow suffici examin of procedur and
control over asset after these question ar answer you can gener pursu the line of
inquiri suggest abov for the ceo assist
it should be note that there ar similar and differ in the question ask of the
ceo the cfo and their staff in the case of the ceo and the cfo both were specif
ask if thei had commit fraud against the compani albeit in a nice wai the staffer
were not ask that specif question
financi statement fraud financi transact
1350 2011 fraud examin manual
the reason is thi signific financi statement fraud as we have state gener
origin with on or both of these two execut staffer have less motiv to engag
in financi statement fraud and ar therefor at less risk to do so thei ar also less like
to have the financi author to enter transact into the book without higher approv
so absent ani specif inform to the contrari ask the employe point blank if thei
have commit fraud is less like to produc inform and more like to offend them
but with the cfo and the ceo ask the direct question will add measur to the
prevent of fraud there ar few defens to not ask the question other than the
specter of embarrass the execut you ar audit that will of cours sound pretti
weak in a court of law where you ar fight for your profession life
