2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/The Money Laundering Process/Integration


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Integration 
The final stage in the laundering process is the integration  of the money back into the 
economy in such a way as to make it appear to be a legitimate business transaction. This 
stage of the process is also difficult to detect; however, if the integration process creates a 
paper trail — such as deeds for real estate, invoices, loan documents, Currency Transaction 
Reports (CTRs), or checks—and if there is cooperation from informants or foreign entities, 
then the chances of detection are improved. 
 
A money laundering scheme cannot be successful until the paper trail is eliminated or made 
so complex that the flow of illegal income cannot be easily traced. The number of steps used 
to launder funds depends on how much distance the money launderer wishes to put between 
the illegally earned cash and the laundered asset into which it is converted. A greater number 
of steps increases the complexity of tracing the funds, but it also increases the length of the 
paper trail and the chance that the transaction will be reported. 
 
The object of money laundering is not only to disguise the source of illegal funds, but also to 
convert large stores of currency into other assets. In some cases, illegal funds are spent on 
personal assets, such as homes, cars, jewelry, and furniture. But the typical money launderer 
will not dispose of all his illegal currency in this manner; he will want to have a certain 
amount of liquid reserves for spending. Keeping large bundles of cash is inefficient because 
they are difficult to hide and transport. Therefore, money launderers will often convert 
substantial portions of their currency into negotiable instruments such as cashier’s checks 
and money orders, which are routinely issued by financial institutions. Criminals prefer these 
negotiable instruments for two reasons. First, cashier’s checks and money orders are bearer 
instruments, and the holder can use them or deposit them without having to prove the 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1603 
source of the funds. Second, they are “liquid” assets because the holder can use  
them immediately. 
 
The following is an example of how a money laundering scheme operates.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Alberto Barrera, dubbed Papa Smurf by the federal agents investigating him, ran a rather 
sophisticated smurfing operation out of Miami involving bank accounts in cities all over the 
country. Barrera and his accomplices would fly to Phoenix, Denver, Omaha, Portland, and 
other cities. When they arrived they would immediately travel to various banks. The scheme 
would begin with the purchase of cashier’s checks and money orders in amounts less than 
$10,000 (to avoid federal report ing requirements). This would be repeated several times at 
different banks. The “smurfs” would then travel to another city where some of the 
previously purchased check and money orders would be deposited in accounts controlled by 
Barrera. Then more purchases of cashier’s checks and money orders would be made before 
the group traveled on to the next city. Once the money was converted or deposited, much of 
it was transferred to off-shore banks.  
 



:


integr
the final stage in the launder process is the integr of the monei back into the
economi in such a wai as to make it appear to be a legitim busi transact thi
stage of the process is also difficult to detect howev if the integr process creat a
paper trail such as deed for real estat invoic loan document currenc transact
report ctr or checksand if there is cooper from inform or foreign entiti
then the chanc of detect ar improv
a monei launder scheme cannot be success until the paper trail is elimin or made
so complex that the flow of illeg incom cannot be easili trace the number of step us
to launder fund depend on how much distanc the monei launder wish to put between
the illeg earn cash and the launder asset into which it is convert a greater number
of step increas the complex of trace the fund but it also increas the length of the
paper trail and the chanc that the transact will be report
the object of monei launder is not onli to disguis the sourc of illeg fund but also to
convert larg store of currenc into other asset in some case illeg fund ar spent on
person asset such as home car jewelri and furnitur but the typic monei launder
will not dispos of all hi illeg currenc in thi manner he will want to have a certain
amount of liquid reserv for spend keep larg bundl of cash is ineffici becaus
thei ar difficult to hide and transport therefor monei launder will often convert
substanti portion of their currenc into negoti instrument such as cashier check
and monei order which ar routin issu by financi institut crimin prefer these
negoti instrument for two reason first cashier check and monei order ar bearer
instrument and the holder can us them or deposit them without have to prove the
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11603
sourc of the fund second thei ar liquid asset becaus the holder can us
them immedi
the follow is an exampl of how a monei launder scheme oper
exampl
alberto barrera dub papa smurf by the feder agent investig him ran a rather
sophist smurf oper out of miami involv bank account in citi all over the
countri barrera and hi accomplic would fly to phoenix denver omaha portland and
other citi when thei arriv thei would immedi travel to variou bank the scheme
would begin with the purchas of cashier check and monei order in amount less than
10000 to avoid feder report ing requir thi would be repeat sever time at
differ bank the smurf would then travel to anoth citi where some of the
previous purchas check and monei order would be deposit in account control by
barrera then more purchas of cashier check and monei order would be made befor
the group travel on to the next citi onc the monei wa convert or deposit much of
it wa transfer to offshor bank
