2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Hawala Exchanges/Signs of a Hawala Exchange


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Signs of a Hawala Exchange 
Red flags of money laundering could also indicate a hawala exchange. The following 
transactions could indicate money laundering via a hawala exchange. The list should be used 
to identify those transactions and customers, which might require further investigation: 
• Use of cash as payment for a transaction, which is typically handled by checks or other 
forms of payment. 
• Several check deposits from various ethnic communities. 
• Lump sum payments made by wire transfer or with foreign currency. 
• Reluctance to provide normal information when setting up a policy, account, or 
providing minimal information. 
• Purchase of investments in amounts considered beyond the customer’s apparent means. 
• Use of a letter of credit or other methods of trade finance to move money between 
countries where such trade is inconsistent with customer’s usual pattern. 
• Establishment of a large investment policy and within a short time period, customer 
requests cancellation of the policy and cash value paid to third-party. 
• Use of wire transfers to move large amounts of money to or from a financial haven 
country such as the Cayman Islands, Colombia, Hong Kong, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Monaco, Panama, or Switzerland. 
• Services provided internationally but paid for locally. 
 
 



:


sign of a hawala exchang
red flag of monei launder could also indic a hawala exchang the follow
transact could indic monei launder via a hawala exchang the list should be us
to identifi those transact and custom which might requir further investig
us of cash as payment for a transact which is typic handl by check or other
form of payment
sever check deposit from variou ethnic commun
lump sum payment made by wire transfer or with foreign currenc
reluct to provid normal inform when set up a polici account or
provid minim inform
purchas of invest in amount consid beyond the custom appar mean
us of a letter of credit or other method of trade financ to move monei between
countri where such trade is inconsist with custom usual pattern
establish of a larg invest polici and within a short time period custom
request cancel of the polici and cash valu paid to thirdparti
us of wire transfer to move larg amount of monei to or from a financi haven
countri such as the cayman island colombia hong kong liechtenstein
luxembourg monaco panama or switzerland
servic provid internation but paid for local
