2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Federal and State Law/PATRIOT Act of 2001


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


PATRIOT Act of 2001 
On October 26, 2001, Pre sident George W. Bush signed into law the Uniting and Strengthening 
America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act  (the 
PATRIOT Act). The PATRIOT Act was a response to the tragedies of September 11, 2001, 
and reflected Congressional concern with the money laundering activities of the terrorists 
who committed those attacks.  
 
Title III of the Act is entitled the International Money Laundering Abatement and Anti-
 Terrorist Financing Act of 2001. Title III creates significant requirements for financial 
institutions aimed at curtailing money laundering. The most significant anti-money 
laundering provisions of the law include the following:  
• Financial institutions are required to establish anti-money laundering programs.  
• Financial institutions are required to establish programs for identifying customers.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1616                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• U.S. banks are prohibited from maintaining correspondent accounts with foreign shell 
banks. 
• Securities broker-dealers are required to file suspicious activity reports.  
• Financial institutions are required to adopt special due diligence procedures for foreign 
correspondent accounts and private banking accounts. 
• Non-financial businesses are required to file currency transaction reports 
• Financial institutions have increased authority to share customer information relating to 
money laundering.  
• The government has greater power to obtain information from financial institutions. 
 



:


patriot act of 2001
on octob 26 2001 pre sident georg w bush sign into law the unit and strengthen
america by provid appropri tool requir to intercept and obstruct terror act the
patriot act the patriot act wa a respons to the tragedi of septemb 11 2001
and reflect congression concern with the monei launder activ of the terrorist
who commit those attack
titl iii of the act is entitl the intern monei launder abat and anti
terrorist financ act of 2001 titl iii creat signific requir for financi
institut aim at curtail monei launder the most signific antimonei
launder provis of the law includ the follow
financi institut ar requir to establish antimonei launder program
financi institut ar requir to establish program for identifi custom
monei launder financi transact
11616 2011 fraud examin manual
us bank ar prohibit from maintain correspond account with foreign shell
bank
secur brokerdeal ar requir to file suspici activ report
financi institut ar requir to adopt special due dilig procedur for foreign
correspond account and privat bank account
nonfinanci busi ar requir to file currenc transact report
financi institut have increas author to share custom inform relat to
monei launder
the govern ha greater power to obtain inform from financi institut
