2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Federal and State Law/Prohibition Against Foreign Shell Bank Accounts


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Prohibition Against Foreign Shell Bank Accounts  
Pursuant to sections 313 and 319 of the PATRIOT Act, the Treasury Department issued a 
far-reaching final regulation that applies to over 9,000 foreign financial institutions that have 
correspondent accounts in the United States. The rule prohibits foreign shell banks (those 
without a physical presence in any country) from maintaining correspondent accounts at any 
U.S. financial institution. It also requires U.S. financial intuitions to maintain the name and 
contact information of the owners of the foreign banks for whom they maintain 
correspondent accounts. The rule strongly encourages U.S. intuitions to obtain 
“certifications” from their foreign bank customer s. The certification can be used by the U.S. 
institution to help ensure that the customer is not a shell bank. (Although not required, 
obtaining the certifications and verifying the information can create a safe harbor from civil 
liability.)   
 
U.S. institutions are also required to take “reasonable steps” to ensure that correspondent 
accounts provided to foreign banks are not used to provide services indirectly to foreign 
shell banks. Foreign banks that have accounts in the U.S. are required to appoint someone in 
the U.S. to accept service of legal process. The rule also gives the Secretary of the Treasury 
and the Attorney General the authority to issue a summons or subpoena to any foreign bank 
that maintains a correspondent account here and to request records relating to that account. 
 



:


prohibit against foreign shell bank account
pursuant to section 313 and 319 of the patriot act the treasuri depart issu a
farreach final regul that appli to over 9000 foreign financi institut that have
correspond account in the unit state the rule prohibit foreign shell bank those
without a physic presenc in ani countri from maintain correspond account at ani
us financi institut it also requir us financi intuit to maintain the name and
contact inform of the owner of the foreign bank for whom thei maintain
correspond account the rule strongli encourag us intuit to obtain
certif from their foreign bank custom s the certif can be us by the us
institut to help ensur that the custom is not a shell bank although not requir
obtain the certif and verifi the inform can creat a safe harbor from civil
liabil
us institut ar also requir to take reason step to ensur that correspond
account provid to foreign bank ar not us to provid servic indirectli to foreign
shell bank foreign bank that have account in the us ar requir to appoint someon in
the us to accept servic of legal process the rule also give the secretari of the treasuri
and the attornei gener the author to issu a summon or subpoena to ani foreign bank
that maintain a correspond account here and to request record relat to that account
