2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Federal and State Law/Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC)


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) 
The Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is an office within the Depar tment of the 
Treasury charged with administering and enforcing U.S. sanction policies against targeted 
foreign organizations and individuals that sponsor terrorism, and international narcotics 
traffickers. OFAC maintains a list of individu als, governmental entities, companies, and 
merchant vessels around the world that are known or suspected to engage in illegal activities. 
Persons or entities on the list, known as Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons 
(“SDNs”), include foreign agents, front organizations, terrorists and terrorist organizations, 
and drug traffickers. The list contains over 5,000 variations on names of individuals, 
governmental entities, companies, and merchant vessels and is updated on a regular basis. 
On September 24, 2001, President George W. Bush issued an executive order imposing 
enhanced trade sanctions on 27 individuals and entities, including Osama bin Laden and Al 
Qaeda. The immediate effect of the order is to block all assets of these individuals and 
entities under U.S. control and ban all dealings with the listed parties.  
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1621 
On July 26, 2001, OFAC issued a bulletin specific to the insurance industry, including 
underwriters, brokers, agents, primary insurers, and reinsurers. The bulletin affirms that U.S. 
insurers may not insure SDNs or individuals or entities located in certain prohibited 
countries or make payments to beneficiaries who are designated as prohibited persons or 
entities. Examples of prohibited transactions include: (1) issuing an insurance policy or 
annuity contract to an SDN; (2) issuing a life insurance policy naming an SDN as a 
beneficiary; and (3) receiving premium payments for any such transactions.  
 



:


offic of foreign asset control ofac
the offic of foreign asset control ofac is an offic within the depar tment of the
treasuri charg with administ and enforc us sanction polici against target
foreign organ and individu that sponsor terror and intern narcot
traffick ofac maintain a list of individu al government entiti compani and
merchant vessel around the world that ar known or suspect to engag in illeg activ
person or entiti on the list known as special design nation and block person
sdn includ foreign agent front organ terrorist and terrorist organ
and drug traffick the list contain over 5000 variat on name of individu
government entiti compani and merchant vessel and is updat on a regular basi
on septemb 24 2001 presid georg w bush issu an execut order impos
enhanc trade sanction on 27 individu and entiti includ osama bin laden and al
qaeda the immedi effect of the order is to block all asset of these individu and
entiti under us control and ban all deal with the list parti
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11621
on juli 26 2001 ofac issu a bulletin specif to the insur industri includ
underwrit broker agent primari insur and reinsur the bulletin affirm that us
insur mai not insur sdn or individu or entiti locat in certain prohibit
countri or make payment to beneficiari who ar design as prohibit person or
entiti exampl of prohibit transact includ 1 issu an insur polici or
annuiti contract to an sdn 2 issu a life insur polici name an sdn as a
beneficiari and 3 receiv premium payment for ani such transact
