2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Federal and State Law/Conspiracy to Defraud the United States


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Conspiracy to Defraud the United States — Title 18, U.S.C., § 371 
Although numerous federal statutes make conspiracy a crime, the most commonly used 
federal conspiracy statute is the general conspiracy statute under section 371 of Title 18, U.S. 
Code.  
 
Section 371 can be divided into two parts: (1) conspiracies to commit a crime against the 
United States, and (2) conspiracies to defraud the United States or its agencies. Several 
courts have upheld convictions based on the second prong of the statute solely for failure to 
file CTRs. Such prosecutions are based on the theory that the person deprived the IRS of 
accurate CTRs. In the case of United States v. Richter, 610 F.Supp. 480 (N.D. Ill. 1985), the 
court held that the division of large amounts of cash into smaller, nonreportable transactions 
by several individuals working as a team was a conspiracy to obstruct the government 
function of receiving CTRs. However, other courts have rejected this theory on the grounds 
that there is no duty on the part of the customer to inform the government or the bank of 
the nature of the transaction whether reportable or not. 
 



:


conspiraci to defraud the unit state titl 18 usc 371
although numer feder statut make conspiraci a crime the most commonli us
feder conspiraci statut is the gener conspiraci statut under section 371 of titl 18 us
code
section 371 can be divid into two part 1 conspiraci to commit a crime against the
unit state and 2 conspiraci to defraud the unit state or it agenc sever
court have upheld convict base on the second prong of the statut sole for failur to
file ctr such prosecut ar base on the theori that the person depriv the ir of
accur ctr in the case of unit state v richter 610 fsupp 480 nd ill 1985 the
court held that the divis of larg amount of cash into smaller nonreport transact
by sever individu work as a team wa a conspiraci to obstruct the govern
function of receiv ctr howev other court have reject thi theori on the ground
that there is no duti on the part of the custom to inform the govern or the bank of
the natur of the transact whether report or not
