2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Special Problems for Insurance Companies/Detection


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Detection 
Insurance companies must file all appropriate reports and follow all the requirements of the 
Bank Secrecy Act, including the implementation of an effective BSA compliance program.  
 
Certain other reports can help companies identify suspicious transactions. Incoming and 
outgoing wire transfer logs  can help companies identify possible patterns suggestive of money 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1645 
laundering. Account activity reports generally show weekly and/or monthly balances, deposits, 
and withdrawals. Review of these statements can identify those accounts with large increases 
in average balances and numbers of transactions. Policy cancellation reports should identify 
policies canceled within a specific time period. Report details should include the amount of 
the cash surrender value, the identity of the sales agent, and the actual term of the policy. 
 
The “Tracing Illicit Transactions” chapter in the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners  
Manual provides more information about techniques for detecting illicit income and 
payments. Included in that chapter are details on analyzing financial records, financial and 
behavioral profiles, and net worth analysis.  
  
Currency Transaction Report
 OMB No. 1506-0004
 FINCEN Form   104
 (Formerly Form 4789)
 (Eff. December 2003)
 (Complete all parts that apply--See Instructions)
 1     Check all box(es) that apply:
 Section A--Person(s) on Whose Behalf Transaction(s) Is Conducted
 5    Doing business as (DBA)
 4  Middle initial3  First name2    Individual’s last name or entity’s name
 6  SSN or EIN
 7    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 Department of the Treasury
 FinCEN
 9     City 10  State 11  ZIP code 12  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 13  Occupation, profession, or business
 25    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 Section B -- Individual(s) Conducting Transaction(s) (if other than above).
 If Section B is left blank or incomplete, check the box(es) below to indicate the reason(s)
 14    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 44  Title of approving official
 47  Type or print preparer’s name
 45   Signature of approving official
 48  Type or print name of person to contact 49  Telephone number
 18    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 17  Middle initial16  First name15    Individual’s last name
 19  SSN
 20     City 21  State 22  ZIP code 23  Country code
        (If not U.S.)
 40    City
 38    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 Enter Regulator or BSA
 Examiner code number
       (see instructions)
 37   Name of financial institution
 42   ZIP code 43  Routing (MICR) number41  State
 26     Total cash in $ .00
 Cat. No. 37683N FinCEN Form 104 (Formerly Form 4789) (Rev. 8-03)
 Previous editions will not be accepted after August 31, 2004.
 Please type or print.
 Person(s) Involved in Transaction(s)Part  I
 b          Mail Deposit or Shipment c          Night Deposit or Automated Teller Machine d          Multiple Transactionsa          Armored Car Service
 8  Date of birth
 ___/__ /_______
 MM DD YYYY
 24  Date of birth
 ___/__ /_______
 MM DD YYYY
 b           Passport c           Alien registration
 d          Other f    Number:
 Part  II Amount and Type of Transaction(s).  Check all boxes that apply.
 28  Date of  transaction
 ___/ __/______
 MM  DD YYYY
 26a   Foreign cash in .00
 27     Total cash out $                 .00
 27a    Foreign cash out .00
 30          Wire Transfer(s) 31           Negotiable Instrument(s) Purchased
 34           Deposit(s)/Withdrawal(s)
 35           Account Number(s) Affected (if any): 36           Other (specify)
 Part  III Financial Institution Where Transaction(s) Takes Place
 39   EIN or SSN
 For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
 Sign
 Here
 ___/__ /_______
 MM DD YYYY
 ( )
 46   Date of signature
  a        Amends prior report         b        Multiple persons        c        Multiple transactions
 e   Issued by:
 33          Currency Exchange(s)
 d          Other
 b          Passport c           Alien registrationa          Driver’s license/State I.D.
 f    Number:e   Issued by:
 e          Conducted On Own Behalf
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D.
  (see instructions, page 3)
 32           Negotiable Instrument(s) Cashed
 29           Foreign Country
  (see instructions, page 3)
Section A--Person(s) on Whose Behalf Transaction(s) Is Conducted
 5    Doing business as (DBA)
 4  Middle initial3  First name2    Individual’s last name or entity’s name
 6  SSN or EIN
 7    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 9     City 10  State 11  ZIP code 12  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 25    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 Section B--Individual(s) Conducting Transaction(s) (if other than above).
 14    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 f    Number:e   Issued by:
 18    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 17  Middle initial16  First name15    Individual’s last name
 19  SSN
 20     City 21  State 22  ZIP code 23  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 Person(s) Involved in Transaction(s)Part  I
 8  Date of birth
 ____/__ /_______
 MM  DD  YYYY
 24  Date of birth
 ___/__ /_____
 MM  DD  YYYY
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D. b           Passport c           Alien registration
 d          Other e   Issued by: f  Number:
 Multiple Persons
 Complete applicable parts below if box 1b on page 1 is checked
 FinCEN Form 104 (formerly Form 4789) (Rev. 8-03) Page 2
 Section A--Person(s) on Whose Behalf Transaction(s) Is Conducted
 5    Doing business as (DBA)
 4  Middle initial3  First name2    Individual’s last name or entity’s name
 6  SSN or EIN
 7    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 9     City 10  State 11  ZIP code 12  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 25    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 Section B--Individual(s) Conducting Transaction(s) (if other than above).
 14    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 f    Number:
 18    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 17  Middle initial16  First name15    Individual’s last name
 19  SSN
 20     City 21  State 22  ZIP code 23  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 Person(s) Involved in Transaction(s)Part  I
 8  Date of birth
 ____/____/___ 
MM  DD  YYYY
 24  Date of birth
 ___/_ _______
 MM DD YYYY
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D. b           Passport c           Alien registration
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D. b          Passport c           Alien registration
 d          Other
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D. b          Passport c           Alien registration
 e   Issued by:
 d          Other
 f    Number:e   Issued by:d          Other
 13  Occupation, profession, or business
 13  Occupation, profession, or business
FinCEN Form 104 (Formerly Form 4789 (Rev. 8-03) Page 3
 Suspicious Transactions
 This Currency Transaction Report (CTR) should NOT be
 filed for suspicious transactions involving $10,000 or less
 in currency OR to note that a transaction of more than
 $10,000 is suspicious.  Any suspicious or unusual activity
 should be reported by a financial institution in the
 manner prescribed by its appropriate federal regulator
 or BSA examiner. (See the instructions for Item 37.) If a
 transaction is suspicious and in excess of $10,000 in
 currency, then both a CTR and the appropriate
 Suspicious Activity Report form must be filed.
 Should the suspicious activity require immediate
 attention, financial institutions should telephone
 1-800-800-CTRS. An Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
 employee will direct the call to the local office of the
 IRS Criminal Investigation Division (CI). This toll-free
 number is operational Monday through Friday, from
 approximately 9:00 am to 6:00 pm Eastern Standard
 Time.  If an emergency, consult directory assistance for
 the local IRS CID Office.
 General Instructions
 Who Must File.  Each financial institution (other than a
 casino, which instead must file FinCEN Form 103, and
 the U.S. Postal Service for which there are separate rules)
 must file FinCEN Form 104 (formerly 4789) (CTR) for
 each deposit, withdrawal, exchange of currency, or other
 payment or transfer, by, through, or to the financial
 institution which involves a transaction in currency of
 more than $10,000.  Multiple transactions must be
 treated as a single transaction if the financial institution
 has knowledge that (1) they are by or on behalf of the
 same person, and (2) they result in either currency
 received (Cash In) or currency disbursed (Cash Out) by
 the financial institution totaling more than $10,000
 during any one business day.  For a bank, a business day
 is the day on which transactions are routinely posted to
 customers’ accounts, as normally communicated to
 depository customers.  For all other financial institutions,
 a business day is a calendar day.
 Generally, financial institutions are defined as banks,
 other types of depository institutions, brokers or dealers
 in securities, money transmitters, currency exchangers,
 check cashers, and issuers and sellers of money orders
 and traveler’s checks.  Should you have questions, see
 the definitions in 31 CFR Part 103.
 When and Where To File.  File this CTR by the 15th
 calendar day after the day of the transaction with the:
 IRS Detroit Computing Center
 ATTN: CTR
 P.O. Box 33604
 Detroit, MI 48232-5604
 Keep a copy of each CTR for five years from the date
 filed.
 A financial institution may apply to file the CTRs
 magnetically. To obtain an application to file magnetically,
 write to the:
 IRS Detroit Computing Center
 ATTN: CTR Magnetic Media Coordinator
 P.O. Box 33604
 Detroit, MI 48232-5604
 Identification Requirements.  All individuals (except
 employees of armored car services) conducting a
 reportable transaction(s) for themselves or for another
 person, must be identified by means of an official
 document(s). Acceptable forms of identification include
 a driver’s license, military and military/dependent
 identification cards, passport, state issued identification
 card, cedular card (foreign), non-resident alien
 identification cards, or any other identification document
 or documents, which contain name and preferably
 address   and a photograph and are normally acceptable
 by financial institutions as a means of identification when
 cashing checks for persons other than established
 customers.
 Acceptable identification information obtained
 previously and maintained in the financial institution’s
 records may be used.  For example, if documents
 verifying an individual’s identity were examined and
 recorded on a signature card when an account was
 opened, the financial institution may rely on that
 information. In completing the CTR, the financial
 institution must indicate on the form the method, type,
 and number of the identification. Statements such as
 “known customer” or “signature card on file” are not
 sufficient for form completion.
 Penalties.  Civil and criminal penalties are provided for
 failure to file a CTR or to supply information or for filing
 a false or fraudulent CTR.  See 31 U.S.C. 5321, 5322
 and 5324.
 For purposes of this CTR, the terms below have the
 following meanings:
 Currency.  The coin and paper money of the United
 States or any other country, which is circulated and
 customarily used and accepted as money.
 Person.  An individual, corporation, partnership, trust
 or estate, joint stock company, association, syndicate,
 joint venture or other unincorporated organization or
 group.
 Organization.  Entity other than an individual.
 Transaction in Currency.  The physical transfer of
 currency from one person to another.  This does not
 include a transfer of funds by means of bank check, bank
 draft, wire transfer or other written order that does not
 involve the physical transfer of currency.
 Negotiable Instruments.  All checks and drafts (including
 business, personal, bank, cashier’s and third-party),
 money orders, and promissory notes. For purposes of
 this CTR, all traveler’s checks shall also be considered
 negotiable instruments whether or not they are in bearer
 form.
 Foreign exchange rates. If completing items 26a/27a,
 use the exchange rate in effect for the business day of
 the transaction. The source of the exchange rate that is
 used will be determined by the reporting institution.
 Specific Instructions
 Because of the limited space on the front and back of
 the CTR, it may be necessary to submit additional
 information on attached sheets. Submit this additional
 information on plain paper attached to the CTR. Be sure
 to put the individual’s or entity’s name and identifying
 number (items 2, 3, 4, and 6 of the CTR) on any
 additional sheets so that if it becomes separated, it may
 be associated with the CTR.
 Item 1a. Amends Prior Report. If this CTR is being
 filed because it  amends a report  filed previously, check
 Item 1a.  Staple a copy of the original CTR to the
 amended one, complete Part III fully and only those other
 entries which are being amended.
 Item 1b. Multiple Persons.  If this transaction is being
 conducted by more than one person or on behalf of
 more than one person, check Item 1b. Enter information
 in Part I for one of the persons and provide information
 on any other persons on the back of the CTR.
 Item 1c. Multiple Transactions.  If the financial
 institution has knowledge that there are multiple
 transactions, check Item 1c.
 PART I - Person(s) Involved in Transaction(s)
 Section A must be completed.  If an individual conducts
 a transaction on his own behalf, complete Section A and
 leave Section “B” BLANK.  If an individual conducts a
 transaction on his own behalf and on behalf of another
 person(s), complete Section “A” for each person and leave
 Section “B” BLANK.  If an individual conducts a
 transaction on behalf of another person(s), complete
 Section “B” for the individual conducting the transaction,
 and complete Section “A” for each person on whose
 behalf the transaction is conducted of whom the financial
 institution has knowledge.
 Section A. Person(s) on Whose Behalf Transaction(s)
 Is Conducted.  See instructions above.
 Items 2, 3, and 4. Individual/Organization Name.  If
 the person on whose behalf the transaction(s) is
 conducted is an individual, put his/her last name in Item
 2, first name in Item 3, and middle initial in Item 4.  If
 there is no middle initial, leave item 4 BLANK. If the
 transaction is conducted on behalf of an entity, put its
 name in Item 2 and leave Items 3 and 4 BLANK.
 Item 5. Doing Business As (DBA).  If the financial
 institution has knowledge of a separate “doing business
 as” name, enter it in Item 5. For example, Smith
 Enterprise DBA MJ’s Pizza.
 Item 6. SSN/ITIN or EIN.  Enter the Social Security
 Number (SSN) or Individual Taxpayer Identification
 Number (ITIN) or Employer Identification Number (EIN)
 of the person or entity identified in Item 2.  If none,
 write NONE.
 Items 7, 9, 10, 11, and 12.  Address.  Enter the
 permanent address including ZIP Code of the person
 identified in Item 2.  Use the U.S. Postal Service’s two
 letter state abbreviation code.  A P. O. Box should not
 be used by itself, and may only be used if there is no
 street address.  If a P. O. Box is used, the name of the
 apartment or suite number, road or route number where
 the person resides must also be provided.  If the address
 is outside the U.S., provide the street address, city,
 province or state, postal code (if known), and the two
 letter country code. For country code list go to
 www.fincen.gov/reg_bsaforms.html or telephone
 1-800-949-2732 and select option number 5. If U.S.,
 leave item 12 blank.
 Item 8. Date of Birth.  Enter the date of birth.  Eight
 numerals must be inserted for each date.  The first two
 will reflect the month, the second two the day, and the
 last four the year.  A zero (0) should precede any single
 digit number.  For example, if an individual’s birth date
 is April 3 1948, Item 8 should read 04 03 1948.
 Item 13. Occupation, Profession, or Business.  Identify
 the occupation, profession, or business of the person on
 whose behalf the transaction was conducted.  For
 example: secretary, shoe salesman, carpenter, attorney,
 housewife, restaurant, liquor store,etc.  Do not use non-
 specific terms such as merchant, self-employed,
 businessman, etc.
 Item 14. If an Individual, Describe Method Used To
 Verify Identity.  If an individual conducts the
 transaction(s) on his/her own behalf, his/her identity must
 be verified by examination of an acceptable document
 (see General Instructions). For example, check box a if
 a driver’s license is used to verify an individual’s identity,
 and enter the state that issued the license and the number
 in items e and f. If the transaction is conducted by an
 individual on behalf of another individual not present
 or on behalf of an entity, enter N/A in Item 14.
 Section B. Individual(s) Conducting Transaction(s)
 (if other than above).  Financial institutions should enter
 as much information as is available.
FinCEN Form 104 (Formerly 4789 (Rev. 8-03) Page 4
 However, there may be instances in which Items 15-25
 may be left BLANK or incomplete. If Items 15-25 are
 left BLANK or incomplete, check one or more of the
 boxes provided to indicate the reasons.
 Example: If there are multiple transactions that, if only
 when aggregated, the financial institution has knowledge
 the transactions exceed the reporting threshold, and
 therefore, did not identify the transactor(s), check box d
 for Multiple Transactions.
 Items 15, 16, and 17. Individual’s Name. Complete
 these items if an individual conducts a transaction(s) on
 behalf of another person.  For example, if John Doe, an
 employee of XYZ Grocery Store, makes a deposit to the
 store’s account, XYZ Grocery Store should be identified
 in Section A and John Doe should be identified in section
 B.
 Items 18, 20, 21, 22, and 23. Address. Enter the
 permanent street address including ZIP Code of the
 individual.  (See the instructions for Items 7 and 9 through
 12.) Enter country code if not U.S. (Reference item 12).
 Item 19. SSN/ITIN.  If the individual has a Social Security
 Number, or Individual Taxpayer Indentifcation Number,
 enter it in Item 19.  If the individual does not have an
 SSN/ITIN, enter NONE.
 Item 24. Date of Birth.  Enter the individual’s date of
 birth.  (See the instructions for Item 8.)
 Item 25. If an Individual, Describe Method Used To
 Verify Identity.  Enter the method used to identify the
 individual’s identity. (See General Instructions and the
 instructions for Item 14.)
 PART II - Amount and Type of Transaction(s)
 Complete Part II to identify the type of transaction(s)
 and the amount(s) involved.
 Items 26 and 27. Total Cash In/Total Cash Out.  In the
 spaces provided, enter the total amount of currency
 received (Total Cash In) or total currency disbursed (Total
 Cash Out) by the financial institution. If foreign currency
 is exchanged, use the U.S. dollar equivalent on the day
 of the transaction (See “Foreign exchange rates”), and
 complete item 26a or 27a, whichever is appropriate.
 If less than a full dollar amount is involved, increase
 that figure to the next highest dollar.  For example, if the
 currency totals $20,000.05, show the total as
 $20,001.00.
 Items 26a and 27a. Foreign cash in/Foreign cash out.
 If foreign currency is exchanged, enter the amount of
 foreign currency in items 26a and 27a. Report country
 of origin in item 29.
 Item 28. Date of Transaction.  Insert eight numerals for
 each date. (See instructions for Item 8.)
 Item 29. Foreign Country.  If items 26a and/or 27a are
 completed indicating that foreign currency is involved,
 check Item 29 and identify the country.  If multiple
 foreign currencies are involved, check box 36 and
 identify the additional country(s) and/or currency(s)
 involved.
 Determining Whether Transactions Meet the
 Reporting Threshold.
 Only cash transactions that, if alone or when
 aggregated, exceed $10,000 should be reported on the
 CTR.  Transactions shall not be offset against one another.
 If there are both Cash In and Cash Out transactions
 that are reportable, the amounts should be considered
 separately and not aggregated.  However, they may be
 reported on a single CTR.
 If there is a currency exchange, it should be aggregated
 separately with each of the Cash In and Cash Out totals.
 Example 1: A person deposits $11,000 in currency to
 his savings account and withdraws $3,000 in currency
 from his checking account. The CTR should be
 completed as follows:
 Cash In $11,000 and no entry for Cash Out.  This is
 because the $3,000 transaction does not meet the
 reporting threshold.
 Example 2: A person deposits $11,000 in currency to
 his savings account and withdraws $12,000 in currency
 from his checking account. The CTR should be
 completed as follows:
 Cash In $11,000, Cash Out $12,000.  This is because
 there are two reportable transactions.  However, one
 CTR may be filed to reflect both.
 Example 3: A person deposits $6,000 in currency to his
 savings account and withdraws $4,000 in currency from
 his checking account. Further, he presents $5,000 in
 currency to be exchanged for the equivalent in French
 Francs. The CTR should be completed as follows:
 Cash In $11,000 and no entry for Cash Out.  This is
 because in determining whether the transactions are
 reportable, the currency exchange is aggregated with
 each of the Cash In and Cash Out amounts. The result is
 a reportable $11,000 Cash In transaction.  The total Cash
 Out amount is $9,000, which does not meet the
 reporting threshold.  Therefore, it is not entered on the
 CTR.
 Example 4: A person deposits $6,000 in currency to his
 savings account and withdraws $7,000 in currency from
 his checking account.  Further, he presents $5,000 in
 currency to be exchanged for the equivalent in French
 francs. The CTR should be completed as follows:
 Cash In $11,000, Cash Out $12,000.  This is because
 in determining whether the transactions are reportable,
 the currency exchange is aggregated with each of the
 Cash In and Cash Out amounts.  In this example, each
 of the Cash In and Cash Out totals exceed $10,000 and
 must be reflected on the CTR.
 Items 30-33.  Check the appropriate item(s) to identify
 the following type of transaction(s):
 30. Wire Transfer(s)
 31. Negotiable Instrument(s) Purchased
 32. Negotiable Instrument(s) Cashed
 33. Currency Exchange(s)
 Item 34. Deposits/Withdrawals.  Check this item to
 identify deposits to or withdrawals from  accounts, e.g.
 demand deposit accounts, savings accounts, time
 deposits, mutual fund accounts, or any other account
 held at the financial institution.  Enter the account
 number(s) in Item 35.
 Item 35. Account Numbers Affected (if any).  Enter
 the account numbers of any accounts affected by the
 transactions that are maintained at the financial
 institution conducting the transaction(s).  If necessary,
 use additional sheets of paper to indicate all of the
 affected accounts.
 Example 1:  If a person cashes a check drawn on an
 account held at the financial institution, the CTR should
 be completed as follows:
 Indicate negotiable instrument(s) cashed and provide
 the account number of the check.
 If the transaction does not affect an account, make no
 entry.
 Example 2: A person cashes a check drawn on another
 financial institution.  In this instance, negotiable
 instrument(s) cashed would be indicated, but no account
 at the financial institution has been affected.  Therefore,
 Item 35 should be left BLANK.
 Item 36. Other (specify).  If a transaction is not identified
 in Items 30-34, check Item 36 and provide an additional
 description.  For example, a person presents a check to
 purchase “foreign currency.” Also list multiple foreign
 currencies from item 29.
 PART III - Financial Institution Where Transaction(s) Take
 Place
 Item 37. Name of Financial Institution and Identity of
 Regulator or BSA Examiner.  Enter the financial institution’s
 full legal name and identify the regulator  or BSA examiner,
 using the following codes:
 Regulator or BSA Examiner                                              CODE
 Comptroller of the Currency (OCC).........................1
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)........2
 Federal Reserve System (FRS)...........................................3
 Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS)......................................4
 National Credit Union Administration (NCUA)........5
 Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).............6
 Internal Revenue Service (IRS).........................................7
 U.S. Postal Service (USPS).................................................8
 Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)...............9
 State Regulator.................................................................10
 Items 38, 40, 41, and 42. Address.  Enter the street address,
 city, state, and ZIP Code of the financial institution where
 the transaction occurred.  If there are multiple transactions,
 provide information of the office or branch where any one
 of the transactions has occurred.
 Item 39. EIN or SSN.  Enter the financial institution’s EIN.
 If the financial institution does not have an EIN, enter the
 SSN of the financial institution’s principal owner.
 Item 43. Routing (MICR) Number.  If a depository
 institution, enter the routing (Magnetic Ink Character
 Recognition (MICR)) number.
 SIGNATURE
 Items 44 and 45. Title and signature of Approving
 Official.  The official who reviews and approves the CTR
 must indicate his/her title and sign the CTR.
 Item 46. Date of Signature.  The approving official must
 enter the date the CTR is signed. (See the instructions for
 Item 8.)
 Item 47. Preparer’s Name.  Type or print the full name of
 the individual preparing the CTR. The preparer and the
 approving official may not necessarily be the same
 individual.
 Items 48 and 49. Contact Person/Telephone Number.
 Type or print the name and telephone number of an
 individual to contact concerning questions about the CTR.
 Paperwork Reduction Act Notice.  The requested
 information is useful in criminal, tax, and regulatory
 investigations and proceedings.  Financial institutions are
 required to provide the information under 31 U.S.C.
 5313 and 31 CFR Part 103, commonly referred to as the
 Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). The BSA is administered by the
 U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Financial Crimes
 Enforcement Network (FinCEN).  You are not required
 to provide the requested information unless a form
 displays a valid OMB control number.
 The time needed to complete this form will vary
 depending on individual circumstances. The estimated
 average time is 19 minutes.  If you have comments
 concerning the accuracy of this time estimate or
 suggestions for making this form simpler, you may write
 to the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, P. O.
 Box 39, Vienna, VA 22183. Do not send this form to
 this office. Instead, see When and Where to File in the
 instructions.
Report of Cash Payments Over $10,000
 Received in a Trade or Business
  
 IRS
 Form
  
8300 
OMB No. 1545-0892 
(Rev. March 2008) 
' See instructions for definition of cash. 
Department of the Treasury
 Internal Revenue Service
  
For Privacy Act and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 5. 
Suspicious transaction.
  
b
  
Amends prior report;
  
a
  
Check appropriate box(es) if:
  
1
  Identity of Individual From Whom the Cash Was Received 
If more than one individual is involved, check here and see instructions '
  
2
  Taxpayer identification number
  
6
  
M.I.
  
5
  
First name
  
4
  
Last name
  
3
  
Occupation, profession, or business
  
13
  
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
  
7
  
Date of birth '
  
8
  
Country (if not U.S.)
  
12
  
ZIP code
  
11
  
State
  
10
  
City
  
9
  
Describe ID '
  
a
  
Identifying
 document (ID)
  
14
  c
  Person on Whose Behalf This Transaction Was Conducted 
If this transaction was conducted on behalf of more than one person, check here and see instructions '
  
15
  19
  
M.I.
  
18
  
First name
  
17
  
Individual’s last name or Organization’s name
  
16
  
Employer identification number
  
Occupation, profession, or business
  
22
  
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
  
21
  
Country (if not U.S.)
  
26
  
ZIP code
  
25
  
State
  
24
  
City
  
23
  
Description of Transaction and Method of Payment 
Business services provided
  
d
  
Personal property purchased
  
a
  
Intangible property purchased
  
e
  
Real property purchased
  
b
  Personal services provided
  
c
  
32
  
Date cash received
  
28
  
.00
  
$
  
Business That Received Cash 
Employer identification number
  
36
  
Name of business that received cash
  
35
  
Social security number
  
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
  
37
  
Nature of your business
  
41
  
ZIP code
  
40
  
State
  
39
  
City
  
38
  
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that to the best of my knowledge the information I have furnished above is true, correct,
 and complete.
  
42
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
Cat. No. 62133S
  
Part IV
  
Part I
  
Part II
  
Part III
  
U.S. currency
  b
  
Foreign currency
  
20
  
Doing business as (DBA) name (see instructions)
  
Total cash received
  
29
  
$ .00
  
If cash was received in
 more than one payment,
 check here '
  
30
  
Total price if different from
 item 29
  
31
  
$ .00
  Amount of cash received (in U.S. dollar equivalent) (must equal item 29) (see instructions):
  
a
  .00
  .00
  .00
  .00
  .00
  
c
  
Cashier’s check(s)
  d
  
Money order(s)
  e
  
Bank draft(s)
  f
  
Traveler’s check(s)
  
(Amount in $100 bills or higher $ )
  (Country ' )
  
.00
  
Type of transaction
  
33
  
Exchange of cash
  
g
  Escrow or trust funds
  
h
  
Other (specify in item 34) '
  
j
  
Debt obligations paid
  
f
  
Specific description of property or service shown in
 33. Give serial or registration number, address, docket
 number, etc. '
  
34
  
 
 
Issuer’s name(s) and serial number(s) of the monetary instrument(s) '
  
 
 
% 
(see instructions)
Taxpayer identification number
Bail received by court clerks
Signature
Title
Date of
 signature
Type or print name of contact person
Contact telephone number
' Use this form for transactions occurring after March 31, 2008. Do not use prior versions after this date. 
FinCEN
 Form
  
8300 
OMB No. 1506-0018 
(Rev. March 2008) 
Department of the Treasury
 Financial Crimes
 Enforcement Network
  
Authorized official
  
' ' 
IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
b
  
Issued by '
  Number '
  
Describe ID '
Alien
 identification (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
  
Continued — Complete if box 2 on page 1 is checked 
Continued — Complete if box 15 on page 1 is checked 
Part I
  
Part II
  
IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
Page 2
  Multiple Parties
  (Complete applicable parts below if box 2 or 15 on page 1 is checked)
  
Taxpayer identification number
M.I.
First name
Last name
Occupation, profession, or business
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
Date of birth '
Country (if not U.S.)
ZIP code
State
City
Taxpayer identification number
M.I.
First name
Last name
Occupation, profession, or business
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
Date of birth '
Country (if not U.S.)
ZIP code
State
City
First name
Individual’s last name or Organization’s name
Employer identification number
Occupation, profession, or business
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
Country (if not U.S.)
ZIP code
State
City
Doing business as (DBA) name (see instructions)
Taxpayer identification number
M.I.
First name
Individual’s last name or Organization’s name
Employer identification number
Occupation, profession, or business
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
Country (if not U.S.)
ZIP code
State
City
Doing business as (DBA) name (see instructions)
Taxpayer identification number
IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
Describe ID '
Identifying
 document (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
Describe ID '
Alien
 identification (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
Describe ID '
Identifying
 document (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
Describe ID '
Alien
 identification (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
Comments – Please use the lines provided below to comment on or clarify any information you entered on any line in Parts I, II, III, and IV
Page 3 IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Important Reminders
  
Clerks of federal or state courts must
 file Form 8300 if more than $10,000 in
 cash is received as bail for an
 individual(s) charged with certain criminal
 offenses. For these purposes, a clerk
 includes the clerk’s office or any other
 office, department, division, branch, or
 unit of the court that is authorized to
 receive bail. If a person receives bail on
 behalf of a clerk, the clerk is treated as
 receiving the bail. See the instructions
 for Item 33 on page 5.
  
General Instructions
  Who must file. Each person engaged in
 a trade or business who, in the course
 of that trade or business, receives more
 than $10,000 in cash in one transaction
 or in two or more related transactions,
 must file Form 8300. Any transactions
 conducted between a payer (or its
 agent) and the recipient in a 24-hour
 period are related transactions.
 Transactions are considered related
 even if they occur over a period of more
 than 24 hours if the recipient knows, or
 has reason to know, that each
 transaction is one of a series of
 connected transactions.
  
Exceptions. Cash is not required to be
 reported if it is received:
  
When to file. File Form 8300 by the
 15th day after the date the cash was
 received. If that date falls on a Saturday,
 Sunday, or legal holiday, file the form on
 the next business day.
  
Statement to be provided. You must
 give a written or electronic statement to
 each person named on a required Form
 8300 on or before January 31 of the
 year following the calendar year in which
 the cash is received. The statement
 must show the name, telephone number,
 and address of the information contact
 for the business, the aggregate amount
 of reportable cash received, and that the
 information was furnished to the IRS.
 Keep a copy of the statement for your
 records.
  Multiple payments. If you receive more
 than one cash payment for a single
 transaction or for related transactions,
 you must report the multiple payments
 any time you receive a total amount that
 exceeds $10,000 within any 12-month
 period. Submit the report within 15 days
 of the date you receive the payment that
  
Taxpayer identification number (TIN).
 You must furnish the correct TIN of the
 person or persons from whom you
 receive the cash and, if applicable, the
 person or persons on whose behalf the
 transaction is being conducted. You may
 be subject to penalties for an incorrect
 or missing TIN.
  
Penalties. You may be subject to
 penalties if you fail to file a correct and
 complete Form 8300 on time and you
 cannot show that the failure was due to
 reasonable cause. You may also be
 subject to penalties if you fail to furnish
 timely a correct and complete statement
 to each person named in a required
 report. A minimum penalty of $25,000
 may be imposed if the failure is due to
 an intentional or willful disregard of the
 cash reporting requirements.
  
c By a financial institution required to file
 Form 104, Currency Transaction Report.
  
c By a casino required to file (or exempt
 from filing) Form 103, Currency
 Transaction Report by Casinos, if the
 cash is received as part of its gaming
 business.
  
c By an agent who receives the cash
 from a principal, if the agent uses all of
 the cash within 15 days in a second
 transaction that is reportable on Form
 8300 or on Form 104, and discloses all
 the information necessary to complete
 Part II of Form 8300 or Form 104 to the
 recipient of the cash in the second
 transaction.
  
c In a transaction occurring entirely
 outside the United States. See
 Publication 1544, Reporting Cash
 Payments of Over $10,000 (Received in
 a Trade or Business), regarding
 transactions occurring in Puerto Rico
 and territories and possessions of the
 United States.
  
c In a transaction that is not in the
 course of a person’s trade or business.
  
If multiple payments are made in cash
 to satisfy bail and the initial payment
 does not exceed $10,000, the initial
 payment and subsequent payments
 must be aggregated and the information
 return must be filed by the 15th day
 after receipt of the payment that causes
 the aggregate amount to exceed
 $10,000 in cash. In such cases, the
 reporting requirement can be satisfied
 either by sending a single written
 statement with an aggregate amount
 listed or by furnishing a copy of each
 Form 8300 relating to that payer.
 Payments made to satisfy separate bail
 requirements are not required to be
 aggregated. See Treasury Regulations
 section 1.6050I-2.
  
Voluntary use of Form 8300. Form
 8300 may be filed voluntarily for any
 suspicious transaction (see Definitions
 on page 4) for use by FinCEN and the
 IRS, even if the total amount does not
 exceed $10,000.
  
If you have requested but are not able
 to get a TIN for one or more of the
 parties to a transaction within 15 days
 following the transaction, file the report
 and attach a statement explaining why
 the TIN is not included.
  Exception: You are not required to
 provide the TIN of a person who is a
 nonresident alien individual or a foreign
 organization if that person or foreign
 organization:
  
Keep a copy of each Form 8300 for 5
 years from the date you file it.
  
Where to file. File the form with the
 Internal Revenue Service, Detroit
 Computing Center, P.O. Box 32621,
 Detroit, Ml 48232.
  
The TIN for an individual (including a
 sole proprietorship) is the individual’s
 social security number (SSN). For certain
 resident aliens who are not eligible to
 get an SSN and nonresident aliens who
 are required to file tax returns, it is an
 IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification
 Number (ITIN). For other persons,
 including corporations, partnerships, and
 estates, it is the employer identification
 number (EIN).
  
Casinos must file Form 8300 for
 nongaming activities (restaurants, shops,
 etc.).
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Section references are to the Internal
 Revenue Code unless otherwise noted.
  
c Section 6050I (26 United States Code
 (U.S.C.) 6050I) and 31 U.S.C. 5331
 require that certain information be
 reported to the IRS and the Financial
 Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN).
 This information must be reported on
 IRS/FinCEN Form 8300.
  
c Item 33 box i is to be checked only by
 clerks of the court; box d is to be
 checked by bail bondsmen. See the
 instructions on page 5.
  
c The meaning of the word “currency” 
for purposes of 31 U.S.C. 5331 is the
 same as for the word “cash” (See Cash
 on page 4).
  
Penalties may also be imposed for
 causing, or attempting to cause, a trade
 or business to fail to file a required
  
causes the total amount to exceed
 $10,000. If more than one report is
 required within 15 days, you may file a
 combined report. File the combined
 report no later than the date the earliest
 report, if filed separately, would have to
 be filed.
  
c Does not have income effectively
 connected with the conduct of a U.S.
 trade or business;
  
c Does not have an office or place of
 business, or a fiscal or paying agent in
 the United States;
  
c Does not furnish a withholding
 certificate described in §1.1441-1(e)(2) or
 (3) or §1.1441-5(c)(2)(iv) or (3)(iii) to the
 extent required under §1.1441-1(e)(4)(vii);
 or
  
c Does not have to furnish a TIN on any
 return, statement, or other document as
 required by the income tax regulations
 under section 897 or 1445.
  
Page 4 IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Part I
  Item 2. If two or more individuals
 conducted the transaction you are
 reporting, check the box and complete
 Part I for any one of the individuals.
 Provide the same information for the
 other individual(s) on the back of the
 form. If more than three individuals are
 involved, provide the same information
 on additional sheets of paper and attach
 them to this form.
  Item 6. Enter the taxpayer identification
 number (TIN) of the individual named.
 See Taxpayer identification number (TIN)
 on page 3 for more information.
  Item 8. Enter eight numerals for the date
 of birth of the individual named. For
 example, if the individual’s birth date is
 July 6, 1960, enter 07 06 1960.
  
Item 13. Fully describe the nature of the
 occupation, profession, or business (for
 example, “plumber,” “attorney,” or
 “automobile dealer”). Do not use general
 or nondescriptive terms such as
 “businessman” or “self-employed.”
  Item 14. You must verify the name and
 address of the named individual(s).
 Verification must be made by
 examination of a document normally
 accepted as a means of identification
 when cashing checks (for example, a
 driver’s license, passport, alien
 registration card, or other official
 document). In item 14a, enter the type of
 document examined. In item 14b,
 identify the issuer of the document. In
 item 14c, enter the document’s number.
 For example, if the individual has a Utah
 driver’s license, enter “driver’s license” 
in item 14a, “Utah” in item 14b, and the
 number appearing on the license in item
 14c.
  
Part II
  Item 15. If the transaction is being
 conducted on behalf of more than one
 person (including husband and wife or
 parent and child), check the box and
 complete Part II for any one of the
 persons. Provide the same information
 for the other person(s) on the back of
 the form. If more than three persons are
 involved, provide the same information
 on additional sheets of paper and attach
 them to this form.
  
Specific Instructions
  You must complete all parts. However,
 you may skip Part II if the individual
 named in Part I is conducting the
 transaction on his or her behalf only. For
 voluntary reporting of suspicious
 transactions, see Item 1 below.
  Item 1. If you are amending a prior
 report, check box 1a. Complete the
 appropriate items with the correct or
 amended information only. Complete all
 of Part IV. Staple a copy of the original
 report to the amended report.
  To voluntarily report a suspicious
 transaction (see Suspicious transaction
 above), check box 1b. You may also
 telephone your local IRS Criminal
 Investigation Division or call
 1-866-556-3974.
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Note. You must complete all three items
 (a, b, and c) in this line to make sure
 that Form 8300 will be processed
 correctly.
  
Definitions
  Cash. The term “cash” means the
 following:
  
c U.S. and foreign coin and currency
 received in any transaction.
  
c A cashier’s check, money order, bank
 draft, or traveler’s check having a face
 amount of $10,000 or less that is
 received in a designated reporting
 transaction (defined below), or that is
 received in any transaction in which the
 recipient knows that the instrument is
 being used in an attempt to avoid the
 reporting of the transaction under either
 section 6050I or 31 U.S.C. 5331.
  
Designated reporting transaction. A
 retail sale (or the receipt of funds by a
 broker or other intermediary in
 connection with a retail sale) of a
 consumer durable, a collectible, or a
 travel or entertainment activity.
  Retail sale. Any sale (whether or not
 the sale is for resale or for any other
 purpose) made in the course of a trade
 or business if that trade or business
 principally consists of making sales to
 ultimate consumers.
  Consumer durable. An item of tangible
 personal property of a type that, under
 ordinary usage, can reasonably be
 expected to remain useful for at least 1
 year, and that has a sales price of more
 than $10,000.
  Collectible. Any work of art, rug,
 antique, metal, gem, stamp, coin, etc.
  Travel or entertainment activity. An
 item of travel or entertainment that
 pertains to a single trip or event if the
 combined sales price of the item and all
 other items relating to the same trip or
 event that are sold in the same
 transaction (or related transactions)
 exceeds $10,000.
  Exceptions. A cashier’s check, money
 order, bank draft, or traveler’s check is
 not considered received in a designated
 reporting transaction if it constitutes the
 proceeds of a bank loan or if it is
 received as a payment on certain
 promissory notes, installment sales
 contracts, or down payment plans. See
 Publication 1544 for more information.
  
Note. Cash does not include a check
 drawn on the payer’s own account, such
 as a personal check, regardless of the
 amount.
  
Person. An individual, corporation,
 partnership, trust, estate, association, or
 company.
  Recipient. The person receiving the
 cash. Each branch or other unit of a
 person’s trade or business is considered
 a separate recipient unless the branch
 receiving the cash (or a central office
 linking the branches), knows or has
 reason to know the identity of payers
 making cash payments to other
 branches.
  Transaction. Includes the purchase of
 property or services, the payment of
 debt, the exchange of a negotiable
 instrument for cash, and the receipt of
 cash to be held in escrow or trust. A
 single transaction may not be broken
 into multiple transactions to avoid
 reporting.
  Suspicious transaction. A suspicious
 transaction is a transaction in which it
 appears that a person is attempting to
 cause Form 8300 not to be filed, or to
 file a false or incomplete form.
  
report; for causing, or attempting to
 cause, a trade or business to file a
 required report containing a material
 omission or misstatement of fact; or for
 structuring, or attempting to structure,
 transactions to avoid the reporting
 requirements. These violations may also
 be subject to criminal prosecution which,
 upon conviction, may result in
 imprisonment of up to 5 years or fines of
 up to $250,000 for individuals and
 $500,000 for corporations or both.
  
Items 16 through 19. If the person on
 whose behalf the transaction is being
 conducted is an individual, complete
 items 16, 17, and 18. Enter his or her
 TIN in item 19. If the individual is a sole
 proprietor and has an employer
 identification number (EIN), you must
 enter both the SSN and EIN in item 19.
 If the person is an organization, put its
 name as shown on required tax filings in
 item 16 and its EIN in item 19.
  Item 20. If a sole proprietor or
 organization named in items 16 through
 18 is doing business under a name other
 than that entered in item 16 (for
 example, a “trade” or “doing business
 as (DBA)” name), enter it here.
  Item 27. If the person is not required to
 furnish a TIN, complete this item. See
 Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) on
 page 3. Enter a description of the type
 of official document issued to that
 person in item 27a (for example, a
 “passport”), the country that issued the
 document in item 27b, and the
 document’s number in item 27c.
  
Page 5 IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Item 31. Enter the total price of the
 property, services, amount of cash
 exchanged, etc. (for example, the total
 cost of a vehicle purchased, cost of
 catering service, exchange of currency) if
 different from the amount shown in item
 29.
  Item 32. Enter the dollar amount of each
 form of cash received. Show foreign
 currency amounts in U.S. dollar
 equivalent at a fair market rate of
 exchange available to the public. The
 sum of the amounts must equal item 29.
 For cashier’s check, money order, bank
 draft, or traveler’s check, provide the
 name of the issuer and the serial number
 of each instrument. Names of all issuers
 and all serial numbers involved must be
 provided. If necessary, provide this
 information on additional sheets of paper
 and attach them to this form.
  Item 33. Check the appropriate box(es)
 that describe the transaction. If the
 transaction is not specified in boxes a–i,
 check box j and briefly describe the
 transaction (for example, “car lease,” 
“boat lease,” “house lease,” or “aircraft
 rental”). If the transaction relates to the
 receipt of bail by a court clerk, check
 box i, “Bail received by court clerks.” 
This box is only for use by court clerks.
 If the transaction relates to cash
 received by a bail bondsman, check box
 d, “Business services provided.”
  
Part IV
  Item 36. If you are a sole proprietorship,
 you must enter your SSN. If your
 business also has an EIN, you must
 provide the EIN as well. All other
 business entities must enter an EIN.
  
Item 41. Fully describe the nature of
 your business, for example, “attorney” or
 “jewelry dealer.” Do not use general or
 nondescriptive terms such as “business” 
or “store.”
  
Privacy Act and Paperwork Reduction
 Act Notice. Except as otherwise noted,
 the information solicited on this form is
 required by the Internal Revenue Service
 (IRS) and the Financial Crimes
 Enforcement Network (FinCEN) in order
 to carry out the laws and regulations of
 the United States Department of the
 Treasury. Trades or businesses, except
 for clerks of criminal courts, are required
 to provide the information to the IRS and
 FinCEN under both section 6050I and 31
 U.S.C. 5331. Clerks of criminal courts
 are required to provide the information
 to the IRS under section 6050I. Section
 6109 and 31 U.S.C. 5331 require that
 you provide your social security number
 in order to adequately identify you and
 process your return and other papers.
 The principal purpose for collecting the
 information on this form is to maintain
 reports or records which have a high
 degree of usefulness in criminal, tax, or
 regulatory investigations or proceedings,
 or in the conduct of intelligence or
 counterintelligence activities, by directing
 the federal Government’s attention to
 unusual or questionable transactions.
  
Generally, tax returns and return
 information are confidential, as stated in
 section 6103. However, section 6103
 allows or requires the IRS to disclose or
 give the information requested on this
 form to others as described in the Code.
 For example, we may disclose your tax
 information to the Department of Justice,
 to enforce the tax laws, both civil and
 criminal, and to cities, states, the District
 of Columbia, to carry out their tax laws.
 We may disclose this information to
 other persons as necessary to obtain
 information which we cannot get in any
 other way. We may disclose this
 information to federal, state, and local
 child support agencies; and to other
 federal agencies for the purposes of
 determining entitlement for benefits or
 the eligibility for and the repayment of
 loans. We may also provide the records
 to appropriate state, local, and foreign
 criminal law enforcement and regulatory
 personnel in the performance of their
 official duties. We may also disclose this
 information to other countries under a
 tax treaty, or to federal and state
 agencies to enforce federal nontax
 criminal laws and to combat terrorism. In
 addition, FinCEN may provide the
 information to those officials if they are
 conducting intelligence or
 counter-intelligence activities to protect
 against international terrorism.
  
You are not required to provide
 information as to whether the reported
 transaction is deemed suspicious.
 Failure to provide all other requested
 information, or providing fraudulent
 information, may result in criminal
 prosecution and other penalties under
 Title 26 and Title 31 of the United States
 Code.
  
Item 42. This form must be signed by an
 individual who has been authorized to
 do so for the business that received the
 cash.
  
You are not required to provide the
 information requested on a form that is
 subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act
 unless the form displays a valid OMB
 control number. Books or records
 relating to a form or its instructions must
 be retained as long as their contents
 may become material in the
 administration of any law under Title 26
 or Title 31.
  The time needed to complete this
 form will vary depending on individual
 circumstances. The estimated average
 time is 21 minutes. If you have
 comments concerning the accuracy of
 this time estimate or suggestions for
 making this form simpler, you can write
 to the Internal Revenue Service, Tax
 Products Coordinating Committee,
 SE:W:CAR:MP:T:T:SP, 1111 Constitution
 Ave. NW, IR-6526, Washington, DC
 20224. Do not send Form 8300 to this
 address. Instead, see Where to File on
 page 3.
  
Comments
  Use this section to comment on or
 clarify anything you may have entered
 on any line in Parts I, II, III, and IV. For
 example, if you checked box b
 (Suspicious transaction) in line 1 above
 Part I, you may want to explain why you
 think that the cash transaction you are
 reporting on Form 8300 may be
 suspicious.
  
 
Part III
  Item 28. Enter the date you received the
 cash. If you received the cash in more
 than one payment, enter the date you
 received the payment that caused the
 combined amount to exceed $10,000.
 See Multiple payments on page 3 for
 more information.
  Item 30. Check this box if the amount
 shown in item 29 was received in more
 than one payment (for example, as
 installment payments or payments on
 related transactions).
  
Note. You must complete all three items
 (a, b, and c) in this line to make sure
 that Form 8300 will be processed
 correctly.
  
 REPORT OF INTERNATIONAL
 TRANSPORTATION OF CURRENCY
 OR MONETARY INSTRUMENTS
 OMB NO. 1506-0014
 To be filed with the Bureau of
 Customs and Border Protection
 AIRLINE/FLIGHT/VESSEL INSPECTOR (Name and Badge Number) LICENSE PLATE
 DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
 FINANCIAL CRIMES ENFORCEMENT NETWORK
 For Paperwork Reduction Act
 Notice and Privacy Act Notice,
 see back of form.
 2. IDENTIFICATION NO.  (See instructions) 3. DATE OF BIRTH (Mo./Day/Yr.)
 4. PERMANENT ADDRESS IN UNITED STATES OR ABROAD 5. YOUR COUNTRY OR COUNTRIES OF
      CITIZENSHIP
 10. IMMIGRATION ALIEN NO.
 FinCEN FORM 105
 7. PASSPORT NO. & COUNTRY
 9. PLACE UNITED STATES VISA WAS ISSUED
 31 U.S.C. 5316;  31 CFR 103.23 and 103.27
 (Formerly Customs Form 4790)
 CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION USE ONLY
 1. NAME (Last or family, first, and middle)
 8. U.S. VISA DATE (Mo./Day/Yr.)
 6. ADDRESS WHILE IN THE UNITED STATES
 Departed From: (U.S. Port/City in U.S.) Arrived At: (City in U.S.)
 11. IF CURRENCY OR MONETARY INSTRUMENT IS ACCOMPANIED BY A PERSON, COMPLETE 11a OR 11b
 B. IMPORTED INTO THE UNITED STATES
 CURRENCY AND MONETARY INSTRUMENT INFORMATION (SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE)(To be completed by everyone)
 A. EXPORTED FROM THE UNITED STATES
 12a. DATE  SHIPPED (Mo./Day/Yr.)
 12e. SHIPPED TO (Name and Address)
 15. TYPE OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY, OCCUPATION, OR PROFESSION
 12f. RECEIVED FROM (Name and Address)
 17. IF OTHER THAN U.S. CURRENCY
 IS INVOLVED, PLEASE COMPLETE
 BLOCKS A AND B.
 SIGNATURE OF PERSON COMPLETING THIS REPORT
 Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this report, and to the best of my knowledge and belief it is true, correct and complete.
 18. NAME AND TITLE (Print) 20. DATE OF REPORT (Mo./Day/Yr.)
 PART IV
 PART  I
 16. TYPE AND AMOUNT OF CURRENCY/MONETARY INSTRUMENTS
 (TOTAL)
 Other Monetary Instruments
 (Specify type, issuing entity and date, and serial or other identifying number.)
 Currency and Coins
 FOR A PERSON DEPARTING OR ENTERING THE UNITED STATES, OR A PERSON SHIPPING, MAILING, OR RECEIVING CURRENCY OR
 MONETARY INSTRUMENTS. (IF ACTING FOR  ANYONE ELSE, ALSO COMPLETE PART II BELOW.)
 19. SIGNATURE
 STATE/COUNTRY NUMBER
 DATE
 COUNT VERIFIED VOLUNTARY
 REPORT
 Yes           No Yes          No
 A. Currency Name
 B. Country
 PART  III
 PART  II
 Yes                         No
 15a. IS THE BUSINESS A BANK?
 INFORMATION ABOUT PERSON(S) OR BUSINESS ON WHOSE BEHALF IMPORTATION OR EXPORTATION WAS CONDUCTED
 13. NAME (Last or family, first, and middle or Business Name)
 14. PERMANENT ADDRESS IN UNITED STATES OR ABROAD
 FinCEN Form  105
  (Formerly Customs Form 4790)
               (Rev. July 2003)
 Department of the Treasury
 FinCEN
 Departed From: (Foreign City/Country)Arrived At: (Foreign City/Country)
 12. IF CURRENCY OR MONETARY INSTRUMENT WAS MAILED OR OTHERWISE SHIPPED, COMPLETE 12a THROUGH 12f
 12d. NAME OF CARRIER12b. DATE  RECEIVED (Mo./Day/Yr.) 12c. METHOD OF SHIPMENT (e.g. u.s. Mail, Public Carrier, etc.)
 Please type or print.
 GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
 This report is required by 31 U.S.C. 5316 and Treasury Department regulations (31 CFR
 103).
 WHO MUST FILE:
 (1) Each person who physically transports, mails, or ships, or causes to be physically
 transported, mailed, or shipped currency or other monetary instruments in an aggregate
 amount exceeding $10,000 at one time from the United States to any place outside the
 United States or into the United States from any place outside the United States, and
 (2) Each person who receives in the United States currency or other monetary
 instruments In an aggregate amount exceeding $10,000 at one time which have been
 transported, mailed, or shipped to the person from any place outside the United States.
 A TRANSFER OF FUNDS THROUGH NORMAL BANKING PROCEDURES, WHICH
 DOES NOT INVOLVE THE PHYSICAL TRANSPORTATION OF CURRENCY OR
 MONETARY INSTRUMENTS, IS NOT REQUIRED TO BE REPORTED.
 Exceptions: Reports are not required to be filed by:
 (1) a Federal Reserve bank,
 (2) a bank, a foreign bank, or a broker or dealer in securities in respect to currency
 or other monetary instruments mailed or shipped through the postal service or by common
 carrier,
 (3) a commercial bank or trust company organized under the laws of any State or of
 the United States with respect to overland shipments of currency or monetary instruments
 shipped to or received from an established customer maintaining a deposit relationship
 with the bank, in amounts which the bank may reasonably conclude do not exceed
 amounts commensurate with the customary conduct of the business, industry, or profession
 of the customer concerned,
 (4) a person who is not a citizen or resident of the United States in respect to
 currency or other monetary instruments mailed or shipped from abroad to a bank or
 broker or dealer in securities through the postal service or by common carrier,
 (5) a common carrier of passengers in respect to currency or other monetary
 instruments in the possession of its passengers,
 (6) a common carrier of goods in respect to shipments of currency or monetary
 instruments not declared to be such by the shipper,
 (7) a travelers’ check issuer or its agent in respect to the transportation of travelers’
 checks prior to their delivery to selling agents for eventual sale to the public,
 (8) a person with a restrictively endorsed traveler’s check that is in the collection
 and reconciliation process after the traveler’s check has been negotiated, nor by
 (9) a person engaged as a business in the transportation of currency, monetary
 instruments and other commercial papers with respect to the transportation of currency
 or other monetary instruments overland between established offices of banks or brokers
 or dealers in securities and foreign persons.
 WHEN AND WHERE TO FILE:
 A. Recipients — Each person who receives currency or other monetary instruments in the
 United States shall file FinCEN Form 105, within 15 days after receipt of the currency or
 monetary instruments, with the Customs officer in charge at any port of entry or departure
 or by mail with the Commissioner of Customs, Attention: Currency Transportation
 Reports, Washington DC 20229.
 B. Shippers or Mailers — If the currency or other monetary instrument does not accompany
 the person entering or departing the United States, FinCEN Form 105 may be filed by
 mail on or before the date of entry, departure, mailing, or shipping with the Commissioner
 of Customs, Attention: Currency Transportation Reports, Washington DC 20229.
 C. Travelers — Travelers carrying currency or other monetary instruments with them shall
 file FinCEN Form 105 at the time of entry into the United States or at the time of departure
 from the United States with the Customs officer in charge at any Customs port of entry or
 departure.
 An additional report of a particular transportation, mailing, or shipping of currency or
 the monetary instruments is not required if a complete and truthful report has already
 been filed. However, no person otherwise required to file a report shall be excused from
 liability for failure to do so if, in fact, a complete and truthful report has not been filed.
 Forms may be obtained from any Bureau of Customs and Border Protection office.
 PENALTIES: Civil and criminal penalties, including under certain circumstances a
 fine of not more than $500,000 and Imprisonment of not more than ten years, are
 provided for failure to file a report, filing a report containing a material omission or
 misstatement, or filing a false or fraudulent report. In addition, the currency or
 monetary instrument may be subject to seizure and forfeiture. See 31 U.S.C.5321
 and 31 CFR 103.57; 31 U.S.C. 5322 and 31 CFR 103.59; 31 U.S.C. 5317 and 31 CFR
 103.58, and U.S.C. 5332.
 DEFINITIONS:
 Bank — Each agent, agency, branch or office within the United States of any person doing
 business in one or more of the capacities listed: (1) a commercial bank or trust company
 organized under the laws of any State or of the United States; (2) a private bank; (3)
 asavings association, savings and loan association, and building and loan association
 organized under the laws of any State or of the United States; (4) an insured institution as
 defined in section 401 of the National Housing Act; (5) a savings bank, industrial bank or
 other thrift institution; (6) a credit union organized under the laws of any State or of the
 United States; (7) any other organization chartered under the banking laws of any State
 and subject to the supervision of the bank supervisory authorities of a State other than a
 money service business; (8) a bank organized under foreign law; and (9) any national
 banking association or corporation acting under the provisions of section 25A of the
 Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. Sections 611-632).
 Foreign Bank — A bank organized under foreign law, or an agency, branch or office located
 outside the United States of a bank. The term does not include an agent, agency, branch
 or office within the United States of a bank organized under foreign law.
 Broker or Dealer in Securities—A broker or dealer in securities, registered or required
 to be registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities
 Exchange Act of 1934.
 Identification Number — Individuals must enter their social security number, if any.
 However, aliens who do not have a social security number should enter passport or alien
 registration number. All others should enter their employer identification number.
 Monetary Instruments — (1) Coin or currency of the United States or of any other country,
 (2) traveler’s checks in any form, (3) negotiable instruments (including checks, promissory
 notes, and money orders) in bearer form, endorsed without restriction, made out to a
 fictitious payee, or otherwise in such form that title thereto passes upon delivery, (4)
 incomplete instruments (including checks, promissory notes, and money orders) that are
 signed but on which the name of the payee has been omitted, and (5) securities or stock
 in bearer form or otherwise in such form that title thereto passes upon delivery. Monetary
 instruments do not include (i) checks or money orders made payable to the order of a
 named person which have not been endorsed or which bear restrictive endorsements,
 (ii) warehouse receipts, or (iii) bills of lading.
 Person — An individual, a corporation, a partnership, a trust or estate, a joint stock
 company, an association, a syndicate, joint venture or other unincorporated organization
 or group, an Indian Tribe (as that term is defined in the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act),
 and all entities cognizable as legal personalities.
 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS
 You should complete each line that applies to you. PART II. -Block 13; provide the
 complete name of the shipper or recipient on whose behalf the exportation or importation
 was conducted. PART III. — Specify type of instrument, issuing entity, and date, serial or
 other identifying number, and payee (if any). PART IV. — Block 22A and 22B; enter the
 exact date you shipped or received currency or monetary instrument(s). Block 21, if
 currency or monetary instruments of more than one country is involved, attach a list
 showing each type, country or origin and amount.
 PRIVACY ACT AND PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT NOTICE:
 Pursuant to the requirements of Public law 93-579 (Privacy Act of 1974), notice is hereby
 given that the authority to collect information on Form 4790 in accordance with 5 U.S.C.
 552a(e)(3) is Public law 91-508; 31 U.S.C. 5316; 5 U.S.C. 301; Reorganization Plan
 No.1 of 1950; Treasury Department Order No. 165, revised, as amended; 31 CFR 103;
 and 44 U.S.C. 3501.
 The principal purpose for collecting the information is to assure maintenance of reports
 or records having a high degree of usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory investigations
 or proceedings. The information collected may be provided to those officers and
 employees of the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection and any other constituent
 unit of the Department of the Treasury who have a need for the records in the performance
 of their duties. The records may be referred to any other department or agency of the
 Federal Government upon the request of the head of such department or agency. The
 information collected may also be provided to appropriate state, local, and foreign criminal
 law enforcement and regulatory personnel in the performance of their official duties.
 Disclosure of this information is mandatory pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 5316 and 31 CFR Part
 103 (See Penalities).
 Disclosure of the social security number is mandatory. The authority to collect this number
 is 31 U.S.C. 5316(b) and 31 CFR 103.27(d). The social security number will be used as a
 means to identify the individual who files the record.
 An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a
 collection of information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number. The
 collection of this information is mandatory pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 5316.
 Statement required by 5 CFR 1320.8(b)(3)(iii): The estimated average burden associated
 with this collection of information is 11 minutes per respondent or record keeper
 depending on individual circumstances. Comments concerning the accuracy of this burden
 estimate and suggestions for reducing this burden should be directed to the Department
 of the Treasury, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, P.O. Box 39 Vienna, Virginia
 22183.  DO NOT send completed forms to this office—See When and Where To File
 above.
 FinCEN FORM 105
 (Formerly Customs Form 4790)
1  Check box below only if correcting a prior report.
 Corrects Prior Report (see instruction #3 under “How to Make a Report”)
 d
   31  Is the relationship an insider relationship?          a          Yes          b          No
  Closed?
          Yes        No
   Yes        No
 a
 b
 1Suspicious
 Activity Report
 July 2003
 Previous editions will not be accepted after December 31, 2003
 ALWAYS COMPLETE ENTIRE REPORT
 (see instructions)
 FRB: FR 2230 OMB No. 7100-0212
 FDIC: 6710/06 OMB No. 3064-0077
 OCC: 8010-9,8010-1 OMB No. 1557-0180
 OTS: 1601 OMB No. 1550-0003
 NCUA: 2362 OMB No. 3133-0094
 TREASURY: TD F 90-22.47 OMB No. 1506-0001
 Part I Reporting Financial Institution Information
 2  Name of Financial Institution
 4  Address of Financial Institution
 6  City
 11  State 12  Zip Code10  City
  9   Address of Branch Office(s) where activity occurred Multiple Branches (include information in narrative, Part V)
 14  Account number(s) affected, if any
 Part II Suspect Information
 15  Last Name or Name of Entity 16  First Name 17  Middle
 18   Address 19  SSN, EIN or TIN
 7  State 8  Zip Code
 20  City 21  State 22  Zip Code 23  Country
 27  Date of Birth
       _______ / _______ / _________
 24  Phone Number - Residence (include area code)
      (        )
 25  Phone Number - Work (include area code)
      (        )
 26  Occupation/Type of Business
 29  Forms of Identification for Suspect:
 a         Driver’s License/State ID          b         Passport          c           Alien Registration          d         Other ______________
            Number  __________________________              Issuing Authority  ______________________
    MM            DD                  YYYY
 c       Still employed at financial institution   e        Terminated
 d       Suspended                                         f         Resigned
 32  Date of Suspension, Termination, Resignation
       _______ / _______ / __________
           MM                DD                   YYYY
 c
 Suspect Information Unavailable
  Closed?
          Yes        No
   Yes        No
    MM       DD            YYYY
 3  EIN
 5   Primary Federal Regulator
    a Federal Reserve d OCC
    b FDIC e OTS
    c NCUA
 If Yes specify:
 13  If institution closed, date closed
         ____ / ____ / _______
 28  Admission/Confession?
       a     Yes       b          No
 30  Relationship to Financial Institution:
        a Accountant d Attorney g Customer j Officer
        b Agent e Borrower h Director k Shareholder
        c Appraiser f Broker i Employee l Other  ________________________________
37  Dollar amount of recovery (if applicable)
                                                                              .00
       f Computer Intrusion
       g Consumer Loan Fraud
       h Counterfeit Check
       i Counterfeit Credit/Debit Card
       j Counterfeit Instrument (other)
       k Credit Card Fraud
      (         )
 34  Total dollar amount involved in known or suspicious activity
       $                                                          .00
 40  Has any law enforcement agency already been advised by telephone, written communication, or otherwise?
 a DEA d Postal Inspection g Other Federal
 b FBI e Secret Service h State
 c IRS f U.S. Customs i Local
  j Agency Name (for g, h or i)
 2
 35  Summary characterization of suspicious activity:
       a Bank Secrecy Act/Structuring/
 Money Laundering
       b Bribery/Gratuity
       c Check Fraud
       d Check Kiting
       e Commercial Loan Fraud
       s Other
 Part III Suspicious Activity Information
 33  Date or date range of suspicious activity
 From   ____ / _____ / _______    To  ____ / _____ / _______
 36  Amount of loss prior to recovery
                                                                       .00
 38  Has the suspicious activity had a
       material impact on, or otherwise
       affected, the financial soundness
      of the institution?
      a Yes b          No
 51   Agency (if not filed by financial institution)
    MM       DD            YYYY    MM       DD            YYYY
 39  Has the institution’s bonding company been notified?
      a Yes b          No
 Part IV Contact for Assistance
 45  Last Name 46  First Name
 50  Date Prepared
       _______ / _______ /_________
 48  Title/Occupation
    MM            DD                  YYYY
 49 Phone Number (include area code)
       (          )
 47  Middle
        (type of activity)
 ,,,
 ,,
 $
  (if applicable)
 ,,
 $
 41  Name of person(s) contacted at Law Enforcement Agency 42  Phone Number (include area code)
 44  Phone Number (include area code)
       (         )
 43  Name of person(s) contacted at Law Enforcement Agency
       l Debit Card Fraud
       m Defalcation/Embezzlement
       n False Statement
       o Misuse of Position or Self Dealing
       p Mortgage Loan Fraud
       q Mysterious Disappearance
       r Wire Transfer Fraud
       t Terrorist Financing
       u  Identity Theft
3Part V Suspicious Activity Information Explanation/Description
 Explanation/description of known or suspected violation
 of law or suspicious activity.
 This section of the report is critical. The care with which it is
 written may make the difference in whether or not the described
 conduct and its possible criminal nature are clearly understood.
 Provide below a chronological and complete account of the
 possible violation of law, including what is unusual, irregular or
 suspicious about the transaction, using the following checklist as
 you prepare your account. If necessary, continue the
 narrative on a duplicate of this page.
 a Describe supporting documentation and retain for 5 years.
 b Explain who benefited, financially or otherwise, from the
 transaction, how much, and how.
 c Retain any confession, admission, or explanation of the
 transaction provided by the suspect and indicate to
 whom and when it was given.
 d Retain any confession, admission, or explanation of the
 transaction provided by any other person and indicate
 to whom and when it was given.
 e Retain any evidence of cover-up or evidence of an attempt
 to deceive federal or state examiners or others.
 f Indicate where the possible violation took place
 (e.g., main office, branch, other).
 g Indicate whether the possible violation is an isolated
 incident or relates to other transactions.
 h Indicate whether there is any related litigation; if so,
 specify.
 i Recommend any further investigation that might assist law
 enforcement authorities.
 j Indicate whether any information has been excluded from
 this report; if so, why?
 k If you are correcting a previously filed report, describe the
 changes that are being made.
 For Bank Secrecy Act/Structuring/Money Laundering reports,
 include the following additional information:
 l Indicate whether currency and/or monetary instruments
 were involved. If so, provide the amount and/or description
 of the instrument (for example, bank draft, letter of
 credit, domestic or international money order, stocks,
 bonds, traveler’s checks, wire transfers sent or received,
 cash, etc.).
 m Indicate any account number that may be involved
 or affected.
 Paperwork Reduction Act Notice:  The purpose of this form is to provide an effective and consistent means for financial institutions to notify appropriate law enforcement agencies of known
 or suspected criminal conduct or suspicious activities that take place at or were perpetrated against financial institutions. This report is required by law, pursuant to authority contained in
 the following statutes.  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System:  12 U.S.C. 324, 334, 611a, 1844(b) and (c), 3105(c) (2) and 3106(a).  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation:
 12 U.S.C. 93a, 1818, 1881-84, 3401-22.  Office of the Comptroller of the Currency:  12 U.S.C. 93a, 1818, 1881-84, 3401-22.  Office of Thrift Supervision:  12 U.S.C. 1463 and 1464.
 National Credit Union Administration:  12 U.S.C. 1766(a), 1786(q).  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network:  31 U.S.C. 5318(g).  Information collected on this report is confidential (5
 U.S.C. 552(b)(7) and 552a(k)(2), and 31 U.S.C. 5318(g)).  The Federal financial institutions’ regulatory agencies and the U.S. Departments of Justice and Treasury may use and share the information.
 Public reporting and recordkeeping burden for this information collection is estimated to average 30 minutes per response, and includes time to gather and maintain data in the required report, review
 the instructions, and complete the information collection.  Send comments regarding this burden estimate, including suggestions for reducing the burden, to the Office of Management and Budget,
 Paperwork Reduction Project, Washington, DC 20503 and, depending on your primary Federal regulatory agency, to Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC 20551;
 or Assistant Executive Secretary, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Washington, DC 20429; or Legislative and Regulatory Analysis Division, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Washington,
 DC 20219; or Office of Thrift Supervision, Enforcement Office, Washington, DC 20552; or National Credit Union Administration, 1775 Duke Street, Alexandria, VA 22314; or Office of the Director, Financial
 Crimes Enforcement Network, Department of the Treasury, 2070 Chain Bridge Road, Vienna, VA 22182.  The agencies may not conduct or sponsor, and an organization (or a person) is not required
 to respond to, a collection of information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number.
  Tips on SAR Form preparation and filing are available in the SAR Activity Review at www.fincen.gov/pub_reports.html
Suspicious Activity Report
 Instructions
  Safe Harbor  Federal law (31 U.S.C. 5318(g)(3)) provides complete protection from civil liability for all reports of suspicious
  transactions made to appropriate authorities, including supporting documentation, regardless of whether such reports are
  filed pursuant to this report’s instructions or are filed on a voluntary basis. Specifically, the law provides that a financial
  institution, and its directors, officers, employees and agents, that make a disclosure of any possible violation of law or
  regulation, including in connection with the preparation of suspicious activity reports, “shall not be liable to any person
  under any law or regulation of the United States, any constitution, law, or regulation of any State or political subdivision of
  any State, or under any contract or other legally  enforceable agreement (including any arbitration agreement), for such
  disclosure or for any failure to provide notice of such  disclosure to the person who is the subject of such disclosure or any
  other person identified in the disclosure”.
  Notification Prohibited Federal law (31 U.S.C. 5318(g)(2)) requires that a financial institution, and its directors, officers,
  employees and agents who, voluntarily or by means of a suspicious activity report, report suspected or known criminal
  violations or suspicious activities may not notify any person involved in the transaction that the transaction has been reported.
  In situations involving violations requiring immediate attention, such as when a reportable violation is ongoing, the
  financial institution shall immediately notify, by telephone, appropriate law enforcement and financial institution
  supervisory authorities in addition to filing a timely suspicious activity report.
 WHEN TO MAKE A REPORT:
 1. All financial institutions operating in the United States, including insured banks, savings associations, savings
 association service corporations, credit unions, bank holding companies, nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding
 companies, Edge and Agreement corporations, and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks, are re-
 quired to make this report following the discovery of:
 a. Insider abuse involving any amount. Whenever the financial institution detects any known or suspected
 Federal criminal violation, or pattern of criminal violations, committed or attempted against the financial
 institution or involving a transaction or transactions conducted through the financial institution, where the
 financial institution believes that it was either an actual or potential victim of a criminal violation, or series of
 criminal violations, or that the financial institution was used to facilitate a criminal transaction, and the
 financial institution has a substantial basis for identifying one of its directors, officers, employees, agents or
 other institution-affiliated parties as having committed or aided in the commission of a criminal act regardless
 of the amount involved in the violation.
 b. Violations aggregating $5,000 or more where a suspect can be identified. Whenever the financial
 institution detects any known or suspected Federal criminal violation, or pattern of criminal violations, com-
 mitted or attempted against the financial institution or involving a transaction or transactions conducted
 through the financial institution and involving or aggregating $5,000 or more in funds or other assets, where
 the financial institution believes that it was either an actual or potential victim of a criminal violation, or series
 of criminal violations, or that the financial institution was used to facilitate a criminal transaction, and the
 financial institution has a substantial basis for identifying a possible suspect or group of suspects. If it is
 determined prior to filing this report that the identified suspect or group of suspects has used an “alias,” then
 information regarding the true identity of the suspect or group of suspects, as well as alias identifiers, such
 as drivers’ licenses or social security numbers, addresses and telephone numbers, must be reported.
 c. Violations aggregating $25,000 or more regardless of a potential suspect. Whenever the financial
 institution detects any known or suspected Federal criminal violation, or pattern of criminal violations, com-
 mitted or attempted against the financial institution or involving a transaction or transactions conducted
 through the financial institution and involving or aggregating $25,000 or more in funds or other assets, where
 the financial institution believes that it was either an actual or potential victim of a criminal violation, or series
 of criminal violations, or that the financial institution was used to facilitate a criminal transaction, even though
 there is no substantial basis for identifying a possible suspect or group of suspects.
 d. Transactions aggregating $5,000 or more that involve potential money laundering or violations of the
 Bank Secrecy Act. Any transaction (which for purposes of this subsection means a deposit, withdrawal,
 transfer between accounts, exchange of currency, loan, extension of credit, purchase or sale of any stock,
 bond, certificate of deposit, or other monetary instrument or investment security, or any other payment, transfer,
 or delivery by, through, or to a financial institution, by whatever means effected) conducted or attempted by, at
or through the financial institution and involving or aggregating $5,000 or more in funds or other assets, if the financial
 institution knows, suspects, or has reason to suspect that:
           i.  The transaction involves funds derived from illegal activities or is intended or conducted in order to hide or
                disguise funds or assets derived from illegal activities (including, without limitation, the ownership, nature,
       source, location, or control of such funds or assets) as part of a plan to violate or evade any law or regulation or
       to avoid any transaction reporting requirement under Federal law;
 ii.  The transaction is designed to evade any regulations promulgated under the Bank Secrecy Act; or
 iii. The transaction has no business or apparent lawful purpose or is not the sort in which the particular customer
 would normally be expected to engage, and the financial institution knows of no reasonable explanation for the
 transaction after examining the available facts, including the background and possible purpose of the transaction.
       The Bank Secrecy Act requires all financial institutions to file currency transaction reports (CTRs) in accordance with
    the Department of the Treasury’s implementing regulations (31 CFR Part 103). These regulations require a financial
    institution to file a CTR whenever a currency transaction exceeds $10,000. If a currency transaction exceeds $10,000
    and is suspicious, the institution must file both a CTR (reporting the currency transaction) and a suspicious activity
    report (reporting the suspicious or criminal aspects of the transaction). If a currency transaction equals or is below
    $10,000 and is suspicious, the institution should only file a suspicious activity report.
   2. Computer Intrusion.  For purposes of this report, “computer intrusion” is defined as gaining access to a
    computer system of a financial institution to:
 a. Remove, steal, procure, or otherwise affect funds of the institution or the institution’s customers;
            b. Remove, steal, procure or otherwise affect critical information of the institution including customer account
          information; or
 c. Damage, disable or otherwise affect critical systems of the institution.
    For purposes of this reporting requirement, computer intrusion does not mean attempted intrusions of websites or
    other non-critical information systems of the institution that provide no access to institution or customer financial or
    other critical information.
   3. A financial institution is required to file a suspicious activity report no later than 30 calendar days after the date of
       initial detection of facts that may constitute a basis for filing a suspicious activity report. If no suspect was identified
    on the date of detection of the incident requiring the filing, a financial institution may delay filing a suspicious activity
    report for an additional 30 calendar days to identify a suspect. In no case shall reporting be delayed more than 60
    calendar days after the date of initial detection of a reportable transaction.
   4. This suspicious activity report does not need to be filed for those robberies and burglaries that are reported to local
    authorities, or (except for savings associations and service corporations) for lost, missing, counterfeit, or stolen
    securities that are reported pursuant to the requirements of 17 CFR 240.17f-1.
 HOW TO MAKE A REPORT:
   1. Send each completed suspicious activity report to:
 Detroit Computing Center, P.O. Box 33980, Detroit, Ml 48232-0980
   2. For items that do not apply or for which information is not available, leave blank.
   3. If you are correcting a previously filed report, check the box at the top of the report (line 1). Complete the report in its
   entirety and include the corrected information in the applicable boxes. Then describe the changes that are being made
   in Part V (Description of Suspicious Activity), line k.
   4. Do not include any supporting documentation with the suspicious activity report. Identify and retain a copy
   of the suspicious activity report and all original supporting documentation or business record equivalent for five (5)
   years from the date of the suspicious activity report. All supporting documentation must be made available to
   appropriate authorities upon request.
   5. If more space is needed to report additional suspects, attach copies of page 1 to provide the additional information. If
   more space is needed to report additional branch addresses, include this information in the narrative, Part V.
   6. Financial institutions are encouraged to provide copies of suspicious activity reports to state and local authorities,
   where appropriate.
*17 Government issued identification (If available)
   a Driver’s license/state ID   b Passport    c  Alien registration    d          Corporate/Partnership Resolution
   e Other ___________________________________________
   f    ID number            g  Issuing state or country (2 digit code)
 FinCEN
 Form 101
 Effective May 2004
 Suspicious Activity Report by the
 Securities and Futures Industries
    Please type or print. Always complete entire report. Items
 marked with an asterisk * are considered critical. (See instructions.) OMB No. 1506 - 0019
 Subject Information 2   Check box   a         if multiple subjects       box   b         subject information unavailablePart I
 *4 First name 5  Middle initial
 6  Also known as (AKA - individual), doing business as (DBA - entity)
 *3  Individual’s last name or entity’s full name
 7 Occupation or type of business
 16  Date of birth 
____/_____/_______ 
  MM        DD           YYYY
  *12
 *14 SSN/ITIN (individual), or EIN (entity)
  *8 Address
 *15  Account number(s) affected, if any. Indicate if closed.
 Part IIIPart III
 *21 Date or date range of suspicious activity
 18 Phone number - work
  23 Instrument type (Check all that apply)
 Suspicious Activity Information
 From  _____/_____/_________
              MM         DD            YYYY
 To  _____/_____/_________
         MM          DD             YYYY
 Part II
 20 Is individual/business associated/affiliated
 with the reporting institution? (See instructions)
        a         Yes           b         No
 13  E-mail address (If available)
 *9  City
   *11 ZIP code
 *30  Type of suspicious activity:
 o Significant wire or other transactions
               without economic purpose
 p Suspicious documents or ID presented
 q Terrorist financing
 r Wash or other fictitious trading
 s Wire fraud
 t Other (Describe in Part VI)
 24 CUSIP® number
 27 CUSIP® number
 25 CUSIP® number
 28 CUSIP® number
 26 CUSIP® number
 29 CUSIP® number
 Catalog No. 35349U
 Acc’t #
 ______________________
  yes      Acc’t #
 ______________________ 
yes
 Acc’t #______________________  yes      Acc’t #______________________ yes
     Country code (If not U.S.)
     (See instructions)
 a Bonds/Notes
 b Cash or equiv.
 c Commercial paper
 d Commodity futures contract
 e Money Market Mutual Fund
 f Mutual Fund
 g OTC Derivatives
 h Other derivatives
 q Commodity type ________________________
         
(Please identify)
 r Instrument description ___________________
 s Market where traded ____________________
 (Enter approprite three or four-letter code.)
 t Other (Explain in Part IV)
 i Commodity options
 j Security futures products
 k Stocks
 l Warrants
 m Other securities
 n Other non-securities
 o Foreign currency futures/options
 p Foreign currencies
 a Bribery/gratuity
 b Check fraud
 c Computer intrusion
 d Credit/debit card fraud
 e Embezzlement/theft
 f Commodity futures/options fraud
 g Forgery
 h Identity theft
 i Insider trading
 j Mail fraud
 k Market manipulation
 l Money laundering/Structuring
 m Prearranged or other non-competitive trading
 n Securities fraud
 1  Check the box if this report corrects a prior report (See instructions)
 *22  Total dollar amount involved in suspicious activity
 Rev. 05/22/04
 19 Phone number - home
 ( )( )
 $
          .00, ,,
   *10 State
Part VIPart IV
 *55  Title/Position
 *54 Middle initial*52  Last name of individual to be contacted regarding this report *53  First name
       _____/_____/_________
          MM         DD              YYYY
 *57 Date report prepared*56  Work phone number
 Contact For Assistance
 Reporting Financial Institution InformationPart IV
  Part V
    2
 31  If a law enforcement or regulatory authority has been contacted (excluding submission of a SAR) check the appropriate box.
 a DEA                           f           Secret Service    k    NYSE     p State securities regulator
  d  FBI                             i            NASD                  n     Other state/local
  e  ICE                             j            NFA                     o          Other SRO-securites (PHLX, PCX, CBOE, AMEX, etc.)
  b  U.S. Attorney (**32)    g           CFTC                   l     Other RFA      q  Foreign
 Law Enforcement or Regulatory Contact InformationPart III
  c  IRS                             h           SEC                    m      Other RE-futures (CME, CBOT, NYMEX, NYBOT)      r  Other (Explain in Part VI)
       _____/_____/_________
         MM         DD              YYYY
 32  Other authority contacted (for Item 31 l through r) ** List U.S. Attorney office here. 33  Name of individual contacted (for all of Item 31)
  35  Date contacted
 *36  Name of financial institution or sole proprietorship
  *39  City  *41  ZIP code
 *37  EIN / SSN / ITIN
   42  Additional branch address locations handling account, activity or customer.           43          Multiple locations (See instructions)
         *40 State
     *38 Address
  j I A
 k Investment company - mutual fund
 l Market maker
 m Municipal securities dealer
 n NFA
 o RE-futures
 p Other RFA
 q Securities broker - clearing
 r Securities broker - introducing
  51  Type of institution or individual- Check box(es) for functions that apply to this report
 s Securities dealer
 t Securities floor broker
 u Securities options broker-dealer
  v SRO-securities
 w Specialist
 x Subsidiary of bank
 y U.S. Government broker-dealer
 z U.S. Government interdealer broker
 aa          Other (Describe in Part VI)
        a       Agricultural trade option merchant
        b         Affiliate of bank holding company
        c         CPO
        d         CTA
        e         Direct participation program
        f          FCM
        g         Futures floor broker
        h         Futures floor trader
        i           IB-C
   44  City
 49  NFA  ID number
  47  Central Registration Depository number
   46  ZIP code45  State
      50  Has this reporting individual/entity coordinated this report with another reporting individual/entity?  Yes        (Provide details in Part VI)   No
 48 SEC ID number
 34  Telephone number of individual contacted (Item 33)
 ( )
 ( )
 Send completed reports to:
 Detroit Computing Center
 Attn: SAR-SF
 P.O. Box 33980
 Detroit, MI 48232
Suspicious Activity Information - Narrative *Part VI 3
 Explanation/description of suspicious activity(ies).  This section of the report is critical.  The care with which it is completed may determine whether
 or not the described activity and its possible criminal nature are clearly understood by investigators. Provide a clear, complete and chronological
 description (not exceeding this page and the next page) of the activity, including what is unusual, irregular or suspicious about the transaction(s), using
 the checklist below as a guide, as you prepare your account.
  a. Describe conduct that raised suspicion.
  b. Explain whether the transaction(s) was completed or only attempted.
  c. Describe supporting documentation (e.g. transaction records, new
 account information, tape recordings, E-mail messages, correspon-
 dence, etc.) and retain such documentation in your file for five years.
  d. Explain who benefited, financially or otherwise, from the
 transaction(s), how much, and how (if known).
  e. Describe and retain any admission or explanation of the transaction(s)
 provided by the subject(s) or other persons. Indicate to whom and
 when it was given.
  f. Describe and retain any evidence of cover-up or evidence of an
 attempt to deceive federal or state examiners, SRO, or others.
  g. Indicate where the possible violation of law(s) took place (e.g., main
 office, branch, other).
  h. Indicate whether the suspicious activity is an isolated incident or
 relates to another transaction.
  i. Indicate whether there is any related litigation. If so, specify the
 name of the litigation and the court where the action is pending.
  j. Recommend any further investigation that might assist law
 enforcement authorities.
 k. Indicate whether any information has been excluded from this report;
 if so, state reasons.
  l. Indicate whether U.S. or foreign currency and/or U.S. or foreign
 negotiable instrument(s) were involved.  If foreign, provide the
 amount, name of currency, and country of origin.
 m. Indicate “Market where traded” and “Wire transfer identifier”
 information when appropriate.
 n. Indicate whether funds or assets were recovered and, if so, enter the
 dollar value of the recovery in whole dollars only.
 o. Indicate any additional account number(s), and any foreign bank(s)
 account number(s) which may be involved.
 p. Indicate for a foreign national any available information on subject’s
 passport(s), visa(s), and/or identification card(s). Include date, country,
  city of issue, issuing authority, and nationality.
 q. Describe any suspicious activities that involve transfer of funds to or
 from a foreign country, or transactions in a foreign currency. Identify
 the country, sources and destinations of funds.
 r. Describe subject(s) position if employed by the financial institution.
 s. Indicate whether securities, futures, or options were involved.  If so,
 list the type, CUSIP® number or ISID® number, and amount.
 t. Indicate the type of institution filing this report, if this is not clear
 from Part IV. For example, an IA that is managing partner of a limited
 partnership that is acting as a hedge fund that detects suspicious activity
 tied in part to its hedge fund activities should note that it is operating as
 a hedge fund.
 u. Indicate, in instances when the subject or entity has a CRD or NFA
 number, what that number is.
 v. If correcting a prior report (box in Item 1 checked), complete the form
 in its entirety and note the corrected items here in Part VI
      Information already provided in earlier parts of this form need not necessarily be repeated if the meaning is clear.
    Supporting documentation should not be filed with this report. Maintain the information for your files.
  Tips on SAR form preparation and filing are available in the SAR Activity Review at www.fincen.gov/pub_reports.html
  Enter explanation/description in the space below. Continue on the next page if necessary.
Suspicious Activity Report Narrative (continued) 4
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1701 



:


detect
insur compani must file all appropri report and follow all the requir of the
bank secreci act includ the implement of an effect bsa complianc program
certain other report can help compani identifi suspici transact incom and
outgo wire transfer log can help compani identifi possibl pattern suggest of monei
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11645
launder account activ report gener show weekli andor monthli balanc deposit
and withdraw review of these statement can identifi those account with larg increas
in averag balanc and number of transact polici cancel report should identifi
polici cancel within a specif time period report detail should includ the amount of
the cash surrend valu the ident of the sale agent and the actual term of the polici
the trace illicit transact chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin
manual provid more inform about techniqu for detect illicit incom and
payment includ in that chapter ar detail on analyz financi record financi and
behavior profil and net worth analysi
currenc transact report
omb no 15060004
fincen form 104
formerli form 4789
eff decemb 2003
complet all part that applyse instruct
1 check all box that appli
section aperson on whose behalf transact is conduct
5 do busi as dba
4 middl initial3 first name2 individu last name or entiti name
6 ssn or ein
7 address number street and apt or suit no
depart of the treasuri
fincen
9 citi 10 state 11 zip code 12 countri code
if not us
13 occup profess or busi
25 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
section b individu conduct transact if other than abov
if section b is left blank or incomplet check the box below to indic the reason
14 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
44 titl of approv offici
47 type or print prepar name
45 signatur of approv offici
48 type or print name of person to contact 49 telephon number
18 address number street and apt or suit no
17 middl initial16 first name15 individu last name
19 ssn
20 citi 21 state 22 zip code 23 countri code
if not us
40 citi
38 address number street and apt or suit no
enter regul or bsa
examin code number
see instruct
37 name of financi institut
42 zip code 43 rout micr number41 state
26 total cash in 00
cat no 37683n fincen form 104 formerli form 4789 rev 803
previou edit will not be accept after august 31 2004
pleas type or print
person involv in transactionspart i
b mail deposit or shipment c night deposit or autom teller machin d multipl transactionsa armor car servic
8 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
24 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
b passport c alien registr
d other f number
part ii amount and type of transact check all box that appli
28 date of transact
mm dd yyyi
26a foreign cash in 00
27 total cash out 00
27a foreign cash out 00
30 wire transfer 31 negoti instrument purchas
34 depositswithdraw
35 account number affect if ani 36 other specifi
part iii financi institut where transact take place
39 ein or ssn
for paperwork reduct act notic see page 4
sign
here
mm dd yyyi
46 date of signatur
a amend prior report b multipl person c multipl transact
e issu by
33 currenc exchang
d other
b passport c alien registrationa driver licensest id
f number issu by
e conduct on own behalf
a driver licensest id
see instruct page 3
32 negoti instrument cash
29 foreign countri
see instruct page 3
section aperson on whose behalf transact is conduct
5 do busi as dba
4 middl initial3 first name2 individu last name or entiti name
6 ssn or ein
7 address number street and apt or suit no
9 citi 10 state 11 zip code 12 countri code
if not us
25 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
section bindividu conduct transact if other than abov
14 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
f number issu by
18 address number street and apt or suit no
17 middl initial16 first name15 individu last name
19 ssn
20 citi 21 state 22 zip code 23 countri code
if not us
person involv in transactionspart i
8 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
24 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr
d other e issu by f number
multipl person
complet applic part below if box 1b on page 1 is check
fincen form 104 formerli form 4789 rev 803 page 2
section aperson on whose behalf transact is conduct
5 do busi as dba
4 middl initial3 first name2 individu last name or entiti name
6 ssn or ein
7 address number street and apt or suit no
9 citi 10 state 11 zip code 12 countri code
if not us
25 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
section bindividu conduct transact if other than abov
14 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
f number
18 address number street and apt or suit no
17 middl initial16 first name15 individu last name
19 ssn
20 citi 21 state 22 zip code 23 countri code
if not us
person involv in transactionspart i
8 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
24 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr
d other
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr
e issu by
d other
f number issu byd other
13 occup profess or busi
13 occup profess or busi
fincen form 104 formerli form 4789 rev 803 page 3
suspici transact
thi currenc transact report ctr should not be
file for suspici transact involv 10000 or less
in currenc or to note that a transact of more than
10000 is suspici ani suspici or unusu activ
should be report by a financi institut in the
manner prescrib by it appropri feder regul
or bsa examin see the instruct for item 37 if a
transact is suspici and in excess of 10000 in
currenc then both a ctr and the appropri
suspici activ report form must be file
should the suspici activ requir immedi
attent financi institut should telephon
1800800ctr an intern revenu servic ir
employe will direct the call to the local offic of the
ir crimin investig divis ci thi tollfre
number is oper mondai through fridai from
approxim 900 am to 600 pm eastern standard
time if an emerg consult directori assist for
the local ir cid offic
gener instruct
who must file each financi institut other than a
casino which instead must file fincen form 103 and
the us postal servic for which there ar separ rule
must file fincen form 104 formerli 4789 ctr for
each deposit withdraw exchang of currenc or other
payment or transfer by through or to the financi
institut which involv a transact in currenc of
more than 10000 multipl transact must be
treat as a singl transact if the financi institut
ha knowledg that 1 thei ar by or on behalf of the
same person and 2 thei result in either currenc
receiv cash in or currenc disburs cash out by
the financi institut total more than 10000
dure ani on busi dai for a bank a busi dai
is the dai on which transact ar routin post to
custom account as normal commun to
depositori custom for all other financi institut
a busi dai is a calendar dai
gener financi institut ar defin as bank
other type of depositori institut broker or dealer
in secur monei transmitt currenc exchang
check casher and issuer and seller of monei order
and travel check should you have question see
the definit in 31 cfr part 103
when and where to file file thi ctr by the 15th
calendar dai after the dai of the transact with the
ir detroit comput center
attn ctr
po box 33604
detroit mi 482325604
keep a copi of each ctr for five year from the date
file
a financi institut mai appli to file the ctr
magnet to obtain an applic to file magnet
write to the
ir detroit comput center
attn ctr magnet media coordin
po box 33604
detroit mi 482325604
identif requir all individu except
employe of armor car servic conduct a
report transact for themselv or for anoth
person must be identifi by mean of an offici
document accept form of identif includ
a driver licens militari and militarydepend
identif card passport state issu identif
card cedular card foreign nonresid alien
identif card or ani other identif document
or document which contain name and prefer
address and a photograph and ar normal accept
by financi institut as a mean of identif when
cash check for person other than establish
custom
accept identif inform obtain
previous and maintain in the financi institut
record mai be us for exampl if document
verifi an individu ident were examin and
record on a signatur card when an account wa
open the financi institut mai reli on that
inform in complet the ctr the financi
institut must indic on the form the method type
and number of the identif statement such as
known custom or signatur card on file ar not
suffici for form complet
penalti civil and crimin penalti ar provid for
failur to file a ctr or to suppli inform or for file
a fals or fraudul ctr see 31 usc 5321 5322
and 5324
for purpos of thi ctr the term below have the
follow mean
currenc the coin and paper monei of the unit
state or ani other countri which is circul and
customarili us and accept as monei
person an individu corpor partnership trust
or estat joint stock compani associ syndic
joint ventur or other unincorpor organ or
group
organ entiti other than an individu
transact in currenc the physic transfer of
currenc from on person to anoth thi doe not
includ a transfer of fund by mean of bank check bank
draft wire transfer or other written order that doe not
involv the physic transfer of currenc
negoti instrument all check and draft includ
busi person bank cashier and thirdparti
monei order and promissori note for purpos of
thi ctr all travel check shall also be consid
negoti instrument whether or not thei ar in bearer
form
foreign exchang rate if complet item 26a27a
us the exchang rate in effect for the busi dai of
the transact the sourc of the exchang rate that is
us will be determin by the report institut
specif instruct
becaus of the limit space on the front and back of
the ctr it mai be necessari to submit addit
inform on attach sheet submit thi addit
inform on plain paper attach to the ctr be sure
to put the individu or entiti name and identifi
number item 2 3 4 and 6 of the ctr on ani
addit sheet so that if it becom separ it mai
be associ with the ctr
item 1a amend prior report if thi ctr is be
file becaus it amend a report file previous check
item 1a stapl a copi of the origin ctr to the
amend on complet part iii fulli and onli those other
entri which ar be amend
item 1b multipl person if thi transact is be
conduct by more than on person or on behalf of
more than on person check item 1b enter inform
in part i for on of the person and provid inform
on ani other person on the back of the ctr
item 1c multipl transact if the financi
institut ha knowledg that there ar multipl
transact check item 1c
part i person involv in transact
section a must be complet if an individu conduct
a transact on hi own behalf complet section a and
leav section b blank if an individu conduct a
transact on hi own behalf and on behalf of anoth
person complet section a for each person and leav
section b blank if an individu conduct a
transact on behalf of anoth person complet
section b for the individu conduct the transact
and complet section a for each person on whose
behalf the transact is conduct of whom the financi
institut ha knowledg
section a person on whose behalf transact
is conduct see instruct abov
item 2 3 and 4 individualorgan name if
the person on whose behalf the transact is
conduct is an individu put hisher last name in item
2 first name in item 3 and middl initi in item 4 if
there is no middl initi leav item 4 blank if the
transact is conduct on behalf of an entiti put it
name in item 2 and leav item 3 and 4 blank
item 5 do busi as dba if the financi
institut ha knowledg of a separ do busi
as name enter it in item 5 for exampl smith
enterpris dba mj pizza
item 6 ssnitin or ein enter the social secur
number ssn or individu taxpay identif
number itin or employ identif number ein
of the person or entiti identifi in item 2 if none
write none
item 7 9 10 11 and 12 address enter the
perman address includ zip code of the person
identifi in item 2 us the us postal servic two
letter state abbrevi code a p o box should not
be us by itself and mai onli be us if there is no
street address if a p o box is us the name of the
apart or suit number road or rout number where
the person resid must also be provid if the address
is outsid the us provid the street address citi
provinc or state postal code if known and the two
letter countri code for countri code list go to
wwwfincengovregbsaformshtml or telephon
18009492732 and select option number 5 if us
leav item 12 blank
item 8 date of birth enter the date of birth eight
numer must be insert for each date the first two
will reflect the month the second two the dai and the
last four the year a zero 0 should preced ani singl
digit number for exampl if an individu birth date
is april 3 1948 item 8 should read 04 03 1948
item 13 occup profess or busi identifi
the occup profess or busi of the person on
whose behalf the transact wa conduct for
exampl secretari shoe salesman carpent attornei
housewif restaur liquor storeetc do not us non
specif term such as merchant selfemploi
businessman etc
item 14 if an individu describ method us to
verifi ident if an individu conduct the
transact on hisher own behalf hisher ident must
be verifi by examin of an accept document
see gener instruct for exampl check box a if
a driver licens is us to verifi an individu ident
and enter the state that issu the licens and the number
in item e and f if the transact is conduct by an
individu on behalf of anoth individu not present
or on behalf of an entiti enter na in item 14
section b individu conduct transact
if other than abov financi institut should enter
as much inform as is avail
fincen form 104 formerli 4789 rev 803 page 4
howev there mai be instanc in which item 1525
mai be left blank or incomplet if item 1525 ar
left blank or incomplet check on or more of the
box provid to indic the reason
exampl if there ar multipl transact that if onli
when aggreg the financi institut ha knowledg
the transact exce the report threshold and
therefor did not identifi the transactor check box d
for multipl transact
item 15 16 and 17 individu name complet
these item if an individu conduct a transact on
behalf of anoth person for exampl if john doe an
employe of xyz groceri store make a deposit to the
store account xyz groceri store should be identifi
in section a and john doe should be identifi in section
b
item 18 20 21 22 and 23 address enter the
perman street address includ zip code of the
individu see the instruct for item 7 and 9 through
12 enter countri code if not us refer item 12
item 19 ssnitin if the individu ha a social secur
number or individu taxpay indentifc number
enter it in item 19 if the individu doe not have an
ssnitin enter none
item 24 date of birth enter the individu date of
birth see the instruct for item 8
item 25 if an individu describ method us to
verifi ident enter the method us to identifi the
individu ident see gener instruct and the
instruct for item 14
part ii amount and type of transact
complet part ii to identifi the type of transact
and the amount involv
item 26 and 27 total cash intot cash out in the
space provid enter the total amount of currenc
receiv total cash in or total currenc disburs total
cash out by the financi institut if foreign currenc
is exchang us the us dollar equival on the dai
of the transact see foreign exchang rate and
complet item 26a or 27a whichev is appropri
if less than a full dollar amount is involv increas
that figur to the next highest dollar for exampl if the
currenc total 2000005 show the total as
2000100
item 26a and 27a foreign cash inforeign cash out
if foreign currenc is exchang enter the amount of
foreign currenc in item 26a and 27a report countri
of origin in item 29
item 28 date of transact insert eight numer for
each date see instruct for item 8
item 29 foreign countri if item 26a andor 27a ar
complet indic that foreign currenc is involv
check item 29 and identifi the countri if multipl
foreign currenc ar involv check box 36 and
identifi the addit countri andor currenc
involv
determin whether transact meet the
report threshold
onli cash transact that if alon or when
aggreg exce 10000 should be report on the
ctr transact shall not be offset against on anoth
if there ar both cash in and cash out transact
that ar report the amount should be consid
separ and not aggreg howev thei mai be
report on a singl ctr
if there is a currenc exchang it should be aggreg
separ with each of the cash in and cash out total
exampl 1 a person deposit 11000 in currenc to
hi save account and withdraw 3000 in currenc
from hi check account the ctr should be
complet as follow
cash in 11000 and no entri for cash out thi is
becaus the 3000 transact doe not meet the
report threshold
exampl 2 a person deposit 11000 in currenc to
hi save account and withdraw 12000 in currenc
from hi check account the ctr should be
complet as follow
cash in 11000 cash out 12000 thi is becaus
there ar two report transact howev on
ctr mai be file to reflect both
exampl 3 a person deposit 6000 in currenc to hi
save account and withdraw 4000 in currenc from
hi check account further he present 5000 in
currenc to be exchang for the equival in french
franc the ctr should be complet as follow
cash in 11000 and no entri for cash out thi is
becaus in determin whether the transact ar
report the currenc exchang is aggreg with
each of the cash in and cash out amount the result is
a report 11000 cash in transact the total cash
out amount is 9000 which doe not meet the
report threshold therefor it is not enter on the
ctr
exampl 4 a person deposit 6000 in currenc to hi
save account and withdraw 7000 in currenc from
hi check account further he present 5000 in
currenc to be exchang for the equival in french
franc the ctr should be complet as follow
cash in 11000 cash out 12000 thi is becaus
in determin whether the transact ar report
the currenc exchang is aggreg with each of the
cash in and cash out amount in thi exampl each
of the cash in and cash out total exce 10000 and
must be reflect on the ctr
item 3033 check the appropri item to identifi
the follow type of transact
30 wire transfer
31 negoti instrument purchas
32 negoti instrument cash
33 currenc exchang
item 34 depositswithdraw check thi item to
identifi deposit to or withdraw from account eg
demand deposit account save account time
deposit mutual fund account or ani other account
held at the financi institut enter the account
number in item 35
item 35 account number affect if ani enter
the account number of ani account affect by the
transact that ar maintain at the financi
institut conduct the transact if necessari
us addit sheet of paper to indic all of the
affect account
exampl 1 if a person cash a check drawn on an
account held at the financi institut the ctr should
be complet as follow
indic negoti instrument cash and provid
the account number of the check
if the transact doe not affect an account make no
entri
exampl 2 a person cash a check drawn on anoth
financi institut in thi instanc negoti
instrument cash would be indic but no account
at the financi institut ha been affect therefor
item 35 should be left blank
item 36 other specifi if a transact is not identifi
in item 3034 check item 36 and provid an addit
descript for exampl a person present a check to
purchas foreign currenc also list multipl foreign
currenc from item 29
part iii financi institut where transact take
place
item 37 name of financi institut and ident of
regul or bsa examin enter the financi institut
full legal name and identifi the regul or bsa examin
us the follow code
regul or bsa examin code
comptrol of the currenc occ1
feder deposit insur corpor fdic2
feder reserv system frs3
offic of thrift supervis ots4
nation credit union administr ncua5
secur and exchang commiss sec6
intern revenu servic irs7
us postal servic usps8
commod futur trade commiss cftc9
state regulator10
item 38 40 41 and 42 address enter the street address
citi state and zip code of the financi institut where
the transact occur if there ar multipl transact
provid inform of the offic or branch where ani on
of the transact ha occur
item 39 ein or ssn enter the financi institut ein
if the financi institut doe not have an ein enter the
ssn of the financi institut princip owner
item 43 rout micr number if a depositori
institut enter the rout magnet ink charact
recognit micr number
signatur
item 44 and 45 titl and signatur of approv
offici the offici who review and approv the ctr
must indic hisher titl and sign the ctr
item 46 date of signatur the approv offici must
enter the date the ctr is sign see the instruct for
item 8
item 47 prepar name type or print the full name of
the individu prepar the ctr the prepar and the
approv offici mai not necessarili be the same
individu
item 48 and 49 contact persontelephon number
type or print the name and telephon number of an
individu to contact concern question about the ctr
paperwork reduct act notic the request
inform is us in crimin tax and regulatori
investig and proceed financi institut ar
requir to provid the inform under 31 usc
5313 and 31 cfr part 103 commonli refer to as the
bank secreci act bsa the bsa is administ by the
us depart of the treasuri financi crime
enforc network fincen you ar not requir
to provid the request inform unless a form
displai a valid omb control number
the time need to complet thi form will vari
depend on individu circumst the estim
averag time is 19 minut if you have comment
concern the accuraci of thi time estim or
suggest for make thi form simpler you mai write
to the financi crime enforc network p o
box 39 vienna va 22183 do not send thi form to
thi offic instead see when and where to file in the
instruct
report of cash payment over 10000
receiv in a trade or busi
ir
form
8300
omb no 15450892
rev march 2008
see instruct for definit of cash
depart of the treasuri
intern revenu servic
for privaci act and paperwork reduct act notic see page 5
suspici transact
b
amend prior report
a
check appropri box if
1
ident of individu from whom the cash wa receiv
if more than on individu is involv check here and see instruct
2
taxpay identif number
6
mi
5
first name
4
last name
3
occup profess or busi
13
address number street and apt or suit no
7
date of birth
8
countri if not us
12
zip code
11
state
10
citi
9
describ id
a
identifi
document id
14
c
person on whose behalf thi transact wa conduct
if thi transact wa conduct on behalf of more than on person check here and see instruct
15
19
mi
18
first name
17
individu last name or organ name
16
employ identif number
occup profess or busi
22
address number street and apt or suit no
21
countri if not us
26
zip code
25
state
24
citi
23
descript of transact and method of payment
busi servic provid
d
person properti purchas
a
intang properti purchas
e
real properti purchas
b
person servic provid
c
32
date cash receiv
28
00
busi that receiv cash
employ identif number
36
name of busi that receiv cash
35
social secur number
address number street and apt or suit no
37
natur of your busi
41
zip code
40
state
39
citi
38
under penalti of perjuri i declar that to the best of my knowledg the inform i have furnish abov is true correct
and complet
42
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
cat no 62133
part iv
part i
part ii
part iii
us currenc
b
foreign currenc
20
do busi as dba name see instruct
total cash receiv
29
00
if cash wa receiv in
more than on payment
check here
30
total price if differ from
item 29
31
00
amount of cash receiv in us dollar equival must equal item 29 see instruct
a
00
00
00
00
00
c
cashier check
d
monei order
e
bank draft
f
travel check
amount in 100 bill or higher
countri
00
type of transact
33
exchang of cash
g
escrow or trust fund
h
other specifi in item 34
j
debt oblig paid
f
specif descript of properti or servic shown in
33 give serial or registr number address docket
number etc
34
issuer name and serial number of the monetari instrument
see instruct
taxpay identif number
bail receiv by court clerk
signatur
titl
date of
signatur
type or print name of contact person
contact telephon number
us thi form for transact occur after march 31 2008 do not us prior version after thi date
fincen
form
8300
omb no 15060018
rev march 2008
depart of the treasuri
financi crime
enforc network
author offici
ir form 8300 rev 32008
b
issu by
number
describ id
alien
identif id
issu by
number
continu complet if box 2 on page 1 is check
continu complet if box 15 on page 1 is check
part i
part ii
ir form 8300 rev 32008
page 2
multipl parti
complet applic part below if box 2 or 15 on page 1 is check
taxpay identif number
mi
first name
last name
occup profess or busi
address number street and apt or suit no
date of birth
countri if not us
zip code
state
citi
taxpay identif number
mi
first name
last name
occup profess or busi
address number street and apt or suit no
date of birth
countri if not us
zip code
state
citi
first name
individu last name or organ name
employ identif number
occup profess or busi
address number street and apt or suit no
countri if not us
zip code
state
citi
do busi as dba name see instruct
taxpay identif number
mi
first name
individu last name or organ name
employ identif number
occup profess or busi
address number street and apt or suit no
countri if not us
zip code
state
citi
do busi as dba name see instruct
taxpay identif number
ir form 8300 rev 32008
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
describ id
identifi
document id
issu by
number
describ id
alien
identif id
issu by
number
describ id
identifi
document id
issu by
number
describ id
alien
identif id
issu by
number
comment pleas us the line provid below to comment on or clarifi ani inform you enter on ani line in part i ii iii and iv
page 3 ir form 8300 rev 32008
import remind
clerk of feder or state court must
file form 8300 if more than 10000 in
cash is receiv as bail for an
individu charg with certain crimin
offens for these purpos a clerk
includ the clerk offic or ani other
offic depart divis branch or
unit of the court that is author to
receiv bail if a person receiv bail on
behalf of a clerk the clerk is treat as
receiv the bail see the instruct
for item 33 on page 5
gener instruct
who must file each person engag in
a trade or busi who in the cours
of that trade or busi receiv more
than 10000 in cash in on transact
or in two or more relat transact
must file form 8300 ani transact
conduct between a payer or it
agent and the recipi in a 24hour
period ar relat transact
transact ar consid relat
even if thei occur over a period of more
than 24 hour if the recipi know or
ha reason to know that each
transact is on of a seri of
connect transact
except cash is not requir to be
report if it is receiv
when to file file form 8300 by the
15th dai after the date the cash wa
receiv if that date fall on a saturdai
sundai or legal holidai file the form on
the next busi dai
statement to be provid you must
give a written or electron statement to
each person name on a requir form
8300 on or befor januari 31 of the
year follow the calendar year in which
the cash is receiv the statement
must show the name telephon number
and address of the inform contact
for the busi the aggreg amount
of report cash receiv and that the
inform wa furnish to the ir
keep a copi of the statement for your
record
multipl payment if you receiv more
than on cash payment for a singl
transact or for relat transact
you must report the multipl payment
ani time you receiv a total amount that
exce 10000 within ani 12month
period submit the report within 15 dai
of the date you receiv the payment that
taxpay identif number tin
you must furnish the correct tin of the
person or person from whom you
receiv the cash and if applic the
person or person on whose behalf the
transact is be conduct you mai
be subject to penalti for an incorrect
or miss tin
penalti you mai be subject to
penalti if you fail to file a correct and
complet form 8300 on time and you
cannot show that the failur wa due to
reason caus you mai also be
subject to penalti if you fail to furnish
time a correct and complet statement
to each person name in a requir
report a minimum penalti of 25000
mai be impos if the failur is due to
an intent or will disregard of the
cash report requir
c by a financi institut requir to file
form 104 currenc transact report
c by a casino requir to file or exempt
from file form 103 currenc
transact report by casino if the
cash is receiv as part of it game
busi
c by an agent who receiv the cash
from a princip if the agent us all of
the cash within 15 dai in a second
transact that is report on form
8300 or on form 104 and disclos all
the inform necessari to complet
part ii of form 8300 or form 104 to the
recipi of the cash in the second
transact
c in a transact occur entir
outsid the unit state see
public 1544 report cash
payment of over 10000 receiv in
a trade or busi regard
transact occur in puerto rico
and territori and possess of the
unit state
c in a transact that is not in the
cours of a person trade or busi
if multipl payment ar made in cash
to satisfi bail and the initi payment
doe not exce 10000 the initi
payment and subsequ payment
must be aggreg and the inform
return must be file by the 15th dai
after receipt of the payment that caus
the aggreg amount to exce
10000 in cash in such case the
report requir can be satisfi
either by send a singl written
statement with an aggreg amount
list or by furnish a copi of each
form 8300 relat to that payer
payment made to satisfi separ bail
requir ar not requir to be
aggreg see treasuri regul
section 16050i2
voluntari us of form 8300 form
8300 mai be file voluntarili for ani
suspici transact see definit
on page 4 for us by fincen and the
ir even if the total amount doe not
exce 10000
if you have request but ar not abl
to get a tin for on or more of the
parti to a transact within 15 dai
follow the transact file the report
and attach a statement explain why
the tin is not includ
except you ar not requir to
provid the tin of a person who is a
nonresid alien individu or a foreign
organ if that person or foreign
organ
keep a copi of each form 8300 for 5
year from the date you file it
where to file file the form with the
intern revenu servic detroit
comput center po box 32621
detroit ml 48232
the tin for an individu includ a
sole proprietorship is the individu
social secur number ssn for certain
resid alien who ar not elig to
get an ssn and nonresid alien who
ar requir to file tax return it is an
ir individu taxpay identif
number itin for other person
includ corpor partnership and
estat it is the employ identif
number ein
casino must file form 8300 for
nongam activ restaur shop
etc
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
section refer ar to the intern
revenu code unless otherwis note
c section 6050i 26 unit state code
usc 6050i and 31 usc 5331
requir that certain inform be
report to the ir and the financi
crime enforc network fincen
thi inform must be report on
irsfincen form 8300
c item 33 box i is to be check onli by
clerk of the court box d is to be
check by bail bondsmen see the
instruct on page 5
c the mean of the word currenc
for purpos of 31 usc 5331 is the
same as for the word cash see cash
on page 4
penalti mai also be impos for
caus or attempt to caus a trade
or busi to fail to file a requir
caus the total amount to exce
10000 if more than on report is
requir within 15 dai you mai file a
combin report file the combin
report no later than the date the earliest
report if file separ would have to
be file
c doe not have incom effect
connect with the conduct of a us
trade or busi
c doe not have an offic or place of
busi or a fiscal or pai agent in
the unit state
c doe not furnish a withhold
certif describ in 114411e2 or
3 or 114415c2iv or 3iii to the
extent requir under 114411e4vii
or
c doe not have to furnish a tin on ani
return statement or other document as
requir by the incom tax regul
under section 897 or 1445
page 4 ir form 8300 rev 32008
part i
item 2 if two or more individu
conduct the transact you ar
report check the box and complet
part i for ani on of the individu
provid the same inform for the
other individu on the back of the
form if more than three individu ar
involv provid the same inform
on addit sheet of paper and attach
them to thi form
item 6 enter the taxpay identif
number tin of the individu name
see taxpay identif number tin
on page 3 for more inform
item 8 enter eight numer for the date
of birth of the individu name for
exampl if the individu birth date is
juli 6 1960 enter 07 06 1960
item 13 fulli describ the natur of the
occup profess or busi for
exampl plumber attornei or
automobil dealer do not us gener
or nondescript term such as
businessman or selfemploi
item 14 you must verifi the name and
address of the name individu
verif must be made by
examin of a document normal
accept as a mean of identif
when cash check for exampl a
driver licens passport alien
registr card or other offici
document in item 14a enter the type of
document examin in item 14b
identifi the issuer of the document in
item 14c enter the document number
for exampl if the individu ha a utah
driver licens enter driver licens
in item 14a utah in item 14b and the
number appear on the licens in item
14c
part ii
item 15 if the transact is be
conduct on behalf of more than on
person includ husband and wife or
parent and child check the box and
complet part ii for ani on of the
person provid the same inform
for the other person on the back of
the form if more than three person ar
involv provid the same inform
on addit sheet of paper and attach
them to thi form
specif instruct
you must complet all part howev
you mai skip part ii if the individu
name in part i is conduct the
transact on hi or her behalf onli for
voluntari report of suspici
transact see item 1 below
item 1 if you ar amend a prior
report check box 1a complet the
appropri item with the correct or
amend inform onli complet all
of part iv stapl a copi of the origin
report to the amend report
to voluntarili report a suspici
transact see suspici transact
abov check box 1b you mai also
telephon your local ir crimin
investig divis or call
18665563974
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
note you must complet all three item
a b and c in thi line to make sure
that form 8300 will be process
correctli
definit
cash the term cash mean the
follow
c us and foreign coin and currenc
receiv in ani transact
c a cashier check monei order bank
draft or travel check have a face
amount of 10000 or less that is
receiv in a design report
transact defin below or that is
receiv in ani transact in which the
recipi know that the instrument is
be us in an attempt to avoid the
report of the transact under either
section 6050i or 31 usc 5331
design report transact a
retail sale or the receipt of fund by a
broker or other intermediari in
connect with a retail sale of a
consum durabl a collect or a
travel or entertain activ
retail sale ani sale whether or not
the sale is for resal or for ani other
purpos made in the cours of a trade
or busi if that trade or busi
princip consist of make sale to
ultim consum
consum durabl an item of tangibl
person properti of a type that under
ordinari usag can reason be
expect to remain us for at least 1
year and that ha a sale price of more
than 10000
collect ani work of art rug
antiqu metal gem stamp coin etc
travel or entertain activ an
item of travel or entertain that
pertain to a singl trip or event if the
combin sale price of the item and all
other item relat to the same trip or
event that ar sold in the same
transact or relat transact
exce 10000
except a cashier check monei
order bank draft or travel check is
not consid receiv in a design
report transact if it constitut the
proce of a bank loan or if it is
receiv as a payment on certain
promissori note instal sale
contract or down payment plan see
public 1544 for more inform
note cash doe not includ a check
drawn on the payer own account such
as a person check regardless of the
amount
person an individu corpor
partnership trust estat associ or
compani
recipi the person receiv the
cash each branch or other unit of a
person trade or busi is consid
a separ recipi unless the branch
receiv the cash or a central offic
link the branch know or ha
reason to know the ident of payer
make cash payment to other
branch
transact includ the purchas of
properti or servic the payment of
debt the exchang of a negoti
instrument for cash and the receipt of
cash to be held in escrow or trust a
singl transact mai not be broken
into multipl transact to avoid
report
suspici transact a suspici
transact is a transact in which it
appear that a person is attempt to
caus form 8300 not to be file or to
file a fals or incomplet form
report for caus or attempt to
caus a trade or busi to file a
requir report contain a materi
omiss or misstat of fact or for
structur or attempt to structur
transact to avoid the report
requir these violat mai also
be subject to crimin prosecut which
upon convict mai result in
imprison of up to 5 year or fine of
up to 250000 for individu and
500000 for corpor or both
item 16 through 19 if the person on
whose behalf the transact is be
conduct is an individu complet
item 16 17 and 18 enter hi or her
tin in item 19 if the individu is a sole
proprietor and ha an employ
identif number ein you must
enter both the ssn and ein in item 19
if the person is an organ put it
name as shown on requir tax file in
item 16 and it ein in item 19
item 20 if a sole proprietor or
organ name in item 16 through
18 is do busi under a name other
than that enter in item 16 for
exampl a trade or do busi
as dba name enter it here
item 27 if the person is not requir to
furnish a tin complet thi item see
taxpay identif number tin on
page 3 enter a descript of the type
of offici document issu to that
person in item 27a for exampl a
passport the countri that issu the
document in item 27b and the
document number in item 27c
page 5 ir form 8300 rev 32008 fincen form 8300 rev 32008
item 31 enter the total price of the
properti servic amount of cash
exchang etc for exampl the total
cost of a vehicl purchas cost of
cater servic exchang of currenc if
differ from the amount shown in item
29
item 32 enter the dollar amount of each
form of cash receiv show foreign
currenc amount in us dollar
equival at a fair market rate of
exchang avail to the public the
sum of the amount must equal item 29
for cashier check monei order bank
draft or travel check provid the
name of the issuer and the serial number
of each instrument name of all issuer
and all serial number involv must be
provid if necessari provid thi
inform on addit sheet of paper
and attach them to thi form
item 33 check the appropri box
that describ the transact if the
transact is not specifi in box ai
check box j and briefli describ the
transact for exampl car leas
boat leas hous leas or aircraft
rental if the transact relat to the
receipt of bail by a court clerk check
box i bail receiv by court clerk
thi box is onli for us by court clerk
if the transact relat to cash
receiv by a bail bondsman check box
d busi servic provid
part iv
item 36 if you ar a sole proprietorship
you must enter your ssn if your
busi also ha an ein you must
provid the ein as well all other
busi entiti must enter an ein
item 41 fulli describ the natur of
your busi for exampl attornei or
jewelri dealer do not us gener or
nondescript term such as busi
or store
privaci act and paperwork reduct
act notic except as otherwis note
the inform solicit on thi form is
requir by the intern revenu servic
ir and the financi crime
enforc network fincen in order
to carri out the law and regul of
the unit state depart of the
treasuri trade or busi except
for clerk of crimin court ar requir
to provid the inform to the ir and
fincen under both section 6050i and 31
usc 5331 clerk of crimin court
ar requir to provid the inform
to the ir under section 6050i section
6109 and 31 usc 5331 requir that
you provid your social secur number
in order to adequ identifi you and
process your return and other paper
the princip purpos for collect the
inform on thi form is to maintain
report or record which have a high
degre of us in crimin tax or
regulatori investig or proceed
or in the conduct of intellig or
counterintellig activ by direct
the feder govern attent to
unusu or question transact
gener tax return and return
inform ar confidenti as state in
section 6103 howev section 6103
allow or requir the ir to disclos or
give the inform request on thi
form to other as describ in the code
for exampl we mai disclos your tax
inform to the depart of justic
to enforc the tax law both civil and
crimin and to citi state the district
of columbia to carri out their tax law
we mai disclos thi inform to
other person as necessari to obtain
inform which we cannot get in ani
other wai we mai disclos thi
inform to feder state and local
child support agenc and to other
feder agenc for the purpos of
determin entitl for benefit or
the elig for and the repay of
loan we mai also provid the record
to appropri state local and foreign
crimin law enforc and regulatori
personnel in the perform of their
offici duti we mai also disclos thi
inform to other countri under a
tax treati or to feder and state
agenc to enforc feder nontax
crimin law and to combat terror in
addit fincen mai provid the
inform to those offici if thei ar
conduct intellig or
counterintellig activ to protect
against intern terror
you ar not requir to provid
inform as to whether the report
transact is deem suspici
failur to provid all other request
inform or provid fraudul
inform mai result in crimin
prosecut and other penalti under
titl 26 and titl 31 of the unit state
code
item 42 thi form must be sign by an
individu who ha been author to
do so for the busi that receiv the
cash
you ar not requir to provid the
inform request on a form that is
subject to the paperwork reduct act
unless the form displai a valid omb
control number book or record
relat to a form or it instruct must
be retain as long as their content
mai becom materi in the
administr of ani law under titl 26
or titl 31
the time need to complet thi
form will vari depend on individu
circumst the estim averag
time is 21 minut if you have
comment concern the accuraci of
thi time estim or suggest for
make thi form simpler you can write
to the intern revenu servic tax
product coordin committe
sewcarmpttsp 1111 constitut
av nw ir6526 washington dc
20224 do not send form 8300 to thi
address instead see where to file on
page 3
comment
us thi section to comment on or
clarifi anyth you mai have enter
on ani line in part i ii iii and iv for
exampl if you check box b
suspici transact in line 1 abov
part i you mai want to explain why you
think that the cash transact you ar
report on form 8300 mai be
suspici
part iii
item 28 enter the date you receiv the
cash if you receiv the cash in more
than on payment enter the date you
receiv the payment that caus the
combin amount to exce 10000
see multipl payment on page 3 for
more inform
item 30 check thi box if the amount
shown in item 29 wa receiv in more
than on payment for exampl as
instal payment or payment on
relat transact
note you must complet all three item
a b and c in thi line to make sure
that form 8300 will be process
correctli
report of intern
transport of currenc
or monetari instrument
omb no 15060014
to be file with the bureau of
custom and border protect
airlineflightvessel inspector name and badg number licens plate
depart of the treasuri
financi crime enforc network
for paperwork reduct act
notic and privaci act notic
see back of form
2 identif no see instruct 3 date of birth modayyr
4 perman address in unit state or abroad 5 your countri or countri of
citizenship
10 immigr alien no
fincen form 105
7 passport no countri
9 place unit state visa wa issu
31 usc 5316 31 cfr 10323 and 10327
formerli custom form 4790
custom and border protect us onli
1 name last or famili first and middl
8 us visa date modayyr
6 address while in the unit state
depart from us portciti in us arriv at citi in us
11 if currenc or monetari instrument is accompani by a person complet 11a or 11b
b import into the unit state
currenc and monetari instrument inform see instruct on reverseto be complet by everyon
a export from the unit state
12a date ship modayyr
12e ship to name and address
15 type of busi activ occup or profess
12f receiv from name and address
17 if other than us currenc
is involv pleas complet
block a and b
signatur of person complet thi report
under penalti of perjuri i declar that i have examin thi report and to the best of my knowledg and belief it is true correct and complet
18 name and titl print 20 date of report modayyr
part iv
part i
16 type and amount of currencymonetari instrument
total
other monetari instrument
specifi type issu entiti and date and serial or other identifi number
currenc and coin
for a person depart or enter the unit state or a person ship mail or receiv currenc or
monetari instrument if act for anyon els also complet part ii below
19 signatur
statecountri number
date
count verifi voluntari
report
ye no ye no
a currenc name
b countri
part iii
part ii
ye no
15a is the busi a bank
inform about person or busi on whose behalf import or export wa conduct
13 name last or famili first and middl or busi name
14 perman address in unit state or abroad
fincen form 105
formerli custom form 4790
rev juli 2003
depart of the treasuri
fincen
depart from foreign citycountryarriv at foreign citycountri
12 if currenc or monetari instrument wa mail or otherwis ship complet 12a through 12f
12d name of carrier12b date receiv modayyr 12c method of shipment eg us mail public carrier etc
pleas type or print
gener instruct
thi report is requir by 31 usc 5316 and treasuri depart regul 31 cfr
103
who must file
1 each person who physic transport mail or ship or caus to be physic
transport mail or ship currenc or other monetari instrument in an aggreg
amount exceed 10000 at on time from the unit state to ani place outsid the
unit state or into the unit state from ani place outsid the unit state and
2 each person who receiv in the unit state currenc or other monetari
instrument in an aggreg amount exceed 10000 at on time which have been
transport mail or ship to the person from ani place outsid the unit state
a transfer of fund through normal bank procedur which
doe not involv the physic transport of currenc or
monetari instrument is not requir to be report
except report ar not requir to be file by
1 a feder reserv bank
2 a bank a foreign bank or a broker or dealer in secur in respect to currenc
or other monetari instrument mail or ship through the postal servic or by common
carrier
3 a commerci bank or trust compani organ under the law of ani state or of
the unit state with respect to overland shipment of currenc or monetari instrument
ship to or receiv from an establish custom maintain a deposit relationship
with the bank in amount which the bank mai reason conclud do not exce
amount commensur with the customari conduct of the busi industri or profess
of the custom concern
4 a person who is not a citizen or resid of the unit state in respect to
currenc or other monetari instrument mail or ship from abroad to a bank or
broker or dealer in secur through the postal servic or by common carrier
5 a common carrier of passeng in respect to currenc or other monetari
instrument in the possess of it passeng
6 a common carrier of good in respect to shipment of currenc or monetari
instrument not declar to be such by the shipper
7 a travel check issuer or it agent in respect to the transport of travel
check prior to their deliveri to sell agent for eventu sale to the public
8 a person with a restrict endors travel check that is in the collect
and reconcili process after the travel check ha been negoti nor by
9 a person engag as a busi in the transport of currenc monetari
instrument and other commerci paper with respect to the transport of currenc
or other monetari instrument overland between establish offic of bank or broker
or dealer in secur and foreign person
when and where to file
a recipi each person who receiv currenc or other monetari instrument in the
unit state shall file fincen form 105 within 15 dai after receipt of the currenc or
monetari instrument with the custom offic in charg at ani port of entri or departur
or by mail with the commission of custom attent currenc transport
report washington dc 20229
b shipper or mailer if the currenc or other monetari instrument doe not accompani
the person enter or depart the unit state fincen form 105 mai be file by
mail on or befor the date of entri departur mail or ship with the commission
of custom attent currenc transport report washington dc 20229
c travel travel carri currenc or other monetari instrument with them shall
file fincen form 105 at the time of entri into the unit state or at the time of departur
from the unit state with the custom offic in charg at ani custom port of entri or
departur
an addit report of a particular transport mail or ship of currenc or
the monetari instrument is not requir if a complet and truth report ha alreadi
been file howev no person otherwis requir to file a report shall be excus from
liabil for failur to do so if in fact a complet and truth report ha not been file
form mai be obtain from ani bureau of custom and border protect offic
penalti civil and crimin penalti includ under certain circumst a
fine of not more than 500000 and imprison of not more than ten year ar
provid for failur to file a report file a report contain a materi omiss or
misstat or file a fals or fraudul report in addit the currenc or
monetari instrument mai be subject to seizur and forfeitur see 31 usc5321
and 31 cfr 10357 31 usc 5322 and 31 cfr 10359 31 usc 5317 and 31 cfr
10358 and usc 5332
definit
bank each agent agenc branch or offic within the unit state of ani person do
busi in on or more of the capac list 1 a commerci bank or trust compani
organ under the law of ani state or of the unit state 2 a privat bank 3
asav associ save and loan associ and build and loan associ
organ under the law of ani state or of the unit state 4 an insur institut as
defin in section 401 of the nation hous act 5 a save bank industri bank or
other thrift institut 6 a credit union organ under the law of ani state or of the
unit state 7 ani other organ charter under the bank law of ani state
and subject to the supervis of the bank supervisori author of a state other than a
monei servic busi 8 a bank organ under foreign law and 9 ani nation
bank associ or corpor act under the provis of section 25a of the
feder reserv act 12 usc section 611632
foreign bank a bank organ under foreign law or an agenc branch or offic locat
outsid the unit state of a bank the term doe not includ an agent agenc branch
or offic within the unit state of a bank organ under foreign law
broker or dealer in securitiesa broker or dealer in secur regist or requir
to be regist with the secur and exchang commiss under the secur
exchang act of 1934
identif number individu must enter their social secur number if ani
howev alien who do not have a social secur number should enter passport or alien
registr number all other should enter their employ identif number
monetari instrument 1 coin or currenc of the unit state or of ani other countri
2 travel check in ani form 3 negoti instrument includ check promissori
note and monei order in bearer form endors without restrict made out to a
fictiti paye or otherwis in such form that titl thereto pass upon deliveri 4
incomplet instrument includ check promissori note and monei order that ar
sign but on which the name of the paye ha been omit and 5 secur or stock
in bearer form or otherwis in such form that titl thereto pass upon deliveri monetari
instrument do not includ i check or monei order made payabl to the order of a
name person which have not been endors or which bear restrict endors
ii warehous receipt or iii bill of lade
person an individu a corpor a partnership a trust or estat a joint stock
compani an associ a syndic joint ventur or other unincorpor organ
or group an indian tribe as that term is defin in the indian game regulatori act
and all entiti cogniz as legal person
special instruct
you should complet each line that appli to you part ii block 13 provid the
complet name of the shipper or recipi on whose behalf the export or import
wa conduct part iii specifi type of instrument issu entiti and date serial or
other identifi number and paye if ani part iv block 22a and 22b enter the
exact date you ship or receiv currenc or monetari instrument block 21 if
currenc or monetari instrument of more than on countri is involv attach a list
show each type countri or origin and amount
privaci act and paperwork reduct act notic
pursuant to the requir of public law 93579 privaci act of 1974 notic is herebi
given that the author to collect inform on form 4790 in accord with 5 usc
552ae3 is public law 91508 31 usc 5316 5 usc 301 reorgan plan
no1 of 1950 treasuri depart order no 165 revis as amend 31 cfr 103
and 44 usc 3501
the princip purpos for collect the inform is to assur mainten of report
or record have a high degre of us in crimin tax or regulatori investig
or proceed the inform collect mai be provid to those offic and
employe of the bureau of custom and border protect and ani other constitu
unit of the depart of the treasuri who have a need for the record in the perform
of their duti the record mai be refer to ani other depart or agenc of the
feder govern upon the request of the head of such depart or agenc the
inform collect mai also be provid to appropri state local and foreign crimin
law enforc and regulatori personnel in the perform of their offici duti
disclosur of thi inform is mandatori pursuant to 31 usc 5316 and 31 cfr part
103 see penal
disclosur of the social secur number is mandatori the author to collect thi number
is 31 usc 5316b and 31 cfr 10327d the social secur number will be us as a
mean to identifi the individu who file the record
an agenc mai not conduct or sponsor and a person is not requir to respond to a
collect of inform unless it displai a current valid omb control number the
collect of thi inform is mandatori pursuant to 31 usc 5316
statement requir by 5 cfr 13208b3iii the estim averag burden associ
with thi collect of inform is 11 minut per respond or record keeper
depend on individu circumst comment concern the accuraci of thi burden
estim and suggest for reduc thi burden should be direct to the depart
of the treasuri financi crime enforc network po box 39 vienna virginia
22183 do not send complet form to thi officese when and where to file
abov
fincen form 105
formerli custom form 4790
1 check box below onli if correct a prior report
correct prior report see instruct 3 under how to make a report
d
31 is the relationship an insid relationship a ye b no
close
ye no
ye no
a
b
1suspici
activ report
juli 2003
previou edit will not be accept after decemb 31 2003
alwai complet entir report
see instruct
frb fr 2230 omb no 71000212
fdic 671006 omb no 30640077
occ 8010980101 omb no 15570180
ot 1601 omb no 15500003
ncua 2362 omb no 31330094
treasuri td f 902247 omb no 15060001
part i report financi institut inform
2 name of financi institut
4 address of financi institut
6 citi
11 state 12 zip code10 citi
9 address of branch offic where activ occur multipl branch includ inform in narr part v
14 account number affect if ani
part ii suspect inform
15 last name or name of entiti 16 first name 17 middl
18 address 19 ssn ein or tin
7 state 8 zip code
20 citi 21 state 22 zip code 23 countri
27 date of birth
24 phone number resid includ area code
25 phone number work includ area code
26 occupationtyp of busi
29 form of identif for suspect
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr d other
number issu author
mm dd yyyi
c still emploi at financi institut e termin
d suspend f resign
32 date of suspens termin resign
mm dd yyyi
c
suspect inform unavail
close
ye no
ye no
mm dd yyyi
3 ein
5 primari feder regul
a feder reserv d occ
b fdic e ot
c ncua
if ye specifi
13 if institut close date close
28 admissionconfess
a ye b no
30 relationship to financi institut
a account d attornei g custom j offic
b agent e borrow h director k sharehold
c apprais f broker i employe l other
37 dollar amount of recoveri if applic
00
f comput intrus
g consum loan fraud
h counterfeit check
i counterfeit creditdebit card
j counterfeit instrument other
k credit card fraud
34 total dollar amount involv in known or suspici activ
00
40 ha ani law enforc agenc alreadi been advis by telephon written commun or otherwis
a dea d postal inspect g other feder
b fbi e secret servic h state
c ir f us custom i local
j agenc name for g h or i
2
35 summari character of suspici activ
a bank secreci actstructur
monei launder
b briberygratu
c check fraud
d check kite
e commerci loan fraud
s other
part iii suspici activ inform
33 date or date rang of suspici activ
from to
36 amount of loss prior to recoveri
00
38 ha the suspici activ had a
materi impact on or otherwis
affect the financi sound
of the institut
a ye b no
51 agenc if not file by financi institut
mm dd yyyi mm dd yyyi
39 ha the institut bond compani been notifi
a ye b no
part iv contact for assist
45 last name 46 first name
50 date prepar
48 titleoccup
mm dd yyyi
49 phone number includ area code
47 middl
type of activ
if applic
41 name of person contact at law enforc agenc 42 phone number includ area code
44 phone number includ area code
43 name of person contact at law enforc agenc
l debit card fraud
m defalcationembezzl
n fals statement
o misus of posit or self deal
p mortgag loan fraud
q mysteri disappear
r wire transfer fraud
t terrorist financ
u ident theft
3part v suspici activ inform explanationdescript
explanationdescript of known or suspect violat
of law or suspici activ
thi section of the report is critic the care with which it is
written mai make the differ in whether or not the describ
conduct and it possibl crimin natur ar clearli understood
provid below a chronolog and complet account of the
possibl violat of law includ what is unusu irregular or
suspici about the transact us the follow checklist as
you prepar your account if necessari continu the
narr on a duplic of thi page
a describ support document and retain for 5 year
b explain who benefit financi or otherwis from the
transact how much and how
c retain ani confess admiss or explan of the
transact provid by the suspect and indic to
whom and when it wa given
d retain ani confess admiss or explan of the
transact provid by ani other person and indic
to whom and when it wa given
e retain ani evid of coverup or evid of an attempt
to deceiv feder or state examin or other
f indic where the possibl violat took place
eg main offic branch other
g indic whether the possibl violat is an isol
incid or relat to other transact
h indic whether there is ani relat litig if so
specifi
i recommend ani further investig that might assist law
enforc author
j indic whether ani inform ha been exclud from
thi report if so why
k if you ar correct a previous file report describ the
chang that ar be made
for bank secreci actstructuringmonei launder report
includ the follow addit inform
l indic whether currenc andor monetari instrument
were involv if so provid the amount andor descript
of the instrument for exampl bank draft letter of
credit domest or intern monei order stock
bond travel check wire transfer sent or receiv
cash etc
m indic ani account number that mai be involv
or affect
paperwork reduct act notic the purpos of thi form is to provid an effect and consist mean for financi institut to notifi appropri law enforc agenc of known
or suspect crimin conduct or suspici activ that take place at or were perpetr against financi institut thi report is requir by law pursuant to author contain in
the follow statut board of governor of the feder reserv system 12 usc 324 334 611a 1844b and c 3105c 2 and 3106a feder deposit insur corpor
12 usc 93a 1818 188184 340122 offic of the comptrol of the currenc 12 usc 93a 1818 188184 340122 offic of thrift supervis 12 usc 1463 and 1464
nation credit union administr 12 usc 1766a 1786q financi crime enforc network 31 usc 5318g inform collect on thi report is confidenti 5
usc 552b7 and 552ak2 and 31 usc 5318g the feder financi institut regulatori agenc and the us depart of justic and treasuri mai us and share the inform
public report and recordkeep burden for thi inform collect is estim to averag 30 minut per respons and includ time to gather and maintain data in the requir report review
the instruct and complet the inform collect send comment regard thi burden estim includ suggest for reduc the burden to the offic of manag and budget
paperwork reduct project washington dc 20503 and depend on your primari feder regulatori agenc to secretari board of governor of the feder reserv system washington dc 20551
or assist execut secretari feder deposit insur corpor washington dc 20429 or legisl and regulatori analysi divis offic of the comptrol of the currenc washington
dc 20219 or offic of thrift supervis enforc offic washington dc 20552 or nation credit union administr 1775 duke street alexandria va 22314 or offic of the director financi
crime enforc network depart of the treasuri 2070 chain bridg road vienna va 22182 the agenc mai not conduct or sponsor and an organ or a person is not requir
to respond to a collect of inform unless it displai a current valid omb control number
tip on sar form prepar and file ar avail in the sar activ review at wwwfincengovpubreportshtml
suspici activ report
instruct
safe harbor feder law 31 usc 5318g3 provid complet protect from civil liabil for all report of suspici
transact made to appropri author includ support document regardless of whether such report ar
file pursuant to thi report instruct or ar file on a voluntari basi specif the law provid that a financi
institut and it director offic employe and agent that make a disclosur of ani possibl violat of law or
regul includ in connect with the prepar of suspici activ report shall not be liabl to ani person
under ani law or regul of the unit state ani constitut law or regul of ani state or polit subdivis of
ani state or under ani contract or other legal enforc agreement includ ani arbitr agreement for such
disclosur or for ani failur to provid notic of such disclosur to the person who is the subject of such disclosur or ani
other person identifi in the disclosur
notif prohibit feder law 31 usc 5318g2 requir that a financi institut and it director offic
employe and agent who voluntarili or by mean of a suspici activ report report suspect or known crimin
violat or suspici activ mai not notifi ani person involv in the transact that the transact ha been report
in situat involv violat requir immedi attent such as when a report violat is ongo the
financi institut shall immedi notifi by telephon appropri law enforc and financi institut
supervisori author in addit to file a time suspici activ report
when to make a report
1 all financi institut oper in the unit state includ insur bank save associ save
associ servic corpor credit union bank hold compani nonbank subsidiari of bank hold
compani edg and agreement corpor and us branch and agenc of foreign bank ar re
quir to make thi report follow the discoveri of
a insid abus involv ani amount whenev the financi institut detect ani known or suspect
feder crimin violat or pattern of crimin violat commit or attempt against the financi
institut or involv a transact or transact conduct through the financi institut where the
financi institut believ that it wa either an actual or potenti victim of a crimin violat or seri of
crimin violat or that the financi institut wa us to facilit a crimin transact and the
financi institut ha a substanti basi for identifi on of it director offic employe agent or
other institutionaffili parti as have commit or aid in the commiss of a crimin act regardless
of the amount involv in the violat
b violat aggreg 5000 or more where a suspect can be identifi whenev the financi
institut detect ani known or suspect feder crimin violat or pattern of crimin violat com
mit or attempt against the financi institut or involv a transact or transact conduct
through the financi institut and involv or aggreg 5000 or more in fund or other asset where
the financi institut believ that it wa either an actual or potenti victim of a crimin violat or seri
of crimin violat or that the financi institut wa us to facilit a crimin transact and the
financi institut ha a substanti basi for identifi a possibl suspect or group of suspect if it is
determin prior to file thi report that the identifi suspect or group of suspect ha us an alia then
inform regard the true ident of the suspect or group of suspect as well as alia identifi such
as driver licens or social secur number address and telephon number must be report
c violat aggreg 25000 or more regardless of a potenti suspect whenev the financi
institut detect ani known or suspect feder crimin violat or pattern of crimin violat com
mit or attempt against the financi institut or involv a transact or transact conduct
through the financi institut and involv or aggreg 25000 or more in fund or other asset where
the financi institut believ that it wa either an actual or potenti victim of a crimin violat or seri
of crimin violat or that the financi institut wa us to facilit a crimin transact even though
there is no substanti basi for identifi a possibl suspect or group of suspect
d transact aggreg 5000 or more that involv potenti monei launder or violat of the
bank secreci act ani transact which for purpos of thi subsect mean a deposit withdraw
transfer between account exchang of currenc loan extens of credit purchas or sale of ani stock
bond certif of deposit or other monetari instrument or invest secur or ani other payment transfer
or deliveri by through or to a financi institut by whatev mean effect conduct or attempt by at
or through the financi institut and involv or aggreg 5000 or more in fund or other asset if the financi
institut know suspect or ha reason to suspect that
i the transact involv fund deriv from illeg activ or is intend or conduct in order to hide or
disguis fund or asset deriv from illeg activ includ without limit the ownership natur
sourc locat or control of such fund or asset as part of a plan to violat or evad ani law or regul or
to avoid ani transact report requir under feder law
ii the transact is design to evad ani regul promulg under the bank secreci act or
iii the transact ha no busi or appar law purpos or is not the sort in which the particular custom
would normal be expect to engag and the financi institut know of no reason explan for the
transact after examin the avail fact includ the background and possibl purpos of the transact
the bank secreci act requir all financi institut to file currenc transact report ctr in accord with
the depart of the treasuri implement regul 31 cfr part 103 these regul requir a financi
institut to file a ctr whenev a currenc transact exce 10000 if a currenc transact exce 10000
and is suspici the institut must file both a ctr report the currenc transact and a suspici activ
report report the suspici or crimin aspect of the transact if a currenc transact equal or is below
10000 and is suspici the institut should onli file a suspici activ report
2 comput intrus for purpos of thi report comput intrus is defin as gain access to a
comput system of a financi institut to
a remov steal procur or otherwis affect fund of the institut or the institut custom
b remov steal procur or otherwis affect critic inform of the institut includ custom account
inform or
c damag disabl or otherwis affect critic system of the institut
for purpos of thi report requir comput intrus doe not mean attempt intrus of websit or
other noncrit inform system of the institut that provid no access to institut or custom financi or
other critic inform
3 a financi institut is requir to file a suspici activ report no later than 30 calendar dai after the date of
initi detect of fact that mai constitut a basi for file a suspici activ report if no suspect wa identifi
on the date of detect of the incid requir the file a financi institut mai delai file a suspici activ
report for an addit 30 calendar dai to identifi a suspect in no case shall report be delai more than 60
calendar dai after the date of initi detect of a report transact
4 thi suspici activ report doe not need to be file for those robberi and burglari that ar report to local
author or except for save associ and servic corpor for lost miss counterfeit or stolen
secur that ar report pursuant to the requir of 17 cfr 24017f1
how to make a report
1 send each complet suspici activ report to
detroit comput center po box 33980 detroit ml 482320980
2 for item that do not appli or for which inform is not avail leav blank
3 if you ar correct a previous file report check the box at the top of the report line 1 complet the report in it
entireti and includ the correct inform in the applic box then describ the chang that ar be made
in part v descript of suspici activ line k
4 do not includ ani support document with the suspici activ report identifi and retain a copi
of the suspici activ report and all origin support document or busi record equival for five 5
year from the date of the suspici activ report all support document must be made avail to
appropri author upon request
5 if more space is need to report addit suspect attach copi of page 1 to provid the addit inform if
more space is need to report addit branch address includ thi inform in the narr part v
6 financi institut ar encourag to provid copi of suspici activ report to state and local author
where appropri
17 govern issu identif if avail
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr d corporatepartnership resolut
e other
f id number g issu state or countri 2 digit code
fincen
form 101
effect mai 2004
suspici activ report by the
secur and futur industri
pleas type or print alwai complet entir report item
mark with an asterisk ar consid critic see instruct omb no 1506 0019
subject inform 2 check box a if multipl subject box b subject inform unavailablepart i
4 first name 5 middl initi
6 also known as aka individu do busi as dba entiti
3 individu last name or entiti full name
7 occup or type of busi
16 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
12
14 ssnitin individu or ein entiti
8 address
15 account number affect if ani indic if close
part iiipart iii
21 date or date rang of suspici activ
18 phone number work
23 instrument type check all that appli
suspici activ inform
from
mm dd yyyi
to
mm dd yyyi
part ii
20 is individualbusi associatedaffili
with the report institut see instruct
a ye b no
13 email address if avail
9 citi
11 zip code
30 type of suspici activ
o signific wire or other transact
without econom purpos
p suspici document or id present
q terrorist financ
r wash or other fictiti trade
s wire fraud
t other describ in part vi
24 cusip number
27 cusip number
25 cusip number
28 cusip number
26 cusip number
29 cusip number
catalog no 35349u
acct
ye acct
ye
acct ye acct ye
countri code if not us
see instruct
a bondsnot
b cash or equiv
c commerci paper
d commod futur contract
e monei market mutual fund
f mutual fund
g otc deriv
h other deriv
q commod type
pleas identifi
r instrument descript
s market where trade
enter approprit three or fourlett code
t other explain in part iv
i commod option
j secur futur product
k stock
l warrant
m other secur
n other nonsecur
o foreign currenc futuresopt
p foreign currenc
a briberygratu
b check fraud
c comput intrus
d creditdebit card fraud
e embezzlementtheft
f commod futuresopt fraud
g forgeri
h ident theft
i insid trade
j mail fraud
k market manipul
l monei launderingstructur
m prearrang or other noncompetit trade
n secur fraud
1 check the box if thi report correct a prior report see instruct
22 total dollar amount involv in suspici activ
rev 052204
19 phone number home
00
10 state
part vipart iv
55 titleposit
54 middl initial52 last name of individu to be contact regard thi report 53 first name
mm dd yyyi
57 date report prepared56 work phone number
contact for assist
report financi institut informationpart iv
part v
2
31 if a law enforc or regulatori author ha been contact exclud submiss of a sar check the appropri box
a dea f secret servic k nyse p state secur regul
d fbi i nasd n other stateloc
e ic j nfa o other srosecurit phlx pcx cboe amex etc
b us attornei 32 g cftc l other rfa q foreign
law enforc or regulatori contact informationpart iii
c ir h sec m other refutur cme cbot nymex nybot r other explain in part vi
mm dd yyyi
32 other author contact for item 31 l through r list us attornei offic here 33 name of individu contact for all of item 31
35 date contact
36 name of financi institut or sole proprietorship
39 citi 41 zip code
37 ein ssn itin
42 addit branch address locat handl account activ or custom 43 multipl locat see instruct
40 state
38 address
j i a
k invest compani mutual fund
l market maker
m municip secur dealer
n nfa
o refutur
p other rfa
q secur broker clear
r secur broker introduc
51 type of institut or individu check box for function that appli to thi report
s secur dealer
t secur floor broker
u secur option brokerdeal
v srosecur
w specialist
x subsidiari of bank
y us govern brokerdeal
z us govern interdeal broker
aa other describ in part vi
a agricultur trade option merchant
b affili of bank hold compani
c cpo
d cta
e direct particip program
f fcm
g futur floor broker
h futur floor trader
i ibc
44 citi
49 nfa id number
47 central registr depositori number
46 zip code45 state
50 ha thi report individualent coordin thi report with anoth report individualent ye provid detail in part vi no
48 sec id number
34 telephon number of individu contact item 33
send complet report to
detroit comput center
attn sarsf
po box 33980
detroit mi 48232
suspici activ inform narr part vi 3
explanationdescript of suspici activityi thi section of the report is critic the care with which it is complet mai determin whether
or not the describ activ and it possibl crimin natur ar clearli understood by investig provid a clear complet and chronolog
descript not exceed thi page and the next page of the activ includ what is unusu irregular or suspici about the transact us
the checklist below as a guid as you prepar your account
a describ conduct that rais suspicion
b explain whether the transact wa complet or onli attempt
c describ support document eg transact record new
account inform tape record email messag correspon
denc etc and retain such document in your file for five year
d explain who benefit financi or otherwis from the
transact how much and how if known
e describ and retain ani admiss or explan of the transact
provid by the subject or other person indic to whom and
when it wa given
f describ and retain ani evid of coverup or evid of an
attempt to deceiv feder or state examin sro or other
g indic where the possibl violat of law took place eg main
offic branch other
h indic whether the suspici activ is an isol incid or
relat to anoth transact
i indic whether there is ani relat litig if so specifi the
name of the litig and the court where the action is pend
j recommend ani further investig that might assist law
enforc author
k indic whether ani inform ha been exclud from thi report
if so state reason
l indic whether us or foreign currenc andor us or foreign
negoti instrument were involv if foreign provid the
amount name of currenc and countri of origin
m indic market where trade and wire transfer identifi
inform when appropri
n indic whether fund or asset were recov and if so enter the
dollar valu of the recoveri in whole dollar onli
o indic ani addit account number and ani foreign bank
account number which mai be involv
p indic for a foreign nation ani avail inform on subject
passport visa andor identif card includ date countri
citi of issu issu author and nation
q describ ani suspici activ that involv transfer of fund to or
from a foreign countri or transact in a foreign currenc identifi
the countri sourc and destin of fund
r describ subject posit if emploi by the financi institut
s indic whether secur futur or option were involv if so
list the type cusip number or isid number and amount
t indic the type of institut file thi report if thi is not clear
from part iv for exampl an ia that is manag partner of a limit
partnership that is act as a hedg fund that detect suspici activ
ti in part to it hedg fund activ should note that it is oper as
a hedg fund
u indic in instanc when the subject or entiti ha a crd or nfa
number what that number is
v if correct a prior report box in item 1 check complet the form
in it entireti and note the correct item here in part vi
inform alreadi provid in earlier part of thi form need not necessarili be repeat if the mean is clear
support document should not be file with thi report maintain the inform for your file
tip on sar form prepar and file ar avail in the sar activ review at wwwfincengovpubreportshtml
enter explanationdescript in the space below continu on the next page if necessari
suspici activ report narr continu 4
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11701
