2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Implementing an Effective Compliance and Ethics Program Under the Corporate Sentencing Guidelines


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Implementing an Effective Compliance and Ethics Program Under the Corporate Sentencing Guidelines 
To review, the United States Sentencing Commission began a study of sanctions for 
corporate wrongdoing in 1988. After three years of study and hearings, on May 1, 1991, the 
USSC submitted its Proposed Guidelines for Sentencing Organizations  to Congress. The 
introductory commentary to the Guidelines clearly states that they are designed to provide 
incentives for organizations to maintain internal mechanisms for preventing, detecting, and 
reporting criminal conduct. Among other things, the Guidelines suggest a substantial 
reduction of fines for organizations that have effective compliance programs. (See the 
chapter on “Organizational Crime” for more in formation about how penalties are calculated 
under the Guidelines.) 
 
The United States Sentencing Commission promulgated modifications to the existing 
provisions of Chapter 8 dealing with effective compliance and ethics programs for business 
organizations that became effective November 1, 2004. These provisions (contained in 
Section 8B2.1) narrowly tailor the criteria for compliance and ethics programs, thereby 
providing organizations with guidance in establishing and maintaining effective programs for 
detecting and preventing internal illegal activities, as well as mitigating sentencing culpability.  
 
Under the Guidelines, if a convicted organization has an effective compliance program in 
place at the time of the offense, the sentencing judge will consider the organization’s acts of 
due diligence in trying to prevent the illegality when deciding whether to increase or mitigate 
the sentence. The guidelines define effective compliance program as one that is reasonably 
designed, implemented, and enforced so that it generally will be effective in preventing and 
detecting criminal conduct. 
 
In April 2010, however, the U.S. Sentencing Commission modified the sentencing guidelines 
for organizations, especially as they relate to compliance programs. The most significant 
change under the modified sentencing guidelines for organizations concerns the sentence 
reduction credit for having an effective compliance program. Before the guidelines were 
modified, organizations were disqualified from receiving a reduction in sentencing for 
maintaining an effective compliance program if a “high-level person” was involved with the 
fraudulent activity. Under the modified guidelines, however, involvement of a high-level 
person is no longer an automatic bar from effective compliance program credit, but the 
amendments impose several conditions to receive a reduction under these circumstances, 
including a direct reporting requirement to the governing authority (board or audit 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.709  
committee). The changes will become effective on November 1, 2010, barring any 
Congressional modifications or rejection. 
 
As provided by the Guidelines, to have an “effective compliance and ethics program,” the 
organization shall: 
• Exercise due diligence to prevent and detect criminal conduct 
• Otherwise promote an organizational culture that encourages ethical conduct and a 
commitment to compliance with the law 
 
The Guidelines further require that such a compliance and ethics program be reasonably 
designed, implemented, and enforced so that it is generally effective in preventing and 
detecting criminal conduct. However, this Section further provides that the failure to prevent 
or detect the offense in question does not necessarily mean that the program is ineffective. 
 
In designing such a program, certain factors must be considered by each organization: 
1. Applicable industry size and practice — An organization’s failure to incorporate and 
follow industry practice or the standards called for by any applicable government 
regulation weighs against a finding that the program is effective. 
2. Size of the organization—Large organizations are expected to devote more formal 
operations and greater resources to meeting the requirements than are small 
organizations. For example, smaller organizations may use available personnel rather 
than employ separate staff to carry out ethics and compliance. 
3. Recurrence of similar misconduct — The recurrence of a similar event creates doubt as to 
whether the organization took reasonable steps to meet the requirements. 
 
To meet the two requirements of due diligence and promotion of an ethical culture, Section 
8B2.1 (b) sets forth the seven factors that are minimally required for such a program to be 
considered effective:  
1. The organization must have established standards and procedures to prevent and detect 
criminal conduct.  
2. Item 2 has three specific subparts: 
a. The organization’s governing authority shall be knowledgeable about the content and 
operation of the compliance and ethics program and shall exercise reasonable 
oversight with respect to implementation and effectiveness of the compliance and 
ethics program. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.710   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
b. High-level personnel shall ensure that the organization has an effective compliance 
and ethics program, and specific individual(s) within the organization shall be 
assigned overall responsibility for the compliance and ethics program. 
c. Specific individual(s) within the organization shall be delegated day-to-day 
operational responsibility for the compliance and ethics program. These individuals 
shall report periodically to high-level personnel and, as appropriate, to the governing 
authority (or a subgroup thereof) on the effectiveness of the program. It is also 
required that these specific individuals be given adequate resources and authority to 
accomplish their responsibilities and be given direct access to the governing 
authority. 
3. The organization shall use reasonable efforts not to include within the substantial 
authority personnel any individual whom the organization knew, or should have known, 
has engaged in illegal activities or other conducts inconsistent with an effective 
compliance and ethics program. 
4. Item 4 has two subparts: 
a. The organization shall take reasonable steps to communicate periodically and in a 
practical manner its standards and procedures, and other aspects of the compliance 
and ethics program, to the individuals referred to in subpart (b) below by conducting 
effective training programs and otherwise disseminating information appropriate to 
such individuals’ respective roles and responsibilities.  
b. The individuals referred to in subpart (a) above are the 1) members of the governing 
authority, 2) high-level personnel, 3) substantial authority personnel, 4) the 
organization’s employees, and, as appropriate, the 5) organization’s agents. 
5. The organization shall take reasonable steps to accomplish the following: 
a. Ensure that the organization’s compliance and ethics program is followed, including 
monitoring and auditing to detect criminal conduct. 
b. Evaluate periodically the effectiveness of the organization’s compliance and ethics 
program. 
c. Have and publicize a system, which may include mechanisms that allow for 
anonymity or confidentiality, whereby the organization’s employees and agents 
may report or seek guidance regarding potential or actual criminal conduct without 
fear of retaliation. 
6. The organization’s compliance and ethics program shall be promoted and enforced 
consistently throughout the organization through (a) appropriate incentives to  
perform in accordance with the program and (b) appropriate disciplinary measures for 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.711  
engaging in criminal conduct and for failing to take reasonable steps to prevent or detect 
criminal conduct. 
7. After criminal conduct has been detected, the organization shall take reasonable steps to 
respond appropriately to the criminal conduct and to prevent further similar criminal 
conduct, including making any necessary modifications to the organization’s compliance 
and ethics program. 
 
The following are some tips and suggestions for developing a compliance and ethics program 
that complies with these seven requirements: 
 
1. Establishing Standards 
The first step is to establish standards and procedures that are reasonably capable of 
preventing and detecting criminal conduct. One should start by producing a clear statement 
of management philosophy. This statement will serve as the backbone of all compliance 
procedures. This is similar to the COSO requirement that management must set the ethical 
tone for the organization.  
 
Organizations should draft clear, concise compliance standards that are consistent with 
management’s ethics policy and are relevant to business operations. A sample corporate 
compliance program is included later in this section. It should provide a framework from 
which fraud examiners can build compliance programs tailored to their own organizations.  
 
2. Assigning Responsisbility 
The Guidelines require that the company’s gove rning authority shall be knowledgeable about 
the content and operation of the compliance and ethics program and shall exercise 
reasonable oversight with respect to the implementation and effectiveness of the program. 
Governing authority  is defined as the board of directors, or if the organization does not have a 
board of directors, the highest-level governing body of the organization. 
 
It is also required that high-level personnel  shall ensure that the company has an effective 
program and that specific individuals within this group be assigned the overall responsibility 
for the program. 
 
High-level personnel are those who have “subst antial control over the organization or who 
have a substantial role in the making of policy within the organization.” Specific examples of 
high-level personnel include: 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.712   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Directors 
• Executive officers 
• Individuals in charge of major business or functional units of the organization 
• Individuals with substantial ownership interests in the organization 
 
Audit Committees 
If a board of directors exists, the board must be knowledgeable about the compliance 
program and oversee its implementation. Accordingly, it is preferable for the board of 
directors or one of the board’s committees to control the organization’s compliance 
program. For instance, many companies place their compliance programs under the control 
of audit committees. There are three principal benefits to this practice: 
• The involvement of the board of directors lends an air of authority to the compliance 
program. It clearly identifies the program as a matter of company policy. 
• The involvement of a board committee provides oversight to the operation of the 
program by personnel who are not involved in the day-to-day operation of the program. 
• Efforts to implement an effective compliance program can be documented in the 
committee’s minutes. This documentation can prove useful if the company ever has to 
defend its actions and seek mitigation of a criminal fine. 
• A member of the board should also be a member of the audit committee. This will help 
ensure that the board is knowledgeable about the content and operation of the program. 
 
Although the board and the officers may delegate the day-to-day operational responsibility 
for the program to other individuals (such as a compliance officer and his staff), these 
individuals must report periodically to the board or other high-level personnel regarding the 
effectiveness of the program. They must also have sufficient authority to ensure that 
standards are strictly adhered to as well as adequate resources to implement and monitor the 
program.  
  
3. Due Diligence in Hiring  
The Guidelines require that the organization “use reasonable efforts not to include within 
the substantial authority personnel of the organization any individual whom the organization 
knew, or should have known through the exercise of due diligence, has engaged in illegal 
activities or other conduct inconsistent with an effective compliance and ethics program.”  
 
Substantial authority personnel  is defined as individuals who exercise a substantial measure of 
discretion in acting on behalf of an organization. The term includes high-level personnel of 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.713  
the organization, individuals who exercise substantial supervisory authority (such as a plant 
manager or a sales manager), and any other individuals who, although not a part of an 
organization’s management, nevertheless exercise  substantial discretion when acting within 
the scope of their authority (such as an individual with authority in an organization to 
negotiate or set price levels or an individual authorized to negotiate or approve significant 
contracts). Whether an individual falls within this category must be determined on a case-by-
 case basis. 
 
Like COSO, the Guidelines require that organi zations hire ethical employees. This requires 
careful screening of applicants, thorough background checks (where permitted by law), and 
effective monitoring of the performance of current employees. Although the Guidelines only 
require such screening for “substantial authority personnel,” it is recommended that such 
screening be adopted for all employees. 
 
4. Communicating the Policy 
The corporate compliance policy should be communicated to everyone who can potentially 
bind a corporation through their own misconduct. This includes the following: 
• Board of directors 
• Executive officers and directors  
• Managers and supervisors 
• Low-level employees 
• Independent contractors 
 
Note in particular that organizations can be held liable for the acts of independent contractors 
if the contractor is acting for the benefit of the organization. It is therefore important to 
distribute copies of the compliance program to contractors as well as employees. 
 
Training Employees 
As required by the Sentencing Guidelines, organizations must  conduct “effective training 
programs.” Organizations are also required to periodically and appropriately communicate the 
program’s compliance requirements and procedures to all employees affected by the program, 
including upper-level personnel. These programs should be designed to inform employees 
about the company’s stance on corporate complia nce. They should also inform employees 
about what kinds of acts and omissions are prohibited by the law and by the organization. The 
training should be designed to help employees identify and avoid situations that could lead to 
criminal conduct. Common training techniques include: 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.714   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Lectures 
• Training films 
• Interactive workshops 
• Computer-based courses 
 
Employees should be trained to understand the organization’s ethical policy. They  
should also be trained to identify potentially compromising situations and learn how to  
avoid them. This training should be tailored to the nature of the organization’s business, 
taking into account the external and internal risks that are inherent in that business. Training 
should also include a review of statutes and regulations that are particularly applicable to  
the organization. 
 
Training should not be a one-time event. Simply handing out a copy of the company’s 
compliance policy at the beginning of an employee’s tenure is insufficient. Organizations 
should stress compliance by regularly emphasizing their standards to all personnel. For 
example, many companies disseminate a copy of their ethics policies every six months along 
with employee paychecks.  
 
5. Achieving Compliance 
An organization is required to take reasonable measures to ensure program compliance 
through monitoring, auditing, periodically evaluating the program’s effectiveness, and having 
a publicized reporting system whereby employees and agents may retain anonymity or 
confidentiality when reporting or seeking guidance regarding actual or potential illegal 
conduct without fear of retribution. These include such things as proactive fraud detection 
and hotlines, which are discussed in more detail in the next section. 
 
6. Disciplinary Action 
Enforcing a compliance program means adhering to a system of disciplinary actions for rule 
breakers. Employees must know that if they violate the company’s compliance policy, they will 
be punished. The opportunity to commit fraud is psychologically more acceptable when 
employees believe fraud normally goes undetected and unprosecuted. New employees should 
be advised of the compliance program at the time of hire, and should sign an annual statement 
acknowledging their understanding of it. The range of possible punishments for violations of 
the policy should be spelled out. These may include:  
• Reprimand 
• Probation 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.715  
• Suspension 
• Reduction in salary 
• Demotion 
• Reimbursement of losses of damages 
• Dismissal 
• Referral for criminal prosecution or civil action 
• A combination of the above 
 
In addition, the Guidelines recommend the discipline of individuals who are responsible for 
failing to detect offenses. 
 
If a compliance program is not enforced, it is nothing more than a paper tiger. There are two 
purposes to any compliance program. The first is to prevent criminal conduct. The second is 
to mitigate any potential fines for criminal conduct by showing that the organization is 
dedicated to preventing illegal activity. If an organization does not enforce its compliance 
program, its chances of mitigating fines are nil. Therefore, organizations should adhere to 
well-defined procedures when investigating potential violations and when disciplining 
individuals for offenses. The organization’s efforts should be documented so that it can 
prove that it made every effort to enforce compliance. For every allegation of an offense, the 
company should maintain: 
• An account of the alleged offense 
• A description of the steps taken to investigate the allegation 
• A description of the actions taken by the organization in response to the violation 
 
Note, however, that the Guidelines also require that the organization promote the compliance 
and ethics program through appropriate incentives that encourage employees to perform in 
accordance with the program. Such incentives can include rewards for reporting ethical concerns 
or misconduct, or rewards for ideas for new or innovative detection and monitoring methods. 
 
7. Appropriate Responses 
After detection of an offense, the organization must take all reasonable steps to appropriately 
respond to this offense and to prevent further similar offenses—including modifying its 
program and administering appropriate discipline for the individuals responsible for the offense 
and those who failed to detect it. When a control failure is identified, changes may be necessary. 
Both COSO and the Guidelines require organizations to identify the weakness in the control 
system and make modifications to prevent similar failures in the future. The Guidelines require 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.716   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
that organizations explain the modifications they have made and demonstrate why they will  
be effective.  
 
The proposed amendments clarify subsection 8B2.1(b)(7), adding an Application Note to 
provide guidance on what actions qualify as “rea sonable steps” for the purposes of this 
subsection. First, the proposed Note states that if the criminal conduct has an identifiable 
victim(s), “the organization should take reasonable steps to provide restitution and otherwise 
remedy the harm resulting from the criminal conduct.” 1 It provides that other proper responses 
include self-reporting and cooperation with authorities. Second, the proposed Note provides 
that the organization should appraise and, if needed, alter its compliance program to guarantee 
that the compliance program is more productive. Finally, the proposed Note provides that, if 
an organization decides to alter its compliance program, it may take the added step of retaining 
an autonomous monitor to guarantee sufficient appraisal and application of the changes. 
 



:


implement an effect complianc and ethic program under the corpor sentenc guidelin
to review the unit state sentenc commiss began a studi of sanction for
corpor wrongdo in 1988 after three year of studi and hear on mai 1 1991 the
ussc submit it propos guidelin for sentenc organ to congress the
introductori commentari to the guidelin clearli state that thei ar design to provid
incent for organ to maintain intern mechan for prevent detect and
report crimin conduct among other thing the guidelin suggest a substanti
reduct of fine for organ that have effect complianc program see the
chapter on organiz crime for more in format about how penalti ar calcul
under the guidelin
the unit state sentenc commiss promulg modif to the exist
provis of chapter 8 deal with effect complianc and ethic program for busi
organ that becam effect novemb 1 2004 these provis contain in
section 8b21 narrowli tailor the criteria for complianc and ethic program therebi
provid organ with guidanc in establish and maintain effect program for
detect and prevent intern illeg activ as well as mitig sentenc culpabl
under the guidelin if a convict organ ha an effect complianc program in
place at the time of the offens the sentenc judg will consid the organ act of
due dilig in try to prevent the illeg when decid whether to increas or mitig
the sentenc the guidelin defin effect complianc program as on that is reason
design implement and enforc so that it gener will be effect in prevent and
detect crimin conduct
in april 2010 howev the us sentenc commiss modifi the sentenc guidelin
for organ especi as thei relat to complianc program the most signific
chang under the modifi sentenc guidelin for organ concern the sentenc
reduct credit for have an effect complianc program befor the guidelin were
modifi organ were disqualifi from receiv a reduct in sentenc for
maintain an effect complianc program if a highlevel person wa involv with the
fraudul activ under the modifi guidelin howev involv of a highlevel
person is no longer an automat bar from effect complianc program credit but the
amend impos sever condit to receiv a reduct under these circumst
includ a direct report requir to the govern author board or audit
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4709
committe the chang will becom effect on novemb 1 2010 bar ani
congression modif or reject
as provid by the guidelin to have an effect complianc and ethic program the
organ shall
exercis due dilig to prevent and detect crimin conduct
otherwis promot an organiz cultur that encourag ethic conduct and a
commit to complianc with the law
the guidelin further requir that such a complianc and ethic program be reason
design implement and enforc so that it is gener effect in prevent and
detect crimin conduct howev thi section further provid that the failur to prevent
or detect the offens in question doe not necessarili mean that the program is ineffect
in design such a program certain factor must be consid by each organ
1 applic industri size and practic an organ failur to incorpor and
follow industri practic or the standard call for by ani applic govern
regul weigh against a find that the program is effect
2 size of the organizationlarg organ ar expect to devot more formal
oper and greater resourc to meet the requir than ar small
organ for exampl smaller organ mai us avail personnel rather
than emploi separ staff to carri out ethic and complianc
3 recurr of similar misconduct the recurr of a similar event creat doubt as to
whether the organ took reason step to meet the requir
to meet the two requir of due dilig and promot of an ethic cultur section
8b21 b set forth the seven factor that ar minim requir for such a program to be
consid effect
1 the organ must have establish standard and procedur to prevent and detect
crimin conduct
2 item 2 ha three specif subpart
a the organ govern author shall be knowledg about the content and
oper of the complianc and ethic program and shall exercis reason
oversight with respect to implement and effect of the complianc and
ethic program
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4710 2011 fraud examin manual
b highlevel personnel shall ensur that the organ ha an effect complianc
and ethic program and specif individu within the organ shall be
assign overal respons for the complianc and ethic program
c specif individu within the organ shall be deleg daytodai
oper respons for the complianc and ethic program these individu
shall report period to highlevel personnel and as appropri to the govern
author or a subgroup thereof on the effect of the program it is also
requir that these specif individu be given adequ resourc and author to
accomplish their respons and be given direct access to the govern
author
3 the organ shall us reason effort not to includ within the substanti
author personnel ani individu whom the organ knew or should have known
ha engag in illeg activ or other conduct inconsist with an effect
complianc and ethic program
4 item 4 ha two subpart
a the organ shall take reason step to commun period and in a
practic manner it standard and procedur and other aspect of the complianc
and ethic program to the individu refer to in subpart b below by conduct
effect train program and otherwis dissemin inform appropri to
such individu respect role and respons
b the individu refer to in subpart a abov ar the 1 member of the govern
author 2 highlevel personnel 3 substanti author personnel 4 the
organ employe and as appropri the 5 organ agent
5 the organ shall take reason step to accomplish the follow
a ensur that the organ complianc and ethic program is follow includ
monitor and audit to detect crimin conduct
b evalu period the effect of the organ complianc and ethic
program
c have and public a system which mai includ mechan that allow for
anonym or confidenti wherebi the organ employe and agent
mai report or seek guidanc regard potenti or actual crimin conduct without
fear of retali
6 the organ complianc and ethic program shall be promot and enforc
consist throughout the organ through a appropri incent to
perform in accord with the program and b appropri disciplinari measur for
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4711
engag in crimin conduct and for fail to take reason step to prevent or detect
crimin conduct
7 after crimin conduct ha been detect the organ shall take reason step to
respond appropri to the crimin conduct and to prevent further similar crimin
conduct includ make ani necessari modif to the organ complianc
and ethic program
the follow ar some tip and suggest for develop a complianc and ethic program
that compli with these seven requir
1 establish standard
the first step is to establish standard and procedur that ar reason capabl of
prevent and detect crimin conduct on should start by produc a clear statement
of manag philosophi thi statement will serv as the backbon of all complianc
procedur thi is similar to the coso requir that manag must set the ethic
tone for the organ
organ should draft clear concis complianc standard that ar consist with
manag ethic polici and ar relev to busi oper a sampl corpor
complianc program is includ later in thi section it should provid a framework from
which fraud examin can build complianc program tailor to their own organ
2 assign responsisbl
the guidelin requir that the compani gove rning author shall be knowledg about
the content and oper of the complianc and ethic program and shall exercis
reason oversight with respect to the implement and effect of the program
govern author is defin as the board of director or if the organ doe not have a
board of director the highestlevel govern bodi of the organ
it is also requir that highlevel personnel shall ensur that the compani ha an effect
program and that specif individu within thi group be assign the overal respons
for the program
highlevel personnel ar those who have subst antial control over the organ or who
have a substanti role in the make of polici within the organ specif exampl of
highlevel personnel includ
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4712 2011 fraud examin manual
director
execut offic
individu in charg of major busi or function unit of the organ
individu with substanti ownership interest in the organ
audit committe
if a board of director exist the board must be knowledg about the complianc
program and overse it implement accordingli it is prefer for the board of
director or on of the board committe to control the organ complianc
program for instanc mani compani place their complianc program under the control
of audit committe there ar three princip benefit to thi practic
the involv of the board of director lend an air of author to the complianc
program it clearli identifi the program as a matter of compani polici
the involv of a board committe provid oversight to the oper of the
program by personnel who ar not involv in the daytodai oper of the program
effort to implement an effect complianc program can be document in the
committe minut thi document can prove us if the compani ever ha to
defend it action and seek mitig of a crimin fine
a member of the board should also be a member of the audit committe thi will help
ensur that the board is knowledg about the content and oper of the program
although the board and the offic mai deleg the daytodai oper respons
for the program to other individu such as a complianc offic and hi staff these
individu must report period to the board or other highlevel personnel regard the
effect of the program thei must also have suffici author to ensur that
standard ar strictli adher to as well as adequ resourc to implement and monitor the
program
3 due dilig in hire
the guidelin requir that the organ us reason effort not to includ within
the substanti author personnel of the organ ani individu whom the organ
knew or should have known through the exercis of due dilig ha engag in illeg
activ or other conduct inconsist with an effect complianc and ethic program
substanti author personnel is defin as individu who exercis a substanti measur of
discret in act on behalf of an organ the term includ highlevel personnel of
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4713
the organ individu who exercis substanti supervisori author such as a plant
manag or a sale manag and ani other individu who although not a part of an
organ manag nevertheless exercis substanti discret when act within
the scope of their author such as an individu with author in an organ to
negoti or set price level or an individu author to negoti or approv signific
contract whether an individu fall within thi categori must be determin on a casebi
case basi
like coso the guidelin requir that organi zation hire ethic employe thi requir
care screen of applic thorough background check where permit by law and
effect monitor of the perform of current employe although the guidelin onli
requir such screen for substanti author personnel it is recommend that such
screen be adopt for all employe
4 commun the polici
the corpor complianc polici should be commun to everyon who can potenti
bind a corpor through their own misconduct thi includ the follow
board of director
execut offic and director
manag and supervisor
lowlevel employe
independ contractor
note in particular that organ can be held liabl for the act of independ contractor
if the contractor is act for the benefit of the organ it is therefor import to
distribut copi of the complianc program to contractor as well as employe
train employe
as requir by the sentenc guidelin organ must conduct effect train
program organ ar also requir to period and appropri commun the
program complianc requir and procedur to all employe affect by the program
includ upperlevel personnel these program should be design to inform employe
about the compani stanc on corpor complia nce thei should also inform employe
about what kind of act and omiss ar prohibit by the law and by the organ the
train should be design to help employe identifi and avoid situat that could lead to
crimin conduct common train techniqu includ
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4714 2011 fraud examin manual
lectur
train film
interact workshop
computerbas cours
employe should be train to understand the organ ethic polici thei
should also be train to identifi potenti compromis situat and learn how to
avoid them thi train should be tailor to the natur of the organ busi
take into account the extern and intern risk that ar inher in that busi train
should also includ a review of statut and regul that ar particularli applic to
the organ
train should not be a onetim event simpli hand out a copi of the compani
complianc polici at the begin of an employe tenur is insuffici organ
should stress complianc by regularli emphas their standard to all personnel for
exampl mani compani dissemin a copi of their ethic polici everi six month along
with employe paycheck
5 achiev complianc
an organ is requir to take reason measur to ensur program complianc
through monitor audit period evalu the program effect and have
a public report system wherebi employe and agent mai retain anonym or
confidenti when report or seek guidanc regard actual or potenti illeg
conduct without fear of retribut these includ such thing as proactiv fraud detect
and hotlin which ar discuss in more detail in the next section
6 disciplinari action
enforc a complianc program mean adher to a system of disciplinari action for rule
breaker employe must know that if thei violat the compani complianc polici thei will
be punish the opportun to commit fraud is psycholog more accept when
employe believ fraud normal goe undetect and unprosecut new employe should
be advis of the complianc program at the time of hire and should sign an annual statement
acknowledg their understand of it the rang of possibl punish for violat of
the polici should be spell out these mai includ
reprimand
probat
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4715
suspens
reduct in salari
demot
reimburs of loss of damag
dismiss
referr for crimin prosecut or civil action
a combin of the abov
in addit the guidelin recommend the disciplin of individu who ar respons for
fail to detect offens
if a complianc program is not enforc it is noth more than a paper tiger there ar two
purpos to ani complianc program the first is to prevent crimin conduct the second is
to mitig ani potenti fine for crimin conduct by show that the organ is
dedic to prevent illeg activ if an organ doe not enforc it complianc
program it chanc of mitig fine ar nil therefor organ should adher to
welldefin procedur when investig potenti violat and when disciplin
individu for offens the organ effort should be document so that it can
prove that it made everi effort to enforc complianc for everi alleg of an offens the
compani should maintain
an account of the alleg offens
a descript of the step taken to investig the alleg
a descript of the action taken by the organ in respons to the violat
note howev that the guidelin also requir that the organ promot the complianc
and ethic program through appropri incent that encourag employe to perform in
accord with the program such incent can includ reward for report ethic concern
or misconduct or reward for idea for new or innov detect and monitor method
7 appropri respons
after detect of an offens the organ must take all reason step to appropri
respond to thi offens and to prevent further similar offensesinclud modifi it
program and administ appropri disciplin for the individu respons for the offens
and those who fail to detect it when a control failur is identifi chang mai be necessari
both coso and the guidelin requir organ to identifi the weak in the control
system and make modif to prevent similar failur in the futur the guidelin requir
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4716 2011 fraud examin manual
that organ explain the modif thei have made and demonstr why thei will
be effect
the propos amend clarifi subsect 8b21b7 ad an applic note to
provid guidanc on what action qualifi as rea sonabl step for the purpos of thi
subsect first the propos note state that if the crimin conduct ha an identifi
victim the organ should take reason step to provid restitut and otherwis
remedi the harm result from the crimin conduct 1 it provid that other proper respons
includ selfreport and cooper with author second the propos note provid
that the organ should apprais and if need alter it complianc program to guarante
that the complianc program is more product final the propos note provid that if
an organ decid to alter it complianc program it mai take the ad step of retain
an autonom monitor to guarante suffici apprais and applic of the chang
