2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Ethics Programs


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Ethics Programs 
A written ethics policy is an excellent method by which management can objectively 
communicate its philosophy and develop a successful ethics program. The policy should be 
disseminated among both new and old employees. Additionally, some companies have 
found it effective to share the ethics policy with their vendors. 
 
In most cultures, the majority of people share the same values. They agree on what is good 
and bad, what is right and wrong, and what is moral and immoral. Although all will not hold 
the same set of values, the social values of the majority will affect the beliefs and behaviors 
of all people.  
 
The collection of a person’s beliefs and morals makes up a set of principles known as ethics. 
Ethics are the judgments about right and wrong or, more specifically, a person’s moral 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.733  
obligations to society that determine a person’s actions. Determining ethical rights and 
wrongs is complicated by the fact that moral standards and generally accepted social 
behavior change with time. In addition, different groups in the same society may have 
conflicting ideas of right and wrong. These values and ethics of an individual are reflected in 
their actions as employees. There are four factors that generally affect the ethical decisions  
of employees: 
• The law and other government regulations 
• Industry and organizational ethical codes 
• Social pressures 
• Tension between personal standards and organizational needs 
 
Employees’ ethics, whatever they may be, influe nce a wide range of organizational decisions 
and actions.  
 
A common fallacy in discussions about ethics is If it’s legal, it’s ethical. A common defense to 
charges of unethical behavior is to invoke the law. This legalistic approach to ethics 
mistakenly implies that actions that are not explicitly prohibited by the law are ethical. The 
main error in this approach is that legal standards do not establish ethical principles. 
Although abiding by the law is a part of ethical behavior, laws themselves do not describe 
how an ethical person should behave. One can be dishonest, unprincipled, untrustworthy, 
unfair, and uncaring without breaking the law. Ethical people measure their conduct by basic 
principles rather than rules. Thus, in making personal or occupational decisions, the law is 
only the minimum threshold in determining what is legally possible, and does not address 
how people should behave ethically. 
 



:


ethic program
a written ethic polici is an excel method by which manag can object
commun it philosophi and develop a success ethic program the polici should be
dissemin among both new and old employe addition some compani have
found it effect to share the ethic polici with their vendor
in most cultur the major of peopl share the same valu thei agre on what is good
and bad what is right and wrong and what is moral and immor although all will not hold
the same set of valu the social valu of the major will affect the belief and behavior
of all peopl
the collect of a person belief and moral make up a set of principl known as ethic
ethic ar the judgment about right and wrong or more specif a person moral
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4733
oblig to societi that determin a person action determin ethic right and
wrong is complic by the fact that moral standard and gener accept social
behavior chang with time in addit differ group in the same societi mai have
conflict idea of right and wrong these valu and ethic of an individu ar reflect in
their action as employe there ar four factor that gener affect the ethic decis
of employe
the law and other govern regul
industri and organiz ethic code
social pressur
tension between person standard and organiz need
employe ethic whatev thei mai be influ nce a wide rang of organiz decis
and action
a common fallaci in discuss about ethic is if it legal it ethic a common defens to
charg of uneth behavior is to invok the law thi legalist approach to ethic
mistakenli impli that action that ar not explicitli prohibit by the law ar ethic the
main error in thi approach is that legal standard do not establish ethic principl
although abid by the law is a part of ethic behavior law themselv do not describ
how an ethic person should behav on can be dishonest unprincipl untrustworthi
unfair and uncar without break the law ethic peopl measur their conduct by basic
principl rather than rule thu in make person or occup decis the law is
onli the minimum threshold in determin what is legal possibl and doe not address
how peopl should behav ethic
