2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Sample Corporate Compliance Program/III. ROLE OF THE COMPLIANCE COORDINATOR


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


III. ROLE OF THE COMPLIANCE COORDINATOR 
 
A. The Compliance Coordinator shall have overall responsibility (1) to oversee 
compliance with the standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and 
the Employee Handbook, and with the compliance procedures established by or 
under the compliance program, and (2) to ensure the proper functioning of the 
compliance program. 
 
B. The Compliance Coordinator shall confer generally with Management about matters 
relating to the compliance program, including all matters that, under the compliance 
program, the Compliance Coordinator is required to report to the Regulatory Affairs 
Committee of the Board of Directors under ¶ XI.B of the compliance program. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall monitor developments relating to compliance 
with applicable laws, regulations, and standards of conduct, and, shall, from time to 
                                                 
3 Source: BNA/ACCA Compliance Manual:  Prevention of Corporate Liability, pp. 1900:4-11. Published by 
The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc. (800-372-1033) <http://www.bna.com> 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.737  
time, distribute to particular employees or groups of employees memoranda, news 
articles, or other informational materials that explain compliance requirements, 
report changes in requirements or industry standards, highlight the importance of 
compliance, or are otherwise relevant to their compliance responsibilities. 
 
D. The Compliance Coordinator and/or the Corporate Compliance Audit Director shall 
review, on a continuing basis, the Corporation’s internal procedures for preventing 
violations of law and shall create a compendium of such procedures, including: 
 
1. Procedures for review of proposed product labeling, promotional materials, and 
advertising materials 
 
2. Procedures for obtaining opinions of counsel on proposed transactions or 
activities that may raise questions under the anti-trust laws or other laws 
 
3. Procedures for review by regulatory affairs professionals of product testing, 
product modifications, introduction of new products, and other matters that may 
raise regulatory issues 
 
4. Procedures for timely preparation and submission of disclosures and reports 
required by law 
  
5. Internal and external programs 
 
E. The Compliance Coordinator shall (1) report to and meet with Management, as 
necessary and appropriate, with respect to any deficiencies identified or 
improvements needed in the compliance program, and (2) report to and meet with 
the Regulatory Affairs Committee of the Board of Directors as required by ¶ XI.B of 
this compliance program. 
 
F. The Compliance Coordinator shall see to it that all reports of suspected misconduct 
or impropriety relating to (company)  operations or practices are promptly, thoroughly, 
and properly investigated in accordance with a Standard Operating Procedure 
approved by Management; and that, where appropriate, disciplinary sanctions are 
imposed in accordance with ¶ IX of this compliance program. 
 
G. The Compliance Coordinator shall discharge the responsibilities assigned to him by 
or under this compliance program. 
 
H. The Compliance Coordinator shall take such other actions as are necessary and 
appropriate to implement and improve the compliance program. 
 
I.  ___________________________ is designated as the Compliance Coordinator. 
  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.738   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     



:


iii role of the complianc coordin
a the complianc coordin shall have overal respons 1 to overse
complianc with the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and
the employe handbook and with the complianc procedur establish by or
under the complianc program and 2 to ensur the proper function of the
complianc program
b the complianc coordin shall confer gener with manag about matter
relat to the complianc program includ all matter that under the complianc
program the complianc coordin is requir to report to the regulatori affair
committe of the board of director under xib of the complianc program
c the complianc coordin shall monitor develop relat to complianc
with applic law regul and standard of conduct and shall from time to
3 sourc bnaacca complianc manual prevent of corpor liabil pp 1900411 publish by
the bureau of nation affair inc 8003721033 httpwwwbnacom
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4737
time distribut to particular employe or group of employe memoranda new
articl or other inform materi that explain complianc requir
report chang in requir or industri standard highlight the import of
complianc or ar otherwis relev to their complianc respons
d the complianc coordin andor the corpor complianc audit director shall
review on a continu basi the corpor intern procedur for prevent
violat of law and shall creat a compendium of such procedur includ
1 procedur for review of propos product label promot materi and
advertis materi
2 procedur for obtain opinion of counsel on propos transact or
activ that mai rais question under the antitrust law or other law
3 procedur for review by regulatori affair profession of product test
product modif introduct of new product and other matter that mai
rais regulatori issu
4 procedur for time prepar and submiss of disclosur and report
requir by law
5 intern and extern program
e the complianc coordin shall 1 report to and meet with manag as
necessari and appropri with respect to ani defici identifi or
improv need in the complianc program and 2 report to and meet with
the regulatori affair committe of the board of director as requir by xib of
thi complianc program
f the complianc coordin shall see to it that all report of suspect misconduct
or improprieti relat to compani oper or practic ar promptli thoroughli
and properli investig in accord with a standard oper procedur
approv by manag and that where appropri disciplinari sanction ar
impos in accord with ix of thi complianc program
g the complianc coordin shall discharg the respons assign to him by
or under thi complianc program
h the complianc coordin shall take such other action as ar necessari and
appropri to implement and improv the complianc program
i is design as the complianc coordin
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4738 2011 fraud examin manual
