2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Sample Code of Business Ethics and Conduct/Reporting Violations


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Reporting Violations  
All employees are responsible for compliance with these rules, standards, and principles. In 
the area of ethics, legality, and propriety, each employee has an obligation to the company 
that transcends normal reporting relationships. Employees should be alert to possible 
violations of the code anywhere in the company and are encouraged to report such 
violations promptly. Reports should be made to the employee’s supervisor, the appropriate 
security, audit, or legal department personnel, or elsewhere as the circumstance dictates. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.764   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Employees will also be expected to cooperate in an investigation of violations. In addition, 
any employee who is convicted of a felony, whether related to these rules or not, should also 
report that fact.  
 
All cases of questionable activity involving the code or other potentially improper actions 
will be reviewed for appropriate action, discipline, or corrective steps. Whenever possible, 
the company will keep confidential the identity of employees about or against whom 
allegations of violations are brought, unless or until it has been determined that a violation 
has occurred. Similarly, whenever possible, the company will keep confidential the identity of 
anyone reporting a possible violation. Reprisal against any employee who has, in good faith, 
reported a violation or suspected violation is strictly prohibited. 
 
All employees are required to notify the company within five (5) days of any conviction of 
any criminal statute violation occurring on the job. In addition, any employee who is 
convicted of a felony, whether related to these rules or not, should report that fact.  
 



:


report violat
all employe ar respons for complianc with these rule standard and principl in
the area of ethic legal and proprieti each employe ha an oblig to the compani
that transcend normal report relationship employe should be alert to possibl
violat of the code anywher in the compani and ar encourag to report such
violat promptli report should be made to the employe supervisor the appropri
secur audit or legal depart personnel or elsewher as the circumst dictat
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4764 2011 fraud examin manual
employe will also be expect to cooper in an investig of violat in addit
ani employe who is convict of a feloni whether relat to these rule or not should also
report that fact
all case of question activ involv the code or other potenti improp action
will be review for appropri action disciplin or correct step whenev possibl
the compani will keep confidenti the ident of employe about or against whom
alleg of violat ar brought unless or until it ha been determin that a violat
ha occur similarli whenev possibl the compani will keep confidenti the ident of
anyon report a possibl violat repris against ani employe who ha in good faith
report a violat or suspect violat is strictli prohibit
all employe ar requir to notifi the compani within five 5 dai of ani convict of
ani crimin statut violat occur on the job in addit ani employe who is
convict of a feloni whether relat to these rule or not should report that fact
