2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Informational Questions/Ask Nonleading (Open) Questions


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Ask Nonleading (Open) Questions 
Open questioning techniques are used almost exclusively in the informational phase of the 
interview. The questions must be inquisitory and not accusatory. Remember, the most 
effective question is constructed as a subtle command. 
  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.228   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Please tell me about ________.” 
 
“Please tell me about your current job procedures.” 
 
“Please tell me what paperwork you are responsible for.” 
 
“Please explain the chain of command in your department.” 
 
“Please tell me what procedures are in effect to prevent errors in the paperwork.” 
 
“Please explain what you understand to be the system of checks and balances (or internal 
controls) in your department.” 
 
“Please explain where you see areas that need to be improved in the system of checks and 
balances in your department.” 
 
Once the respondent has answered open questions, the interviewer can go back and review 
the facts in greater detail. If the answers are inconsistent, try to clarify them. But the 
interviewer should not challenge the honesty or integrity of the respondent at this point. 
 



:


ask nonlead open question
open question techniqu ar us almost exclus in the inform phase of the
interview the question must be inquisitori and not accusatori rememb the most
effect question is construct as a subtl command
interview theori and applic investig
3228 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
interview
pleas tell me about
pleas tell me about your current job procedur
pleas tell me what paperwork you ar respons for
pleas explain the chain of command in your depart
pleas tell me what procedur ar in effect to prevent error in the paperwork
pleas explain what you understand to be the system of check and balanc or intern
control in your depart
pleas explain where you see area that need to be improv in the system of check and
balanc in your depart
onc the respond ha answer open question the interview can go back and review
the fact in greater detail if the answer ar inconsist try to clarifi them but the
interview should not challeng the honesti or integr of the respond at thi point
