2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Closing Questions/Conclude the Interview


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Conclude the Interview 
Establishing rapport with the subject is important because it helps ensure future 
cooperation. Ask if the respondent has anything else to say. This gives the respondent one 
final time chance to make any statement. Also ask if the interviewer can call with any 
additional questions. It leaves the door open to additional cooperation. 
 
To maintain good will, it is also a good idea to ask respondents if they have been treated 
fairly. It is especially helpful to ask this when the respondent has not been cooperative, or at 
the conclusion of an admission-seeking interview. The interviewer generally should ask the 
question as if it were perfunctory. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, this is just a standard que stion. Do you feel that I have treated you fairly 
in this interview?” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.237 
In addition, leave the respondent a business card or a telephone number. Invite the 
respondent to call about anything else relevant.  
 
Also, in some cases, the interviewer should attempt to obtain a commitment that the 
respondent will not discuss the matter. However, this step is not recommended with adverse 
or hostile respondents, it may give them the idea to share the information. Here is an 
example of the proper approach. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“In these kinds of situations, innocent people ca n have their reputation hurt because of rumor 
and innuendo. We don’t want that to happen and neither do you. Therefore, I’d like your 
cooperation. Can I count on you not to discuss this until all the facts are out?” 
 
Finally, the interviewer should shake hands with the respondents and thank them for their 
time and information.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, I know you have given your time and effort to help me. I appreciate it. 
Good-bye.”  
 
 



:


conclud the interview
establish rapport with the subject is import becaus it help ensur futur
cooper ask if the respond ha anyth els to sai thi give the respond on
final time chanc to make ani statement also ask if the interview can call with ani
addit question it leav the door open to addit cooper
to maintain good will it is also a good idea to ask respond if thei have been treat
fairli it is especi help to ask thi when the respond ha not been cooper or at
the conclus of an admissionseek interview the interview gener should ask the
question as if it were perfunctori
exampl
interview
ms de la garza thi is just a standard que stion do you feel that i have treat you fairli
in thi interview
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3237
in addit leav the respond a busi card or a telephon number invit the
respond to call about anyth els relev
also in some case the interview should attempt to obtain a commit that the
respond will not discuss the matter howev thi step is not recommend with advers
or hostil respond it mai give them the idea to share the inform here is an
exampl of the proper approach
exampl
interview
in these kind of situat innoc peopl ca n have their reput hurt becaus of rumor
and innuendo we dont want that to happen and neither do you therefor id like your
cooper can i count on you not to discuss thi until all the fact ar out
final the interview should shake hand with the respond and thank them for their
time and inform
exampl
interview
ms de la garza i know you have given your time and effort to help me i appreci it
goodby
