2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Assessment Questions/Norming or Calibrating


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Norming or Calibrating 
Norming  or calibrating  is the process of observing behavior before critical questions are asked, 
as opposed to doing so during questioning. Norming should be a routine part of all 
interviews. People with truthful attitudes will answer questions one way; those with 
untruthful attitudes will generally answer them differently. Assessment questions ask the 
subject to agree with matters that go against the principles of most honest people. In other 
words, dishonest people are likely to agree with many of the statements, while honest people 
won’t. Assessment questions are designed primarily to get a verbal or nonverbal reaction 
from the respondent. The interviewer will then carefully assess that reaction.  
 
Suggestions for observing the verbal and physical behavior of the respondent include: 
• Use your senses of touch, sight, and hearing to establish a norm. 
• Do not stare or call attention to the person’s behavior symptoms. 
• Be aware of the respondent’s entire body. 
• Observe the timing and consistency of behavior. 
• Note clusters of behaviors. 
 
The best way to calibrate a witness is through the use of noncritical questions on 
background information, place of employment, and the like. If the witness displays general 
nervousness or other verbal and non-verbal clues during this phase of questioning, 
subsequent indicators may not be reliable. The key is to observe changes in behavior when 
pertinent questions are asked.  
 
Based on the respondent’s reaction to the assessment questions, the interviewer then 
considers all the verbal and nonverbal responses together (not in isolation) to decide 
whether to proceed to the admission-seeking phase of the interview. No one behavior 
should be isolated or a conclusion drawn from it. They should be considered together. 
 



:


norm or calibr
norm or calibr is the process of observ behavior befor critic question ar ask
as oppos to do so dure question norm should be a routin part of all
interview peopl with truth attitud will answer question on wai those with
untruth attitud will gener answer them differ assess question ask the
subject to agre with matter that go against the principl of most honest peopl in other
word dishonest peopl ar like to agre with mani of the statement while honest peopl
wont assess question ar design primarili to get a verbal or nonverb reaction
from the respond the interview will then carefulli assess that reaction
suggest for observ the verbal and physic behavior of the respond includ
us your sens of touch sight and hear to establish a norm
do not stare or call attent to the person behavior symptom
be awar of the respond entir bodi
observ the time and consist of behavior
note cluster of behavior
the best wai to calibr a wit is through the us of noncrit question on
background inform place of employ and the like if the wit displai gener
nervous or other verbal and nonverb clue dure thi phase of question
subsequ indic mai not be reliabl the kei is to observ chang in behavior when
pertin question ar ask
base on the respond reaction to the assess question the interview then
consid all the verbal and nonverb respons togeth not in isol to decid
whether to proce to the admissionseek phase of the interview no on behavior
should be isol or a conclus drawn from it thei should be consid togeth
