2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Assessment Questions/Physiology of Deception


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Physiology of Deception 
It is said that everyone lies and does so for one of two reasons: to receive rewards or to 
avoid punishment. In most people, lying produces stress. The human body will attempt to 
relieve this stress (even in practiced liars) through verbal and nonverbal clues. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.239 
Conclusions concerning behavior must be tempered by a number of factors. The physical 
environment in which the interview is conducted can affect behavior. If the respondent is 
comfortable, fewer behavior quirks might be exhibited. The more intelligent the respondent, 
the more reliable verbal and nonverbal clues will be. If the respondent is biased toward the 
interviewer, or vice versa, this will affect behavior. 
 
People who are mentally unstable, or are under the influence of drugs, will be unsuitable to 
interview. Behavior symptoms of juveniles are generally unreliable. Racial, ethnic, and 
economic factors should be carefully noted. Some cultures, for example, discourage looking 
directly at someone. Other cultures use certain body language that might be misinterpreted. 
Because professional pathological liars often are familiar with interview techniques, they are 
less likely to furnish observable behavioral clues.  
 



:


physiolog of decept
it is said that everyon li and doe so for on of two reason to receiv reward or to
avoid punish in most peopl ly produc stress the human bodi will attempt to
reliev thi stress even in practic liar through verbal and nonverb clue
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3239
conclus concern behavior must be temper by a number of factor the physic
environ in which the interview is conduct can affect behavior if the respond is
comfort fewer behavior quirk might be exhibit the more intellig the respond
the more reliabl verbal and nonverb clue will be if the respond is bias toward the
interview or vice versa thi will affect behavior
peopl who ar mental unstabl or ar under the influenc of drug will be unsuit to
interview behavior symptom of juvenil ar gener unreli racial ethnic and
econom factor should be carefulli note some cultur for exampl discourag look
directli at someon other cultur us certain bodi languag that might be misinterpret
becaus profession patholog liar often ar familiar with interview techniqu thei ar
less like to furnish observ behavior clue
