2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Admission-Seeking Questions 
The choice of when to conduct an admission-seeking interview of a suspect is critical. 
Normally, the interviewer should ask accusatory or admission-seeking questions when there 
is a reasonable probability that the respondent has committed the act in question, all other 
reasonable investigative steps have been completed and as much information as possible has 
been developed from other sources, and the interviewer can reasonably control the place, 
time, and subject matter of the interview. An assessment of culpability might be based on 
verbal and nonverbal responses to interview questions, as well as documents, physical 
evidence, and other interviews.  
 
A transitional theme is necessary when proceeding from assessment-seeking questions to 
admission-seeking questions. Part of the purpose of this theme is to create in the mind of 
the miscreant that he has been caught. Under the ideal circumstance, the interviewer will 
leave the room for just a few minutes, saying this is to “check on something.” If the 
interviewer has incriminating documents, copies can be placed inside a file folder and 
brought back to the interview. If no documents exist, it might be appropriate to fill a file 
folder with blank paper. 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.249 
EXAMPLE 
 
When the interviewer returns to  the room, the file folder is placed on the desk, and the 
interviewer asks, “Is there something that  you would like to tell me about_________ _ ?” 
OR 
“Is there any reason why some one would say that you _________?” 
 
Hand the documents to the respondent and ask for “comments.” Do not introduce the 
evidence or explain it. In about 20 percent of the cases, the miscreant will admit to 
incriminating conduct. If not, proceed. Once the interviewer is reasonably convinced of 
guilt, it might be appropriate to confront the respondent.  
 



:


admissionseek question
the choic of when to conduct an admissionseek interview of a suspect is critic
normal the interview should ask accusatori or admissionseek question when there
is a reason probabl that the respond ha commit the act in question all other
reason investig step have been complet and as much inform as possibl ha
been develop from other sourc and the interview can reason control the place
time and subject matter of the interview an assess of culpabl might be base on
verbal and nonverb respons to interview question as well as document physic
evid and other interview
a transit theme is necessari when proceed from assessmentseek question to
admissionseek question part of the purpos of thi theme is to creat in the mind of
the miscreant that he ha been caught under the ideal circumst the interview will
leav the room for just a few minut sai thi is to check on someth if the
interview ha incrimin document copi can be place insid a file folder and
brought back to the interview if no document exist it might be appropri to fill a file
folder with blank paper
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3249
exampl
when the interview return to the room the file folder is place on the desk and the
interview ask is there someth that you would like to tell me about
or
is there ani reason why some on would sai that you
hand the document to the respond and ask for comment do not introduc the
evid or explain it in about 20 percent of the case the miscreant will admit to
incrimin conduct if not proce onc the interview is reason convinc of
guilt it might be appropri to confront the respond
