2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Diffuse Alibis/DISCUSS WITNESSES


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


DISCUSS WITNESSES 
Another technique for diffusing alibis is to discuss the testimony of witnesses. The objective 
is to give enough information about what other people would say without providing too 
much. Ideally, the interviewer’s statement will create the impression in the mind of the 
accused that many people are in a position to contradict his story. 
 
The interviewer is again cautioned about furnishing enough information to the accused so 
that he can identify the witnesses. This might place the witness in a difficult position, and the 
accused could contact the witness in an effort to influence testimony. The accused could 
take reprisals against potential witnesses, though this is rare.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I couldn’t possibly have done this. It would require the approval of a supervisor.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“In normal situations it would. The problem is that your statement doesn’t hold up. There are 
several people who will tell a completely different story. I can understand how you would want 
me to believe that. But you’re only worsening the situation by making these statements. If you 
will help me on this, you’ll also be helping yourself. Understand?” 
 



:


discuss wit
anoth techniqu for diffus alibi is to discuss the testimoni of wit the object
is to give enough inform about what other peopl would sai without provid too
much ideal the interview statement will creat the impress in the mind of the
accus that mani peopl ar in a posit to contradict hi stori
the interview is again caution about furnish enough inform to the accus so
that he can identifi the wit thi might place the wit in a difficult posit and the
accus could contact the wit in an effort to influenc testimoni the accus could
take repris against potenti wit though thi is rare
exampl
respond
i couldnt possibl have done thi it would requir the approv of a supervisor
interview
in normal situat it would the problem is that your statement doesnt hold up there ar
sever peopl who will tell a complet differ stori i can understand how you would want
me to believ that but your onli worsen the situat by make these statement if you
will help me on thi youll also be help yourself understand
