2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Verbal Confession


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Verbal Confession 
The transition to the verbal confession is made when the accused furnishes the first detailed 
information about the offense. Thereafter, it is the interviewer’s job to probe gently for 
additional details — preferably including those that would be known only to the miscreant. As 
with any interview, there are three general approaches to obtaining the verbal confession: 
chronologically, by transaction, or by event. The approach to be taken should be governed 
by the circumstances of the case.  
 
During the admission-seeking interview, it is best to first confirm the general details of the 
offense. For example, the interviewer will want the accused’s estimates of the amounts 
involved, other parties to the offense, and the location of physical evidence. After these basic 
facts are confirmed, the interviewer can then return to the specifics, in chronological order. 
It is imperative that the interviewer obtain an early admission that the accused knew the 
conduct in question was wrong. This confirms the essential element of intent.  
 
Because of the psychology of confessions, most confessors will lie about one or more 
aspects of the offense, even though confirming overall guilt. When this happens during the 
verbal confession, the interviewer should make a mental note of the discrepancy and 
proceed as if the falsehood had been accepted as truthful.  
 
Such discrepancies should be saved until all other relevant facts are provided by the accused. 
If the discrepancies are material to the offense, then the interviewer should either resolve 
them at the end of the verbal confession or wait and correct them in the written confession. 
If not material, such information can be omitted altogether from the written confession. The 
following items of information should be obtained during the verbal confession: 
 



:


verbal confess
the transit to the verbal confess is made when the accus furnish the first detail
inform about the offens thereaft it is the interview job to probe gentli for
addit detail prefer includ those that would be known onli to the miscreant as
with ani interview there ar three gener approach to obtain the verbal confess
chronolog by transact or by event the approach to be taken should be govern
by the circumst of the case
dure the admissionseek interview it is best to first confirm the gener detail of the
offens for exampl the interview will want the accus estim of the amount
involv other parti to the offens and the locat of physic evid after these basic
fact ar confirm the interview can then return to the specif in chronolog order
it is imper that the interview obtain an earli admiss that the accus knew the
conduct in question wa wrong thi confirm the essenti element of intent
becaus of the psycholog of confess most confessor will lie about on or more
aspect of the offens even though confirm overal guilt when thi happen dure the
verbal confess the interview should make a mental note of the discrep and
proce as if the falsehood had been accept as truth
such discrep should be save until all other relev fact ar provid by the accus
if the discrep ar materi to the offens then the interview should either resolv
them at the end of the verbal confess or wait and correct them in the written confess
if not materi such inform can be omit altogeth from the written confess the
follow item of inform should be obtain dure the verbal confess
