2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Criteria-Based Statement Analysis/Pronouns


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Pronouns 
When describing an incident or situation, a truthful subject will most likely use the pronoun 
“I.” If the subject is guilty of an offense or involved in some fashion, that person will 
attempt to distance himself from the situation by removing the “I” from his statement. 
Often, the “I” will be replaced by “we,” as though the subject had little involvement in or 
was not responsible for the situation. 
 
EXAMPLE 
“I went to the grocery store with my girlfriend, but I didn’t steal any of the items.” 
 
“We went to the grocery store, but we didn’t steal anything.”  
 
The subject’s reasoning, subconsciously, is to re move himself from the situation as much as 
possible. By swapping “we” for “I” in the sentences, the perpetrator hopes to deflect 
attention or blame. 
 
In a situation in which the subject uses “we” constantly, the subject is indicating to the 
interviewer that the subject has some sort of relationship with another party in the situation. 
If, for example, the subject continually uses impersonal pronouns, such as “my girlfriend and 
I” rather than “we,” this indicates a lack of  personal involvement with the girlfriend. Fraud 
examiners can utilize this pronoun use to determine whether the interviewee is involved in a 
fraudulent situation with other employees. 
  



:


pronoun
when describ an incid or situat a truth subject will most like us the pronoun
i if the subject is guilti of an offens or involv in some fashion that person will
attempt to distanc himself from the situat by remov the i from hi statement
often the i will be replac by we as though the subject had littl involv in or
wa not respons for the situat
exampl
i went to the groceri store with my girlfriend but i didnt steal ani of the item
we went to the groceri store but we didnt steal anyth
the subject reason subconsci is to re move himself from the situat as much as
possibl by swap we for i in the sentenc the perpetr hope to deflect
attent or blame
in a situat in which the subject us we constantli the subject is indic to the
interview that the subject ha some sort of relationship with anoth parti in the situat
if for exampl the subject continu us imperson pronoun such as my girlfriend and
i rather than we thi indic a lack of person involv with the girlfriend fraud
examin can util thi pronoun us to determin whether the interviewe is involv in a
fraudul situat with other employe
