2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Criteria-Based Statement Analysis/Verbs


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Verbs 
Verbs are very important pieces of the statement analysis puzzle; the tense that is used by the 
interviewee will shed light on whether the incident has been recalled or improvised. Because 
the subject should be recalling events from the past, the verb tense used to recount the story 
should be past also.  
 
EXAMPLE 
“My wife and I left the house at 7:00, went to dinner, and then saw a movie. We returned to 
the house after the movie was over.” 
 
However, the deceptive interviewee will often change the verb tense at precisely the moment 
at which he is no longer recalling, but rather improvising the event. 
 
EXAMPLE 
“My wife and I left the house at 7:00, went to dinner, and then saw a movie. We return to the 
house and as we pull up to it, we see shattered glass on the driveway.” 
 
Verb tense is also crucial concerning the whereabouts of another person, such as in cases of 
possible kidnapping. If the person interviewed continually refers to the missing person in the 
past tense, there is a good chance that the missing person has been harmed. Again, the Susan 
Smith case is a textbook example of how verb tense usage can lead to a confession. 
 



:


verb
verb ar veri import piec of the statement analysi puzzl the tens that is us by the
interviewe will shed light on whether the incid ha been recal or improvis becaus
the subject should be recal event from the past the verb tens us to recount the stori
should be past also
exampl
my wife and i left the hous at 700 went to dinner and then saw a movi we return to
the hous after the movi wa over
howev the decept interviewe will often chang the verb tens at precis the moment
at which he is no longer recal but rather improvis the event
exampl
my wife and i left the hous at 700 went to dinner and then saw a movi we return to the
hous and as we pull up to it we see shatter glass on the drivewai
verb tens is also crucial concern the whereabout of anoth person such as in case of
possibl kidnap if the person interview continu refer to the miss person in the
past tens there is a good chanc that the miss person ha been harm again the susan
smith case is a textbook exampl of how verb tens usag can lead to a confess
