2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/The Cognitive Interview Technique


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


The Cognitive Interview Technique 
Police and fraud investigators must often rely on the testimony of witnesses to bring the 
facts of a case together. The testimony of an important witness can determine the entire 
outcome of a fraud case, so it is essential that witnesses’ words be as reliable and detailed  
as possible. 
 
Unfortunately, witnesses are human, and humans are prone to make errors. Fraud 
investigators must understand that in a time of crisis, or even in a situation in which the 
witness was simply not paying close attention, the eyewitness can easily miss acute details. 
Often witnesses have trouble recalling large portions of events simply because they didn’t 
know at the time that they needed to be looking for specific details. Dr. R. Edward 
Geiselman and Dr. Ronald P. Fisher write in the National Institute of Justice article  
Interviewing Victims and Witnesses of Crime  that “most victims and eyewitnesses ... are so 
occupied with the event that they do not have the time to try to learn or memorize details 
about a suspect at the time of the crime.”  
 
Because of these problems, different techniques for filling out the witnesses’ testimony have 
been developed to assist the investigator. One of the first techniques developed was the use 
of hypnosis on witnesses. The notion behind this approach was that an investigator could 
open the mind of a witness and pick into his subconscious for specific details. The merits of 
this technique are highly debatable and have been hotly contested in courts of law. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.281 
But more recently, the cognitive interview technique was developed to serve much the same 
purpose. This approach has proven far more effective than questionable hypnosis techniques 
and has been deemed a reliable method in the court of law.  
 
The cognitive interview technique was established, researched, and fine-tuned by Dr. 
Geiselman, a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, and other colleagues in 
the psychiatric profession. Geiselman and others have written numerous articles and 
governmental documents detailing the extensive research dealing with the interviewing  
of witnesses.  
 
Geiselman believes that the cognitive interview should be split into two distinct phases: the 
narrative phase and the specific-detail phase. When these phases are used in succession 
during an interview, it is likely that an investigator will come away from an interview with an 
excellent witness account of an event. The narrative phase deals more with “what happened” 
during the event; the specific-detail phase works more to track down who was involved and 
obtain specific details about the suspect. 
 



:


the cognit interview techniqu
polic and fraud investig must often reli on the testimoni of wit to bring the
fact of a case togeth the testimoni of an import wit can determin the entir
outcom of a fraud case so it is essenti that wit word be as reliabl and detail
as possibl
unfortun wit ar human and human ar prone to make error fraud
investig must understand that in a time of crisi or even in a situat in which the
wit wa simpli not pai close attent the eyewit can easili miss acut detail
often wit have troubl recal larg portion of event simpli becaus thei didnt
know at the time that thei need to be look for specif detail dr r edward
geiselman and dr ronald p fisher write in the nation institut of justic articl
interview victim and wit of crime that most victim and eyewit ar so
occupi with the event that thei do not have the time to try to learn or memor detail
about a suspect at the time of the crime
becaus of these problem differ techniqu for fill out the wit testimoni have
been develop to assist the investig on of the first techniqu develop wa the us
of hypnosi on wit the notion behind thi approach wa that an investig could
open the mind of a wit and pick into hi subconsci for specif detail the merit of
thi techniqu ar highli debat and have been hotli contest in court of law
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3281
but more recent the cognit interview techniqu wa develop to serv much the same
purpos thi approach ha proven far more effect than question hypnosi techniqu
and ha been deem a reliabl method in the court of law
the cognit interview techniqu wa establish research and finetun by dr
geiselman a professor at the univers of california lo angel and other colleagu in
the psychiatr profess geiselman and other have written numer articl and
government document detail the extens research deal with the interview
of wit
geiselman believ that the cognit interview should be split into two distinct phase the
narr phase and the specificdetail phase when these phase ar us in success
dure an interview it is like that an investig will come awai from an interview with an
excel wit account of an event the narr phase deal more with what happen
dure the event the specificdetail phase work more to track down who wa involv and
obtain specif detail about the suspect
