2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


CONSUMER FRAUD 
 
Complaints of consumer fraud can be found as far back as the first century when Pliny the 
Elder told of the adulterated honey being sold in Rome and the mixing of wine with gypsum, 
lime, pitch, rosin, wood ashes, salt, sulphur, and other artificial additives.  
 
Schemes against consumers range from home repair frauds to more sophisticated scams. In 
a nationwide solicitation, l00,000 people purchased light bulbs because they were persuaded 
that the profits were going to the disabled. They were, but the disabilities certified by doctors 
included such crippling disorders as acne, hay fever, nervousness, and obesity. Those 
“donating” paid about three times the going price for similar light bulbs.  
 
Sometimes fraud occurs when the immediate victim cannot fight back: a Tennessee funeral 
director was charged with burying people without caskets and throwing trash in on top of 
the corpses.  
 
Scandals involving the ministry, especially television evangelism, also have captured 
headlines. In l988, U.S. evangelist Jim Bakker was indicted on mail fraud charges stemming 
from the television sale of lifetime “partnerships” in a vacation hotel at the Heritage USA 
theme park. Prosecutors were able to document that Bakker and his wife, Tammy Fay, 
received about $3.5 million in “bonuses” from the scheme. Bakker received a 45-year prison 
sentence, which later was reduced. He is now out of prison. 
 
Fraud is notably common in the repair and service industries. Home repair fraud, frequently 
perpetrated against the elderly, ranges from the sale or use of substandard materials — such as 
roofing — to securing payment without doing any work at all. Automobile repairs often 
involve fraudulent acts. One study maintained that 53 cents of every “repair” dollar was 
wasted because of unnecessary work, overcharging, services never performed, or 
incompetence. A U.S. government survey concluded that American motorists are 
overcharged an average of $l50 a car each year.  
 
In Australia, John Braithwaite found that used car dealers rolled back odometers on a third 
of the cars they offer for sale. Interviews with the dealers in Australia illustrate the kind of 
reasoning that can buttress such illegal activity. One salesman said: “People pay too much 
attention to the mileage reading on a car. There might be a car with a low mileage reading 
but all sorts of faults, and another perfect car with a high mileage reading. It doesn’t matter 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1702                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
what the mileage reading is, but how good the car is. So if you turn the mileage reading back 
on a car in perfect order, you’re encouraging people to buy a good car.” There was no 
evidence, however, that it was only on “good” cars that the odometer was made to provide a 
lower reading. 
 
Another Australian dealer said: “They think because you are a used car dealer you are a liar. 
So they treat you like one and lie to you. Can you blame the dealer for lying back?” 1 
 
 



:


consum fraud
complaint of consum fraud can be found as far back as the first centuri when plini the
elder told of the adulter honei be sold in rome and the mix of wine with gypsum
lime pitch rosin wood ash salt sulphur and other artifici addit
scheme against consum rang from home repair fraud to more sophist scam in
a nationwid solicit l00000 peopl purchas light bulb becaus thei were persuad
that the profit were go to the disabl thei were but the disabl certifi by doctor
includ such crippl disord as acn hai fever nervous and obes those
donat paid about three time the go price for similar light bulb
sometim fraud occur when the immedi victim cannot fight back a tennesse funer
director wa charg with buri peopl without casket and throw trash in on top of
the corps
scandal involv the ministri especi televis evangel also have captur
headlin in l988 us evangelist jim bakker wa indict on mail fraud charg stem
from the televis sale of lifetim partnership in a vacat hotel at the heritag usa
theme park prosecutor were abl to document that bakker and hi wife tammi fai
receiv about 35 million in bonus from the scheme bakker receiv a 45year prison
sentenc which later wa reduc he is now out of prison
fraud is notabl common in the repair and servic industri home repair fraud frequent
perpetr against the elderli rang from the sale or us of substandard materi such as
roof to secur payment without do ani work at all automobil repair often
involv fraudul act on studi maintain that 53 cent of everi repair dollar wa
wast becaus of unnecessari work overcharg servic never perform or
incompet a us govern survei conclud that american motorist ar
overcharg an averag of l50 a car each year
in australia john braithwait found that us car dealer roll back odomet on a third
of the car thei offer for sale interview with the dealer in australia illustr the kind of
reason that can buttress such illeg activ on salesman said peopl pai too much
attent to the mileag read on a car there might be a car with a low mileag read
but all sort of fault and anoth perfect car with a high mileag read it doesnt matter
consum fraud financi transact
11702 2011 fraud examin manual
what the mileag read is but how good the car is so if you turn the mileag read back
on a car in perfect order your encourag peopl to bui a good car there wa no
evid howev that it wa onli on good car that the odomet wa made to provid a
lower read
anoth australian dealer said thei think becaus you ar a us car dealer you ar a liar
so thei treat you like on and lie to you can you blame the dealer for ly back 1
