2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Con Schemes/Goat Pasture Scam


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Goat Pasture Scam    
The mark receives a call from a person who says he’s from an oil and gas service that is 
sponsoring a lottery on mineral rights. If the consumer invests a certain tax deductible sum, 
they can receive a percentage of the income in royalty payments. 
 
Other common hustles occur in the privacy of one’s own home or through telephone 
solicitations (i.e., boiler rooms). 
 
 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1708                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Telemarkting Fraud 
Victims of telemarketing fraud are swindled out of more than $40 billion a year. According 
to one survey, 92 percent of U.S. adults say they have received postcards or letters promising 
they had “definitely” been awarded a “guaranteed” prize. Of those responding, 69 percent 
never received the promised prizes. Telemarketers select victims deliberately, targeting the 
elderly and the unemployed. Over 5.5 million Americans said they had bought items by 
telephone in the past two years and were exploited in the process. 
 
While the telephone, newspaper, and postal service used to be the key tools of telemarketers, 
the Internet has afforded fraudsters a more fast paced and anonymous method of carrying 
out their schemes. The number one scam to be currently found on the Internet, says the 
National Consumer League’s Fraud Watch (NCL), is the fake check scam, in which 
consumers are paid with a phony check for work or items sold and are instructed to wire 
money back. This has been the number one ranking telemarketing fraud for two years 
running. Advance fee scams and phishing also rank in the top 10 schemes on the World 
Wide Web. A discussion of some of the specific Internet schemes can be found in the 
“Computer and Internet Fraud” chapter in the Financial Transactions section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual. 
 
Telemarketing offenses are classified as consumer fraud, yet many businesses are affected by 
office supply and marketing services scams. The hit-and-run nature of phone rooms, the 
geographical distances between the crooks and their victims, and the resources and priorities 
of law enforcement agencies all make enforcement efforts difficult. Only about one in 100 
victims ever files a complaint. 
  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1709 
NCLs Top 10 


:


goat pastur scam
the mark receiv a call from a person who sai he from an oil and ga servic that is
sponsor a lotteri on miner right if the consum invest a certain tax deduct sum
thei can receiv a percentag of the incom in royalti payment
other common hustl occur in the privaci of on own home or through telephon
solicit ie boiler room
consum fraud financi transact
11708 2011 fraud examin manual
telemarkt fraud
victim of telemarket fraud ar swindl out of more than 40 billion a year accord
to on survei 92 percent of us adult sai thei have receiv postcard or letter promis
thei had definit been award a guarante prize of those respond 69 percent
never receiv the promis prize telemarket select victim deliber target the
elderli and the unemploi over 55 million american said thei had bought item by
telephon in the past two year and were exploit in the process
while the telephon newspap and postal servic us to be the kei tool of telemarket
the internet ha afford fraudster a more fast pace and anonym method of carri
out their scheme the number on scam to be current found on the internet sai the
nation consum leagu fraud watch ncl is the fake check scam in which
consum ar paid with a phoni check for work or item sold and ar instruct to wire
monei back thi ha been the number on rank telemarket fraud for two year
run advanc fee scam and phish also rank in the top 10 scheme on the world
wide web a discuss of some of the specif internet scheme can be found in the
comput and internet fraud chapter in the financi transact section of the fraud
examin manual
telemarket offens ar classifi as consum fraud yet mani busi ar affect by
offic suppli and market servic scam the hitandrun natur of phone room the
geograph distanc between the crook and their victim and the resourc and prioriti
of law enforc agenc all make enforc effort difficult onli about on in 100
victim ever file a complaint
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11709
ncl top 10
