2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Consolation


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Consolation 
When irate customers call telemarketers back to complain, their calls are routed to 
professionals who placate the caller with more promises and obfuscations. Some boiler 
rooms have a prearranged communication route for leading complaints through four or five 
different “departments.” This tactic causes many callers to eventually hang up without 
having spoken to anyone. In some instances, telemarketers confronted with furious callers 
threatening legal action do award something of value to the customer, though the item is 
usually worth far less than the person has paid. 
 
If obfuscation and consolation prizes fail to appease the caller, the con turns to threats and 
intimidation. This is a favorite method for dealing with senior citizens, especially elderly 
women. Threats are used not just to keep customers from filing complaints, but to cajole 
more money out of them. Some telemarketers have actually threatened callers’ personal 
safety if they refused to pay. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1715 
The odds in favor of catching a boiler room operation in progress are usually poor. 
Operations can select a town, set up a room, make their haul, and leave again in a matter of 
weeks or months. When authorities raid a boiler room, the operation has typically already 
moved on. If the company owners registered with state regulators, they probably did so 
under an alias. By the time police arrive, the perpetrators have moved on and the chances of 
finding them are slim.  
 



:


consol
when irat custom call telemarket back to complain their call ar rout to
profession who placat the caller with more promis and obfusc some boiler
room have a prearrang commun rout for lead complaint through four or five
differ depart thi tactic caus mani caller to eventu hang up without
have spoken to anyon in some instanc telemarket confront with furiou caller
threaten legal action do award someth of valu to the custom though the item is
usual worth far less than the person ha paid
if obfusc and consol prize fail to appeas the caller the con turn to threat and
intimid thi is a favorit method for deal with senior citizen especi elderli
women threat ar us not just to keep custom from file complaint but to cajol
more monei out of them some telemarket have actual threaten caller person
safeti if thei refus to pai
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11715
the odd in favor of catch a boiler room oper in progress ar usual poor
oper can select a town set up a room make their haul and leav again in a matter of
week or month when author raid a boiler room the oper ha typic alreadi
move on if the compani owner regist with state regul thei probabl did so
under an alia by the time polic arriv the perpetr have move on and the chanc of
find them ar slim
