2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Work-at-Home Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Work-at-Home Schemes 
Besides franchise offers and other miscellaneous business scams, the most prevalent frauds 
involve work-at-home schemes and FCC-related investments. Victims of these phony 
offerings do not see themselves as part of the telemarketer’s prey. They believe they are 
making a legitimate business investment. 
 
Biz op promoters often use a team approach in their enterprises. The victim usually sees an 
ad and calls a fronter, who makes the introductory pitch and then passes the victim to a 
higher-up. Next, the caller is put through to a crier who endorses the opportunity and tells 
the victim of the profits he made. Finally, a closer seals the deal and gets the payment secured 
as quickly as possible.  
 
Telemarketers use business-related terms such as exclusive territory, annual gross revenues, and 
emerging markets in these calls. This helps convince the mark that the biz op is legitimate. A 
Louis Harris poll found that 1 in 33 cold calls for investments were successful. 
 
Some business-pitch operations are complete fabrications. They offer envelope stuffing or 
book-review enterprises that do not really exist. Scammers mail out postcards or buy cheap 
ads in magazines and newspapers. Some may not even take any phone calls. The ads 
convince the victims to send money to a mailbox. Unlike the U.S. Postal Service, which 
requires identification from renters and divulges this information to anyone who inquires, 
private companies will rent mail-drops to anyone for a few dollars a month and can refuse to 
say who paid for the box.  
 



:


workathom scheme
besid franchis offer and other miscellan busi scam the most preval fraud
involv workathom scheme and fccrelat invest victim of these phoni
offer do not see themselv as part of the telemarket prei thei believ thei ar
make a legitim busi invest
biz op promot often us a team approach in their enterpris the victim usual see an
ad and call a fronter who make the introductori pitch and then pass the victim to a
higherup next the caller is put through to a crier who endors the opportun and tell
the victim of the profit he made final a closer seal the deal and get the payment secur
as quickli as possibl
telemarket us businessrel term such as exclus territori annual gross revenu and
emerg market in these call thi help convinc the mark that the biz op is legitim a
loui harri poll found that 1 in 33 cold call for invest were success
some businesspitch oper ar complet fabric thei offer envelop stuf or
bookreview enterpris that do not realli exist scammer mail out postcard or bui cheap
ad in magazin and newspap some mai not even take ani phone call the ad
convinc the victim to send monei to a mailbox unlik the us postal servic which
requir identif from renter and divulg thi inform to anyon who inquir
privat compani will rent maildrop to anyon for a few dollar a month and can refus to
sai who paid for the box
