2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Precious Stones


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Precious Stones 
Gems are generally regarded as items that will not lose their value. Telescammers exploit this 
mindset by offering “high-quality” gems for wholesale prices. Customers are told they are 
being offered a special deal due to fluctuations in the market or because their names are on 
an industry list.  
 
The risk is minimal, victims are told. By acquiring the stones wholesale, the individual 
minimizes the investment exposure. The company even offers its own “brokerage” services, 
which can liquidate the stones at a moment’s notice should the investor need the cash back 
quickly. The stones not only have a grading certificate and appraisal documents, but are also 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1724                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
sealed in a plastic wrapper to guarantee that their condition remains flawless. The real 
purpose of the seal — which victims are told must not be broken if the gems are ever to be 
offered for sale — is to keep buyers from making a genuine inspection of the article.  
 
Once a victim makes a buy, a company spokesperson calls a second time, saying that if the 
person buys more stones, his “gemstone portfo lio” will be more attractive to prospective 
buyers and at auctions advertised in company literature. If the victim buys additional items, a 
company broker will inevitably call with “good news.” The brokerage will have found a 
buyer for the victim’s holdings, but before the transaction can go through, the customer 
must pay some “minor fees.” These may be passed off as finders’ fees, brokers’ 
commissions, examination fees, international duties, or taxes. There may be a provision 
requiring the victim to buy more stones before making the sale. 
 
A variation on the scheme targets those who have already bought gems from telemarketers 
and whose names are taken from insider lists. The caller claims to be a broker representing 
an “overseas buyer” ready to purchase the listener’s portfolio. But, invariably, the buyer must 
have a few more stones in the portfolio—which the caller offers to supply—in order to 
make the sale, and there are fees and commissions to be paid. 
  



:


preciou stone
gem ar gener regard as item that will not lose their valu telescamm exploit thi
mindset by offer highqual gem for wholesal price custom ar told thei ar
be offer a special deal due to fluctuat in the market or becaus their name ar on
an industri list
the risk is minim victim ar told by acquir the stone wholesal the individu
minim the invest exposur the compani even offer it own brokerag servic
which can liquid the stone at a moment notic should the investor need the cash back
quickli the stone not onli have a grade certif and apprais document but ar also
consum fraud financi transact
11724 2011 fraud examin manual
seal in a plastic wrapper to guarante that their condit remain flawless the real
purpos of the seal which victim ar told must not be broken if the gem ar ever to be
offer for sale is to keep buyer from make a genuin inspect of the articl
onc a victim make a bui a compani spokesperson call a second time sai that if the
person bui more stone hi gemston portfo lio will be more attract to prospect
buyer and at auction advertis in compani literatur if the victim bui addit item a
compani broker will inevit call with good new the brokerag will have found a
buyer for the victim hold but befor the transact can go through the custom
must pai some minor fee these mai be pass off as finder fee broker
commiss examin fee intern duti or tax there mai be a provis
requir the victim to bui more stone befor make the sale
a variat on the scheme target those who have alreadi bought gem from telemarket
and whose name ar taken from insid list the caller claim to be a broker repres
an oversea buyer readi to purchas the listen portfolio but invari the buyer must
have a few more stone in the portfoliowhich the caller offer to supplyin order to
make the sale and there ar fee and commiss to be paid
