2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Phishing


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Phishing 
Phishing is a popular scheme that involves tricking businesses or individuals into providing 
passwords, account numbers, or other sensitive data by claiming to be from an actual 
company the victim does business with. A solicitation for information appears to come from 
a legitimate business and can occur over the phone (such as a call from the victim’s “bank” 
saying their account has been compromised and requesting PIN numbers, account numbers, 
or passwords), or via e-mail (which is the most common technique). An individual receives 
an e-mail that appears to come from eBay, PayPal, or a financial institution. The e-mail states 
that the customer must immediately log into his account in order to update his information. 
The link directs the individual to a fake site that captures his identifying information such as 
Social Security numbers and PIN, mothers’ maiden name, and financial account numbers. 
 
It is crucial for people to recognize phishing so that they don’t fall victim to it:  
• Phishing occurs mostly by e-mail. As described above, the sender of the e-mail pretends 
to be a legitimate bank, government agency, or retailer and asks the recipient to confirm 
his personal information for any of these or other made-up reasons: the person’s 
account will be closed if they don’t give the information, an order has been placed in 
their name, or their information has been lost because of a computer glitch. Don’t ever 
respond to these e-mails. Legitimate banks, government agencies, and retailers would not 
e-mail you for your password of other identifying information.  
• Do not click on any link in an e-mail that asks for your personal information. The links 
included in the e-mails sent by phishers will take you to a phony website that looks just 
like the website of the real company or agency. If you followed the instructions, you 
would enter your personal information, which would go straight into the hands of 
identity thieves.  
• Ironically, phishers may even say that they are from the fraud departments of popular 
companies and ask you to verify your information because they suspect you may be a 
victim of identity theft. Other tactics include the phisher claiming to be from a state 
lottery commission who requests people’s banking information to deposit their 
“winnings” in their accounts. Again, never disclose any personal information via e-mail. 
• Phishing can also happen by phone. Verify caller’s identity and contact their company 
for legitimacy. Instead of fraudsters sending spam, they might call you and pretend to be 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1729 
from a company or government agency, making the same kinds of false claims and 
asking for your personal information. If someone contacts you and says that you have 
been a victim of fraud, verify the person’s identity before you provide any personal 
information. Legitimate credit card issuers and other companies may contact you if there 
is an unusual pattern indicating that someone else might be using one of your accounts. 
However, they only ask if you made particular transactions; they don’t request your 
account number or other personal information. Law enforcement agencies might also 
contact you if you’ve been the victim of fraud. To be on the safe side, ask for the 
person’s name, the name of the agency or  company, the telephone number, and the 
address. Then get the main number and call to find out if the person is legitimate. 
• Phishers also target people who list themselves on job search sites. They pretend to be 
potential employers and ask for your Social Security number and other personal 
information. Before giving anyone your personal information, follow the above advice 
and make sure to verify the person’s identity. 
• Be suspicious if contacted unexpectedly and asked for your personal information. It is 
difficult to determine a company’s legitimacy by  reading an e-mail, going to a website, or 
talking to someone on the phone. If you’re contacted unexpectedly and asked to give out 
your personal information, a red flag should go up that something is “phishy.” 
Legitimate companies and agencies do not operate this way. 
• Act immediately if you’ve been hooked by a phisher. If you provided account numbers, 
PINs, or passwords to a phisher, notify the companies with whom you have the 
accounts right away. For information about how to put a “fraud alert” on your files at 
the credit reporting bureaus and other advice for ID theft victims, contact the Federal 
Trade Commission’s ID Theft Clearinghouse, www.consumer.gov/idtheft or toll-free, 
877-438-4338.  
 



:


phish
phish is a popular scheme that involv trick busi or individu into provid
password account number or other sensit data by claim to be from an actual
compani the victim doe busi with a solicit for inform appear to come from
a legitim busi and can occur over the phone such as a call from the victim bank
sai their account ha been compromis and request pin number account number
or password or via email which is the most common techniqu an individu receiv
an email that appear to come from ebai paypal or a financi institut the email state
that the custom must immedi log into hi account in order to updat hi inform
the link direct the individu to a fake site that captur hi identifi inform such as
social secur number and pin mother maiden name and financi account number
it is crucial for peopl to recogn phish so that thei dont fall victim to it
phish occur mostli by email as describ abov the sender of the email pretend
to be a legitim bank govern agenc or retail and ask the recipi to confirm
hi person inform for ani of these or other madeup reason the person
account will be close if thei dont give the inform an order ha been place in
their name or their inform ha been lost becaus of a comput glitch dont ever
respond to these email legitim bank govern agenc and retail would not
email you for your password of other identifi inform
do not click on ani link in an email that ask for your person inform the link
includ in the email sent by phisher will take you to a phoni websit that look just
like the websit of the real compani or agenc if you follow the instruct you
would enter your person inform which would go straight into the hand of
ident thiev
iron phisher mai even sai that thei ar from the fraud depart of popular
compani and ask you to verifi your inform becaus thei suspect you mai be a
victim of ident theft other tactic includ the phisher claim to be from a state
lotteri commiss who request peopl bank inform to deposit their
win in their account again never disclos ani person inform via email
phish can also happen by phone verifi caller ident and contact their compani
for legitimaci instead of fraudster send spam thei might call you and pretend to be
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11729
from a compani or govern agenc make the same kind of fals claim and
ask for your person inform if someon contact you and sai that you have
been a victim of fraud verifi the person ident befor you provid ani person
inform legitim credit card issuer and other compani mai contact you if there
is an unusu pattern indic that someon els might be us on of your account
howev thei onli ask if you made particular transact thei dont request your
account number or other person inform law enforc agenc might also
contact you if youv been the victim of fraud to be on the safe side ask for the
person name the name of the agenc or compani the telephon number and the
address then get the main number and call to find out if the person is legitim
phisher also target peopl who list themselv on job search site thei pretend to be
potenti employ and ask for your social secur number and other person
inform befor give anyon your person inform follow the abov advic
and make sure to verifi the person ident
be suspici if contact unexpectedli and ask for your person inform it is
difficult to determin a compani legitimaci by read an email go to a websit or
talk to someon on the phone if your contact unexpectedli and ask to give out
your person inform a red flag should go up that someth is phishi
legitim compani and agenc do not oper thi wai
act immedi if youv been hook by a phisher if you provid account number
pin or password to a phisher notifi the compani with whom you have the
account right awai for inform about how to put a fraud alert on your file at
the credit report bureau and other advic for id theft victim contact the feder
trade commiss id theft clearinghous wwwconsumergovidtheft or tollfre
8774384338
