2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Franchise Fraud/Relationship Issues


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Relationship Issues 
Fraud in franchising is not limited to disclosure fraud. Once the franchising relationship is 
established, the franchiser and franchisee stand in a business relationship that typically 
involves the transaction of funds at several levels under a series of contracts:  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1755 
• The payment of royalties under the franchise or license agreement for the right to use 
the franchiser’s trademark, trade name, and business system. 
• The payment of rent under a lease or sub-lease of real property and/or equipment. 
• Contributions to an advertising fund. 
 
All of these financial transactions may be subject to claims for breach of contract, fraud, or 
breach of a fiduciary duty. Of course, to determine the exact claims, you must consult the 
exact language in the franchise agreement.  
Numerous issues also may arise in the course of the franchise relationship, each of which 
reflects an inherent tension between the interests of franchiser and franchisee: 
• Training and support.  Has the franchiser provided the level of training and technical 
support that was promised? 
• Control. What degree of control is the franchiser en titled to exercise over the franchisee’s 
products, suppliers, and pricing? To what extent may the franchiser derive profit from 
the franchisee’s supplier relationships? 
• New products.  To what extent does the franchiser have a duty to introduce new products 
to keep ahead of the competition? Once the decision to introduce new products is made, 
is the franchiser held to any “standard of care” to ensure that the product is successful? 
• Expansion or contraction of the system.  Does the franchiser’s natural desire to expand the 
franchise system conflict with a franchisee’s de sire to maximize profits at his location? 
Conversely, what duties, if any, does a franchiser owe to franchisees in a particular 
market if the franchiser plans to withdraw from that market? 
• Encroachment. To what extent does the franchiser have a duty to refrain from opening 
new outlets “too close” to existing units? How close is “too close” if the license 
agreement is silent?  
• Expansion by the franchisee. To what extent is an individual franchisee’s desire to expand in 
conflict with what is best for the system as a whole?  
• Reinvestment. May a franchiser require a franchisee to reinvest a portion of his revenue 
back into the business? Does it depend on whether the franchisee owns or leases the  
real estate? 
 



:


relationship issu
fraud in franchis is not limit to disclosur fraud onc the franchis relationship is
establish the franchis and franchise stand in a busi relationship that typic
involv the transact of fund at sever level under a seri of contract
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11755
the payment of royalti under the franchis or licens agreement for the right to us
the franchis trademark trade name and busi system
the payment of rent under a leas or subleas of real properti andor equip
contribut to an advertis fund
all of these financi transact mai be subject to claim for breach of contract fraud or
breach of a fiduciari duti of cours to determin the exact claim you must consult the
exact languag in the franchis agreement
numer issu also mai aris in the cours of the franchis relationship each of which
reflect an inher tension between the interest of franchis and franchise
train and support ha the franchis provid the level of train and technic
support that wa promis
control what degre of control is the franchis en titl to exercis over the franchise
product supplier and price to what extent mai the franchis deriv profit from
the franchise supplier relationship
new product to what extent doe the franchis have a duti to introduc new product
to keep ahead of the competit onc the decis to introduc new product is made
is the franchis held to ani standard of care to ensur that the product is success
expans or contract of the system doe the franchis natur desir to expand the
franchis system conflict with a franchise de sire to maxim profit at hi locat
convers what duti if ani doe a franchis ow to franchise in a particular
market if the franchis plan to withdraw from that market
encroach to what extent doe the franchis have a duti to refrain from open
new outlet too close to exist unit how close is too close if the licens
agreement is silent
expans by the franchise to what extent is an individu franchise desir to expand in
conflict with what is best for the system as a whole
reinvest mai a franchis requir a franchise to reinvest a portion of hi revenu
back into the busi doe it depend on whether the franchise own or leas the
real estat
