2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Identity Theft/The Internet


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


The Internet 
The Internet offers many opportunities to the identity thief. It has made much information 
available to more people at a small cost. It has also been an attractive place for identity 
thieves to find their victim. Once you have logged on, information you thought was private 
might now be traced by anyone who is interested in finding personal information about you. 
Identifying information such as passwords, credit card numbers, and in some cases, banking 
information has been made available via the Internet. Spam, or unsolicited e-mail, is 
frequently responded to by many people who are unaware that the sole purpose of the e-
 mail is to obtain personal information.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A Midwestern woman was accused of trying to get a $25,000 loan through an Illinois 
bank using personal information she found on the Internet. The victim, a college professor, 
called police when the bank sent the completed application to her home rather than to the 
home of the accused. The same woman reportedly obtained a MasterCard under another 
professor’s name and ran up almost $3,000 in charges.  
 
In addition, some database companies sell information — your personal information — online 
to persons or organizations that you might not want to have that information, thus 
increasing the chance for fraud and abuse. For example, information you provide by 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1762                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
responding to a questionnaire online might be collected and sold to insurance and drug 
companies without your knowledge. The same can be true when applying for a low-interest 
credit card or consumer loans. Do you know who is actually receiving the information that 
you provide online? There is no physical address to check out in most cases. 
 
The Internet also is a source for “information brokering.” For a fee, information brokers will 
reveal the most personal aspects of your life — from financial information to medical 
information. For fees as low as $40 per search, they will disclose everything from non-published 
telephone numbers to the location of your safety deposit box. Some of it is legal 
and can be found in public records, but some of it is illegal.  
 



:


the internet
the internet offer mani opportun to the ident thief it ha made much inform
avail to more peopl at a small cost it ha also been an attract place for ident
thiev to find their victim onc you have log on inform you thought wa privat
might now be trace by anyon who is interest in find person inform about you
identifi inform such as password credit card number and in some case bank
inform ha been made avail via the internet spam or unsolicit email is
frequent respond to by mani peopl who ar unawar that the sole purpos of the e
mail is to obtain person inform
exampl
a midwestern woman wa accus of try to get a 25000 loan through an illinoi
bank us person inform she found on the internet the victim a colleg professor
call polic when the bank sent the complet applic to her home rather than to the
home of the accus the same woman reportedli obtain a mastercard under anoth
professor name and ran up almost 3000 in charg
in addit some databas compani sell inform your person inform onlin
to person or organ that you might not want to have that inform thu
increas the chanc for fraud and abus for exampl inform you provid by
consum fraud financi transact
11762 2011 fraud examin manual
respond to a questionnair onlin might be collect and sold to insur and drug
compani without your knowledg the same can be true when appli for a lowinterest
credit card or consum loan do you know who is actual receiv the inform that
you provid onlin there is no physic address to check out in most case
the internet also is a sourc for inform broker for a fee inform broker will
reveal the most person aspect of your life from financi inform to medic
inform for fee as low as 40 per search thei will disclos everyth from nonpublish
telephon number to the locat of your safeti deposit box some of it is legal
and can be found in public record but some of it is illeg
