2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Identity Theft/Consumer Protection Measures


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Consumer Protection Measures 
How do you protect yourself and your clients from identity theft? Some of the useful 
methods are: 
• Before providing personal information, make sure the individual or business requesting 
it has a valid reason for requiring the information. 
• Never write your credit card numbers or Social Security number on checks or on the 
outside of envelopes. 
• Don’t give account numbers over the telephone or to persons/companies you are not 
familiar with. 
                                                          
4 Report Summary: Excerpts from Final Report – Volume 1: Findings and Recommendations. Published by 
the ANSI-BBB Identity Theft Prevention and Identity Management Standards Panel, January 31, 2008. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1768                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Don’t use cordless or cellular telephones or e-mail to transmit financial or private 
personal information. 
• Keep all financial documents in a secure place. 
• If you have your driver’s license information pre-printed on your checks, shred canceled 
checks before discarding them. 
• Check your financial information regularly looking for what should and shouldn’t  
be there. 
• Obtain a copy of your credit report on a regular basis. 
• Tear up or shred pre-approved credit applications. 
• Have yourself taken off of “pre-screened lists.” 
• Mail bills from the post office or your business location 
• Consider having your name and telephone number removed from the telephone 
directory or having the address removed. 
• Don’t provide personal information over the telephone unless you initiated the call and 
know who you are speaking with. 
• If telemarketing companies call, tell them: “Under the federal Telephone Consumer 
Protection Act, I want to be on your ‘do not call’ list.” 
• Keep your birth certificate in a safe place. 
• Choose passwords that will be difficult to crack and use different passwords for  
all accounts. 
• Change passwords and PIN codes often. 
• Don’t put your Social Security number on any document that you aren’t legally  
required to. 
• Shred any papers with financial information and identifiers rather than simply throwing 
them in the trash. 
 
In addition, insurance companies are now offering insurance for identity theft. For an annual 
fee, the policy covers the cost of clearing the policyholder’s name and correcting their 
financial records including legal expenses, loan re-application fees, telephone and certified 
mailing charges, notary expenses, and lost wages for the time it takes to deal with the fraud. 
 



:


consum protect measur
how do you protect yourself and your client from ident theft some of the us
method ar
befor provid person inform make sure the individu or busi request
it ha a valid reason for requir the inform
never write your credit card number or social secur number on check or on the
outsid of envelop
dont give account number over the telephon or to personscompani you ar not
familiar with
4 report summari excerpt from final report volum 1 find and recommend publish by
the ansibbb ident theft prevent and ident manag standard panel januari 31 2008
consum fraud financi transact
11768 2011 fraud examin manual
dont us cordless or cellular telephon or email to transmit financi or privat
person inform
keep all financi document in a secur place
if you have your driver licens inform preprint on your check shred cancel
check befor discard them
check your financi inform regularli look for what should and shouldnt
be there
obtain a copi of your credit report on a regular basi
tear up or shred preapprov credit applic
have yourself taken off of prescreen list
mail bill from the post offic or your busi locat
consid have your name and telephon number remov from the telephon
directori or have the address remov
dont provid person inform over the telephon unless you initi the call and
know who you ar speak with
if telemarket compani call tell them under the feder telephon consum
protect act i want to be on your do not call list
keep your birth certif in a safe place
choos password that will be difficult to crack and us differ password for
all account
chang password and pin code often
dont put your social secur number on ani document that you arent legal
requir to
shred ani paper with financi inform and identifi rather than simpli throw
them in the trash
in addit insur compani ar now offer insur for ident theft for an annual
fee the polici cover the cost of clear the policyhold name and correct their
financi record includ legal expens loan reapplic fee telephon and certifi
mail charg notari expens and lost wage for the time it take to deal with the fraud
