2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/What Is Financial Statement Fraud?


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


What Is Financial Statement Fraud? 
Financial statement fraud is the deliberate misrepresentation  of the financial condition of an 
enterprise accomplished through the intentional misstatement or omission  of amounts or 
disclosures in the financial statements to deceive  financial statement users.  
 
Financial statement fraud is usually a means to an end rather than an end in itself. When 
people “cook the books” they may be doing it to “buy more time” to quietly fix business 
problems that prevent their company from achieving its expected earnings or complying 
with loan covenants. It may also be done to obtain or renew financing that would not be 
granted, or would be smaller, if honest financial statements were provided. People who are 
intent on profiting from crime may commit financial statement fraud to obtain loans they 
can then siphon off for personal gain or to inflate the price of the company’s shares, 
allowing them to sell their holdings or exercise stock options at a profit. However, in many 
past cases of financial statement fraud, the perpetrators have gained little or nothing 
personally in financial terms. Instead the focus appears to have been preserving their status 
as leaders of the organization—a status that might have been lost had the real financial 
results been published promptly.  
 
Financial statement fraud usually involves overstating assets, revenues, and profits and 
understating liabilities, expenses, and losses. However, the overall objective of the 
manipulation may sometimes require the opposite action, e.g., concealing over-budget results 
in a good year in order to help the subsequent year, which is expected to be tougher. 
 
 



:


what is financi statement fraud
financi statement fraud is the deliber misrepresent of the financi condit of an
enterpris accomplish through the intent misstat or omiss of amount or
disclosur in the financi statement to deceiv financi statement user
financi statement fraud is usual a mean to an end rather than an end in itself when
peopl cook the book thei mai be do it to bui more time to quietli fix busi
problem that prevent their compani from achiev it expect earn or compli
with loan coven it mai also be done to obtain or renew financ that would not be
grant or would be smaller if honest financi statement were provid peopl who ar
intent on profit from crime mai commit financi statement fraud to obtain loan thei
can then siphon off for person gain or to inflat the price of the compani share
allow them to sell their hold or exercis stock option at a profit howev in mani
past case of financi statement fraud the perpetr have gain littl or noth
person in financi term instead the focu appear to have been preserv their statu
as leader of the organizationa statu that might have been lost had the real financi
result been publish promptli
financi statement fraud usual involv overst asset revenu and profit and
underst liabil expens and loss howev the overal object of the
manipul mai sometim requir the opposit action eg conceal overbudget result
in a good year in order to help the subsequ year which is expect to be tougher
