2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Fraud Schemes/Improper Asset Valuation


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Improper Asset Valuation 
Under the “lower of cost or market value” ru le, where an asset’s  cost exceeds its current 
market value (as happens often with obsolete technology), the asset must be written down to 
market value. With the exception of certain securities, asset values are generally not increased 
to reflect current market value. It is often necessary to use estimates in accounting. For 
example, estimates are used in determining the residual value and the useful life of a 
depreciable asset, the uncollectible portion of accounts receivable, or the excess or obsolete 
portion of inventory. Whenever estimates are used, there is an additional opportunity for 
fraud by manipulating those estimates.  
 
Many schemes are used to inflate current assets  at the expense of long-term assets. The net 
effect is seen in the current ratio. The misclassification of long-term assets as current assets 
can be of critical concern to lending institutions that often require the maintenance of 
certain financial ratios. This is of particular consequence when the loan covenants are on 
unsecured or under-secured lines of credit and other short-term borrowings. Sometimes 
these misclassifications are referred to as “window dressing.” 
 
Most improper asset valuations involve the fraudulent overstatement of inventory or 
receivables. Other improper asset valuations include manipulation of the allocation of the 
purchase price of an acquired business in order to inflate future earnings, misclassification of 
fixed and other assets, or improper capitalization of inventory or start-up costs.  
 
Improper asset valuations usually take the form of one of the following classifications:  
• Inventory valuation 
• Accounts receivable 
• Business combinations 
• Fixed assets 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.318                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


improp asset valuat
under the lower of cost or market valu ru le where an asset cost exce it current
market valu as happen often with obsolet technolog the asset must be written down to
market valu with the except of certain secur asset valu ar gener not increas
to reflect current market valu it is often necessari to us estim in account for
exampl estim ar us in determin the residu valu and the us life of a
depreci asset the uncollect portion of account receiv or the excess or obsolet
portion of inventori whenev estim ar us there is an addit opportun for
fraud by manipul those estim
mani scheme ar us to inflat current asset at the expens of longterm asset the net
effect is seen in the current ratio the misclassif of longterm asset as current asset
can be of critic concern to lend institut that often requir the mainten of
certain financi ratio thi is of particular consequ when the loan coven ar on
unsecur or undersecur line of credit and other shortterm borrow sometim
these misclassif ar refer to as window dress
most improp asset valuat involv the fraudul overstat of inventori or
receiv other improp asset valuat includ manipul of the alloc of the
purchas price of an acquir busi in order to inflat futur earn misclassif of
fix and other asset or improp capit of inventori or startup cost
improp asset valuat usual take the form of on of the follow classif
inventori valuat
account receiv
busi combin
fix asset
financi statement fraud financi transact
1318 2011 fraud examin manual
