2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Fraud Schemes/Backdating Stock Options


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Backdating Stock Options 
As a supplement to salary, companies frequently offer employees stock options, which grant 
the recipient the privilege to purchase a share of the company’s stock at a future date for a 
specific price called the strike price. A strike price is the value of a share at a particular date. 
Generally, the strike price is set at the price of the underlying stock on the day the option is 
granted; therefore, the option becomes valuable only with future increases in the stock price.  
In this way, companies grant stock options as an incentive for employees to boost company 
performance and thus raise the stock price. The practice of backdating stock options, 
however, gives the employee a chance to profit by purchasing stock at past low prices, 
providing an immediate payoff. Backdating stock options occurs when a company alters the 
date of the grant to a time when the stock was trading at a lower price in the interest of 
making the option instantly valuable and further increasing the employee’s gain if the stock 
price continues to rise.  
 
EXAMPLE 
On June 1, 20X1, Company XYZ grants its CEO a stock option that provides the 
executive the right to purchase 100 shares of XYZ stock on January 1, 20X2 for the 
strike price. Per its usual policy, the strike price is set at the price of the company stock on 
the date of the option grant. On June 1, 2008  (the grant date), XYZ stock was trading at 
$40 per share. Therefore, if the stock price increases to $45 per share by January 1, 
20X2, the CEO could exercise the option and purchase the shares for $40 per share, then 
sell them immediately on the market for $45 per share, resulting in a gain of $5 per share. 
However, the company has recently experienced a dramatic increase in its share price. On 
May 24, 20X1, the stock was trading for $15 per share. To provide the CEO with an 
opportunity to exploit this increase in share price, the company chooses to backdate the 
stock options to make it appear that they  were granted on May 24, 20X1. Because the 
strike price is set at the price of the stock on the option grant date, the strike price is 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.330                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
effectively changed to $15 per share. As a result, the CEO now has the option to buy 100 
shares of XYZ stock on January 1, 20X2 for $15 per share. Thus, the CEO has 
immediately gained $25 per share (the difference  between the stock price on the actual grant 
date of June 1 and the stated grant date of May 24) based solely on the manipulation of 
the grant date used.  
 
Backdating stock options came to the attention of the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) when academic research revealed a pattern of stock prices descending 
just prior to many reported dates of option grants, then ascending immediately afterwards. 
Backdating is not necessarily illegal, but can be if not handled appropriately. In order to be 
legal, the practice must be explicitly reported to shareholders and the government. Failure to 
do so may constitute securities fraud.  
 
In August of 2002, certain provisions laid out under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act took effect, 
requiring companies to report stock option grants within two business days after the grants. 
The rules greatly reduced the time companies had to choose a favorable grant date; 
companies were previously allowed weeks or months before they were required to report 
stock option grants. Consequently, the apparent pattern of backdating nearly disappeared 
around the time the rules were enacted. However, reports of actual practices in stock options 
and the recorded data remain inconsistent in many cases because not all companies adhere 
to Sarbanes-Oxley. Additionally, the revelation of the prevalence of backdating has caused 
concern that companies may not have recorded and disclosed the option grants on the 
financial statements in an accurate manner. In response to this issue, the Public Company 
Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) issued a practice alert to prepare auditors for the 
possibility of financial misstatements due to backdating of stock options. To keep a tight 
rope on the possibility of this type of illegal activity, auditors should assess the information 
obtained from the audit to determine if there is a need for further audit procedures. 
 



:


backdat stock option
as a supplement to salari compani frequent offer employe stock option which grant
the recipi the privileg to purchas a share of the compani stock at a futur date for a
specif price call the strike price a strike price is the valu of a share at a particular date
gener the strike price is set at the price of the underli stock on the dai the option is
grant therefor the option becom valuabl onli with futur increas in the stock price
in thi wai compani grant stock option as an incent for employe to boost compani
perform and thu rais the stock price the practic of backdat stock option
howev give the employe a chanc to profit by purchas stock at past low price
provid an immedi payoff backdat stock option occur when a compani alter the
date of the grant to a time when the stock wa trade at a lower price in the interest of
make the option instantli valuabl and further increas the employe gain if the stock
price continu to rise
exampl
on june 1 20x1 compani xyz grant it ceo a stock option that provid the
execut the right to purchas 100 share of xyz stock on januari 1 20x2 for the
strike price per it usual polici the strike price is set at the price of the compani stock on
the date of the option grant on june 1 2008 the grant date xyz stock wa trade at
40 per share therefor if the stock price increas to 45 per share by januari 1
20x2 the ceo could exercis the option and purchas the share for 40 per share then
sell them immedi on the market for 45 per share result in a gain of 5 per share
howev the compani ha recent experienc a dramat increas in it share price on
mai 24 20x1 the stock wa trade for 15 per share to provid the ceo with an
opportun to exploit thi increas in share price the compani choos to backdat the
stock option to make it appear that thei were grant on mai 24 20x1 becaus the
strike price is set at the price of the stock on the option grant date the strike price is
financi statement fraud financi transact
1330 2011 fraud examin manual
effect chang to 15 per share as a result the ceo now ha the option to bui 100
share of xyz stock on januari 1 20x2 for 15 per share thu the ceo ha
immedi gain 25 per share the differ between the stock price on the actual grant
date of june 1 and the state grant date of mai 24 base sole on the manipul of
the grant date us
backdat stock option came to the attent of the us secur and exchang
commiss sec when academ research reveal a pattern of stock price descend
just prior to mani report date of option grant then ascend immedi afterward
backdat is not necessarili illeg but can be if not handl appropri in order to be
legal the practic must be explicitli report to sharehold and the govern failur to
do so mai constitut secur fraud
in august of 2002 certain provis laid out under the sarbanesoxlei act took effect
requir compani to report stock option grant within two busi dai after the grant
the rule greatli reduc the time compani had to choos a favor grant date
compani were previous allow week or month befor thei were requir to report
stock option grant consequ the appar pattern of backdat nearli disappear
around the time the rule were enact howev report of actual practic in stock option
and the record data remain inconsist in mani case becaus not all compani adher
to sarbanesoxlei addition the revel of the preval of backdat ha caus
concern that compani mai not have record and disclos the option grant on the
financi statement in an accur manner in respons to thi issu the public compani
account oversight board pcaob issu a practic alert to prepar auditor for the
possibl of financi misstat due to backdat of stock option to keep a tight
rope on the possibl of thi type of illeg activ auditor should assess the inform
obtain from the audit to determin if there is a need for further audit procedur
