2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ACCOUNTING CONCEPTS/Accounting Basics


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Basic Accounting Concepts


:


Accounting Basics 
Accounting can be defined as the identification, accumulation, measurement, and 
communication of economic data about an enterprise for decision makers and other 
interested parties. The measurement and recording of this data are accomplished through 
keeping a balance of the accounting equation. The accounting model or accounting equation, 
as shown below, is the basis for all double-entry accounting:  
 
Assets = Liabilities + Owners’ Equity 
 
By definition, assets consist of the net resources owned by an entity. Examples of assets 
include cash, receivables, inventory, property, and equipment, as well as intangible items of 
value such as patents, licenses, and trademarks. To qualify as an asset, an item must (1) be 
owned by the entity and (2) provide future benefit.  
 
Liabilities are the obligations of an entity or outsiders’ claims against a company’s assets. 
Liabilities usually arise from the acquisition of assets or the incurrence of operational 
expenses. 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.102                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Owners’ equity  represents the investment of a company’s owners plus accumulated profits 
(revenues less expenses). Owners’ equity is equal to assets minus liabilities.  
 
This equation has been the cornerstone of accounting since 1494, when Luca Pacioli 
invented it. The balance of the equation is the key. If a company borrows from a bank, cash 
(an asset) and notes payable (a liability) increase to show the receipt of cash and an 
obligation owed by the company. Since both assets and liabilities increase by the same 
amount, the equation stays in balance.  
 



:


account basic
account can be defin as the identif accumul measur and
commun of econom data about an enterpris for decis maker and other
interest parti the measur and record of thi data ar accomplish through
keep a balanc of the account equat the account model or account equat
as shown below is the basi for all doubleentri account
asset liabil owner equiti
by definit asset consist of the net resourc own by an entiti exampl of asset
includ cash receiv inventori properti and equip as well as intang item of
valu such as patent licens and trademark to qualifi as an asset an item must 1 be
own by the entiti and 2 provid futur benefit
liabil ar the oblig of an entiti or outsid claim against a compani asset
liabil usual aris from the acquisit of asset or the incurr of oper
expens
account concept financi transact
1102 2011 fraud examin manual
owner equiti repres the invest of a compani owner plu accumul profit
revenu less expens owner equiti is equal to asset minu liabil
thi equat ha been the cornerston of account sinc 1494 when luca pacioli
invent it the balanc of the equat is the kei if a compani borrow from a bank cash
an asset and note payabl a liabil increas to show the receipt of cash and an
oblig ow by the compani sinc both asset and liabil increas by the same
amount the equat stai in balanc
