2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ACCOUNTING CONCEPTS/Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Basic Accounting Concepts


:


Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) 
In preparing financial statements, management, accountants, and auditors are charged with 
following measurement and reporting practices known as generally accepted accounting principles  
(GAAP). The accounting practices that compose GAAP have developed through the 
accumulation of authoritative accounting pronouncements issued by several authoritative 
bodies. Historically, these pronouncements included Accounting Research Bulletins, 
Accounting Principles Board (APB) Opinions, Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB) Statements and Interpretations, Emerging Issues Task Force Abstracts, and SEC 
Staff Accounting Bulletins.  
 
In 2009, FASB launched the FASB Accounting Standards Codification(FASB ASC)  as the 
sole source of authoritative U.S. GAAP for non-governmental organizations. The 
Codification compiles and organizes all previous sources of GAAP by topic, providing an 
efficient and easy-to-use structure for researching and referencing accounting standards. The 
FASB ASC effectively supersedes the pre-Codification GAAP hierarchy established in SAS 
No. 69 and FASB Statement No. 162.  
 
While the U.S. has its own set of accounting standards that form GAAP, the various 
accounting rules from different countries are converging. The International Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB) is developing a single set of standards, called International Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS). For each accounting function, the IASB is looking for the most 
appropriate principle for how transactions should be accounted for, or the most suitable 
method of reporting the results. The IASB has sought the best, sometimes adopting a 
standard from one country or another, other times creating a new standard entirely. 
Currently, more than 120 countries require or permit the use of IFRS, with several more 
planning to adopt IFRS in the next few years. A list of the countries that have adopted the 
IFRS is available at www.iasplus.com/country/useias.htm.  
 



:


gener accept account principl gaap
in prepar financi statement manag account and auditor ar charg with
follow measur and report practic known as gener accept account principl
gaap the account practic that compos gaap have develop through the
accumul of authorit account pronounc issu by sever authorit
bodi histor these pronounc includ account research bulletin
account principl board apb opinion financi account standard board
fasb statement and interpret emerg issu task forc abstract and sec
staff account bulletin
in 2009 fasb launch the fasb account standard codificationfasb asc as the
sole sourc of authorit us gaap for nongovernment organ the
codif compil and organ all previou sourc of gaap by topic provid an
effici and easytous structur for research and referenc account standard the
fasb asc effect supersed the precodif gaap hierarchi establish in sa
no 69 and fasb statement no 162
while the us ha it own set of account standard that form gaap the variou
account rule from differ countri ar converg the intern account
standard board iasb is develop a singl set of standard call intern financi
report standard ifr for each account function the iasb is look for the most
appropri principl for how transact should be account for or the most suitabl
method of report the result the iasb ha sought the best sometim adopt a
standard from on countri or anoth other time creat a new standard entir
current more than 120 countri requir or permit the us of ifr with sever more
plan to adopt ifr in the next few year a list of the countri that have adopt the
ifr is avail at wwwiaspluscomcountryuseiashtm
