2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Types of Data Mining and Analysis Software


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


Types of Data Mining and Analysis Software 
There are many types of data mining and data analysis software on the market these days, 
and every year new products and new versions of old products emerge. Because every fraud 
examination involving data analysis is different, it would be impossible to recommend one 
software product to serve every purpose. Choosing a data analysis tool is something that the 
fraud examiner must evaluate on each individual case. A fraud examiner should research 
applications intensively to decide which package is most appropriate for the current 
investigation.  
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.616   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Data mining and knowledge discovery software are generally classified into the following 
categories: 
• Public domain/shareware/freeware: This type of software is available free or for a 
nominal charge through websites, ftp sites, and newsgroups. Many shareware programs, 
such as WINKS SDA, allow users a trial period, after which they must pay a fee to 
reactivate the software. Freeware, however, is available at no cost or for an optional fee. 
These types of programs can be located through Internet search engines and through 
software download services such as ZDNet. 
• Beta software: Beta software is pre-release software that is still in test mode. Generally, 
this type of software is free, and users are asked to review the software’s performance, 
report malfunctions, and so on.  
• Commercial applications: Commercial applications are general release products that 
usually come with technical support and warranty. The most prominent commercial 
applications, which are discussed below, include: 
–  ACL 
–  IDEA 
–  Excel 
–  ActiveData for Excel 
–  AutoAudit 
–  SNAP! Reporter 
–  DataWatch Corporation’s Monarch for Windows 
–  Arbutus Query 
–  Oversight Systems 
 



:


type of data mine and analysi softwar
there ar mani type of data mine and data analysi softwar on the market these dai
and everi year new product and new version of old product emerg becaus everi fraud
examin involv data analysi is differ it would be imposs to recommend on
softwar product to serv everi purpos choos a data analysi tool is someth that the
fraud examin must evalu on each individu case a fraud examin should research
applic intens to decid which packag is most appropri for the current
investig
data analysi and report tool investig
3616 2011 fraud examin manual
data mine and knowledg discoveri softwar ar gener classifi into the follow
categori
public domainsharewarefreewar thi type of softwar is avail free or for a
nomin charg through websit ftp site and newsgroup mani sharewar program
such as wink sda allow user a trial period after which thei must pai a fee to
reactiv the softwar freewar howev is avail at no cost or for an option fee
these type of program can be locat through internet search engin and through
softwar download servic such as zdnet
beta softwar beta softwar is prereleas softwar that is still in test mode gener
thi type of softwar is free and user ar ask to review the softwar perform
report malfunct and so on
commerci applic commerci applic ar gener releas product that
usual come with technic support and warranti the most promin commerci
applic which ar discuss below includ
acl
idea
excel
activedata for excel
autoaudit
snap report
datawatch corpor monarch for window
arbutu queri
oversight system
