2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Types of Data Mining and Analysis Software/ActiveData for Excel


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


ActiveData for Excel 
ActiveData for Microsoft Excel is an easy-to-use tool for advanced data manipulation and 
analysis within the Excel environment. 
 
ActiveData for Excel was designed to overcome Excel’s many limitations: 
 
Excel Limitation ActiveData for Excel’s Compensation  
Does not document the fraud 
examiner’s work in easy-to-access 
logs for reference and storage. 
ActiveData for Excel provides a log of each 
processed step (as a comment in cell A1 of the 
worksheet created). Then, using the Index Sheets 
function, a summary page of all comment fields 
can easily be created for review, in essence 
creating an audit log of all work performed with 
the spreadsheet data. 
Has difficulty performing data-
 analysis and management tests such 
as relating tables. Although it can be 
accomplished, it is an onerous task. 
ActiveData for Excel provides more than 100 
data-analysis and management features that 
automate functions, some of which may be 
possible but extremely difficult in Excel. 
Does not have functionality 
specifically tailored to the fraud 
examiner. For example, an examiner 
can calculate a sample in just a couple 
of clicks with minimal training using 
specifically designed audit software. 
In Excel, it can be done, but it does 
take much effort and guidance. 
ActiveData for Excel has more than 100 features 
that are tailored to the auditor, accountant, and 
fraud examiner. For example, you can use 
ActiveData for Excel to find duplicate records in 
a few clicks (rather than setting up complex 
formulas in Excel). 
 
The following are some examples of how ActiveData can be used for fraud detection. 
 



:


activedata for excel
activedata for microsoft excel is an easytous tool for advanc data manipul and
analysi within the excel environ
activedata for excel wa design to overcom excel mani limit
excel limit activedata for excel compens
doe not document the fraud
examin work in easytoaccess
log for refer and storag
activedata for excel provid a log of each
process step as a comment in cell a1 of the
worksheet creat then us the index sheet
function a summari page of all comment field
can easili be creat for review in essenc
creat an audit log of all work perform with
the spreadsheet data
ha difficulti perform data
analysi and manag test such
as relat tabl although it can be
accomplish it is an oner task
activedata for excel provid more than 100
dataanalysi and manag featur that
autom function some of which mai be
possibl but extrem difficult in excel
doe not have function
specif tailor to the fraud
examin for exampl an examin
can calcul a sampl in just a coupl
of click with minim train us
specif design audit softwar
in excel it can be done but it doe
take much effort and guidanc
activedata for excel ha more than 100 featur
that ar tailor to the auditor account and
fraud examin for exampl you can us
activedata for excel to find duplic record in
a few click rather than set up complex
formula in excel
the follow ar some exampl of how activedata can be us for fraud detect
