2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Misprision of Felony (18 U.S.C. § 4)


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Misprision of Felony (18 U.S.C. § 4) 
Even though citizens have no general duty to report criminal activity, 18 U.S.C. § 4 
recognizes misprision of felony as a criminal offense. In general terms, misprision of felony 
is a crime dealing with the failure to report a crime where there is a legal duty to do so. The 
text of 18 U.S.C. § 4 provides:  
 
Whoever, having knowledge of the actual commission of a felony cognizable by a court of the United 
States, conceals and does not as soon  as possible make known the same to some judge or other person in 
civil or military authority under the United States, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more 
than three years, or both. 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.247 
Under the federal statute, the prosecution must prove the following four elements to obtain 
a misprision of felony conviction: “(1) the principal committed and completed the felony 
alleged; (2) the defendant had knowledge of the fact; (3) the defendant failed to notify the 
authorities; and (4) the defendant took affirmative steps to conceal the crime of the 
principal.” 
 
Even though the federal misprision of felony is rarely prosecuted, a recent bribery scandal 
illustrates its applicability to white collar crime. In July 2008, attorney Zach Scruggs received 
fourteen months in prison and a $250,000 fine after pleading guilty to misprision of felony. 
Specifically, Scruggs committed a criminal offense because he failed to report a conspiracy 
by other lawyers to bribe a Mississippi judge. 
 



:


mispris of feloni 18 usc 4
even though citizen have no gener duti to report crimin activ 18 usc 4
recogn mispris of feloni as a crimin offens in gener term mispris of feloni
is a crime deal with the failur to report a crime where there is a legal duti to do so the
text of 18 usc 4 provid
whoever have knowledg of the actual commiss of a feloni cogniz by a court of the unit
state conceal and doe not as soon as possibl make known the same to some judg or other person in
civil or militari author under the unit state shall be fine under thi titl or imprison not more
than three year or both
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2247
under the feder statut the prosecut must prove the follow four element to obtain
a mispris of feloni convict 1 the princip commit and complet the feloni
alleg 2 the defend had knowledg of the fact 3 the defend fail to notifi the
author and 4 the defend took affirm step to conceal the crime of the
princip
even though the feder mispris of feloni is rare prosecut a recent briberi scandal
illustr it applic to white collar crime in juli 2008 attornei zach scrugg receiv
fourteen month in prison and a 250000 fine after plead guilti to mispris of feloni
specif scrugg commit a crimin offens becaus he fail to report a conspiraci
by other lawyer to bribe a mississippi judg
