2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.)/Telemarketing Fraud


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Telemarketing Fraud 
Telemarketing fraud refers to any type of scheme that is perpetrated over the telephone, and 
these schemes may be prosecuted under sections 2325–2327 of Title 18 of the U.S. Code. 
For purposes of this statute, telemarketing  is defined as: 
 
[A] plan, program, promotion or campaign that is conducted to induce — 
(A) purchases of goods or services; or 
(B) participation in a contest or sweepstakes, 
by use of 1 or more interstate telephone calls initiated either by a person who is conducting the 
plan, program, promotion, or campaign or by a prospective purchaser or contest or sweepstakes 
participant … 
 
The definition contains an exclusion for the solicitation of sales through direct mail catalogs 
when the calls are initiated by the customer. 
 
The statute does not specifically outlaw telemarketing fraud. Instead, the statute provides 
enhanced penalties for persons convicted of identity fraud, fraud in connection with access 
devices, mail fraud, or wire fraud if that offense was committed in connection with the 
conduct of “telemarketing.” If a person is c onvicted of one of the listed offenses through 
the use of telemarketing, then the statute provides that up to five years shall be added to the 
person’s sentence. It also provides that if the victims were over the age of 55, then the 
person shall be sentenced to up to 10 additional years. Section 2327 directs the judge to 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.310  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
order mandatory restitution in all cases. The courts are also allowed to seize any property 
used to commit the crime, as well as any proceeds of the crime. 
 
In addition to charges brought under these provisions, federal prosecutors often use other 
fraud-related laws to prosecute telemarketing fraud, including charges of money-laundering 
(18 U.S.C. §§ 1956 and 1957); credit card fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1029); and bank fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1344). 
 



:


telemarket fraud
telemarket fraud refer to ani type of scheme that is perpetr over the telephon and
these scheme mai be prosecut under section 23252327 of titl 18 of the us code
for purpos of thi statut telemarket is defin as
a plan program promot or campaign that is conduct to induc
a purchas of good or servic or
b particip in a contest or sweepstak
by us of 1 or more interst telephon call initi either by a person who is conduct the
plan program promot or campaign or by a prospect purchas or contest or sweepstak
particip
the definit contain an exclus for the solicit of sale through direct mail catalog
when the call ar initi by the custom
the statut doe not specif outlaw telemarket fraud instead the statut provid
enhanc penalti for person convict of ident fraud fraud in connect with access
devic mail fraud or wire fraud if that offens wa commit in connect with the
conduct of telemarket if a person is c onvict of on of the list offens through
the us of telemarket then the statut provid that up to five year shall be ad to the
person sentenc it also provid that if the victim were over the ag of 55 then the
person shall be sentenc to up to 10 addit year section 2327 direct the judg to
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2310 2011 fraud examin manual
order mandatori restitut in all case the court ar also allow to seiz ani properti
us to commit the crime as well as ani proce of the crime
in addit to charg brought under these provis feder prosecutor often us other
fraudrel law to prosecut telemarket fraud includ charg of moneylaund
18 usc 1956 and 1957 credit card fraud 18 usc 1029 and bank fraud 18 usc 1344
