2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.)/Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (18 U.S.C. §§ 1831–1839)


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (18 U.S.C. §§ 1831–1839) 
The Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (EEA) made the theft of trade secrets a federal 
criminal offense. The Department of Justice now has sweeping authority to prosecute trade 
secret theft whether it is in the United States, via the Internet, or outside the United States. 
 
Section 1839 defines trade secrets as any secret “patterns, plans, compilations, program 
devices, formulas, designs, prototypes, methods, techniques, processes, procedures, 
programs, or codes” that have some independ ent economic value and are used to obtain an 
economic advantage over competitors or customers. Furthermore, the EEA applies to 
anyone who, without authorization, copies, duplicates, “downloads, uploads, alters, destroys 
... replicates, transmits, delivers, sends, mails, communicates, or conveys a trade secret.” 
 
The EEA outlaws two types of trade secret misappropriation: economic espionage and theft 
of commercial trade secrets. Section 1831 criminalizes the theft of a trade secret to benefit a 
foreign government, instrumentality, or agent. Section 1832, however, criminalizes the theft 
of commercial trade secrets to obtain an economic advantage. Both sections are examined in 
more detail below.  
 
Prosecutors can apply the EEA to a wide variety of misconduct because it criminalizes 
attempts and conspiracies to violate the EEA. The same penalties apply to these offenses 
with increased penalties if the trade secret misappropriation benefits a foreign government, 
foreign instrumentality, or a foreign agent.  
 
Section 1834 of the EEA allows criminal forfeiture to the United States of (1) any property 
constituting or derived from the proceeds of violations of the Act, and (2) the forfeiture of 
any property used or intended to be used, in any manner or part, to commit or facilitate a 
violation of the Act. (See 18 U.S.C. § 1834.) The criminal forfeiture provisions enable federal 
prosecutors to dismantle entire Internet networks and seek criminal forfeiture of all the 
computers, printers and other devices used to commit or facilitate the offenses proscribed by 
the Act.  
 
The EEA also authorizes the attorney general, deputy attorney general, or assistant attorney 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.322  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
general in the Criminal Division of the Justice Department to apply for a federal court order 
authorizing or approving the interception of wire or oral communications by the FBI or 
other federal agencies having responsibility for the investigation of the offense. These are the 
same investigative tools available in other federal criminal prosecutions. 
 
The EEA also applies to offenses committed outside the United States if (1) the offender is 
a citizen or permanent resident alien of the United States, (2) if the corporation or other 
organization was incorporated or organized in the United States, or (3) an act in furtherance 
of the offense was committed in the United States. See  18 U.S.C. § 1837. These 
extraterritorial provisions in the Act will provide the Justice Department with broad 
authority to prosecute the international theft of trade secrets and will prevent the willful 
evasion of liability for trade secret misappropriation by using the Internet or other means to 
transfer the trade secret information outside the United States. 
 
Moreover, the EEA authorizes the attorney general to commence a civil action seeking 
injunctive relief to prevent further disclosure of a trade secret by the defendant or third 
parties. See 18 U.S.C. § 1836. There is no requirement in  the Act that criminal indictments be 
issued first. Therefore, the Justice Department  may commence civil actions for injunctive 
relief at any stage of the investigation. In any prosecution or other proceeding under the Act, 
the Court is required to issue protective orders and to take such other action as be necessary 
to preserve the confidentiality of the trade secrets consistent with the Federal Rules of 
Criminal and Civil Procedure. See  18 U.S.C. § 1835. 
 
Finally, violations under the EEA may implicate other federal laws, including: 
• Disclosing government trade secrets (18 U.S.C. § 1905) 
• Interstate transportation and receipt of stolen property or goods (18 U.S.C. § 2314) 
• Mail or wire fraud (18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343) 
• Computer Fraud (18 U.S.C. 1030(a)) 
• Criminal copyright infringement (17 U.S.C. § 506 and 18 U.S.C. § 2319) 
 



:


econom espionag act of 1996 18 usc 18311839
the econom espionag act of 1996 eea made the theft of trade secret a feder
crimin offens the depart of justic now ha sweep author to prosecut trade
secret theft whether it is in the unit state via the internet or outsid the unit state
section 1839 defin trade secret as ani secret pattern plan compil program
devic formula design prototyp method techniqu process procedur
program or code that have some independ ent econom valu and ar us to obtain an
econom advantag over competitor or custom furthermor the eea appli to
anyon who without author copi duplic download upload alter destroi
replic transmit deliv send mail commun or convei a trade secret
the eea outlaw two type of trade secret misappropri econom espionag and theft
of commerci trade secret section 1831 crimin the theft of a trade secret to benefit a
foreign govern instrument or agent section 1832 howev crimin the theft
of commerci trade secret to obtain an econom advantag both section ar examin in
more detail below
prosecutor can appli the eea to a wide varieti of misconduct becaus it crimin
attempt and conspiraci to violat the eea the same penalti appli to these offens
with increas penalti if the trade secret misappropri benefit a foreign govern
foreign instrument or a foreign agent
section 1834 of the eea allow crimin forfeitur to the unit state of 1 ani properti
constitut or deriv from the proce of violat of the act and 2 the forfeitur of
ani properti us or intend to be us in ani manner or part to commit or facilit a
violat of the act see 18 usc 1834 the crimin forfeitur provis enabl feder
prosecutor to dismantl entir internet network and seek crimin forfeitur of all the
comput printer and other devic us to commit or facilit the offens proscrib by
the act
the eea also author the attornei gener deputi attornei gener or assist attornei
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2322 2011 fraud examin manual
gener in the crimin divis of the justic depart to appli for a feder court order
author or approv the intercept of wire or oral commun by the fbi or
other feder agenc have respons for the investig of the offens these ar the
same investig tool avail in other feder crimin prosecut
the eea also appli to offens commit outsid the unit state if 1 the offend is
a citizen or perman resid alien of the unit state 2 if the corpor or other
organ wa incorpor or organ in the unit state or 3 an act in further
of the offens wa commit in the unit state see 18 usc 1837 these
extraterritori provis in the act will provid the justic depart with broad
author to prosecut the intern theft of trade secret and will prevent the will
evas of liabil for trade secret misappropri by us the internet or other mean to
transfer the trade secret inform outsid the unit state
moreov the eea author the attornei gener to commenc a civil action seek
injunct relief to prevent further disclosur of a trade secret by the defend or third
parti see 18 usc 1836 there is no requir in the act that crimin indict be
issu first therefor the justic depart mai commenc civil action for injunct
relief at ani stage of the investig in ani prosecut or other proceed under the act
the court is requir to issu protect order and to take such other action as be necessari
to preserv the confidenti of the trade secret consist with the feder rule of
crimin and civil procedur see 18 usc 1835
final violat under the eea mai implic other feder law includ
disclos govern trade secret 18 usc 1905
interst transport and receipt of stolen properti or good 18 usc 2314
mail or wire fraud 18 usc 1341 1343
comput fraud 18 usc 1030a
crimin copyright infring 17 usc 506 and 18 usc 2319
