2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.)/Computer Fraud (18 U.S.C. 1030(a))


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Computer Fraud (18 U.S.C. 1030(a)) 
Prosecutors may also consider bring computer fraud charges in addition to or in lieu of EEA 
charges. As previously discussed, section 1030 of Title 18 of the U.S. Code, commonly 
known as the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, provides criminal sanctions and a civil action 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.325 
for misappropriation of trade secrets stored on protected computers (i.e., computers used 
by, or whose use affects, a financial institution or the U.S. government, or used for interstate 
or foreign commerce). 
 
Section 1030(a) includes seven types of criminal activity; however, only two sections of the 
Act are particularly relevant to trade secrets. Section 1030(a)(2) makes it illegal to access or 
attempt to access a protected computer to obtain information. Section 1030(a)(4) makes it 
illegal to access or attempt to access a protected computer to commit fraud.  
 
The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act provides both criminal and civil liability. Criminal acts 
charged under the Act are punishable by up to 20 years in prison, a fine, or both. The Act 
also provides that any person who suffers “d amage or loss” under the Act may maintain a 
civil action against the violator to obtain compensatory damages and injunctive relief or 
other equitable relief. 
 



:


comput fraud 18 usc 1030a
prosecutor mai also consid bring comput fraud charg in addit to or in lieu of eea
charg as previous discuss section 1030 of titl 18 of the us code commonli
known as the comput fraud and abus act provid crimin sanction and a civil action
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2325
for misappropri of trade secret store on protect comput ie comput us
by or whose us affect a financi institut or the us govern or us for interst
or foreign commerc
section 1030a includ seven type of crimin activ howev onli two section of the
act ar particularli relev to trade secret section 1030a2 make it illeg to access or
attempt to access a protect comput to obtain inform section 1030a4 make it
illeg to access or attempt to access a protect comput to commit fraud
the comput fraud and abus act provid both crimin and civil liabil crimin act
charg under the act ar punish by up to 20 year in prison a fine or both the act
also provid that ani person who suffer d amag or loss under the act mai maintain a
civil action against the violat to obtain compensatori damag and injunct relief or
other equit relief
