2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.)/The Sherman Antitrust Act (15 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.)


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


The Sherman Antitrust Act (15 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.) 
The Sherman Antitrust Act is designed to combat anticompetitive practices that harm the 
public by undermining economic growth. Specifically, the Act prohibits competitors from 
entering into any agreement to restrain trade in interstate commerce, including price fixing, 
bid rigging, and bid rotation schemes. 
 
Under the Sherman Antitrust Act, every contract, combination in the form of trust or 
otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among the several states, or with 
foreign nations, is declared to be illegal. Every person who shall make any contract or engage 
in any combination or conspiracy hereby declared to be illegal shall be deemed guilty of a 
felony, and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by fine not exceeding $10 million if a 
corporation, or if any other person, $350,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding three years, 
or by both said punishments, in the discretion of the court. However, these maximum 
Sherman Act penalties were increased in June 2004. For offenses committed on or after June 
22, 2004, the maximum corporate fine is $100 million, the maximum individual fine is $1 
million, and the maximum jail term is 10 years. 
 
The elements of a criminal antitrust violation include: 
• An agreement or combination 
• Of two or more entities 
• That unduly restrains trade 
• In interstate or foreign commerce 
 



:


the sherman antitrust act 15 usc 1 et seq
the sherman antitrust act is design to combat anticompetit practic that harm the
public by undermin econom growth specif the act prohibit competitor from
enter into ani agreement to restrain trade in interst commerc includ price fix
bid rig and bid rotat scheme
under the sherman antitrust act everi contract combin in the form of trust or
otherwis or conspiraci in restraint of trade or commerc among the sever state or with
foreign nation is declar to be illeg everi person who shall make ani contract or engag
in ani combin or conspiraci herebi declar to be illeg shall be deem guilti of a
feloni and on convict thereof shall be punish by fine not exceed 10 million if a
corpor or if ani other person 350000 or by imprison not exceed three year
or by both said punish in the discret of the court howev these maximum
sherman act penalti were increas in june 2004 for offens commit on or after june
22 2004 the maximum corpor fine is 100 million the maximum individu fine is 1
million and the maximum jail term is 10 year
the element of a crimin antitrust violat includ
an agreement or combin
of two or more entiti
that unduli restrain trade
in interst or foreign commerc
