2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Qui Tam Suits and the Civil False Claims Act/Who Can Bring a Qui Tam Action


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Who Can Bring a Qui Tam Action 
The False Claims Act provides that any “person” can file a qui tam action as long as they 
have direct and independent knowledge of the fraud and such knowledge was not obtained 
from a “public disclosure.” The definition of person includes not only individuals, but also 
businesses and state or local government entities. The most common plaintiffs in qui tam 
actions are employees of government contractors, health care employees, and employees of 
local, state, or federal government. 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court reaffirmed this definition in an opinion handed down May 22, 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.340  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
2000. In the case of Vermont Agency of Natural Resources v. U.S. ex rel. Stevens, 120 S.Ct. 1858, 
the court resolved a conflict among some of the courts of appeal by stating firmly that 
private citizens do have the right to sue under the False Claims Act. However, the Court also 
held that states and state agencies are not subject to liability under the False Claims Act. 
Therefore, if a state or state agency submits false claims to the federal government, they 
cannot be sued by a private individual under the provisions of the False Claims Act. The 
Court did not address the issue of whether the U.S. government could file suit against a state 
under the FCA. 
 
The requirement that a person’s knowledge of the fraud was not obtained from a public 
disclosure does, however, have one exception. Even if based on public disclosure, a qui tam 
suit may proceed if the plaintiff is “an original  source of the information,” which requires the 
plaintiff to have “direct and independent knowledge of the information on which the 
allegations are based” and have “voluntarily provided the information to the government 
before filing [a suit] which is  based on the information.”  
 
At the present time, a controversy still exists over whether federal employees can file qui tam 
actions under the False Claims Act when knowledge of the fraud was obtained through their 
official duties. At least two federal circuit courts that have addressed the issue have 
concluded that employees who are required and paid by the government to disclose fraud 
cannot bring qui tam actions since their knowledge of fraud was not obtained independently. 
In contrast, two federal circuits have held that federal employees may bring a qui tam suit, 
even if the action is based on information obtained during the course of their employment. 
Thus, federal employees may be prohibited from filing qui tam actions, particularly if 
detecting fraud is part of their job duties. 
 



:


who can bring a qui tam action
the fals claim act provid that ani person can file a qui tam action as long as thei
have direct and independ knowledg of the fraud and such knowledg wa not obtain
from a public disclosur the definit of person includ not onli individu but also
busi and state or local govern entiti the most common plaintiff in qui tam
action ar employe of govern contractor health care employe and employe of
local state or feder govern
the us suprem court reaffirm thi definit in an opinion hand down mai 22
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2340 2011 fraud examin manual
2000 in the case of vermont agenc of natur resourc v us ex rel steven 120 sct 1858
the court resolv a conflict among some of the court of appeal by state firmli that
privat citizen do have the right to sue under the fals claim act howev the court also
held that state and state agenc ar not subject to liabil under the fals claim act
therefor if a state or state agenc submit fals claim to the feder govern thei
cannot be su by a privat individu under the provis of the fals claim act the
court did not address the issu of whether the us govern could file suit against a state
under the fca
the requir that a person knowledg of the fraud wa not obtain from a public
disclosur doe howev have on except even if base on public disclosur a qui tam
suit mai proce if the plaintiff is an origin sourc of the inform which requir the
plaintiff to have direct and independ knowledg of the inform on which the
alleg ar base and have voluntarili provid the inform to the govern
befor file a suit which is base on the inform
at the present time a controversi still exist over whether feder employe can file qui tam
action under the fals claim act when knowledg of the fraud wa obtain through their
offici duti at least two feder circuit court that have address the issu have
conclud that employe who ar requir and paid by the govern to disclos fraud
cannot bring qui tam action sinc their knowledg of fraud wa not obtain independ
in contrast two feder circuit have held that feder employe mai bring a qui tam suit
even if the action is base on inform obtain dure the cours of their employ
thu feder employe mai be prohibit from file qui tam action particularli if
detect fraud is part of their job duti
