2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/“Red Flags” of Insurance Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


“Red Flags” of Insurance Fraud 
Red flags of insurance fraud may include any of the following: 
• The claim is made a short time after inception of the policy, or after an increase or 
change in the coverage under which the claim is made. This could include the purchase  
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1110                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of a scheduled property or jewelry floater policy, or more than one during the time 
before the loss. 
• The insured has a history of many insurance claims and losses. 
• The insured earlier asked his insurance agent hypothetical questions about coverage in 
the event of a loss similar to the actual claim. 
• The insured is very pushy and insistent about a fast settlement, and exhibits more than 
the usual amount of knowledge about insurance coverage and claims procedures, 
particularly if the claim is not well documented. 
• In a burglary loss, the claim includes large, bulky property, which is unusual for  
a burglary. 
• In a theft or fire loss claim, the claim includes a lot of recently purchased, expensive 
property, or the insured insists that everything was the best or the most expensive 
model, especially if the insured cannot provide receipts, owner’s manuals, or other 
documentary proof of purchase. 
• In a fire loss claim, property that would be personal or sentimental to the insured and 
that you would expect to see among the lost property — photographs, family heirlooms, 
or pets — is conspicuous by its absence. 
• A large amount of the property was purchased at garage and yard sales and flea markets, 
or otherwise for cash, and there are no receipts (the insured will usually be unable to 
recall exactly where these sales took place or by whom). 
• The insured cannot remember or does not know where he acquired the claimed 
property, especially unusual items, and/or he cannot provide adequate descriptions. 
• On the other hand, the insured already has receipts and other documentation, witnesses, 
and duplicate photographs for everything; the claim is too perfect. 
• Documentation provided by the insured is irregular or questionable, such as: 
? Numbered receipts are from the same store and dated differently or sequentially. 
? Documents show signs of alteration such as dates, descriptions, or amounts. 
? Photocopies of documents are provided and the insured cannot produce  
the originals. 
? Similar handwriting or signatures — or the insured’s apparent handwriting — on 
different receipts, invoices, gift verifications, appraisals, etc. 
? The amount of tax is wrong, either for the price of the property or for the date 
appearing on the receipt. 
? Receipts, invoices, or shipping documents do not have “paid,” “received,” or other 
shipping stamps. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1111 
? In a theft or loss away from home, the insured waits an unusually long time before 
reporting the theft to the police. 
? The insured is able to give the police a complete list of lost property on the day of 
the burglary or shortly after. 
? The amount of the claim differs from the value given by the insured to the police. 
? In a business inventory or income loss claim, the insured does not keep complete 
books, or the books do not follow accepted accounting principles. 
? The physical evidence is inconsistent with the loss claimed by the insured. 
? In a burglary loss, there is no physical evidence of breaking and entering, or a 
burglary could not have occurred unnoticed under the circumstances. 
? In a fire loss: 
The apparent cause and origin of the fire is inconsistent with an accidental cause and 
origin, or there is evidence of the use of an accelerant. 
The remains of the property do not match the claimed property. 
? The premises do not show signs of having contained the claimed property, or the 
amount of property will not fit into the space where the insured says it was. 
? Physical damage to the insured’s car is inconsistent with its having been in a collision 
with an uninsured car. 
? The insured has discarded the claimed damaged property before the adjuster can 
examine it. 
? The cost of the claimed property, over the period of time it was allegedly acquired, 
seems to exceed the insured’s financial ability to purchase it. 
? The insured refuses or is unable to answer routine questions. 
? The insured provides supporting evidence and documentation that cannot be 
corroborated. 
• Information on a life application is very vague or ambiguous as to the details of health 
history: dates, places of treatment, names of  physicians or hospitals, or specific diagnosis. 
• Applicant fails to sign and date the application. 
• Pertinent questions on the application are not answered, such as income, other insurance 
carried, hazardous duties, or aviation or flying activity. 
• The insured has “excess insurance,” either shown at the time of application or developed 
through an underwriting report of database information. 
• Earned income does not warrant the amount of insurance being applied for. 
• The applicant’s date of birth as shown on the application is much earlier than shown 
with other carriers or in previous applications or policies. 
• The agent is putting on a great deal of pressure to have the policy issued because of the 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1112                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
large amount applied for, but is going over the underwriter’s head in order to do so 
(working out of the system). 
• The physician’s report is very vague on details of past medical history and does not 
coincide with the information shown on the application. 
• A death claim is presented in which the death has taken place outside of the country. 
• The signature on the application for insurance does not appear to be the same signature 
as shown on an authorization at the time of the claim. 
• A claimant or claimant’s attorney attempts to limit the type of information to be related 
by a signed authorization, which is a standard authorization used by the company. 
• An attorney is immediately brought into a contestable death claim, attempting to 
interfere with the investigation and to withhold information required by the company. 
• A contestable death claim that is reported as an accidental death could possibly be a 
suicide (fatal accident involving only one vehicle, a hunting accident, an accidental 
shooting while cleaning a weapon or repairing same, etc.). 
• An autopsy report discloses a different height and weight than what is shown on the 
recent application (auto or house fire death). Dental records do not coincide with those 
dental findings as shown by an autopsy report. 
• Records are missing on a patient who was confined to a hospital, or records are missing 
on a patient from a physician’s office. 
• The death claim package sent to the insurance company is too well packaged and 
complete in every detail with supportive documents. Documentation that was not 
initially requested or required by the insurance company was voluntarily sent, such as 
newspaper reports, burial certificates, shipment of the body from one country to the 
home country. 
• The routine audit of a designated insured group shows a significant increase of added 
employees whose names do not show up on the payroll. 
• Gunshot wounds or stabbings were inflicted by the insured as the aggressor or were  
self-inflicted. 
• Police accident reports were submitted by the claimant. 
• Pressure for speed of handling — claimant wants to stop by the office to pick up his 
check “as we’re leaving for vacation in the morning.” 
• A series of prescription numbers from the same drug store don’t coincide 
chronologically with the dates of the prescriptions. 
• An automobile fire in a very remote rural area with no witness, but the driver claims an 
electrical shortage in the engine compartment caused the entire car to be gutted  
by flames. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1113 
• Preliminary information for a business fire loss or home fire loss indicates considerable 
financial difficulties and financial pressures being brought upon the owner and the fire is 
suspicious in nature and/or origin. 
• An employee within the claims operations of an insurance company is known to have a 
drinking problem, drug problem, financial pressures, or is having serious marital 
difficulties or having an affair and irregularities start to appear. 
• On burglary losses from a business or especially a home, the investigator observes that 
the remaining contents at the scene are of much inferior quality than that which is being 
reported stolen. There is no indication of indentation in the piling of the carpet where 
heavy items of furniture or equipment were to have been placed. There are no hooks or 
nails on the walls where valuable pictures might have been hung. Entrances or exits are 
too small to take a large item through without laboriously disassembling it. 
• Any information on a claim that has been filed if it is determined that there is deliberate 
cover-up or false statements contained therein. 
• A disability income protection claim is filed and it is determined that the claimant had 
recently purchased numerous expensive items on credit and had them all covered by 
credit A&H insurance coverage. 
• Public transportation accidents in which there are more passenger claims filed than there 
were passengers at the time of the accident. 
• A witness to an accident or incident deliberately tries to hide from investigators rather 
than come forth and tell the truth. 
• An official document of findings is in complete conflict with the facts in the case and 
there is no explanation for this conflict of facts. Photographs or other documents do not 
substantiate the reported findings. 
 
 



:


red flag of insur fraud
red flag of insur fraud mai includ ani of the follow
the claim is made a short time after incept of the polici or after an increas or
chang in the coverag under which the claim is made thi could includ the purchas
insur fraud financi transact
11110 2011 fraud examin manual
of a schedul properti or jewelri floater polici or more than on dure the time
befor the loss
the insur ha a histori of mani insur claim and loss
the insur earlier ask hi insur agent hypothet question about coverag in
the event of a loss similar to the actual claim
the insur is veri pushi and insist about a fast settlement and exhibit more than
the usual amount of knowledg about insur coverag and claim procedur
particularli if the claim is not well document
in a burglari loss the claim includ larg bulki properti which is unusu for
a burglari
in a theft or fire loss claim the claim includ a lot of recent purchas expens
properti or the insur insist that everyth wa the best or the most expens
model especi if the insur cannot provid receipt owner manual or other
documentari proof of purchas
in a fire loss claim properti that would be person or sentiment to the insur and
that you would expect to see among the lost properti photograph famili heirloom
or pet is conspicu by it absenc
a larg amount of the properti wa purchas at garag and yard sale and flea market
or otherwis for cash and there ar no receipt the insur will usual be unabl to
recal exactli where these sale took place or by whom
the insur cannot rememb or doe not know where he acquir the claim
properti especi unusu item andor he cannot provid adequ descript
on the other hand the insur alreadi ha receipt and other document wit
and duplic photograph for everyth the claim is too perfect
document provid by the insur is irregular or question such as
number receipt ar from the same store and date differ or sequenti
document show sign of alter such as date descript or amount
photocopi of document ar provid and the insur cannot produc
the origin
similar handwrit or signatur or the insur appar handwrit on
differ receipt invoic gift verif apprais etc
the amount of tax is wrong either for the price of the properti or for the date
appear on the receipt
receipt invoic or ship document do not have paid receiv or other
ship stamp
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11111
in a theft or loss awai from home the insur wait an unusu long time befor
report the theft to the polic
the insur is abl to give the polic a complet list of lost properti on the dai of
the burglari or shortli after
the amount of the claim differ from the valu given by the insur to the polic
in a busi inventori or incom loss claim the insur doe not keep complet
book or the book do not follow accept account principl
the physic evid is inconsist with the loss claim by the insur
in a burglari loss there is no physic evid of break and enter or a
burglari could not have occur unnot under the circumst
in a fire loss
the appar caus and origin of the fire is inconsist with an accident caus and
origin or there is evid of the us of an acceler
the remain of the properti do not match the claim properti
the premis do not show sign of have contain the claim properti or the
amount of properti will not fit into the space where the insur sai it wa
physic damag to the insur car is inconsist with it have been in a collis
with an uninsur car
the insur ha discard the claim damag properti befor the adjust can
examin it
the cost of the claim properti over the period of time it wa allegedli acquir
seem to exce the insur financi abil to purchas it
the insur refus or is unabl to answer routin question
the insur provid support evid and document that cannot be
corrobor
inform on a life applic is veri vagu or ambigu as to the detail of health
histori date place of treatment name of physician or hospit or specif diagnosi
applic fail to sign and date the applic
pertin question on the applic ar not answer such as incom other insur
carri hazard duti or aviat or fly activ
the insur ha excess insur either shown at the time of applic or develop
through an underwrit report of databas inform
earn incom doe not warrant the amount of insur be appli for
the applic date of birth as shown on the applic is much earlier than shown
with other carrier or in previou applic or polici
the agent is put on a great deal of pressur to have the polici issu becaus of the
insur fraud financi transact
11112 2011 fraud examin manual
larg amount appli for but is go over the underwrit head in order to do so
work out of the system
the physician report is veri vagu on detail of past medic histori and doe not
coincid with the inform shown on the applic
a death claim is present in which the death ha taken place outsid of the countri
the signatur on the applic for insur doe not appear to be the same signatur
as shown on an author at the time of the claim
a claimant or claimant attornei attempt to limit the type of inform to be relat
by a sign author which is a standard author us by the compani
an attornei is immedi brought into a contest death claim attempt to
interfer with the investig and to withhold inform requir by the compani
a contest death claim that is report as an accident death could possibl be a
suicid fatal accid involv onli on vehicl a hunt accid an accident
shoot while clean a weapon or repair same etc
an autopsi report disclos a differ height and weight than what is shown on the
recent applic auto or hous fire death dental record do not coincid with those
dental find as shown by an autopsi report
record ar miss on a patient who wa confin to a hospit or record ar miss
on a patient from a physician offic
the death claim packag sent to the insur compani is too well packag and
complet in everi detail with support document document that wa not
initi request or requir by the insur compani wa voluntarili sent such as
newspap report burial certif shipment of the bodi from on countri to the
home countri
the routin audit of a design insur group show a signific increas of ad
employe whose name do not show up on the payrol
gunshot wound or stab were inflict by the insur as the aggressor or were
selfinflict
polic accid report were submit by the claimant
pressur for speed of handl claimant want to stop by the offic to pick up hi
check as were leav for vacat in the morn
a seri of prescript number from the same drug store dont coincid
chronolog with the date of the prescript
an automobil fire in a veri remot rural area with no wit but the driver claim an
electr shortag in the engin compart caus the entir car to be gut
by flame
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11113
preliminari inform for a busi fire loss or home fire loss indic consider
financi difficulti and financi pressur be brought upon the owner and the fire is
suspici in natur andor origin
an employe within the claim oper of an insur compani is known to have a
drink problem drug problem financi pressur or is have seriou marit
difficulti or have an affair and irregular start to appear
on burglari loss from a busi or especi a home the investig observ that
the remain content at the scene ar of much inferior qualiti than that which is be
report stolen there is no indic of indent in the pile of the carpet where
heavi item of furnitur or equip were to have been place there ar no hook or
nail on the wall where valuabl pictur might have been hung entranc or exit ar
too small to take a larg item through without labori disassembl it
ani inform on a claim that ha been file if it is determin that there is deliber
coverup or fals statement contain therein
a disabl incom protect claim is file and it is determin that the claimant had
recent purchas numer expens item on credit and had them all cover by
credit ah insur coverag
public transport accid in which there ar more passeng claim file than there
were passeng at the time of the accid
a wit to an accid or incid deliber tri to hide from investig rather
than come forth and tell the truth
an offici document of find is in complet conflict with the fact in the case and
there is no explan for thi conflict of fact photograph or other document do not
substanti the report find
