2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Corporate Organization and Criminal Behavior/The Image of the Corporation


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


The Image of the Corporation 
Large corporations have contributed significantly to industrial and commercial development 
throughout the world. Their size and resources enable them to organize and coordinate 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.503  
production and distribution. The capital resources of a large corporation provide it with the 
ability to develop, adopt, and alter technology on a mammoth scale. A considerable portion 
of the population has been accorded a high standard of living because of corporate activity. 
 
At the same time, large corporations have the power to influence the manner in which  
laws are written and to commit acts that can inflict serious harm upon the population. They 
can hire lobbyists and lawyers who manipulate definitions of wrongdoing in the 
corporations’ interests.  
 
The very largeness and remoteness of the corporation from most of us is part of the reason 
that Americans traditionally have a love-hate attitude toward such organizations. We admire 
and desire corporations’ products, but we are uneasy about their power — a power that tends 
to be used single-mindedly in the pursuit of profits. Thomas Hobbes, a seventeenth century 
English political philosopher, stands out in the crowd that has been scornful of 
corporations. Hobbes’ unsavory comparison was between corporations and ascarides — 
worms that eat at the entrails of what Hobbes called “natural man.” 1 Centuries later, Robert 
Heilbroner, an economist, would castigate “the corporation with its wealth-seeking, its 
dehumanizing calculus of plus and minus, its careful inculcation of impulses and goals that 
should at most be tolerated.” 2  
 
Corporations and their executives are often the object of deprecatory humor. As far back as 
l635, a satirist had a businessman proclaiming: “I love churches. I mean to rob my 
countrymen and build one.” 3 In more recent times, a U.S. Senator told the story of a 
corporation officer who, when asked at a committee hearing if he were not ashamed of 
double-dealing people who trusted him, was puzzled: “Who else can you cheat?” he wanted 
to know. The putdowns of the business world are part of a common folklore, reflected in 
the belief that the expression legitimate business  is an oxymoron. 
 
According to William Kristol, public hostility toward big business dates back to the Populist 
movement of the late nineteenth century and suspicions of trusts that led to the 1890 
Sherman Anti-Trust Act. People are suspicious as to whether goods produced by large 
corporations are of the highest quality or are available at the lowest possible price. In 1978, a 
                                                 
1Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan (London: Andrew Crooke, 1651). 
2Robert Heilbroner, In the Name of Profit  (New York: Doubleday, 1973), p. 223. 
3Christopher Hill, Society and Puritanism in Pre-Revolutionary England  (London: Secker & Warburg, 1964), p. 267. 
4John T. Noonan, Bribes (New York: Macmillan, 1984). 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.504   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
survey by Seymour Lipset and Gordan Schneider concluded that major industries and 
corporations had dropped in public esteem greatly during the 1970s.  
 



:


the imag of the corpor
larg corpor have contribut significantli to industri and commerci develop
throughout the world their size and resourc enabl them to organ and coordin
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4503
product and distribut the capit resourc of a larg corpor provid it with the
abil to develop adopt and alter technolog on a mammoth scale a consider portion
of the popul ha been accord a high standard of live becaus of corpor activ
at the same time larg corpor have the power to influenc the manner in which
law ar written and to commit act that can inflict seriou harm upon the popul thei
can hire lobbyist and lawyer who manipul definit of wrongdo in the
corpor interest
the veri larg and remot of the corpor from most of us is part of the reason
that american tradition have a loveh attitud toward such organ we admir
and desir corpor product but we ar uneasi about their power a power that tend
to be us singlemindedli in the pursuit of profit thoma hobb a seventeenth centuri
english polit philosoph stand out in the crowd that ha been scorn of
corpor hobb unsavori comparison wa between corpor and ascarid
worm that eat at the entrail of what hobb call natur man 1 centuri later robert
heilbron an economist would castig the corpor with it wealthseek it
dehuman calculu of plu and minu it care inculc of impuls and goal that
should at most be toler 2
corpor and their execut ar often the object of deprecatori humor as far back as
l635 a satirist had a businessman proclaim i love church i mean to rob my
countrymen and build on 3 in more recent time a us senat told the stori of a
corpor offic who when ask at a committe hear if he were not asham of
doubled peopl who trust him wa puzzl who els can you cheat he want
to know the putdown of the busi world ar part of a common folklor reflect in
the belief that the express legitim busi is an oxymoron
accord to william kristol public hostil toward big busi date back to the populist
movement of the late nineteenth centuri and suspicion of trust that led to the 1890
sherman antitrust act peopl ar suspici as to whether good produc by larg
corpor ar of the highest qualiti or ar avail at the lowest possibl price in 1978 a
1thoma hobb leviathan london andrew crook 1651
2robert heilbron in the name of profit new york doubledai 1973 p 223
3christoph hill societi and puritan in prerevolutionari england london secker warburg 1964 p 267
4john t noonan bribe new york macmillan 1984
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4504 2011 fraud examin manual
survei by seymour lipset and gordan schneider conclud that major industri and
corpor had drop in public esteem greatli dure the 1970
