2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Management Behavior


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


Management Behavior 
Brenner and Molander found that superiors are the primary influence in unethical decision 
making. Therefore, the use of sanctions to accomplish compliance with the law is only one 
of the various forces operating within a corporation encouraging or opposing violations of 
law. Stone found that the success of law enforcement “ultimately depends upon its 
consistency with and reinforcement of the organization’s rules for advancement and reward, 
its customs, conventions, and morals.” He maintains that if the law is too much at odds with 
the corporation’s “culture,” employees will tend to cover up their tracks rather than change  
their behavior. 
 
Corporations also argue that “regulation is faulty because most government regulations are 
incomprehensible and too complex.” Conklin found that anti-trust laws are seen as 
inconsistent, hypocritical, poorly defined, and rarely enforced. Therefore, most regulations 
must be written in detail to cover as many contingencies as possible. 
 
Silk and Vogel found several other actions used by business to rationalize conduct:  
• Government regulations are unjustified because the additional costs of regulations and 
bureaucratic procedures cut heavily into profits. 
• Regulation is unnecessary because the matters being regulated are unimportant. 
• Although some corporate violations involve millions of dollars, the damage is so 
diffused among a large number of consumers that individually there is little loss. 
• Violations are caused by economic necessity; they aim to protect the value of stock, to 
ensure an adequate return for stockholders, and to protect the job security of employees 
by ensuring the financial stability of the corporation. 
 
John Braithwaite is a researcher in white-collar crime at Australian National University in 
Canberra. He is also the recipient of the 1990 Cressey Award by the Association of Certified 
Fraud Examiners for his research in international white-collar crime issues. Braithwaite views 
                                                 
9Christopher Stone, “Where the Law Ends: The Social Control of Corporate Behavior .” New York:  
Harper & Row, 1975. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.513  
white-collar crime as a product of the corporate subculture. In Braithwaite’s view, 
corporations will turn to crime as a result of “blocked opportunities.”  
 
Because white-collar crime can exist only in secrecy, deviant subcultures develop (conspiracy 
among executives, for example), lines of communication are not allowed to develop, and 
people operate within spheres of responsibility.  
 
 



:


manag behavior
brenner and moland found that superior ar the primari influenc in uneth decis
make therefor the us of sanction to accomplish complianc with the law is onli on
of the variou forc oper within a corpor encourag or oppos violat of
law stone found that the success of law enforc ultim depend upon it
consist with and reinforc of the organ rule for advanc and reward
it custom convent and moral he maintain that if the law is too much at odd with
the corpor cultur employe will tend to cover up their track rather than chang
their behavior
corpor also argu that regul is faulti becaus most govern regul ar
incomprehens and too complex conklin found that antitrust law ar seen as
inconsist hypocrit poorli defin and rare enforc therefor most regul
must be written in detail to cover as mani conting as possibl
silk and vogel found sever other action us by busi to ration conduct
govern regul ar unjustifi becaus the addit cost of regul and
bureaucrat procedur cut heavili into profit
regul is unnecessari becaus the matter be regul ar unimport
although some corpor violat involv million of dollar the damag is so
diffus among a larg number of consum that individu there is littl loss
violat ar caus by econom necess thei aim to protect the valu of stock to
ensur an adequ return for stockhold and to protect the job secur of employe
by ensur the financi stabil of the corpor
john braithwait is a research in whitecollar crime at australian nation univers in
canberra he is also the recipi of the 1990 cressei award by the associ of certifi
fraud examin for hi research in intern whitecollar crime issu braithwait view
9christoph stone where the law end the social control of corpor behavior new york
harper row 1975
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4513
whitecollar crime as a product of the corpor subcultur in braithwait view
corpor will turn to crime as a result of block opportun
becaus whitecollar crime can exist onli in secreci deviant subcultur develop conspiraci
among execut for exampl line of commun ar not allow to develop and
peopl oper within sphere of respons
