2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Corporate Sentencing Guidelines/Calculating the Fine/FINE MULTIPLES


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


FINE MULTIPLES 
After the base fine is established, the next step in sentencing is to calculate the culpability 
multiplier of the organization. The calculation of this multiplier is a complicated process. 
Every organization begins with a preset score of five on a scale of zero to ten. The 
organization’s score is then increased or decreased based on the presence of aggravating or 
mitigating factors. Aggravating factors increase the score (and thus increase the fine for the 
organization), while mitigating factors decrease the score. The Guidelines note four 
aggravating factors that can cause an organization’s score to increase:  
1. Involvement in or tolerance of criminal activity. Points will be added if high-level employees of 
the organization participated in, condoned, or were willfully ignorant of the offense. 
Points may also be added if there was pervasive tolerance of the offense by high-level 
employees. Depending on the size of the organization, this can add from 1 to 5 points to 
an organization’s culpability score.  
2. Prior history. If that organization has previously been found criminally guilty of similar 
acts, or if the organization has been found guilty of a civil offense for similar acts on at 
least two occasions, points may be added to the culpability score. Depending on how 
long it has been since the previous offense, up to two points can be added to the 
organization’s culpability score.  
3. Violation of a prior court order. Points are added to the organization’s culpability score if, in 
committing the offense at hand, the organization violated an injunction or other judicial 
order. Points are also added if the offense in question is similar to a prior offense for 
which the organization is already on probation, and if the commission of the current 
offense violated the probation order. This factor can add up to two points to the 
culpability score.  
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.520   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
4. Obstruction of justice. Finally, points are added to the organization’s culpability score if that 
organization interfered in any way with the investigation, prosecution, or sentencing of 
the offense in question. This does not always require an affirmative act by the 
organization. For instance, if the organization knew of an attempt by some party to 
obstruct an investigation, prosecution, or sentencing, and did nothing to prevent it, then 
the organization may be found to have obstructed justice. Simply stated, if the 
organization “turns a blind eye” to any form of obstruction, it faces the possibility of 
having its fine substantially increased under the Guidelines. This factor can add up to 
three points.  
 



:


fine multipl
after the base fine is establish the next step in sentenc is to calcul the culpabl
multipli of the organ the calcul of thi multipli is a complic process
everi organ begin with a preset score of five on a scale of zero to ten the
organ score is then increas or decreas base on the presenc of aggrav or
mitig factor aggrav factor increas the score and thu increas the fine for the
organ while mitig factor decreas the score the guidelin note four
aggrav factor that can caus an organ score to increas
1 involv in or toler of crimin activ point will be ad if highlevel employe of
the organ particip in condon or were willfulli ignor of the offens
point mai also be ad if there wa pervas toler of the offens by highlevel
employe depend on the size of the organ thi can add from 1 to 5 point to
an organ culpabl score
2 prior histori if that organ ha previous been found crimin guilti of similar
act or if the organ ha been found guilti of a civil offens for similar act on at
least two occas point mai be ad to the culpabl score depend on how
long it ha been sinc the previou offens up to two point can be ad to the
organ culpabl score
3 violat of a prior court order point ar ad to the organ culpabl score if in
commit the offens at hand the organ violat an injunct or other judici
order point ar also ad if the offens in question is similar to a prior offens for
which the organ is alreadi on probat and if the commiss of the current
offens violat the probat order thi factor can add up to two point to the
culpabl score
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4520 2011 fraud examin manual
4 obstruct of justic final point ar ad to the organ culpabl score if that
organ interf in ani wai with the investig prosecut or sentenc of
the offens in question thi doe not alwai requir an affirm act by the
organ for instanc if the organ knew of an attempt by some parti to
obstruct an investig prosecut or sentenc and did noth to prevent it then
the organ mai be found to have obstruct justic simpli state if the
organ turn a blind ey to ani form of obstruct it face the possibl of
have it fine substanti increas under the guidelin thi factor can add up to
three point
