2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Register Disbursement Schemes/False Voids


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


False Voids 
Fictitious voids are similar to refund schemes in that they make fraudulent disbursements 
from the register appear to be legitimate. When a sale is voided on a register, a copy of the 
customer’s receipt is usually attached to a void slip, along with the signature or initials of a 
manager indicating that the transaction has been approved. (See “False Voids” flowchart.) In 
order to process a false void, then, the first thing the perpetrator needs is the customer’s 
copy of the sales receipt. Typically, when an employee sets about processing a fictitious void, 
he simply withholds the customer’s receipt at the time of the sale. In many cases customers 
do not notice that they are not given a receipt.  
 
With the customer’s copy of the receipt in hand, the culprit rings a voided sale. Whatever 
money the customer paid for the item is removed from the register as though it is being 
returned to a customer. The copy of the customer’s receipt is attached to the void slip to 
verify the authenticity of the transaction.  
 
Before the voided sale will be perceived as valid, a manager generally must approve the 
transaction. In many instances, the manager in question simply neglects to verify the 
authenticity of the voided sale. A number of managers will sign most anything presented to 
them and thus leave themselves vulnerable to voided sales schemes. It is not a coincidence 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.505 
that the perpetrators of these crimes present their void slips to managers who are 
lackadaisical about authorizing them. These kinds of managers are generally targeted by the 
fraudsters and are essential to the success of the schemes.  
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.506                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.507 
EXAMPLE 
An employee processed fraudulent voids, kept customer receipts, and presented them to her 
supervisors for review at the end of her shift, long after the alleged transactions had taken 
place. Her supervisors approved the voided sales and the accounts receivable department 
failed to notice the excessive number of voided sales processed by this employee.  
 
Obviously, not all managers give rubber-stamp approval to voided sales. Some employees 
must therefore take other routes to get their voided sales “approved.” In most of these cases 
the perpetrator simply forges his supervisor’s authorization on the fraudulent void slips. It is 
also possible that managers will conspire with register employees and approve false voids in 
return for a share of the proceeds from the scheme.  
 



:


fals void
fictiti void ar similar to refund scheme in that thei make fraudul disburs
from the regist appear to be legitim when a sale is void on a regist a copi of the
custom receipt is usual attach to a void slip along with the signatur or initi of a
manag indic that the transact ha been approv see fals void flowchart in
order to process a fals void then the first thing the perpetr need is the custom
copi of the sale receipt typic when an employe set about process a fictiti void
he simpli withhold the custom receipt at the time of the sale in mani case custom
do not notic that thei ar not given a receipt
with the custom copi of the receipt in hand the culprit ring a void sale whatev
monei the custom paid for the item is remov from the regist as though it is be
return to a custom the copi of the custom receipt is attach to the void slip to
verifi the authent of the transact
befor the void sale will be perceiv as valid a manag gener must approv the
transact in mani instanc the manag in question simpli neglect to verifi the
authent of the void sale a number of manag will sign most anyth present to
them and thu leav themselv vulner to void sale scheme it is not a coincid
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1505
that the perpetr of these crime present their void slip to manag who ar
lackadais about author them these kind of manag ar gener target by the
fraudster and ar essenti to the success of the scheme
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1506 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1507
exampl
an employe process fraudul void kept custom receipt and present them to her
supervisor for review at the end of her shift long after the alleg transact had taken
place her supervisor approv the void sale and the account receiv depart
fail to notic the excess number of void sale process by thi employe
obvious not all manag give rubberstamp approv to void sale some employe
must therefor take other rout to get their void sale approv in most of these case
the perpetr simpli forg hi supervisor author on the fraudul void slip it is
also possibl that manag will conspir with regist employe and approv fals void in
return for a share of the proce from the scheme
