2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Re-Routing the Delivery of Checks


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Re-Routing the Delivery of Checks 
Employees may also misappropriate signed checks by altering the addresses to which those 
checks are mailed. These perpetrators usually replace the legitimate address of the payee with 
an address where the employee can retrieve the check, such as the employee’s home or a 
P.O. box the employee controls. In other instances, the perpetrator might purposely 
misaddress a check so that it will be returned as undeliverable. The employee steals the check 
after it is returned to the victim organization.  
 
Obviously, proper separation of duties should  preclude anyone who prepares disbursements 
from being involved in their delivery. Nevertheless, the person who prepares a check is often 
allowed to address and mail it as well. In some instances where proper controls are in place, 
employees are still able to cause the misdelivery of checks. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A clerk in the customer service department of a mortgage company was in charge of 
changing the mailing addresses of property ow ners. She was assigned a password that gave 
her access to make these changes. The clerk was transferred to a new department where one 
of her duties was the issuance of checks to property owners. Unfortunately, her supervisor 
forgot to cancel her old password. When the clerk realized this oversight, she would request 
a check for a certain property owner, then sign onto the system with her old password and 
change the address of that property owner. The check would be sent to her. The next day 
the employee would use her old password to re-enter the system and replace the proper 
address so that there would be no record of where the check h ad been sent. This fraudster’s 
scheme resulted in a loss of over $250,000 to the victim company.  
 



:


rerout the deliveri of check
employe mai also misappropri sign check by alter the address to which those
check ar mail these perpetr usual replac the legitim address of the paye with
an address where the employe can retriev the check such as the employe home or a
po box the employe control in other instanc the perpetr might purpos
misaddress a check so that it will be return as undeliver the employe steal the check
after it is return to the victim organ
obvious proper separ of duti should preclud anyon who prepar disburs
from be involv in their deliveri nevertheless the person who prepar a check is often
allow to address and mail it as well in some instanc where proper control ar in place
employe ar still abl to caus the misdeliveri of check
exampl
a clerk in the custom servic depart of a mortgag compani wa in charg of
chang the mail address of properti ow ner she wa assign a password that gave
her access to make these chang the clerk wa transfer to a new depart where on
of her duti wa the issuanc of check to properti owner unfortun her supervisor
forgot to cancel her old password when the clerk realiz thi oversight she would request
a check for a certain properti owner then sign onto the system with her old password and
chang the address of that properti owner the check would be sent to her the next dai
the employe would us her old password to reenter the system and replac the proper
address so that there would be no record of where the check h ad been sent thi fraudster
scheme result in a loss of over 250000 to the victim compani
