2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Overriding Controls Through Intimidation


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Overriding Controls Through Intimidation 
When a person is authorized to sign company checks, preparing the checks is easy. The 
employee simply writes and signs the instruments the same way he would with any legitimate 
check. In most situations, check signers are owners, officers, or otherwise high-ranking 
employees, and thus have or can obtain access to all the blank checks they need. Even if 
company policy prohibits check signers from handling blank checks, the perpetrator can 
normally use his influence to overcome this impediment. What employee is going to tell the 
CEO that he can’t have a blank check?   
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.524                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The most basic way an employee accomplishes an authorized maker scheme is to override 
controls designed to prevent fraud. Most authorized signatories have high levels of influence 
within their companies. The perpetrators use this influence to deflect questions about 
fraudulent transactions.  
 
A common authorized maker scheme is one in which a majority owner or sole shareholder 
uses his company as a sort of alter ego, paying personal expenses directly out of company 
accounts. Instead of paying personal expenses, the perpetrator might cut checks directly to 
himself, his friends, or family. Using fear of job security as a weapon, the owner can 
maintain a work environment in which employees are afraid to question these transactions.  
 
High-level managers or officers might also use their authority to override controls in 
companies with absent or inattentive ownership. Intimidation can play a large part in the 
commission and concealment of types of occupational fraud involving powerful individuals.  
 
EXAMPLE 
The manager of a sales office stole approximately $150,000 from his employers over a two-
 year period. This manager had primary check-signing authority and abused this power by 
writing company checks to pay his personal expenses. The manager’s fraudulent activities 
were well known by certain members of his staff, but these employees’ careers were controlled 
by the perpetrator. Fear of losing their jobs combined with lack of a proper whistleblowing 
structure prevented the manager’s employees from reporting his fraud.  
 



:


overrid control through intimid
when a person is author to sign compani check prepar the check is easi the
employe simpli write and sign the instrument the same wai he would with ani legitim
check in most situat check signer ar owner offic or otherwis highrank
employe and thu have or can obtain access to all the blank check thei need even if
compani polici prohibit check signer from handl blank check the perpetr can
normal us hi influenc to overcom thi impedi what employe is go to tell the
ceo that he cant have a blank check
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1524 2011 fraud examin manual
the most basic wai an employe accomplish an author maker scheme is to overrid
control design to prevent fraud most author signatori have high level of influenc
within their compani the perpetr us thi influenc to deflect question about
fraudul transact
a common author maker scheme is on in which a major owner or sole sharehold
us hi compani as a sort of alter ego pai person expens directli out of compani
account instead of pai person expens the perpetr might cut check directli to
himself hi friend or famili us fear of job secur as a weapon the owner can
maintain a work environ in which employe ar afraid to question these transact
highlevel manag or offic might also us their author to overrid control in
compani with absent or inattent ownership intimid can plai a larg part in the
commiss and conceal of type of occup fraud involv power individu
exampl
the manag of a sale offic stole approxim 150000 from hi employ over a two
year period thi manag had primari checksign author and abus thi power by
write compani check to pai hi person expens the manag fraudul activ
were well known by certain member of hi staff but these employe career were control
by the perpetr fear of lose their job combin with lack of a proper whistleblow
structur prevent the manag employe from report hi fraud
