2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Concealing Check Tampering Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Concealing Check Tampering Schemes  
Most check tampering schemes do not consist of a single occurrence but instead continue 
over a period of time. Therefore, concealing the fraud is arguably the most important aspect 
of the scheme. If an employee intended to steal a large sum of money and escape to South 
America, hiding the fraud might not be so important. But the vast majority of occupational 
fraudsters remain employees of their companies as they continue to steal from them, which 
makes concealment the key to the crime.  
 
Concealment of the fraud means not only hiding the identity of the criminal, but in most 
cases hiding the fact that a fraud has even occurred. The most successful frauds are those in 
which the victim organization is unaware that it is being robbed. Obviously, once a business 
learns that it is being victimized it will take steps to staunch its bleeding and the end of the 
scheme will be at hand.  
 
Check tampering schemes can present especially tricky concealment problems for dishonest 
employees. In other types of fraudulent disbursements such as invoice or payroll schemes, 
the fraudulent payment is entered in the books as a legitimate transaction by someone other 
than the perpetrator. The payments in those schemes are generated by the production of 
false documents that cause accounts payable personnel to think that money is owed to a 
particular person or vendor. When accounts payable issues a disbursement for a bogus 
invoice, it does so because it believes the invoice to be genuine. The payment is then entered 
in the books as a legitimate payment. In other words, the perpetrator generally does not have 
to worry about concealing the payment in the books, because someone else unwittingly does 
it for him. But in forgery and authorized maker schemes the perpetrator is the one writing 
the check, and he is usually the one coding the check in the disbursements journal. He must 
“explain” the check on the books.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.527 
Forged endorsement schemes and altered payee schemes are different because they involve 
the alteration of checks that were already prepared and coded by someone else. 
Nevertheless, they create a problem for the perpetrator because the intercepted check was 
intended for a legitimate recipient. Someone is out there waiting for the check that the 
perpetrator has taken. The culprit in these schemes must worry not only about hiding the 
fraud from his employer, but also about appeasing the intended payee.  
 



:


conceal check tamper scheme
most check tamper scheme do not consist of a singl occurr but instead continu
over a period of time therefor conceal the fraud is arguabl the most import aspect
of the scheme if an employe intend to steal a larg sum of monei and escap to south
america hide the fraud might not be so import but the vast major of occup
fraudster remain employe of their compani as thei continu to steal from them which
make conceal the kei to the crime
conceal of the fraud mean not onli hide the ident of the crimin but in most
case hide the fact that a fraud ha even occur the most success fraud ar those in
which the victim organ is unawar that it is be rob obvious onc a busi
learn that it is be victim it will take step to staunch it bleed and the end of the
scheme will be at hand
check tamper scheme can present especi tricki conceal problem for dishonest
employe in other type of fraudul disburs such as invoic or payrol scheme
the fraudul payment is enter in the book as a legitim transact by someon other
than the perpetr the payment in those scheme ar gener by the product of
fals document that caus account payabl personnel to think that monei is ow to a
particular person or vendor when account payabl issu a disburs for a bogu
invoic it doe so becaus it believ the invoic to be genuin the payment is then enter
in the book as a legitim payment in other word the perpetr gener doe not have
to worri about conceal the payment in the book becaus someon els unwittingli doe
it for him but in forgeri and author maker scheme the perpetr is the on write
the check and he is usual the on code the check in the disburs journal he must
explain the check on the book
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1527
forg endors scheme and alter paye scheme ar differ becaus thei involv
the alter of check that were alreadi prepar and code by someon els
nevertheless thei creat a problem for the perpetr becaus the intercept check wa
intend for a legitim recipi someon is out there wait for the check that the
perpetr ha taken the culprit in these scheme must worri not onli about hide the
fraud from hi employ but also about appeas the intend paye
