2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Physical Tampering Prevention


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Physical Tampering Prevention 
The following list details check-tampering prevention techniques that are being used today, 
by some institutions, to secure businesses’ check integrity. These methods can be used 
individually or in combination.  
• Signature line void safety band — The word VOID appears on the check when 
photocopied. 
• Rainbow foil bar — A horizontal colored bar placed on the check fades and is shaded 
from one bar to the next. Photocopied foil bars appear solid. 
• Holographic safety border — Holographic images are created in a way that reflect light to 
reveal a three-dimensional graphic. 
• Embossed pearlescent numbering—Checks are numbered using a technique that is 
revealed by a colored highlighter pen or by a bright light held behind the check. 
• Other chemical voids—Checks reveal an image or the word VOID when treated with an 
eradicator chemical. 
• Micro line printing — Extremely small print is too small to read with the naked eye and 
becomes distorted when photocopied. 
• High resolution microprinting—Images are produced on the check in high resolution, 
2,400 dots per inch or higher. This technique is very difficult to reproduce. 
• Security inks—Checks contain inks that react with eradication chemicals, reducing a 
forger’s ability to modify the check. 
• Chrome coloring — The use of chrome-like coloring deters photocopying even with 
color copiers. The chrome pattern or numbering develops solid black. 
• Watermark backers — Hidden images can only be  seen when the check is held at an 
angle. This image is very difficult to reproduce. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.534                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Ultraviolet ink — This ink displays an image or message when held under ultraviolet 
lighting. 
 



:


physic tamper prevent
the follow list detail checktamp prevent techniqu that ar be us todai
by some institut to secur busi check integr these method can be us
individu or in combin
signatur line void safeti band the word void appear on the check when
photocopi
rainbow foil bar a horizont color bar place on the check fade and is shade
from on bar to the next photocopi foil bar appear solid
holograph safeti border holograph imag ar creat in a wai that reflect light to
reveal a threedimension graphic
emboss pearlesc numberingcheck ar number us a techniqu that is
reveal by a color highlight pen or by a bright light held behind the check
other chemic voidscheck reveal an imag or the word void when treat with an
erad chemic
micro line print extrem small print is too small to read with the nake ey and
becom distort when photocopi
high resolut microprintingimag ar produc on the check in high resolut
2400 dot per inch or higher thi techniqu is veri difficult to reproduc
secur inkscheck contain ink that react with erad chemic reduc a
forger abil to modifi the check
chrome color the us of chromelik color deter photocopi even with
color copier the chrome pattern or number develop solid black
watermark backer hidden imag can onli be seen when the check is held at an
angl thi imag is veri difficult to reproduc
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1534 2011 fraud examin manual
ultraviolet ink thi ink displai an imag or messag when held under ultraviolet
light
