2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes/Collusion


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Collusion 
Collusion among several employees is sometimes used to overcome well-designed internal 
controls. For example, in a company with proper separation of duties, the functions of 
purchasing goods or services, authorizing the purchase, receiving the goods or services, and 
making the payment to the vendor should all be separated. If this process is strictly adhered 
to, it will be extremely difficult for any single employee to commit a false-billing scheme. But 
if several employees work together, they can overcome the internal controls of their 
employer.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A warehouse foreman and a parts ordering clerk conspired to purchase approximately 
$300,000 of nonexistent supplies. The parts ordering clerk would initiate the false 
transactions by obtaining approval to place orders for parts he claimed were needed. The 
orders were then sent to a vendor who, acting in conjunction with the two employee 
fraudsters, prepared false invoices, which were sent to the victim company. Meanwhile, the 
warehouse foreman verified receipt of the fi ctitious shipments of incoming supplies. The 
perpetrators were therefore able to compile complete vouchers for the fraudulent purchases 
without overstepping their normal duties.  
 
Even if all internal controls are observed, at some point a company must rely on its 
employees to be honest. One of the purposes of separating duties is to prevent any one 
person from having too much control over a particular business function. It provides a built-in 
monitoring mechanism where every person’s actions are in some way verified by another 
person. But if everyone is corrupt, even proper controls will not prevent fraud.  
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.540                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


collus
collus among sever employe is sometim us to overcom welldesign intern
control for exampl in a compani with proper separ of duti the function of
purchas good or servic author the purchas receiv the good or servic and
make the payment to the vendor should all be separ if thi process is strictli adher
to it will be extrem difficult for ani singl employe to commit a falsebil scheme but
if sever employe work togeth thei can overcom the intern control of their
employ
exampl
a warehous foreman and a part order clerk conspir to purchas approxim
300000 of nonexist suppli the part order clerk would initi the fals
transact by obtain approv to place order for part he claim were need the
order were then sent to a vendor who act in conjunct with the two employe
fraudster prepar fals invoic which were sent to the victim compani meanwhil the
warehous foreman verifi receipt of the fi ctitiou shipment of incom suppli the
perpetr were therefor abl to compil complet voucher for the fraudul purchas
without overstep their normal duti
even if all intern control ar observ at some point a compani must reli on it
employe to be honest on of the purpos of separ duti is to prevent ani on
person from have too much control over a particular busi function it provid a builtin
monitor mechan where everi person action ar in some wai verifi by anoth
person but if everyon is corrupt even proper control will not prevent fraud
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1540 2011 fraud examin manual
