2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes/Personal Purchases Through False Invoicing/FALSE PURCHASE REQUISITIONS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


FALSE PURCHASE REQUISITIONS 
If an employee does not have purchasing authority, he may get approval for a fraudulent 
purchase by misrepresenting the nature of the acquisition. In many companies, those with 
the power to authorize purchases are not always attentive to their duties. If a trusted 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.544                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subordinate says that the company needs to buy a certain item or items, busy supervisors 
often give rubber stamp approval to the purchase requisition. Additionally, employees 
sometimes misrepresent the nature of the items they are purchasing in order to pass a 
cursory review by their superiors.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An engineer bought over $30,000 worth of personal items. The engineer dealt directly with 
vendors and was also in charge of overseeing the receipt of the materials he purchased. He 
was therefore able to misrepresent the nature of the merchandise he bought, listing it as 
“maintenance items.” Vendor invoices were altered to agree to this description.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.545 
 
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.546                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If the perpetrator falsifies his purchase requisition in this manner, the fraud should be 
detected when delivery occurs. For example, if the purchase requisition says “maintenance 
items” but the vendor delivers home furnishings, it will be obvious that the perpetrator has 
committed fraud. The problem of delivery can be avoided if the perpetrator is in charge of 
receiving incoming shipments. He can verify that delivery of “maintenance items” was 
received. This is a breach of separation of duties, but unfortunately, it is fairly common for 
purchasing agents to verify delivery of their own orders. Even if the victim organization 
enforces a centralized delivery point, the perpetrator might enlist the aid of an accomplice in 
the receiving department to falsify the organization’s receiving reports.  
 
Another way to avoid detection at the delivery stage is to change the delivery address for 
purchases. Instead of being shipped to the victim organization, the items that the employee 
buys are sent directly to his home or business. The perpetrator might also order the goods 
drop shipped to a remote location.  
 



:


fals purchas requisit
if an employe doe not have purchas author he mai get approv for a fraudul
purchas by misrepres the natur of the acquisit in mani compani those with
the power to author purchas ar not alwai attent to their duti if a trust
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1544 2011 fraud examin manual
subordin sai that the compani need to bui a certain item or item busi supervisor
often give rubber stamp approv to the purchas requisit addition employe
sometim misrepres the natur of the item thei ar purchas in order to pass a
cursori review by their superior
exampl
an engin bought over 30000 worth of person item the engin dealt directli with
vendor and wa also in charg of overse the receipt of the materi he purchas he
wa therefor abl to misrepres the natur of the merchandis he bought list it as
mainten item vendor invoic were alter to agre to thi descript
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1545
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1546 2011 fraud examin manual
if the perpetr falsifi hi purchas requisit in thi manner the fraud should be
detect when deliveri occur for exampl if the purchas requisit sai mainten
item but the vendor deliv home furnish it will be obviou that the perpetr ha
commit fraud the problem of deliveri can be avoid if the perpetr is in charg of
receiv incom shipment he can verifi that deliveri of mainten item wa
receiv thi is a breach of separ of duti but unfortun it is fairli common for
purchas agent to verifi deliveri of their own order even if the victim organ
enforc a central deliveri point the perpetr might enlist the aid of an accomplic in
the receiv depart to falsifi the organ receiv report
anoth wai to avoid detect at the deliveri stage is to chang the deliveri address for
purchas instead of be ship to the victim organ the item that the employe
bui ar sent directli to hi home or busi the perpetr might also order the good
drop ship to a remot locat
