2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes/Personal Purchases on Credit Cards or Other Company Accounts


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Personal Purchases on Credit Cards or Other Company Accounts  
Instead of running false invoices through accounts payable, some employees make personal 
purchases on company credit cards or on running accounts with vendors. (See “Purchases 
on Credit Card or Company Account” flowchar t.) Unlike invoicing schemes, prior approval 
for these purchases is not required. An employee with a company credit card can buy an 
item merely by signing his name (or forging someone else’s) at the time of purchase. Later 
review of the credit card statement, however, may detect the fraudulent purchase. 
Unfortunately, many high-level employees approve their own credit card expenses, making it 
very easy to carry out a purchasing scheme. 
 
Of course, only certain employees are authorized to use company credit cards. Employees 
without this privilege can only make fraudulent purchases with a company card if they first 
manage to get hold of one. To this end, company cards are sometimes stolen or “borrowed” 
from authorized users.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.547 
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.548                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An accountant falsely added her name to a list of employees to whom cards were to be 
issued. She used her card to make fraudulent purchases, but forged the signatures of 
authorized cardholders to cover her tracks. Since no one knew she even had a company 
card, she would not be a prime suspect in the fraud even if someone questioned the 
purchases. For over five years this employee continued her scheme, racking up a six figure 
bill on her employer’s account. In addition, she had control of the credit card statement and 
was able to code her purchases to various expense accounts, thereby further delaying 
detection of her crime. 
 
Another way to conceal a credit card purchasing scheme is to doctor the credit card 
statement so that fraudulent purchases do not show up. Some employees go so far as to 
destroy the real credit card statement and produce counterfeit copies on which their 
fraudulent purchases are omitted.  
 



:


person purchas on credit card or other compani account
instead of run fals invoic through account payabl some employe make person
purchas on compani credit card or on run account with vendor see purchas
on credit card or compani account flowchar t unlik invoic scheme prior approv
for these purchas is not requir an employe with a compani credit card can bui an
item mere by sign hi name or forg someon els at the time of purchas later
review of the credit card statement howev mai detect the fraudul purchas
unfortun mani highlevel employe approv their own credit card expens make it
veri easi to carri out a purchas scheme
of cours onli certain employe ar author to us compani credit card employe
without thi privileg can onli make fraudul purchas with a compani card if thei first
manag to get hold of on to thi end compani card ar sometim stolen or borrow
from author user
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1547
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1548 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an account fals ad her name to a list of employe to whom card were to be
issu she us her card to make fraudul purchas but forg the signatur of
author cardhold to cover her track sinc no on knew she even had a compani
card she would not be a prime suspect in the fraud even if someon question the
purchas for over five year thi employe continu her scheme rack up a six figur
bill on her employ account in addit she had control of the credit card statement and
wa abl to code her purchas to variou expens account therebi further delai
detect of her crime
anoth wai to conceal a credit card purchas scheme is to doctor the credit card
statement so that fraudul purchas do not show up some employe go so far as to
destroi the real credit card statement and produc counterfeit copi on which their
fraudul purchas ar omit
