2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes/Sample Audit Program


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Sample Audit Program 
The following audit program may be beneficial in detecting red flags to billing schemes: 
• Does the company have a purchasing department? If yes, is it independent of (1) the 
accounting department, (2) the receiving department, or (3) the shipping department? 
• Are purchases made only after the respective department heads sign purchase 
requisitions? 
• Are purchases made by means of purchase orders sent to vendors for all purchases or 
only for purchases over a predetermined dollar limit? 
• Do purchase orders specify a description of items, quantity, price, terms, delivery 
requirements, and dates? 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.551 
• Is a list of unfilled purchase orders maintained and reviewed periodically? 
• Are purchase order forms prenumbered and is the sequence accounted for periodically? 
• Does the client maintain an approved vendors list? 
• Are items purchased only after competitive bids are obtained? If so, are competitive bids 
obtained for all purchases or only for purchases over a predetermined dollar limit? 
• Is a log maintained of all receipts? 
• Does the receiving department prepare receiving reports for all items received? If yes, 
are receiving reports (1) prepared for all items, (2) prepared only for items that have 
purchase orders, or (3) renumbered? 
• At the time the items are received, does someone independent of the purchasing 
department check the merchandise before acceptance as to description, quantity,  
and condition? 
• Are copies of receiving reports (1) furnished to the accounting department, (2) furnished 
to the purchasing department, or (3) filed in the receiving department? 
• Are receipts under blanket purchase orders monitored, and are quantities exceeding 
authorized total returned to the vendor? 
• Are procedures adequate for the proper accounting for partial deliveries of  
purchase orders? 
• Are purchasing and receiving functions separate from invoice processing, accounts 
payable, and general ledger functions? 
• Are vendors’ invoices, receiving reports, and purchase orders matched before the related 
liability is recorded? 
• Are invoices checked as to prices, extensions, footings, freight charges, allowances, and 
credit terms? 
• Are controls adequate to ensure that all available discounts are taken? 
• Are purchases recorded in a purchase register or voucher register before being processed 
through cash disbursements? 
• Does a responsible employee assign the appropriate general ledger account distribution 
to which the invoices are to be posted? 
• Are procedures adequate to ensure that invoices have been processed before payment 
and to prevent duplicate payment (e.g., a block stamp)? 
• Does a responsible official approve invoices for payment? 
• Are procedures adequate to ensure that merchandise purchased for direct delivery to 
customers is promptly billed to the customers and recorded as both a receivable and  
a payable? 
• Are records of goods returned to vendors matched to vendor credit memos? 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.552                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Are unmatched receiving reports, purchase orders, and vendors’ invoices periodically 
reviewed and investigated for proper recording? 
• Is the accounts payable ledger or voucher register reconciled monthly to the general 
ledger control accounts? 
• Are statements from vendors regularly reviewed and reconciled against recorded 
liabilities? 
• Do adjustments to accounts payable (e.g., writing off of debit balances) require the 
approval of a designated official? 
• Are budgets used? If yes, are bu dgets approved by responsible officials, and are actual 
expenditures compared with budgeted amounts and variances analyzed and explained? 
• If excess inventory purchasing is suspected, verify that all inventory purchased was 
received (receiving report) at the proper location. An examination of receiving reports or 
invoices might reveal alternate shipping sites. 
 



:


sampl audit program
the follow audit program mai be benefici in detect red flag to bill scheme
doe the compani have a purchas depart if ye is it independ of 1 the
account depart 2 the receiv depart or 3 the ship depart
ar purchas made onli after the respect depart head sign purchas
requisit
ar purchas made by mean of purchas order sent to vendor for all purchas or
onli for purchas over a predetermin dollar limit
do purchas order specifi a descript of item quantiti price term deliveri
requir and date
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1551
is a list of unfil purchas order maintain and review period
ar purchas order form prenumb and is the sequenc account for period
doe the client maintain an approv vendor list
ar item purchas onli after competit bid ar obtain if so ar competit bid
obtain for all purchas or onli for purchas over a predetermin dollar limit
is a log maintain of all receipt
doe the receiv depart prepar receiv report for all item receiv if ye
ar receiv report 1 prepar for all item 2 prepar onli for item that have
purchas order or 3 renumb
at the time the item ar receiv doe someon independ of the purchas
depart check the merchandis befor accept as to descript quantiti
and condit
ar copi of receiv report 1 furnish to the account depart 2 furnish
to the purchas depart or 3 file in the receiv depart
ar receipt under blanket purchas order monitor and ar quantiti exceed
author total return to the vendor
ar procedur adequ for the proper account for partial deliveri of
purchas order
ar purchas and receiv function separ from invoic process account
payabl and gener ledger function
ar vendor invoic receiv report and purchas order match befor the relat
liabil is record
ar invoic check as to price extens foot freight charg allow and
credit term
ar control adequ to ensur that all avail discount ar taken
ar purchas record in a purchas regist or voucher regist befor be process
through cash disburs
doe a respons employe assign the appropri gener ledger account distribut
to which the invoic ar to be post
ar procedur adequ to ensur that invoic have been process befor payment
and to prevent duplic payment eg a block stamp
doe a respons offici approv invoic for payment
ar procedur adequ to ensur that merchandis purchas for direct deliveri to
custom is promptli bill to the custom and record as both a receiv and
a payabl
ar record of good return to vendor match to vendor credit memo
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1552 2011 fraud examin manual
ar unmatch receiv report purchas order and vendor invoic period
review and investig for proper record
is the account payabl ledger or voucher regist reconcil monthli to the gener
ledger control account
ar statement from vendor regularli review and reconcil against record
liabil
do adjust to account payabl eg write off of debit balanc requir the
approv of a design offici
ar budget us if ye ar bu dget approv by respons offici and ar actual
expenditur compar with budget amount and varianc analyz and explain
if excess inventori purchas is suspect verifi that all inventori purchas wa
receiv receiv report at the proper locat an examin of receiv report or
invoic might reveal altern ship site
