2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes/Prevention Checklist


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Prevention Checklist 
The following is a list of billing scheme prevention methods that may be helpful in the 
deterrence of billing fraud: 
• Authorization procedures of purchase orders, invoicing, and payments should be 
documented and adhered to. 
• The accounts payable list of vendors should be periodically reviewed for strange vendors 
and addresses. 
• Payment codings should be reviewed for abnormal descriptions. 
• Vendor purchases should be analyzed for abnormal levels on both a monthly and yearly 
basis. 
• Purchases and inventory levels should be compared and analyzed. (See Inventory and 
Other Assets). 
• Control methods to check for duplicate invoices and purchase order numbers should be 
in place. 
• A separation of duties between authorization, purchasing, receiving, shipping, and 
accounting should be in place. 
• Payment of vouchers should be periodically reviewed to ensure integrity of proper 
documentation. 
• Receiving and shipping reports should be reviewed for completeness and accuracy. 
• Asset information should include purchasing trails and other information. 
• Journal entries to inventory accounts should be strictly scrutinized. 
• Appropriate bank reconciliation and review procedures should be performed 
periodically, checking for out-of-place vendors and endorsements. 
• Credit card statements should be reviewed often for irregularities. 
• The validity of invoices with a post office box address should be verified. 
• Proper controls for the receipt and handling of “return to sender” checks should be 
installed. 
 
 



:


prevent checklist
the follow is a list of bill scheme prevent method that mai be help in the
deterr of bill fraud
author procedur of purchas order invoic and payment should be
document and adher to
the account payabl list of vendor should be period review for strang vendor
and address
payment code should be review for abnorm descript
vendor purchas should be analyz for abnorm level on both a monthli and yearli
basi
purchas and inventori level should be compar and analyz see inventori and
other asset
control method to check for duplic invoic and purchas order number should be
in place
a separ of duti between author purchas receiv ship and
account should be in place
payment of voucher should be period review to ensur integr of proper
document
receiv and ship report should be review for complet and accuraci
asset inform should includ purchas trail and other inform
journal entri to inventori account should be strictli scrutin
appropri bank reconcili and review procedur should be perform
period check for outofplac vendor and endors
credit card statement should be review often for irregular
the valid of invoic with a post offic box address should be verifi
proper control for the receipt and handl of return to sender check should be
instal
