2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Payroll Fraud/Manually Prepared Timecards/POOR CUSTODY PROCEDURES


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


POOR CUSTODY PROCEDURES 
One form of control breakdown that often occurs is the failure to maintain proper control 
over timecards. In a properly run system, timecards that have been authorized by 
management should be sent directly to payroll. Those who prepare the timecards should not 
have access to them after they have been approved. If this separation of duties is not 
observed, the person who prepared a timecard can alter it after his supervisor has approved 
the timecard but before it is delivered to payroll. For instance, the employee might fill out his 
timecard in erasable ink, obtain his supervisor’s signature on the timecard, and then change 
the hours reflected on the timecard so that he will be overcompensated.  
 
Another way hours are falsified is in the misreporting of leave time. This is not as common 
as timecard falsification, but it does occur with some frequency. Incidentally, this is the one 
instance in which salaried employees commit payroll fraud by falsifying their hours. A leave 
time scheme is very simple. An employee takes a certain amount of time off of work as paid 
leave or vacation, but does not report this leave time. Employees typically receive a certain 
amount of paid leave per year. If a person takes a leave of absence but does not report it, 
those days are not deducted from his allotted days off. In other words, he gets more leave 
time than he is entitled to. The result is that the employee shows up for work less, yet still 
receives the same pay.  
 



:


poor custodi procedur
on form of control breakdown that often occur is the failur to maintain proper control
over timecard in a properli run system timecard that have been author by
manag should be sent directli to payrol those who prepar the timecard should not
have access to them after thei have been approv if thi separ of duti is not
observ the person who prepar a timecard can alter it after hi supervisor ha approv
the timecard but befor it is deliv to payrol for instanc the employe might fill out hi
timecard in eras ink obtain hi supervisor signatur on the timecard and then chang
the hour reflect on the timecard so that he will be overcompens
anoth wai hour ar falsifi is in the misreport of leav time thi is not as common
as timecard falsif but it doe occur with some frequenc incident thi is the on
instanc in which salari employe commit payrol fraud by falsifi their hour a leav
time scheme is veri simpl an employe take a certain amount of time off of work as paid
leav or vacat but doe not report thi leav time employe typic receiv a certain
amount of paid leav per year if a person take a leav of absenc but doe not report it
those dai ar not deduct from hi allot dai off in other word he get more leav
time than he is entitl to the result is that the employe show up for work less yet still
receiv the same pai
