2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Expense Reimbursement Schemes/Producing Fictitious Receipts


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Producing Fictitious Receipts  
One way to generate a reimbursement for a fictitious expense is to create bogus support 
documents, such as false receipts. The emergence of personal computers has enabled some 
employees to create realistic-looking counterfeit receipts at home. These counterfeits are 
often very sophisticated, even including the logos of the stores where goods or services were 
allegedly purchased. Computers are not the only means of creating support for a fictitious 
expense. Some employees use calculator tapes, others cut and paste old receipts from 
suppliers, and some even use professional printers to generate fictitious receipts.  
 
Unfortunately, not all companies require receipts to be attached to expense reports. Checks 
written by the employee or copies of his personal credit card bill might be allowed as 
support in lieu of a receipt. Some employees write personal checks that appear to be for 
business expenses, then photocopy these checks and attach them to reimbursement requests. 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.578                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In actuality, nothing is purchased with the checks; they are destroyed after the copies are 
made. The perpetrator ends up receiving a reimbursement from his employer without ever 
actually incurring a business expense. The same method can be used with credit cards, where 
a copy of a statement is used to support a purchase. Once the expense report is filed, the 
perpetrator returns the item and receives a credit to his account. 
 



:


produc fictiti receipt
on wai to gener a reimburs for a fictiti expens is to creat bogu support
document such as fals receipt the emerg of person comput ha enabl some
employe to creat realisticlook counterfeit receipt at home these counterfeit ar
often veri sophist even includ the logo of the store where good or servic were
allegedli purchas comput ar not the onli mean of creat support for a fictiti
expens some employe us calcul tape other cut and past old receipt from
supplier and some even us profession printer to gener fictiti receipt
unfortun not all compani requir receipt to be attach to expens report check
written by the employe or copi of hi person credit card bill might be allow as
support in lieu of a receipt some employe write person check that appear to be for
busi expens then photocopi these check and attach them to reimburs request
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1578 2011 fraud examin manual
in actual noth is purchas with the check thei ar destroi after the copi ar
made the perpetr end up receiv a reimburs from hi employ without ever
actual incur a busi expens the same method can be us with credit card where
a copi of a statement is us to support a purchas onc the expens report is file the
perpetr return the item and receiv a credit to hi account
