2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/WHITE-COLLAR CRIME/Crimes of the Middle Classes — A Look at White-Collar Crime/Organizational Opportunity


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


White-Collar Crime


:


Organizational Opportunity 
Of all factors, organizational opportunity remains the determinant aspect of white-collar 
crime. Against Sutherland’s emphasis on an elite group running high-class sting operations, 
Crimes shows that organization and complexity make a larger difference than the offender’s 
social status. In a fascinating case, a church group used its daycare center to defraud the 
federal government of approximately $1 million.  Their arrangement with the Department of 
Agriculture required the daycare’s administrators to submit monthly vouchers reporting the 
number of meals they had served and the cost of food and labor. When auditors descended 
upon the scam, they found that for about $79,000 in actual expenses, the administrators had 
submitted almost $1 million in food costs, and $400,000 for labor. Teachers said they 
sometimes brought food to the center themselves because the children weren’t being fed 
properly. There were also reports that “mor ning snacks were never served unless the 
government inspectors were expected, that the same children were run through serving lines 
                                                 
6 Weisburd, p. 65n. 
7 Weisburd, p. 65. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.408   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
twice when inspectors were present, and that some children were bused in from other 
daycare centers on inspection days.” 8 The example shows, according to the authors, that a 
criminal’s position in an organization and his ability to organize the scam have far more 
bearing on the crime than social status or class alone. 
 



:


organiz opportun
of all factor organiz opportun remain the determin aspect of whitecollar
crime against sutherland emphasi on an elit group run highclass sting oper
crime show that organ and complex make a larger differ than the offend
social statu in a fascin case a church group us it daycar center to defraud the
feder govern of approxim 1 million their arrang with the depart of
agricultur requir the daycar administr to submit monthli voucher report the
number of meal thei had serv and the cost of food and labor when auditor descend
upon the scam thei found that for about 79000 in actual expens the administr had
submit almost 1 million in food cost and 400000 for labor teacher said thei
sometim brought food to the center themselv becaus the children werent be fed
properli there were also report that mor ning snack were never serv unless the
govern inspector were expect that the same children were run through serv line
6 weisburd p 65n
7 weisburd p 65
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4408 2011 fraud examin manual
twice when inspector were present and that some children were buse in from other
daycar center on inspect dai 8 the exampl show accord to the author that a
crimin posit in an organ and hi abil to organ the scam have far more
bear on the crime than social statu or class alon
