2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/WHITE-COLLAR CRIME/Crimes of the Middle Classes — A Look at White-Collar Crime/Conclusion


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


White-Collar Crime


:


Conclusion 
Curbing this pernicious trend will not be easy, but there are ways. Since organizational 
opportunity determines so much criminal activity, the foremost deterrent is to pay 
heightened attention to “where the money is and how it flows” within any group. Obviously, 
                                                 
20 Weisburd, p. 171. 
21 Weisburd, p. 183. 
22 Weisburd, p. 184. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.415  
most businesses have some system of financial control, but the authors say that 
“organizational intelligence” is often less than stellar. Offenders are not usually “the highly 
sophisticated swindlers” from the mass media,  just “average people in a financial jam who 
see a way out through fraud.” 23  
 
Furthermore, like many analysts these days, the Crimes team believes it is far too easy to 
acquire money and goods on credit. Tightening the restrictions on credit cards and loans 
would directly address the role that debt plays in many schemes. 
 
Finally, these authors center the problem of white-collar crime around values. As long as the 
places where citizens learn their priorities — schools, families, neighborhoods, mass media —
emphasize high-pressure risk-taking and material affluence over “honesty and moral 
integrity,” many people will go for the gold, even if they have to steal it. It will never be easy, 
they acknowledge, to balance a market-based economy which requires competition, with an 
equal insistence on forthrightness and fair play. 
 
                                                 
23 Weisburd, p. 190. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.501  



:


conclus
curb thi pernici trend will not be easi but there ar wai sinc organiz
opportun determin so much crimin activ the foremost deterr is to pai
heighten attent to where the monei is and how it flow within ani group obvious
20 weisburd p 171
21 weisburd p 183
22 weisburd p 184
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4415
most busi have some system of financi control but the author sai that
organiz intellig is often less than stellar offend ar not usual the highli
sophist swindler from the mass media just averag peopl in a financi jam who
see a wai out through fraud 23
furthermor like mani analyst these dai the crime team believ it is far too easi to
acquir monei and good on credit tighten the restrict on credit card and loan
would directli address the role that debt plai in mani scheme
final these author center the problem of whitecollar crime around valu as long as the
place where citizen learn their prioriti school famili neighborhood mass media
emphas highpressur risktak and materi affluenc over honesti and moral
integr mani peopl will go for the gold even if thei have to steal it it will never be easi
thei acknowledg to balanc a marketbas economi which requir competit with an
equal insist on forthright and fair plai
23 weisburd p 190
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4501
