2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/WHITE-COLLAR CRIME/Crimes of the Middle Classes — A Look at White-Collar Crime/Methodology


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


White-Collar Crime


:


Methodology 
All the conclusions in the Crimes of the Middle Classes are qualified. The authors and 
researchers drew from the federal court records of seven districts11 and obtained access to 
the pre-sentencing reports (PSIs) prepared by probation officers. PSIs had never been 
available to researchers before, and the close reading of these documents formed a central 
part of the project. Admittedly, the crimes and specific cases studied were selected, not 
drawn from a random sample. Eight crimes were targeted as “white-collar”: securities 
violations, anti-trust suits, bribery and influence-peddling, embezzlement, mail or wire fraud, 
tax fraud, false claims and statements (in official documents), and credit fraud. Certain 
violations—such as RICO charges against organized crime and breaking importation laws—
 were excluded, judged to lie outside the parameters of what most people think of as white-
 collar activity.  
                                                 
8 Weisburd, p. 94. 
9 The authors opine that “the individualism and in dependence” of professions like doctors or lawyers 
discourage their involvement in the organizational network that drives these crimes, though we are warned that 
“the growing participation of profes sionals in large private organizations” (such as HMOs) may change both 
the opportunity for and attitude toward criminal activity (89-91). 
10 Weisburd, p. 73. 
11 The districts and “central cities” were as follows:  Central California (Los Angeles), Northern Georgia 
(Atlanta), Northern Illinois (Chicago), Maryland (Balti more), Southern New York (Manhattan and the Bronx), 
Northern Texas (Dallas), and Western Washington (Seattle). A detailed discussion of the sampling process is 
included as Appendix 1. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.409  
Even within their eight categories, the authors didn’t examine every single case, deciding to 
focus on no more than 30 cases within each category in order to facilitate the close reading 
of PSIs. They warn that their findings were taken from studying people actually convicted, 
so the results don’t take into account how often charges are actually filed and followed up by 
prosecution. By dealing with the convicted, they focused on the treatment of people already 
inside the federal system.  
 
Finally, the long-range nature of the project meant that the study’s sample years — 
1976–1978 — were considerably past before the findings were published. The sentencing 
guidelines handed down in 1984 and adopted in 1987 make some material that judges 
considered at their discretion (like the dollar amount of a crime) a mandatory element of 
sentencing. At the same time, the Sentencing Act systematically excludes  judgments based on 
a defendant’s “moral character,” which had previously been a standard in assessments. 
Wheeler and company write that these developments will have to be accommodated in 
future studies, but they don’t expect that such trends will seriously affect the general picture 
they present. “For example, we see no reason to believe that the role of organizational 
opportunity in white-collar crime... is any different in substance in 1990 than it was in the 
late 1970s, although the particular organizations singled out for public inquiry and 
prosecution may well have changed.” 12  
 
With these qualifications in mind, it remains useful to consider the findings of this report. 
The following chart summarizes the ranking of offenders by social status and in respect to 
certain demographic features.  
 



:


methodolog
all the conclus in the crime of the middl class ar qualifi the author and
research drew from the feder court record of seven districts11 and obtain access to
the presentenc report psi prepar by probat offic psi had never been
avail to research befor and the close read of these document form a central
part of the project admittedli the crime and specif case studi were select not
drawn from a random sampl eight crime were target as whitecollar secur
violat antitrust suit briberi and influencepeddl embezzl mail or wire fraud
tax fraud fals claim and statement in offici document and credit fraud certain
violationssuch as rico charg against organ crime and break import law
were exclud judg to lie outsid the paramet of what most peopl think of as white
collar activ
8 weisburd p 94
9 the author opin that the individu and in depend of profess like doctor or lawyer
discourag their involv in the organiz network that drive these crime though we ar warn that
the grow particip of profe sional in larg privat organ such as hmo mai chang both
the opportun for and attitud toward crimin activ 8991
10 weisburd p 73
11 the district and central citi were as follow central california lo angel northern georgia
atlanta northern illinoi chicago maryland balti more southern new york manhattan and the bronx
northern texa dalla and western washington seattl a detail discuss of the sampl process is
includ as appendix 1
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4409
even within their eight categori the author didnt examin everi singl case decid to
focu on no more than 30 case within each categori in order to facilit the close read
of psi thei warn that their find were taken from studi peopl actual convict
so the result dont take into account how often charg ar actual file and follow up by
prosecut by deal with the convict thei focus on the treatment of peopl alreadi
insid the feder system
final the longrang natur of the project meant that the studi sampl year
19761978 were consider past befor the find were publish the sentenc
guidelin hand down in 1984 and adopt in 1987 make some materi that judg
consid at their discret like the dollar amount of a crime a mandatori element of
sentenc at the same time the sentenc act systemat exclud judgment base on
a defend moral charact which had previous been a standard in assess
wheeler and compani write that these develop will have to be accommod in
futur studi but thei dont expect that such trend will serious affect the gener pictur
thei present for exampl we see no reason to believ that the role of organiz
opportun in whitecollar crime is ani differ in substanc in 1990 than it wa in the
late 1970 although the particular organ singl out for public inquiri and
prosecut mai well have chang 12
with these qualif in mind it remain us to consid the find of thi report
the follow chart summar the rank of offend by social statu and in respect to
certain demograph featur
