2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming/Sales Skimming


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Sales Skimming 
The most basic skimming scheme occurs when an employee sells goods or services to a 
customer, collects the customer’s payment, but makes no record of the sale. The employee 
simply pockets the money received from the customer instead of turning it over to his 
employer. (See “Unrecorded Sales” flowchart.)   
 
Consider one of the simplest and most common sales transactions, a sale of goods at the 
cash register. In a normal transaction, a customer purchases an item and an employee enters 
the sale on the register. The register tape reflects that the sale has been made and shows that 
a certain amount of cash (the purchase price of the item) should have been placed in the 
register. By comparing the register tape to the amount of money on hand, it may be possible 
to detect thefts. For instance, if there were $500 worth of sales recorded on a particular 
register on a given day, but only $400 cash in the register, it would be obvious that someone 
had stolen $100 (assuming no beginning cash balance).  
 
If the employee is skimming money, however, it will be impossible to detect theft simply by 
comparing the register tape to the cash drawer. Returning to the example in the paragraph 
above, assume that an employee wants to make off with $100. Through the course of the 
day, there are $500 worth of sales at his register ; one sale is for $100. When the $100 sale is 
made, the employee does not record the transaction on his register. The customer pays $100 
and takes the merchandise home, but instead of placing the money in the cash drawer, the 
employee pockets it. In order to create the appearance that the sale is being entered in the 
register, the employee might ring a “no sale” or some other non-cash transaction. Since the 
employee did not record the sale, at the end of the day the register tape will only reflect $400 
in sales. There will be $400 on hand in the re gister ($500 in total sales minus the $100 that 
the employee stole) so the register will balance. Thus by not recording the sale the employee 
is able to steal money without the missing funds appearing on the books. Of course, the 
theft will show up indirectly in the company’s records as inventory shrinkage. But the books 
will provide no direct evidence of the theft. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.403 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.404                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 The most difficult part in skimming at the register is that the employee must commit the 
overt act of taking money. If the employee takes the customer’s money and shoves it into his 
pocket without entering the transaction on the register, the customer will probably suspect 
that something is wrong and might report the conduct to another employee or a manager. It 
is also possible that a manager, a fellow employee, or a surveillance camera will spot the 
illegal conduct. Therefore, it is often desirable for a perpetrator to act as though he is 
properly recording a transaction while he skims sales.  
 



:


sale skim
the most basic skim scheme occur when an employe sell good or servic to a
custom collect the custom payment but make no record of the sale the employe
simpli pocket the monei receiv from the custom instead of turn it over to hi
employ see unrecord sale flowchart
consid on of the simplest and most common sale transact a sale of good at the
cash regist in a normal transact a custom purchas an item and an employe enter
the sale on the regist the regist tape reflect that the sale ha been made and show that
a certain amount of cash the purchas price of the item should have been place in the
regist by compar the regist tape to the amount of monei on hand it mai be possibl
to detect theft for instanc if there were 500 worth of sale record on a particular
regist on a given dai but onli 400 cash in the regist it would be obviou that someon
had stolen 100 assum no begin cash balanc
if the employe is skim monei howev it will be imposs to detect theft simpli by
compar the regist tape to the cash drawer return to the exampl in the paragraph
abov assum that an employe want to make off with 100 through the cours of the
dai there ar 500 worth of sale at hi regist on sale is for 100 when the 100 sale is
made the employe doe not record the transact on hi regist the custom pai 100
and take the merchandis home but instead of place the monei in the cash drawer the
employe pocket it in order to creat the appear that the sale is be enter in the
regist the employe might ring a no sale or some other noncash transact sinc the
employe did not record the sale at the end of the dai the regist tape will onli reflect 400
in sale there will be 400 on hand in the re gister 500 in total sale minu the 100 that
the employe stole so the regist will balanc thu by not record the sale the employe
is abl to steal monei without the miss fund appear on the book of cours the
theft will show up indirectli in the compani record as inventori shrinkag but the book
will provid no direct evid of the theft
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1403
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1404 2011 fraud examin manual
the most difficult part in skim at the regist is that the employe must commit the
overt act of take monei if the employe take the custom monei and shove it into hi
pocket without enter the transact on the regist the custom will probabl suspect
that someth is wrong and might report the conduct to anoth employe or a manag it
is also possibl that a manag a fellow employe or a surveil camera will spot the
illeg conduct therefor it is often desir for a perpetr to act as though he is
properli record a transact while he skim sale
