2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming/Skimming Controls


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Skimming Controls 
The discovery of thefts of checks and cash involves proper controls on the receipt process. 
Deficiencies in the answers to these typical audit-program questions may be red flags.  
• Is mail opened by someone independent of cashier, accounts receivable bookkeeper, or 
other accounting employees who may initiate or post journal entries? 
                                                          
1 George Georgiades, Audit Procedures  (New York: Harcourt Brace Professional Publishing, 1995). 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.419 
• Is the delivery of unopened business mail prohibited to employees having access to the 
accounting records? 
• Does the employee who opens the mail: 
? Place restrictive endorsements (“For Deposit Only”) on all checks received? 
? Prepare a list of the money, checks, and other receipts? 
? Forward all remittances to the person responsible for preparing and making the daily 
bank deposit? 
? Forward the total of all remittances to the person responsible for comparing it to the 
authenticated deposit ticket and amount recorded? 
• Is a lock box used? 
• Do cash sales occur? If yes: 
? Are cash receipts prenumbered? 
? Is an independent check of prenumbered receipts done daily and reconciled to cash 
collections? 
• Do cash refunds require approval? 
• Are cash receipts deposited intact daily? 
• Are employees who handle receipts bonded? 
• Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper restricted from: 
? Preparing the bank deposit? 
? Obtaining access to the cash receipts book? 
? Having access to collections from customers? 
? Are banks instructed not to cash checks drawn to the order of the company? 
• Is the cashier restricted from gaining access to the accounts receivable records and bank 
and customer statements? 
• Are areas where physical handling of cash takes place reasonably safeguarded? 
• Is the person who makes postings to the general ledger independent of the cash receipts 
and accounts receivable functions?  
• Does a person independent of the cashier or accounts receivable functions handle 
customer complaints? 
 
 



:


skim control
the discoveri of theft of check and cash involv proper control on the receipt process
defici in the answer to these typic auditprogram question mai be red flag
is mail open by someon independ of cashier account receiv bookkeep or
other account employe who mai initi or post journal entri
1 georg georgiad audit procedur new york harcourt brace profession publish 1995
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1419
is the deliveri of unopen busi mail prohibit to employe have access to the
account record
doe the employe who open the mail
place restrict endors for deposit onli on all check receiv
prepar a list of the monei check and other receipt
forward all remitt to the person respons for prepar and make the daili
bank deposit
forward the total of all remitt to the person respons for compar it to the
authent deposit ticket and amount record
is a lock box us
do cash sale occur if ye
ar cash receipt prenumb
is an independ check of prenumb receipt done daili and reconcil to cash
collect
do cash refund requir approv
ar cash receipt deposit intact daili
ar employe who handl receipt bond
is the account receiv bookkeep restrict from
prepar the bank deposit
obtain access to the cash receipt book
have access to collect from custom
ar bank instruct not to cash check drawn to the order of the compani
is the cashier restrict from gain access to the account receiv record and bank
and custom statement
ar area where physic handl of cash take place reason safeguard
is the person who make post to the gener ledger independ of the cash receipt
and account receiv function
doe a person independ of the cashier or account receiv function handl
custom complaint
