2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Cash Larceny/Cash Larceny from the Deposit


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Cash Larceny from the Deposit 
At some point in every revenue-generating business, someone must physically take the 
company’s currency and checks to the bank. This person or persons, left alone literally 
holding the bag, will have an opportunity to take a portion of the money prior to depositing 
it into the company’s accounts.  
 
Typically, when a company receives cash, someone is assigned to tabulate the receipts, list 
the form of payment (currency or check), and prepare a deposit slip for the bank. Then 
another employee takes the cash and deposits it in the bank. The person who made out the 
deposit generally retains one copy of the slip. This copy is matched to a receipted copy of 
the slip, which is stamped by the bank when the deposit is made.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.425 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.426                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
This procedure is designed to prevent the theft of funds from the deposit, but thefts still 
occur, often because the process is not adhered to. (See “Cash Larceny from the Deposit” 
flowchart.) For example, when one person is in charge of preparing the deposit slips, making 
the deposit, and reconciling the bank statement, that person can pilfer money from the day’s 
receipts and conceal it by falsifying the deposit slips. If the day’s receipts are $1,000, the 
perpetrator might fill out a deposit slip for $5 00 and steal the other $500. The employee then 
makes correspondingly false entries in the books, understating the day’s receipts. This 
process creates a false balance in the victim organization’s records.  
 
A failure to reconcile the bank copy of the deposit slip with the office copy can result in 
fraud. When the person making the deposit knows his company does not reconcile the two 
copies, he can steal cash from the deposit on the way to the bank and alter the deposit slip 
so that it reflects a lesser amount. In some cases sales records will also be altered to match 
the diminished deposit.  
 
When cash is stolen from the deposit, the receipted deposit slip will of course be out of 
balance with the company’s copy of the deposit slip (unless the perpetrator also prepared the 
deposit). To correct this problem, some perpetrators alter the bank copy of the deposit slip 
after it has been validated. This brings the two copies back into balance.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee altered 24 deposit slips and validated bank receipts in the course of a year to 
conceal the theft of over $15, 000. These documents were altered with white-out or a ball 
point pen to match the company’s cash reports.  
 
One common-sense issue that is sometimes over looked by organizations is the handling of 
the deposit on the way to the bank. Once prepared, the deposit should immediately be put in 
a safe place until it is taken to the bank. Unfortunately, some organizations leave their 
deposits carelessly unattended. For example, some companies prepare the daily deposit, then 
leave it in the office overnight to be taken to the bank the next morning. Employees familiar 
with this routine have little trouble pilfering checks and currency from the deposit after 
hours.  
 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.427 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.428                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
As with all cash larceny schemes, stealing from the company deposit can be rather difficult 
to conceal. In most cases these schemes are only successful in the long term when the 
person who counts the cash also makes the deposit. In any other circumstance the success of 
the scheme depends primarily on the inattentiveness of those charged with preparing and 
reconciling the deposit. 
 



:


cash larceni from the deposit
at some point in everi revenuegener busi someon must physic take the
compani currenc and check to the bank thi person or person left alon liter
hold the bag will have an opportun to take a portion of the monei prior to deposit
it into the compani account
typic when a compani receiv cash someon is assign to tabul the receipt list
the form of payment currenc or check and prepar a deposit slip for the bank then
anoth employe take the cash and deposit it in the bank the person who made out the
deposit gener retain on copi of the slip thi copi is match to a receipt copi of
the slip which is stamp by the bank when the deposit is made
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1425
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1426 2011 fraud examin manual
thi procedur is design to prevent the theft of fund from the deposit but theft still
occur often becaus the process is not adher to see cash larceni from the deposit
flowchart for exampl when on person is in charg of prepar the deposit slip make
the deposit and reconcil the bank statement that person can pilfer monei from the dai
receipt and conceal it by falsifi the deposit slip if the dai receipt ar 1000 the
perpetr might fill out a deposit slip for 5 00 and steal the other 500 the employe then
make correspondingli fals entri in the book underst the dai receipt thi
process creat a fals balanc in the victim organ record
a failur to reconcil the bank copi of the deposit slip with the offic copi can result in
fraud when the person make the deposit know hi compani doe not reconcil the two
copi he can steal cash from the deposit on the wai to the bank and alter the deposit slip
so that it reflect a lesser amount in some case sale record will also be alter to match
the diminish deposit
when cash is stolen from the deposit the receipt deposit slip will of cours be out of
balanc with the compani copi of the deposit slip unless the perpetr also prepar the
deposit to correct thi problem some perpetr alter the bank copi of the deposit slip
after it ha been valid thi bring the two copi back into balanc
exampl
an employe alter 24 deposit slip and valid bank receipt in the cours of a year to
conceal the theft of over 15 000 these document were alter with whiteout or a ball
point pen to match the compani cash report
on commonsens issu that is sometim over look by organ is the handl of
the deposit on the wai to the bank onc prepar the deposit should immedi be put in
a safe place until it is taken to the bank unfortun some organ leav their
deposit carelessli unattend for exampl some compani prepar the daili deposit then
leav it in the offic overnight to be taken to the bank the next morn employe familiar
with thi routin have littl troubl pilfer check and currenc from the deposit after
hour
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1427
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1428 2011 fraud examin manual
as with all cash larceni scheme steal from the compani deposit can be rather difficult
to conceal in most case these scheme ar onli success in the long term when the
person who count the cash also make the deposit in ani other circumst the success of
the scheme depend primarili on the inattent of those charg with prepar and
reconcil the deposit
