2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Cash Larceny/Control Objectives


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Control Objectives 
In analyzing the cash receipt process, it is important to meet the following control 
objectives: 
• Cash receipts must be complete. Each day’s receipts must be promptly collected and 
deposited in full. 
• Each receivable transaction recorded must be legitimate and have supporting 
documentation.  
• All information included in the transaction must be correctly verified as to amount, date, 
account coding, and descriptions. 
• The cash must be safeguarded while in the physical possession of the company. 
• There must be appropriate personnel responsible for overseeing cash control processes.  
• Cash register tape totals should be reconciled to the amount of cash in drawer. 
• An independent listing of cash receipts should be prepared before the receipts are 
submitted to the cashier or accounts receivable bookkeeper. 
• An independent person should verify the listing against the deposit slips. 
• Authenticated deposit slips should be retained and reconciled to the corresponding 
amounts in the cash receipts records. 
• The bank deposit should be made by someone other than the cashier or the accounts 
receivable bookkeeper. A person independent of the cash receipts and accounts 
receivable functions should compare entries to the cash receipts journal with: 
? Authenticated bank deposit slips 
? Deposit per the bank statements 
• Areas where physical handling of cash takes place should be reasonably safeguarded. 
 



:


control object
in analyz the cash receipt process it is import to meet the follow control
object
cash receipt must be complet each dai receipt must be promptli collect and
deposit in full
each receiv transact record must be legitim and have support
document
all inform includ in the transact must be correctli verifi as to amount date
account code and descript
the cash must be safeguard while in the physic possess of the compani
there must be appropri personnel respons for overse cash control process
cash regist tape total should be reconcil to the amount of cash in drawer
an independ list of cash receipt should be prepar befor the receipt ar
submit to the cashier or account receiv bookkeep
an independ person should verifi the list against the deposit slip
authent deposit slip should be retain and reconcil to the correspond
amount in the cash receipt record
the bank deposit should be made by someon other than the cashier or the account
receiv bookkeep a person independ of the cash receipt and account
receiv function should compar entri to the cash receipt journal with
authent bank deposit slip
deposit per the bank statement
area where physic handl of cash take place should be reason safeguard
