2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Cash Larceny/Physical Security of Cash


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Physical Security of Cash 
• Ensure proper segregation of duties of key personnel. 
• Review the check and cash composition of the daily bank deposit during unannounced 
cash counts and during substantive audit tests of cash receipts. 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.432                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Review the entity’s records of the numerical series of printed prenumbered receipts, and 
verify that these receipts are used sequentially (including voided documents). 
• Review the timeliness of deposits from locations to the central treasurer function. 
• Observe cash receipting operations of locations. 
• Prepare and review a schedule of all cash receipting functions from a review of revenue 
reports, from cash receipt forms at the central treasurer function, and from discussion 
with knowledgeable employees. 
• Prepare and analyze an inventory of all imprest and change funds by purpose, amount, 
custodian, date, and location. 
• Audit all revenue sources on a cycle. 
• Periodically use comparative analytical reviews to determine which functions have 
unfavorable trends. 
• Determine reason(s) why revenue has changed from previous reporting periods. 
• Confirm responses obtained from managers by using alternative records or through 
substantive audit tests. 
• Adhere to a communicated policy of unannounced cash counts. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.501 



:


physic secur of cash
ensur proper segreg of duti of kei personnel
review the check and cash composit of the daili bank deposit dure unannounc
cash count and dure substant audit test of cash receipt
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1432 2011 fraud examin manual
review the entiti record of the numer seri of print prenumb receipt and
verifi that these receipt ar us sequenti includ void document
review the timeli of deposit from locat to the central treasur function
observ cash receipt oper of locat
prepar and review a schedul of all cash receipt function from a review of revenu
report from cash receipt form at the central treasur function and from discuss
with knowledg employe
prepar and analyz an inventori of all imprest and chang fund by purpos amount
custodian date and locat
audit all revenu sourc on a cycl
period us compar analyt review to determin which function have
unfavor trend
determin reason why revenu ha chang from previou report period
confirm respons obtain from manag by us altern record or through
substant audit test
adher to a commun polici of unannounc cash count
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1501
