2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (18 U.S.C. § 1961, et. seq.)


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (18 U.S.C. § 1961, et. seq.)  
The Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) statute is probably the best-
 known and most controversial federal statute in use today. Originally enacted in 1970 to 
fight organized crime’s infiltration of legitimate business, its powerful criminal and civil 
provisions have come to be used in a wide range of fraud cases. The statute outlaws the 
investment of ill-gotten gains in another business enterprise; the acquisition of an interest in 
an enterprise through certain illegal acts; and the conduct of the affairs of an enterprise 
through such acts.  
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.237 
RICO provides both criminal penalties and civil remedies. Criminal penalties include stiff 
fines and prison terms, as well as the forfeiture of all illegal proceeds or interests. Civil 
remedies include treble damages, attorneys’ fees, dissolution of the offending enterprise, and 
other penalties. 
 



:


racket influenc and corrupt organ 18 usc 1961 et seq
the racket influenc and corrupt organ rico statut is probabl the best
known and most controversi feder statut in us todai origin enact in 1970 to
fight organ crime infiltr of legitim busi it power crimin and civil
provis have come to be us in a wide rang of fraud case the statut outlaw the
invest of illgotten gain in anoth busi enterpris the acquisit of an interest in
an enterpris through certain illeg act and the conduct of the affair of an enterpris
through such act
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2237
rico provid both crimin penalti and civil remedi crimin penalti includ stiff
fine and prison term as well as the forfeitur of all illeg proce or interest civil
remedi includ trebl damag attornei fee dissolut of the offend enterpris and
other penalti
