2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 78dd-1, 78dd-2, 78dd-3, 78m) 
The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) was originally enacted in 1977 to prohibit certain 
publicly held companies from making corrupt payments to foreign officials or political 
organizations. Other amendments to the Act make it illegal for any U.S. citizen to make such 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.250  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
payments. The statute was the result of disclosures from the Watergate investigations of 
corporate grease payments to foreigners to obtain business overseas.  
 
The FCPA criminalizes the bribery of a foreign public official in order to obtain or retain 
business, and it requires publicly traded companies to keep accurate books and records and 
adopt internal controls to prevent diversion of assets or other improper use of corporate 
funds. 
 
FCPA enforcement actions can include criminal actions by the Department of Justice (DOJ), 
civil actions brought by either the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) or the DOJ, 
or both, and administrative actions filed by the SEC.  
 
Since the FCPA was enacted, there have been a number of international initiatives to 
strengthen anti-bribery laws around the world. One of the most significant is the work of the 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). The OECD has 30 
member countries, including many of the world’s largest economic powers—the United 
States, Canada, Germany, France, Japan, Italy, Mexico, Spain, Australia, and the United 
Kingdom. In response to the articles drafted by the OECD, the member countries have or 
are in the process of drafting new, tougher transnational bribery laws. 
 



:


the foreign corrupt practic act 15 usc 78dd1 78dd2 78dd3 78m
the foreign corrupt practic act fcpa wa origin enact in 1977 to prohibit certain
publicli held compani from make corrupt payment to foreign offici or polit
organ other amend to the act make it illeg for ani us citizen to make such
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2250 2011 fraud examin manual
payment the statut wa the result of disclosur from the waterg investig of
corpor greas payment to foreign to obtain busi oversea
the fcpa crimin the briberi of a foreign public offici in order to obtain or retain
busi and it requir publicli trade compani to keep accur book and record and
adopt intern control to prevent divers of asset or other improp us of corpor
fund
fcpa enforc action can includ crimin action by the depart of justic doj
civil action brought by either the secur and exchang commiss sec or the doj
or both and administr action file by the sec
sinc the fcpa wa enact there have been a number of intern initi to
strengthen antibriberi law around the world on of the most signific is the work of the
organ for econom cooper and develop oecd the oecd ha 30
member countri includ mani of the world largest econom powersth unit
state canada germani franc japan itali mexico spain australia and the unit
kingdom in respons to the articl draft by the oecd the member countri have or
ar in the process of draft new tougher transnat briberi law
