2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Data Breaches and Breach Notification Laws/PAYMENT CARD INDUSTRY’S DATA SECURITY STANDARD


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


PAYMENT CARD INDUSTRY’S DATA SECURITY STANDARD  
In addition to state laws, management must be aware of its industry-specific data security 
standards, such as the Payment Card Industry’s Data Security Standard (PCI DSS), one of 
the most important private-industry data-security standards. 
 
Developed by the five major credit card companies (American Express, Discover, JCB, 
MasterCard, and Visa) to prevent security issues, the PCI DSS is a comprehensive set of 
security due diligence practices to help ensure the safe handling of payment card data. All 
companies that store, process, or transmit credit or debit card data must comply with this set 
of standards. 
 
The PCI DSS framework comprises the following 12 security requirements: 
• Install and maintain a firewall configuration to protect cardholder data. 
• Do not use vendor-supplied defaults of system passwords and other security parameters. 
• Protect stored cardholder data. 
• Encrypt transmission of cardholder data across open, public networks. 
• Use and regularly update anti-virus software or programs. 
• Develop and maintain secure systems and applications. 
• Restrict access to cardholder data on a need-to-know basis. 
• Assign a unique ID to each person with computer access. 
• Restrict physical access to cardholder data. 
• Track and monitor all access to network resources and cardholder data. 
• Regularly test security systems and processes. 
• Maintain a policy that addresses information security for employees and contractors. 
 
Failure to comply with PCI DSS can result in severe consequences imposed by the card 
brands, including: 
• Fines up to $500,000 per data breach if data is compromised 
• Fines up to $25,000 per month until compliance is obtained 
• Liability for all fraud losses incurred from compromised account numbers 
• Loss of ability to process payment card transactions 
 
And while the federal government has not mandated compliance with the PCI DSS, some 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.272  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
state laws force elements of the PCI DSS into law, and several states have considered 
amending their breach-notification laws to include liability for an organization’s failure to 
adopt certain safeguards required by the PCI DSS.  
 



:


payment card industri data secur standard
in addit to state law manag must be awar of it industryspecif data secur
standard such as the payment card industri data secur standard pci dss on of
the most import privateindustri datasecur standard
develop by the five major credit card compani american express discov jcb
mastercard and visa to prevent secur issu the pci dss is a comprehens set of
secur due dilig practic to help ensur the safe handl of payment card data all
compani that store process or transmit credit or debit card data must compli with thi set
of standard
the pci dss framework compris the follow 12 secur requir
instal and maintain a firewal configur to protect cardhold data
do not us vendorsuppli default of system password and other secur paramet
protect store cardhold data
encrypt transmiss of cardhold data across open public network
us and regularli updat antiviru softwar or program
develop and maintain secur system and applic
restrict access to cardhold data on a needtoknow basi
assign a uniqu id to each person with comput access
restrict physic access to cardhold data
track and monitor all access to network resourc and cardhold data
regularli test secur system and process
maintain a polici that address inform secur for employe and contractor
failur to compli with pci dss can result in sever consequ impos by the card
brand includ
fine up to 500000 per data breach if data is compromis
fine up to 25000 per month until complianc is obtain
liabil for all fraud loss incur from compromis account number
loss of abil to process payment card transact
and while the feder govern ha not mandat complianc with the pci dss some
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2272 2011 fraud examin manual
state law forc element of the pci dss into law and sever state have consid
amend their breachnotif law to includ liabil for an organ failur to
adopt certain safeguard requir by the pci dss
