2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES/External Auditors/Statement of Standards for Attestation Engagements No. 15


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Manager's and Auditor's Responsibilities


:


Statement of Standards for Attestation Engagements No. 15—An Examination of an 
Entity’s Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is Integrated With an Audit of Its Financial Statements  
Non-public entities may wish to have auditors examine the internal controls over financial 
reporting as a matter of best practice or to comply with lender or regulatory requirements. 
The Auditing Standards Board issued Statement of Standards for Attestation Engagements 
(SSAE) No. 15, An Examination of an Entity ’s Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is 
Integrated With an Audit of Its Financial Statements, as guidance to auditors of non-public 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.239 
organizations when undertaking this type of engagement alongside an audit of the financial 
statements. SSAE No. 15 converges the standards for these engagements for auditors of 
non-public companies with those provided for auditors of public companies in PCAOB 
Auditing Standard No. 5. More information about SSAE No. 15 is available at 
www.AICPA.org.  
 



:


statement of standard for attest engag no 15an examin of an
entiti intern control over financi report that is integr with an audit of it financi statement
nonpubl entiti mai wish to have auditor examin the intern control over financi
report as a matter of best practic or to compli with lender or regulatori requir
the audit standard board issu statement of standard for attest engag
ssae no 15 an examin of an entiti s intern control over financi report that is
integr with an audit of it financi statement as guidanc to auditor of nonpubl
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1239
organ when undertak thi type of engag alongsid an audit of the financi
statement ssae no 15 converg the standard for these engag for auditor of
nonpubl compani with those provid for auditor of public compani in pcaob
audit standard no 5 more inform about ssae no 15 is avail at
wwwaicpaorg
