2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Public Sector Fraud


:


PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD 
 
Government Fraud Auditing Standards 
Standards for audits of government organizations, programs, activities, and functions, and of 
government assistance received by contractors, non-profit organizations, and other non-
 government organizations have been developed by the Comptroller General of the United 
States, Government Accountability Office (GAO). These standards are by and large taken 
from generally accepted auditing standards as established by the AICPA. However, 
Government Auditing Standards, also known as the Yellow Book, go beyond the AICPA 
standards. Generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS) are required to be 
followed by auditors and audit organizations when mandated by law, regulation, agreement, 
contract, or policy. These standards include the following classifications: 
• General standards 
• Fieldwork standards for financial audits 
• Reporting standards for financial audits 
• Field work standards for performance audits 
• Reporting standards for performance audits 
 
(The Yellow Book also provides separate general, field work, and reporting standards for 
attestation engagements. However, the following discussion will focus on those standards 
applicable to financial and performance auditing engagements.) 
 
General standards apply to both financial and performance audits and relate to: 
• Independence of the audit organization and its individual auditors. 
• Use of professional judgment in the performance of work and the preparation of related 
reports. 
• Competence of the audit staff. 
• Audit quality control and assurance. 
• External peer reviews. 
 
Financial audits provide an independent assessment as to whether financial statements are 
presented fairly in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles or other 
recognized criteria. Other objectives of financial audits, which provide for different levels of 
assurance and entail various scopes of work, may include: 
  
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1902                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Reporting on internal control, compliance with laws and regulations, and provisions of 
contracts and grant agreements as they relate to financial transactions, systems, and 
processes; 
• Providing special reports for specified elements, accounts, or items of a financial 
statement; 
• Reviewing interim financial information; 
• Issuing letters for underwriters and certain other requesting parties; 
• Reporting on the controls over the processing of transactions by service organizations; 
and 
• Auditing compliance with regulations relating to federal award expenditures and other 
governmental financial assistance in conjunction with or as a by-product of a financial 
statement audit. 
 
Performance audits provide assurance or conclusions on certain audit objectives based on 
evaluation against objective criteria, such as specific requirements, measures, or defined 
business practices. Performance audits include engagements related to assessing program 
economy, efficiency, and effectiveness; inter nal controls; compliance; and prospective 
analyses.  
 
The following are the GAO Standards or portions thereof that relate to the government 
auditor’s responsibilities pertaining to fraud. (The standards included in the following section 
reflect the version of the standards adopted by the GAO in of July, 2007.) 
 
Field Work Standards for Financial Audits — Chapter 4 
GAGAS field work standards for financial audits include the three AICPA generally 
accepted standards of field work and five other standards specific to government financial 
audits covering auditor communication, considering the results of previous audits, detecting 
material misstatements from violations or abuse, developing elements of a finding, and audit 
documentation. 
 
Detecting Material Misstatements Resulting from Violations of Provisions of Contracts or Grant Agreements or from Abuse 
4.10 Auditors should design the audit to provide reasonable assurance of detecting 
misstatements that result from violations of provisions of contracts or grant 
agreements and could have a direct and material effect on the determination of 
financial statement amounts or other financial data significant to the audit objectives. 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1903 
4.11  If specific information comes to the auditors’ attention that provides evidence 
concerning the existence of possible violations of provisions of contracts or grant 
agreements that could have a material indirect effect on the financial statements, the 
auditors should apply audit procedures specifically directed to ascertaining whether 
such violations have occurred. When the auditors conclude that a violation of 
provisions of contracts or grant agreements has or is likely to have occurred, they 
should determine the effect on the financial statements as well as the implications for 
other aspects of the audit. 
4.12  Abuse involves behavior that is deficient or improper when compared with behavior 
that a prudent person would consider reasonable and necessary business practice 
given the facts and circumstances. Abuse also includes misuse of authority or 
position for personal financial interests or those of an immediate or close family 
member or business associate. Abuse does not necessarily involve fraud, violation of 
laws, regulations, or provisions of a contract or grant agreement. 
4.13 If during the course of the audit, auditors become aware of abuse that could be 
quantitatively or qualitatively material to the financial statements, auditors should 
apply audit procedures specifically directed to ascertain the potential effect on the 
financial statements or other financial data significant to the audit objectives. After 
performing additional work, auditors may discover that the abuse represents 
potential fraud or illegal acts. Because the determination of abuse is subjective, 
auditors are not required to provide reasonable assurance of detecting abuse. 
 
Developing Elements of a Finding 
4.14 Audit findings may involve deficiencies in internal control, fraud, illegal acts, 
violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, and abuse. The elements 
needed for a finding depend entirely on the objectives of the audit. Thus, a finding 
or set of findings is complete to the extent that the audit objectives are satisfied. 
When auditors identify deficiencies, auditors should plan and perform procedures to 
develop the elements of the findings that are relevant and necessary to achieve the 
audit objectives. The elements of an audit finding are discussed in paragraphs 4.15 
through 4.18. 
4.15 Criteria: The laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements, standards, measures, 
expected performance, defined business practices, and benchmarks against which 
performance is compared or evaluated. Criteria identify the required or desired state 
or expectation with respect to the program or operation. Criteria provide a context 
for evaluating evidence and understanding the findings. 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1904                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
4.16 Condition: Condition is a situation that exists. The condition is determined and 
documented during the audit. 
4.17 Cause: The cause identifies the reason or explanation for the condition or the factor 
or factors responsible for the difference between the situation that exists (condition) 
and the required or desired state (criteria), which may also serve as a basis for 
recommendations for corrective actions. Common factors include poorly designed 
policies, procedures, or criteria; inconsistent, incomplete, or incorrect 
implementation; or factors beyond the control of program management. Auditors 
may assess whether the evidence provides a reasonable and convincing argument for 
why the stated cause is the key factor or factors contributing to the difference. 
4.18 Effect or potential effect: The effect is a clear, logical link to establish the impact or 
potential impact of the difference between the situation that exists (condition) and 
the required or desired state (criteria). The effect or potential effect identifies the 
outcomes or consequences of the condition. When the audit objectives include 
identifying the actual or potential consequences of a condition that varies (either 
positively or negatively) from the criteria identified in the audit, “effect” is a measure 
of those consequences. Effect or potential effect may be used to demonstrate the 
need for corrective action in response to identified problems or relevant risks. 
 
Consideration of Fraud and Illegal Acts 
4.27  Under both the AICPA standards and GAGAS, auditors should plan and perform 
the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are 
free of material misstatement, whether caused by error or fraud. Recognizing the 
possibility that a material misstatement due to fraud could be present is important 
for achieving this objective. However, absolute assurance is not attainable and thus 
even a properly planned and performed audit may not detect a material misstatement 
resulting from fraud. 
4.28 Under both the AICPA standards and GAGAS, auditors should design the audit to 
provide reasonable assurance of detecting material misstatements resulting from 
illegal acts that could have a direct and material effect on the financial statements. If 
specific information comes to the auditors’ attention that provides evidence 
concerning the existence of possible illegal acts that could have a material indirect 
effect on the financial statements, the auditors should apply audit procedures 
specifically directed to ascertaining whether an illegal act has occurred. When an 
illegal act has or is likely to have occurred, auditors should determine the effect on 
the financial statements as well as the implications for other aspects of the audit. 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1905 
Reporting Standards for Financial Audits — Chapter 5 
GAGAS reporting standards for financial audits include four AICPA generally accepted 
standards of reporting and eight other standards specific to government financial audits. The 
additional GAGAS standards relate to: 
• Reporting auditors’ compliance with GAGAS; 
• Reporting on internal control and on compliance with laws, regulations, and provisions 
of contracts or grant agreements; 
• Reporting deficiencies in internal control, fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements, or abuse; 
• Communicating significant matters in the auditors’ report; 
• Reporting on restatement of previously-issued financial statements; 
• Reporting views of responsible officials; 
• Reporting confidential or sensitive information; and 
• Distributing reports. 
 
Reporting Deficiencies in Internal Control, Fraud, Illegal Acts, Violations of Provisions of Contracts or Grant Agreements, and Abuse 
5.10  For financial audits, including audits of financial statements in which auditors 
provide an opinion or disclaimer, auditors should report, as applicable to the 
objectives of the audit, and based upon the audit work performed, (1) significant 
deficiencies in internal control, identifying those considered to be material 
weaknesses; (2) all instances of fraud and illegal acts unless inconsequential; and (3) 
violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements and abuse that could have a 
material effect on the financial statements. 
 
FRAUD, ILLEGAL ACTS, VIOLATIONS OF PROVISIONS OF CONTRACTS OR GRANT AGREEMENTS, AND ABUSE 
5.15  Under AICPA standards and GAGAS, auditors have responsibilities for detecting 
fraud and illegal acts that have a material effect on the financial statements and 
determining whether those charged with governance are adequately informed about 
fraud and illegal acts. GAGAS include additional reporting standards. When auditors 
conclude, based on sufficient, appropriate evidence, that any of the following either 
has occurred or is likely to have occurred, they should include in their audit report 
the relevant information about 
a. Fraud and illegal acts that have an effect on the financial statements that is more 
than inconsequential, 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1906                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
b. Fraud and illegal acts that have an effect on the financial statements that is more 
than inconsequential, determination of financial statement amounts or other 
financial data significant to the audit, and 
c. Abuse that is material, either quantitatively or qualitatively. 
5.16  When auditors detect violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements or 
abuse that have an effect on the financial statements that is less than material but 
more than inconsequential, they should communicate those findings in writing to 
officials of the audited entity. Determining whether and how to communicate to 
officials of the audited entity fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of contracts 
or grant agreements, or abuse that is inconsequential is a matter of professional 
judgment. Auditors should document such communications. 
5.17 When fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, or 
abuse either have occurred or are likely to have occurred, auditors may consult with 
authorities or legal counsel about whether publicly reporting such information would 
compromise investigative or legal proceedings. Auditors may limit their public 
reporting to matters that would not compromise those proceedings, and for 
example, report only on information that is already a part of the public record. 
 
REPORTING FINDINGS DIRECTLY TO PARTIES OUTSIDE THE AUDITED ENTITY 
5.18  Auditors should report known or likely fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements, or abuse directly to parties outside the audited entity 
in the following two circumstances: 
a. When entity management fails to satisfy legal or regulatory requirements to 
report such information to external parties specified in law or regulation, auditors 
should first communicate the failure to report such information to those charged 
with governance. If the audited entity still does not report this information to the 
specified external parties as soon as practicable after the auditors’ 
communication with those charged with governance, then the auditors should 
report the information directly to the specified external parties. 
b. When entity management fails to take timely and appropriate steps to respond to 
known or likely fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of contracts or grant 
agreements, or abuse that (1) is likely to have a material effect on the financial 
statements and (2) involves funding received directly or indirectly from a 
government agency, auditors should first report management’s failure to take 
timely and appropriate steps to those charged with governance. If the audited 
entity still does not take timely and appropriate steps as soon as practicable after 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1907 
the auditors’ communication with those charged with governance, then the 
auditors should report the entity’s failure to take timely and appropriate steps 
directly to the funding agency. 
5.19  The reporting in paragraph 5.18 is in addition to any legal requirements to report 
such information directly to parties outside the audited entity. Auditors should 
comply with these requirements even if they have resigned or been dismissed from 
the audit prior to its completion. 
5.20  Auditors should obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence, such as confirmation from 
outside parties, to corroborate assertions by management of the audited entity that it 
has reported such findings in accordance with laws, regulations, and funding 
agreements. When auditors are unable to do so, they should report such information 
directly as discussed in paragraph 5.18. 
 
PRESENTING FINDINGS IN THE AUDITORS’ REPORT 
5.21  In presenting findings such as deficiencies in internal control, fraud, illegal acts, 
violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, and abuse, auditors should 
develop the elements of the findings to the extent necessary to achieve the audit 
objectives. Clearly developed audit findings, as discussed in paragraphs 4.14 through 
4.18, assist management or oversight officials of the audited entity in understanding 
the need for taking corrective action. If auditors sufficiently develop the elements of 
a finding, they may provide recommendations for corrective action. 
5.22 Auditors should place their findings in perspective by describing the nature and 
extent of the issues being reported and the extent of the work performed that 
resulted in the finding. To give the reader a basis for judging the prevalence and 
consequences of these findings, auditors should, as applicable, relate the instances 
identified to the population or the number of cases examined and quantify the results 
in terms of dollar value or other measures, as appropriate. If the results cannot be 
projected, auditors should limit their conclusions appropriately. 
 
Field Work Standards for Performance Audits — Chapter 7 
GAGAS has adopted four field work standards for performance audits. The field work 
standards for performance audits relate to planning the audit; supervising staff; obtaining 
sufficient, appropriate evidence; and preparing audit documentation. 
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1908                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Audit Risk 
7.05  Audit risk is the possibility that the auditors’ findings, conclusions, 
recommendations, or assurance may be improper or incomplete, as a result of 
factors such as evidence that is not sufficient and/or appropriate, an inadequate audit 
process, or intentional omissions or misleading information due to misrepresentation 
or fraud. The assessment of audit risk involves both qualitative and quantitative 
considerations. Factors such as the time frames, complexity, or sensitivity of the 
work; size of the program in terms of dollar amounts and number of citizens served; 
adequacy of the audited entity’s systems and processes to detect inconsistencies, 
significant errors, or fraud; and auditors’ access to records, also impact audit risk. 
Audit risk includes the risk that auditors will not detect a mistake, inconsistency, 
significant error, or fraud in the evidence supporting the audit. Audit risk can be 
reduced by taking actions such as increasing the scope of work; adding experts, 
additional reviewers, and other resources to the audit team; changing the 
methodology to obtain additional evidence, higher quality evidence, or alternative 
forms of corroborating evidence; or aligning the findings and conclusions to reflect 
the evidence obtained. 
 
Planning
7.11  Auditors should assess audit risk and significance within the context of the audit 
objectives by gaining an understanding of the following: 
a. the nature and profile of the programs and the needs of potential users of the 
audit report; 
b. internal control as it relates to the specific objectives and scope of the audit; 
c. information systems controls for purposes of assessing audit risk and planning 
the audit within the context of the audit objectives; 
d. legal and regulatory requirements, contract provisions or grant agreements, 
potential fraud, or abuse that are significant within the context of the audit 
objectives; and 
e. the results of previous audits and attestation engagements that directly relate to 
the current audit objectives. 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1909 
LEGAL AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS, PROVISIONS OF CONTRACTS OR GRANT AGREEMENTS, FRAUD, OR ABUSE
7.30  In planning the audit, auditors should assess risks of fraud occurring that is 
significant within the context of the audit objectives. Audit team members should 
discuss among the team fraud risks, including factors such as individuals’ incentives 
or pressures to commit fraud, the opportunity for fraud to occur, and 
rationalizations or attitudes that could allow individuals to commit fraud. Auditors 
should gather and assess information to identify risks of fraud that are significant 
within the scope of the audit objectives or that could affect the findings and 
conclusions. For example, auditors may obtain information through discussion with 
officials of the audited entity or through other means to determine the susceptibility 
of the program to fraud, the status of internal controls the entity has established to 
detect and prevent fraud, or the risk that officials of the audited entity could override 
internal control. An attitude of professional skepticism in assessing these risks assists 
auditors in assessing which factors or risks could significantly affect the audit 
objectives. 
7.31  When auditors identify factors or risks related to fraud that has occurred or is likely 
to have occurred that they believe are significant within the context of the audit 
objectives, they should design procedures to provide reasonable assurance of 
detecting such fraud. Assessing the risk of fraud is an ongoing process throughout 
the audit and relates not only to planning the audit but also to evaluating evidence 
obtained during the audit. 
7.32  When information comes to the auditors’ attention indicating that fraud that is 
significant within the context of the audit objectives may have occurred, auditors 
should extend the audit steps and procedures, as necessary, to (1) determine whether 
fraud has likely occurred and (2) if so, determine its effect on the audit findings. If 
the fraud that may have occurred is not significant within the context of the audit 
objectives, the auditors may conduct additional audit work as a separate engagement, 
or refer the matter to other parties with oversight responsibility or jurisdiction. 
 
Reporting Standards for Performance Audits — Chapter 8 
According to GAGAS, the reporting standards for performance audits relate to the form of 
the report, the report contents, and report issuance and distribution.  
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1910                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Reporting Findings 
8.18  Auditors should report deficiencies in internal control that are significant within the 
context of the objectives of the audit, all instances of fraud, illegal acts unless they 
are inconsequential within the context of the audit objectives, significant violations 
of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, and significant abuse that have 
occurred or are likely to have occurred. 
 
FRAUD, ILLEGAL ACTS, VIOLATIONS OF PROVISIONS OF CONTRACTS OR GRANT AGREEMENTS, AND ABUSE 
8.21  When auditors conclude, based on sufficient, appropriate evidence, that fraud, illegal 
acts, significant violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, or 
significant abuse either has occurred or is likely to have occurred, they should report 
the matter as a finding. 
8.22  When auditors detect violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, or 
abuse that are not significant, they should communicate those findings in writing to 
officials of the audited entity unless the findings are inconsequential within the 
context of the audit objectives, considering both qualitative and quantitative factors. 
Determining whether or how to communicate to officials of the audited entity fraud, 
illegal acts, violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, or abuse that is 
inconsequential is a matter of the auditors’ professional judgment. Auditors should 
document such communications. 
8.23  When fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, or 
abuse either have occurred or are likely to have occurred, auditors may consult with 
authorities or legal counsel about whether publicly reporting such information would 
compromise investigative or legal proceedings. Auditors may limit their public 
reporting to matters that would not compromise those proceedings, and for 
example, report only on information that is already a part of the public record. 
 
REPORTING FINDINGS DIRECTLY TO PARTIES OUTSIDE THE AUDITED ENTITY 
8.24 Auditors should report known or likely fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements, or abuse directly to parties outside the audited entity 
in the following two circumstances. 
a. When entity management fails to satisfy legal or regulatory requirements to 
report such information to external parties specified in law or regulation, auditors 
should first communicate the failure to report such information to those charged 
with governance. If the audited entity still does not report this information to the 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1911 
specified external parties as soon as practicable after the auditors’ 
communication with those charged with governance, then the auditors should 
report the information directly to the specified external parties. 
b. When entity management fails to take timely and appropriate steps to respond to 
known or likely fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of contracts or grant 
agreements, or abuse that (1) is significant to the findings and conclusions, and 
(2) involves funding received directly or indirectly from a government agency, 
auditors should first report management’s failure to take timely and appropriate 
steps to those charged with governance. If the audited entity still does not take 
timely and appropriate steps as soon as practicable after the auditors’ 
communication with those charged with governance, then the auditors should 
report the entity’s failure to take timely and appropriate steps directly to the 
funding agency. 
8.25 The reporting in paragraph 8.24 is in addition to any legal requirements to report 
such information directly to parties outside the audited entity. Auditors should 
comply with these requirements even if they have resigned or been dismissed from 
the audit prior to its completion. 
8.26 Auditors should obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence, such as confirmation from 
outside parties, to corroborate assertions by management of the audited entity that it 
has reported such findings in accordance with laws, regulations, and funding 
agreements. When auditors are unable to do so, they should report such information 
directly as discussed in paragraph 8.24. 
 
 
False Claims and Statements 
Intentionally false statements (such as false eligibility declarations for government benefits 
and false claims) may be offenses themselves or could be part of broader schemes involving 
misappropriation, contract or procurement fraud, and corruption. 
 
Federal Laws Prohibiting False Claims 
There are a number of federal statutes related to false claims and statements made to the 
federal government. Among the most useful are: 
• False, Fictitious, or Fraudulent Claims (18, U.S. Code, § 287) 
• False Statements (18, U.S. Code, § 1001) 
• Conspiracy to Defraud the Government (18, U.S. Code, § 286) 
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1912                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The Major Fraud Act (18, U.S. Code, § 1031) 
• Obstruction of Federal Audit (18, U.S. Code, §1516) 
 
These statutes are discussed in greater detail in the Law section. There are also a number of 
civil remedies discussed in the Law section including the Civil False Claims Act, Program 
Fraud Civil Remedies, and the Civil Monetary Penalty Law (CMPL). 
 
Under 18 U.S. Code, § 1001, a false statement ca n be oral, written, sworn or unsworn, signed 
or unsigned. The person must make the false statement “knowingly and willfully,” which is 
satisfied by showing that the person acted deliberately and with knowledge that the 
representation was false. Concealment by failure to fully disclose required information is also 
a violation. The statement need not be made directly to the government; it can be made to a 
third-party as long as it involves a matter within the jurisdiction of any governmental 
department or agency.  
 
The statement must be material, but there is no requirement that the government suffer an 
actual loss. The materiality of the false statement is judged by the capability of the statement 
to influence government action. 
 
Examples of False Claims 
Some examples of false claims and statements include: 
• Falsified contractor qualifications. 
• False certifications or assurances. 
• False records or invoices. 
• Invoices from nonexistent companies. 
• Claims made in duplicate or altered invoices. 
• Billing for fictitious employees. 
• Billing for goods and services not provided. 
• Inflated costs or substitution of cheaper goods. 
 
Other examples of false claims and statements might include false statements about 
employees, fictitious transactions, and falsified documents. 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1913 
False Statements Concerning Employees 
 
EXAMPLE 
A meat packing company in Nebraska pled guilty to Social Security number misuse, 
Social Security benefits fraud, harboring aliens, and filing false employment documents. The 
company was fined $103,000. The settlement came after federal agents raided the plant, 
arresting more than 300 people. Of those arrested, most agreed to deportation without 
hearings. The company admitted to harboring aliens, but it claimed that illegal workers 
were never hired knowingly.  
 
Fictitious Transactions 
 
EXAMPLE 
A former supervisory accountant in the Environmental Protection Agency pled guilty to 
defrauding the EPA of $28,000. She admitted that she entered false information into the 
EPA’s Integrated Financial Management System resulting in her receiving 23 U.S. 
Treasury checks, which she later deposited into her credit union account. After receiving the 
funds, she made entries into the financial reporting system to balance the accounts. 
 
False Documentation 
 
EXAMPLE 
A former real estate salesperson was indicted and arrested for submitting false statements to 
a mortgage corporation in an attempt to qualify a veteran for a VA-guaranteed loan. The 
indictment charged that the individual deposited funds into a credit union account belonging 
to the veteran, then submitted a document to the mortgage corporation reflecting the false 
and fictitious account balance. The loan defaul ted and resulted in a loss to the VA of 
$44,708.  
 
Detection 
The ultimate detection method for false statements is the examination of source documents. 
This auditing approach is called “tracing” or “inside-out,” that is, from the source document 
out to the report or financial statement. 
 
However, the auditor might be alerted to the possibility of false statements if any of the 
following red flags are present: 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1914                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Failure to produce documents in a timely manner. 
• Failure to respond to inquiries in a timely manner. 
• Inadequacies in reporting requirements (for example, untimely reports, incomplete 
reports, and others). 
• Failure to have an adequate information gathering and retrieval system. 
• Altered or missing documents. 
• Photocopied or duplicate documents. 
• Failure to have adequate supporting documentation for reports and summary data. 
 
Failure to Produce Documents in a Timely Manner 
This might be an indication that there are no source documents to substantiate the summary 
data. For example, if costs are submitted for reimbursement, and the costs have not been 
incurred, then there will be no supporting data. 
 
Failure to Respond to Inquiries in a Timely Manner 
This might also be an indication that there is no source documentation. It can also be an 
indication that the information is not readily retrievable. This area should, however, be 
approached with caution. If new and different information is requested, the contractor or 
agency might have to redesign its system in order to retrieve the requested information, 
causing an unanticipated time delay. It is important the requests for proposals include 
adequate specifications for responding to data requests. 
 
Inadequacies in Reporting Requirements 
If the required reports are consistently late, incomplete, or unsatisfactory, this might be an 
indication that the source data is either unavailable, nonexistent, or it cannot be retrieved. 
Source data is derived from source documentation. If the source documentation is false, 
then summarizing the corresponding data becomes an increasingly more difficult problem. 
  
Failure to Have Adequate Information Gathering and Retrieval Systems 
This, along with the red flags concerning the source documents, assists the auditor in 
determining whether or not the scope of the audit should be increased, and if so, in  
what areas. 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1915 
Altered or Missing Documents 
Frauds are often concealed by altering or misplacing supporting documentation. The tenacity 
of the auditor to obtain and examine the source documentation will go a long way in proving 
false statements. 
 
Photocopied or Duplicate Documents 
Transactions should be authorized and recorded based on original documentation, not 
duplicates. Duplicates or photocopied documentation is subject to alteration and 
manipulation. 
 
Failure to Have Adequate Supporting Documentation for Reports and Summary Data 
For supporting documentation to be adequate, it must be sufficient, competent, and relevant. 
In addition, the auditor must apply common sense to the source document. For example, are 
the amounts too high or too low, do they include odd times, places, and/or people? 
 
These are all indicators that there might be false statements. Therefore, these red flags might 
alert the auditor to select a larger sample of source documents for examination.  
 
 
Beneficiary Fraud 
Beneficiary frauds tend to be perpetrated by individuals, without collusion or bribery. The 
motive for this type of fraud is personal gain (or reduction of loss) by the perpetrator. 
 
An example of this type of fraud might include a taxpayer who claims an unearned tax credit 
on his federal income tax return. This person has perpetrated a fraud against the 
government. 
 
Some reported cases typifying these frauds are: 
• Social Security frauds 
• False claims for benefits 
• Supplemental Security Income (SSI) fraud 
• Fraudulent Social Security numbers 
• Improper billing procedures 
• False Medicare claims 
• Kickbacks 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1916                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Schemes 
Social Security Frauds 
 
EXAMPLE 
An Indiana woman was sentenced to 5-1/2 years incarceration, suspended, ordered to 
make restitution of $40,800, and fined $10, 000 for concealing her mother’s death and 
forging and cashing her Social Security benefits checks. An out-of-state relative had told 
police it was difficult to believe that her mother, who was in her seventies, was always 
indisposed when they called. Police found the woman’s remains in a padlocked mobile home 
next to the woman’s house. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Washington D.C. woman was found to have wrongfully converted 34 Social Security 
widow’s benefit checks made payable to her de ceased mother, thereby improperly receiving 
$13,400 from the Social Security Administration. Aggravating circumstances were found 
in that she wrongfully converted an additional 190 Social Security checks and attempted to 
conceal her misconduct by lying to the SSA field representative regarding the whereabouts of 
her deceased mother. The Administrative Law Judge found that the woman was liable 
under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act for having submitted claims she knew were 
false. She therefore had to pay the maximum amount of penalties and assessments, which 
totaled $196,800.  
 
False Claims for Benefits 
 
EXAMPLE 
A New Jersey Council woman admitted to stealing more than $17,000 in Social Security 
disability benefits from 2007 to 2009. According to her attorney, she had been unable to 
work because of surgeries and pain in her back and had received disability benefits of $600 
per month for a total of for six years. However, she had been working at her family’s 
restaurant for a portion of the time that she was claiming disability. She was asked to help 
out there after her mother’s death in 2007 on a temporary basis, which over time became 
on a daily basis. She resigned from her post, repaid the money, and was sentenced to one 
year probation. 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1917 
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) Fraud 
 
EXAMPLE 
A California woman was convicted of murdering three of seven SSI beneficiaries found 
buried in the yard of her boarding house. She had been charged with murdering all seven 
boarders, plus two found elsewhere, for their benefits. The OIG investigators who assisted 
in identifying the victims and the theft of their benefits checks also proved that the woman 
had impersonated one of the victims in attempting to obtain Dalmane, a drug found in 
seven of the bodies. She was sentenced to life imprisonment without possibility of parole.   
 
Fraudulent Social Security Numbers 
 
EXAMPLE 
Nine individuals were sentenced to prison in Illinois for terms ranging from 2-½ to nearly 
5 years for a series of schemes through which they defrauded several insurance companies. 
They obtained approximately $500,000 by submitting false claims under fraudulent 
SSNs in 27 incidents in several cities throughout the United States. The claims were based 
on automobile and slip-and-fall accidents that  were either staged or never occurred. In 
addition, three of the defendants, two of whom were insurance company employees, stole 
blank checks from an insurance company and cashed them on forged endorsements for 
$68,000. The group moved from city to city using false names and SSNs, which made 
them difficult to find or identify.  
 
Improper Billing Procedures 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Utah physician was convicted on 32 federal counts of mail fraud, submitting false 
claims, and aiding and abetting. Although he was excluded from participating in the 
Medicare and state health care programs in 1987 for similar crimes, he continued to 
submit claims under the names and provider numbers of physicians who performed services 
at his clinic. He also upcoded claims and billed for services not rendered. He was sentenced 
to 56 months in prison and 3 years probation upon release, fined $50,000 and assessed a 
special victim’s assessment fee.  
 
Public Sector Fraud Financial Transactions   
1.1918                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
False Medicare Claims 
 
EXAMPLE 
A speech therapist was sentenced in Minnesota to 16 months incarceration for causing the 
submission of false Medicare claims. He contracted with a therapy company to bill 
Medicare and Medicaid for his work in several nursing homes. The company reported that 
he overstated time spent with patients, claiming up to 20 hours a day. He claimed to 
provide speech therapy to a patient several days after the patient’s death, and to nursing 
home residents he had never met. He was also observed using flash cards with a blind 
resident. He was ordered to pay restitut ion of $40,000 and a fine of $25,000.  
 
Kickbacks 
 
EXAMPLE 
The former billing clerk and 14 former patients of a Georgia chiropractor were sentenced in 
a kickback scheme costing Medicare and more than 30 insurance companies millions of 
dollars. All were incarcerated and ordered to pay fines and restitution. The chiropractor 
and his office manager wife had paid employees 10 percent of each week’s revenues, and 
patients 33 percent of whatever  the carriers paid on their claims. Claims were submitted for 
patients and their families regardless of whether they were treated. In one instance, bills 
were submitted for 169 persons supposedly trea ted in one day. More than 40 persons have 
been sentenced thus far, including the chiropractor and his wife, who earlier received lengthy 
jail sentences and were ordered to pay $2.2 million in restitution.  
 
Detection 
As with false statements perpetrated by management, the best detection methods for 
beneficiary fraud will require the examination of source documents or developing computer 
programs to identify fraudulent patterns. 
 
In either a performance audit or a financial audit, the fraud examiner should include some 
steps to determine if there is a high occurrence rate for beneficiary fraud. By selecting a 
random sample of recipient beneficiaries and examining the documentation supporting the 
benefits, the auditor might be able to estimate the potential of beneficiary fraud schemes.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1919 
Government Initiatives to Reduce Fraud 
 
The Department of Defense (DoD) 
This department, long notorious for its waste and abuse, has dramatically increased its fraud 
detection and prevention efforts in recent years. A full complement of auditors and 
investigators are assigned to detect and prevent fraud. Contract officers are trained to 
recognize and required to promptly report any possibly fraudulent situations. Major 
government contractors are assigned a DoD auditor who works on-site, increasing the 
chances of possible procurement fraud being reported. The measures taken to combat fraud 
in this agency have proven quite effective, with increased prosecution and recovery. 
 
Within the DoD, several investigative agencies exist:  
• Defense Criminal Investigative Service 
• Air Force Office of Special Investigations  
• Army Criminal Investigation Command 
• Naval Criminal Investigative Services 
 
In addition to their other investigative duties, each of these agencies pursues fraud cases 
involving military personnel, civilian employees, and contractors. 
 
Voluntary Disclosure 
The Voluntary Disclosure Program was begun by DoD in 1986 and allows contractors to 
inform DoD of irregularities. While the program does not state that voluntary disclosure will 
exempt contractors from prosecution or suspension, it does note that voluntary disclosure 
and full cooperation “are strong indications of an attitude of contractor integrity even in the 
wake of disclosures of potential criminal liability.” 
 
Certain criteria exist for contractors to claim they made a voluntary disclosure. While 
voluntary disclosure of wrongdoing may not exempt a corporation from prosecution, it 
certainly is a contributing factor in the decision of whether to prosecute. The criteria include 
that:  
• The admission must come from the corporation, not an individual employee.  
• Any disclosure precipitated by the knowledge that news of the fraud may soon leak out 
and cause a government investigation would not allow the contractor to claim voluntary 
disclosure.  
• After the disclosure has been made, the corporation must take immediate steps to 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1920                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
correct the damage done the government and discipline the offending parties.  
• Full cooperation with the government investigation is essential. 
 
Defense Contract Audit Agency (DCAA) 
The DCAA is essentially an audit agency that reviews procurement contracts. It has the 
authority to subpoena contractors’ records if fraud is suspected. Government suppliers with 
large contracts usually are assigned their own DCAA auditor. The Defense Contract Audit 
Manual explains fraud reporting procedures for DCAA auditors. Reports of fraud are passed 
to DCAA Counsel and the Assistant Director and, from there, to the appropriate DoD or 
federal investigative branch. DCAA auditors are trained to look for: 
• Poor internal controls 
• Bad financial situations 
• Inadequate accounting records 
• Poor timekeeping system 
• A mix of commercial, fixed-price, and cost-type contracts 
• A background of fraud 
• Management dominated by one or a few individuals 
• Individuals with lavish lifestyles beyond their incomes 
• No or few internal and external audits 
 
Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) 
Larger go vernment contractors have staff from this agency stationed in their facilities. Their 
purpose there is to serve as contract administrators and inspection personnel. If a DLA 
employee working in this capacity suspects contract or procurement fraud, a report is made 
to DoD legal personnel. Fraud cases are investigated by the Defense Logistics Agency 
Criminal Investigations Activity (DCIA). 
 
The Department of Justice 
The United States Department of Justice (DOJ) is the federal government’s executive 
department that is responsible for enforcing the law and administrating justice. The DOJ is 
headed by the United States Attorney General. United States Attorneys, which are under the 
direction of the Attorney General, serve as the nation’s litigators. They conduct most of the 
trial work in which the United States is a party, including the prosecution of fraud cases. 
They also indict individuals, negotiate settlements, and recover damages. 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1921 
The DOJ and the federal government have increased their efforts to curb fraud and abuse in 
the federal spending. In 2006, for example, the Department of Justice (DOJ) formed the 
National Procurement Fraud Task Force to promote the early detection, prevention, and 
prosecution of procurement fraud. Since its creation, more than 300 procurement fraud 
cases have resulted in criminal convictions and the recovery of hundreds of millions of 
dollars in civil settlements and judgments. Also, President Obama recently clarified his 
position on procurement fraud by ordering an overhaul of the federal contracting system, 
vowing to “strengthen oversight to maximize transparency and accountability.” 
Furthermore, according to a report issued by the Office of the Attorney General (“National 
Priorities for the Investigation and Prosecution of White Collar Crime”), procurement fraud 
has been a primary area of investigative efforts by the DOJ since 1980. 
 
Such efforts are necessary because the federal government spends trillions of dollars each 
year on a wide variety of programs (e.g., national defense and homeland security, Social 
Security, Medicare and Medicaid, anti-poverty programs, interest on the national debt, 
education, veterans’ spending, unemployment  benefits, farm subsidies, etc.), and such 
expenditures create numerous opportunities for corrupt players to commit procurement 
fraud against the government. According to the Government Accountability Office (GAO), 
losses from fraud, misuse, and other types of improper payments are about $100 billion a 
year. 
 
Moreover, federal expenditures are increasing. During fiscal year (FY) 2009, the federal 
government spent about $3.52 trillion, up 18 percent from FY 2008, and the federal 
government is projected to spend $3.6 trillion in FY 2010. Thus, the threat of government 
fraud schemes is also increasing, and, as a result, there is a growing need to detect, prevent, 
and prosecute this type of fraud. 
 
The government’s message is clear: offenders will be prosecuted and punished to the full 
extent of the law.  
 
Divisions 
The DOJ is comprised of several divisions, including the Criminal Division and the Civil 
Division.  
 
The Criminal Division, which is headed by an Assistant Attorney General, is responsible for 
enforcing federal criminal laws.  
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1922                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Within the Justice Department’s Criminal Division, two offices are primarily occupied with 
white-collar crime: the Public Integrity Secti on and the Fraud Section. The Public Integrity 
Section reviews anti-fraud programs involving white-collar crimes by public officials. The 
Fraud Section’s duties include: 
• Investigating and prosecuting complex, sensitive, or multi-district cases involving major 
white-collar crimes either developed by the section or as requested by U.S. Attorney’s 
offices. 
• Providing training to federal, state, and local investigators and prosecutors. 
• Developing and implementing national white-collar crime enforcement policies. 
 
The Civil Division of the DOJ represents the federal government in civil cases. According to 
its website, the Civil Division’s “litigation reflects the diversity of government activities, 
involving, for example, the defense of challenges to Presidential actions; national security 
issues; benefit programs; energy policies; commercial issues such as contract disputes, 
banking insurance, patents, fraud, and debt collection; all manner of accident and liability 
claims; enforcement of immigration laws; and civil and criminal violations of consumer 
protection laws.” 
 
The Department of Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General  
The Department of Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General (OIG) 
investigates federal Medicaid fraud cases, it oversees state Medicaid Fraud Control Units, it 
can sanction fraudulent providers by imposing exclusions and civil monetary penalties, and it 
refers its investigative findings to the DOJ. 
 
Healthcare Fraud and Abuse Control Program  
The Healthcare Fraud and Abuse Control Program (HCFAC), which is jointly directed by 
the DOJ and the OIG, oversees state Medicaid  agencies and provides ongoing forums and 
training for state officials on fraud control. 
 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services  
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is a federal agency wi thin the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, it provides each state with technical assistance, 
guidance, and oversight for Medicare/Medicaid fraud prevention and detection efforts, it 
oversees each state’s fraud and abuse efforts, it keeps the Medicaid Alliance for Program 
Safeguards, which provides assistance against fraud and abuse, in working order, and it 
provides a national forum for Medicaid fraud and abuse issues. 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1923 
Federal Investigative Agencies 
In the United States, several federal agencies have investigative jurisdiction over white-collar 
crime cases. Some of the primary investigative agencies are discussed below.  
 
The Federal Bureau of Investigation 
As the principal investigative arm of the DOJ, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
investigates federal fraud cases, and it refers its investigative findings to the United States 
Attorney’s Office.  
 
The Inspectors General 
In the United States, many agencies use Inspectors General (IGs) to conduct investigations 
of misconduct, waste, fraud, theft, and certain types of criminal activity related to the 
agency’s operations.  
 
The Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigative Division 
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Criminal Investigative Division investigates potential 
criminal violations of the Internal Revenue Code and related financial crimes. 
 
 
Prosecution: The Government Employee’s Role 
The government employee will frequently work with investigators from the appropriate 
government agency. Some of the investigators will be specialists, while others handle a great 
variety of cases. In addition, some investigators are assigned to civil cases, while others will 
specialize in criminal activity. 
 
Common Problems of Investigators 
Regardless of the professional variations, many problems are common among these 
investigators. Several examples are set forth below. 
 
Lack of Familiarity with Terminology 
Many investigators assigned to fraud and white-collar crime cases lack a business 
background. This is both a strength and weakness. It is a strength in that they will normally 
ask the same questions and be confused on the same issues as a jury of laymen. It is a 
weakness in that many investigators are confused over accounting concepts, and the auditor 
must explain these concepts in nontechnical language.  
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1924                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Wide Variety of Case Assignments 
The typical investigator for a government agency must investigate a wide variety of cases, 
and therefore might not be intimately familiar with your type of case.  
 
Case Loads 
Like auditors, most government investigators have more cases than they can handle. They 
therefore look for the most egregious violations, or the ones in which proof is easily at hand. 
For that reason, investigators tend to place more reliance on witnesses than on documents.  
 
Reluctance of Government Prosecutors 
An investigator will not investigate cases that prosecutors will not accept. Although not 
prosecutors themselves, investigators tend to develop a “sixth sense” for what will be 
prosecuted and what will not. This issue is addressed below. 
  
Key Issues Facing Investigators  
Investigators are looking to maximize the cost-benefit relationship of their resources. In 
general, they believe that auditors are too ready to place undue reliance on documentation, 
and do not understand the concept of “jury appeal,” which is detailed in the next section.  
 
The typical investigator will ask: 
• What is the evidence? Is it clear and convincing? 
• Who are the witnesses? Are they credible? 
• What is the amount of the loss? Can it be proven? 
• What is the intent of the perpetrator? Can it be demonstrated that there was malice 
aforethought? 
• How difficult is the case to investigate? Is it necessary to review reams of documents 
looking for evidence? 
 
Overcoming the Reluctance to Investigate 
The auditor can best overcome reluctance of the investigator to work a case by using good 
salesmanship. In this regard, the following suggestions are helpful: 
• Present your case in person, not over the telephone. 
• Spend a little time establishing a relationship with the investigator if you don’t know him.  
• Summarize your case in one sentence. If you cannot, there is little realistic hope of 
prosecution. 
  
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1925 
• After summarizing the case, fill in the details. Do not overwhelm the investigator with 
minutia. 
• Pledge the resources of your agency in helping provide backup.  
• Follow up periodically with the investigator after the case has been referred, but be 
careful of making a pest of yourself.  
• Offer an expert witness if necessary. Remember, though, if you testify in a criminal case, 
you might be excluded from sitting in on your own case due to rules concerning 
witnesses.  
 
 
Interviewing Government Officials 
More and more frequently, high government officials find themselves the subjects of 
investigations into allegedly fraudulent activities. In today’s climate of complaints and 
accusations, a high official may be questioned intensely on subjects ranging from 
misallocating parking spaces or personal use of frequent traveler miles on the trivial end to 
bribery and conflict of interest on the serious side.  
 
Regardless of the seriousness of the allegations, the accusation will trigger an all-out 
investigation/audit into the matter. This is true whether the source of the allegation is a 
reliable one or an anonymous tipster. The issue is not the lack of discretion in deciding what 
“cases” to investigate, but how to conduct interviews of senior officials. 
 
Assigning the Interview 
People assigned to interview high officials will find that there are both similarities and 
differences with “normal” interviews. 
 
The first rule is to ensure that the interviewer is not subordinate to the subject of the 
interview. This is no problem for outside entities such as an independent counsel or even an 
inspector general, but where auditors or investigators need to interview someone far up in 
their own chain of command, problems may arise. 
 
If there is any possibility that the high official could influence the career of the interviewer, 
either presently or in the future, someone else should be chosen. Agencies should be able to 
call on outside entities to conduct such interviews where appropriate. In any event, any hint 
by the official of help (or harm) to the interviewer should be documented and reported. 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1926                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The term “high official” appears to encompass a homogenous group, but, in reality, anyone 
from a naive or brash political appointee to a grizzled and canny veteran civil servant with 
many such interviews under his belt may be encountered. The best method of interviewing 
will therefore depend on a number of factors: 
• Is the interviewee suspected of wrongdoing? 
• Is he likely to be cooperative? (Are there files or previous interviewers who can be 
consulted?) 
• Is he likely to be embarrassed by the results of the inquiry even though not personally 
culpable? 
 
These and other factors will determine whether the interviewer should be humble, 
deferential, apologetic, matter of fact, or aggressive. Obviously, no one mode fits all subjects 
or all situations. However, the interviewer should not be cowed by the subject’s position, 
although feigning humility may be appropriate. 
 
The Warning Dilemma 
A crucial element in interviewing a high official, as with the interview of any public 
employee, is proper regard for the Constitutional rights of the subject. A series of cases in 
the 1960s — such as Murphy v. Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor, 378 U.S. 52 (1964), 
Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493 (1967) and Gardner v. Broderick,  392 U.S. 273 (1968) — are 
instructive. In short, the United States Supreme Court held that a public employee cannot be 
compelled to answer job-related questions concerning his own possible criminal conduct 
under threat of disciplinary action, e.g., removal, without violating his rights under the Self-Incrimination 
Clause of the Fifth Amendment. The choice between job forfeiture and self-incrimination, 
said the Court, is inherently coercive and, in effect, a choice “between the 
rock and the whirlpool.” Put another way, a public employee cannot be put in a position 
wherein he will incriminate himself if he tells the truth, will subject himself to perjury 
prosecution if he lies, or will set himself up for a removal action if he refuses to cooperate. 
Thus, the issue of what warning(s), if any, to give the subject must be addressed. 
   
If the high official is reasonably believed to be merely a third-party witness, no warnings are 
required, and he is obligated to respond to the questions. In fact, most agencies have a 
provision in their policies and procedures manual that mandates cooperation. The following 
is typical: 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1927 
Requirement to Cooperate
 
Employees must furnish testimony, or fully disclose information in their knowledge or 
possession, concerning any matter of official interest, to any federal court, board, panel, 
tribunal, agent, or official authorized to conduct a particular inquiry, investigation, hearing, 
trial or other proceeding, or to act upon such testimony or information, when directed to do 
so by proper authority. In this regard, employees must answer any proper questions, under 
oath or affirmation if required, including furnishing or authorizing the release of 
information related to their financial affairs, which has reasonable relationship to matters of 
official interest. 
 
An agency’s table of offenses and penalties then delineates the punishment for failure  
to cooperate. 
 
However, before these rules can be utilized in a case where the official is suspected of 
wrongdoing, a threshold determination of whether or not the violation is potentially criminal 
(and not whether a prosecutor would in fact accept it), must be made. If the allegation is 
inherently administrative, i.e., noncriminal, in nature, such as a misuse of vehicles or giving 
the appearance of a conflict of interest, the Fifth Amendment does not come into play and 
the official must cooperate in the same fashion as if he were a third-party witness. Instructive 
is the Merit Systems Protection Board’s 1981 decision in Ashford v. Bureau of Prisons, 6 MSPB 389, MSPR 458, 81 FMSR 7044. 
 
Administrative Warnings 
The official should be advised of his obligation to cooperate via the agency’s so-called 
“administrative warning,” which will read similar to the following:   
 
Under [the applicable agency policies and procedures manual] you are required to disclose 
any information in your possession pertaining to the matter under investigation and answer 
any proper questions asked of you. 
 
You may be subject to disciplinary action for your failure or refusal to answer proper 
questions relating to the performance of your duties as an employee. You may also be subject 
to criminal prosecution for any false answer that you give to any such questions. Do you 
understand this? 
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1928                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
It should be noted that there is never a right to lie, even if incorrect warnings or no warnings 
were given. Only silence would be acceptable. 
 
Criminal Investigations 
If, on the other hand, the high government official is the subject of an actual or potential 
criminal investigation, a totally different situation arises. As noted above, a public employee 
cannot be compelled to cooperate or face loss of his job. The first step may well be 
attempting to secure the voluntary  cooperation of the individual with clear and full knowledge 
on his part of the possible consequences. Many agencies have developed their own wording, 
but the “Beckwith” or “Civiletti” warning is often used: 
 
You have the right to remain silent if your answers may tend to incriminate you. 
 
Anything you say may be used as evidence both in an administrative proceeding or any 
future criminal procee ding involving you. 
 
If you refuse to answer the questions posed to you on the grounds that the answers may 
incriminate you, you cannot be discharged solely for remaining silent. However, your silence 
can be considered in an administrative proceeding for its evidentiary value that is warranted 
by the facts surrounding your case. 
 
This warning clearly discloses its voluntary nature and the possible adverse consequences of 
cooperation. But in reality, adverse consequences for failing to cooperate under these 
circumstances are negligible. 
 
Declination of Prosecution 
If the interviewee declines to cooperate voluntarily, the interviewer must make an election. If 
he absolutely needs the statement of the official to ascertain what occurred, he must forego 
any use of the statement (or of any evidence derived from the statement) in a subsequent 
criminal prosecution. In fact, the interviewer must secure a declination of prosecution from a 
prosecutor and thus eliminate the Fifth Amendment problem. (The United States courts and 
most state courts only confer immunity to an official who must cooperate pursuant to an 
agency’s regulations, although at least one state’s supreme court has mandated transactional 
immunity.) In any event, a heavy burden is imposed on the government to show that its 
subsequent criminal case was not tainted by the compelled statement, and a decision to 
compel an interview will ordinarily preclude the option of criminal prosecution. 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1929 
To ensure that the interviewee has been advised of his obligation to cooperate in a declined 
criminal case, the “Kalkines” warning must be given immediately following the above-
 mentioned administrative warning:  
 
You are further advised that the answers you give to questions pertaining to the matter 
presently under investigation or any information or evidence that is gained by reason of your 
answers, cannot and will not be used against you in any subsequent criminal proceedings, 
except that you may be subject to criminal prosecution for any false answer that you give to 
any questions. Do you understand this? 
 
Failure to comply with this elaborate and complex array of warning requirements can, and 
unfortunately often does, ruin otherwise well-run investigations of senior officials. Two 
additional cases worth reading are Kalkines v. United States, 473 F.2d 1391 (CtCl, 1973) and 
Weston v. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 724 F.2d 943 (CAFC, 1983). A final key 
point to remember is that a failure to give a proper warning by any interviewer, with or 
without official authority to bind the government, will in fact do so. 
 
Legal Counsel 
The higher the official to be interviewed, the more likely he is to be cognizant of his right to 
the presence of counsel and his ability to afford one. High officials are also frequently 
shocked by the fact that they may not be entitled to representation. In fact, government 
employees are more often than not in a position where no right to counsel in an interview 
exists. Simply put, if the official is being interviewed as a witness only (and not as a suspect) 
or if the matter is strictly administrative, or if, although criminal in nature, a decision has 
been made not to prosecute, there is simply no right to the presence of an attorney (or any 
other personal representative).  
 
Miranda warnings, of course, are limited to those situations where the interviewee is “in 
custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom of action in any significant way,” i.e., is in jail, 
under arrest, or in a situation that has all the trappings of a formal arrest. Such situations will 
rarely arise. See Beckwith v. United States, 425 U.S. 341 (1976); Howard v. Office of Personnel 
Management, 86 FMSR 5342 (1986); Ashford v. Bureau of Prisons, supra. 
 
Only where criminal liability is a possibility and the interview is thus voluntary in nature will 
the official be able to insist on the presence of a lawyer as a condition of his cooperation. It 
is important to remember, however, that even though an official may not have the right to 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1930                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
counsel, the decision as to whether or not to allow it is a tactical one and, in a particular case, 
may be the quickest and most efficient means to secure the desired information. 
 
Obstructing the Investigation 
An official who declines to be interviewed or to answer certain questions acts at his own 
peril if under orders from his own superior or on the advice of counsel. In fact, a superior 
who tells his employees of whatever rank that they do not have to cooperate with 
investigations commits actionable misconduct. Often overlooked is the ability of high 
officials to influence underlings to be less than forthcoming or to “misplace” key 
documents.  
 
When appropriate, the high official should be reminded of all public employees’ obligation 
to assist in the fact-finding process. Interviewers should make no assumption in advance of 
any high official’s integrity or lack thereof. Finally, the high official who offers the “I was 
conducting my own investigation” story usually gets no further than did the “Abscam” 
defendants. 
 
Rules of Procedure 
Those who interview high officials must avoid extremes of procedure and should, as a 
general rule, neither act overly belligerent nor kowtow to them. Basic rules of procedure in 
the areas of warnings and representation apply to these people as much as to the general 
population of public employees. What is different is the high official’s ability to influence 
others and their particular susceptibility to embarrassing publicity, and a good interviewer 
will turn these traits to his own advantage in his quest for a truthful recitation of what did in 
fact occur. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2001 



:


public sector fraud
govern fraud audit standard
standard for audit of govern organ program activ and function and of
govern assist receiv by contractor nonprofit organ and other non
govern organ have been develop by the comptrol gener of the unit
state govern account offic gao these standard ar by and larg taken
from gener accept audit standard as establish by the aicpa howev
govern audit standard also known as the yellow book go beyond the aicpa
standard gener accept govern audit standard gaga ar requir to be
follow by auditor and audit organ when mandat by law regul agreement
contract or polici these standard includ the follow classif
gener standard
fieldwork standard for financi audit
report standard for financi audit
field work standard for perform audit
report standard for perform audit
the yellow book also provid separ gener field work and report standard for
attest engag howev the follow discuss will focu on those standard
applic to financi and perform audit engag
gener standard appli to both financi and perform audit and relat to
independ of the audit organ and it individu auditor
us of profession judgment in the perform of work and the prepar of relat
report
compet of the audit staff
audit qualiti control and assur
extern peer review
financi audit provid an independ assess as to whether financi statement ar
present fairli in accord with gener accept account principl or other
recogn criteria other object of financi audit which provid for differ level of
assur and entail variou scope of work mai includ
public sector fraud financi transact
11902 2011 fraud examin manual
report on intern control complianc with law and regul and provis of
contract and grant agreement as thei relat to financi transact system and
process
provid special report for specifi element account or item of a financi
statement
review interim financi inform
issu letter for underwrit and certain other request parti
report on the control over the process of transact by servic organ
and
audit complianc with regul relat to feder award expenditur and other
government financi assist in conjunct with or as a byproduct of a financi
statement audit
perform audit provid assur or conclus on certain audit object base on
evalu against object criteria such as specif requir measur or defin
busi practic perform audit includ engag relat to assess program
economi effici and effect inter nal control complianc and prospect
analys
the follow ar the gao standard or portion thereof that relat to the govern
auditor respons pertain to fraud the standard includ in the follow section
reflect the version of the standard adopt by the gao in of juli 2007
field work standard for financi audit chapter 4
gaga field work standard for financi audit includ the three aicpa gener
accept standard of field work and five other standard specif to govern financi
audit cover auditor commun consid the result of previou audit detect
materi misstat from violat or abus develop element of a find and audit
document
detect materi misstat result from violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or from abus
410 auditor should design the audit to provid reason assur of detect
misstat that result from violat of provis of contract or grant
agreement and could have a direct and materi effect on the determin of
financi statement amount or other financi data signific to the audit object
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11903
411 if specif inform come to the auditor attent that provid evid
concern the exist of possibl violat of provis of contract or grant
agreement that could have a materi indirect effect on the financi statement the
auditor should appli audit procedur specif direct to ascertain whether
such violat have occur when the auditor conclud that a violat of
provis of contract or grant agreement ha or is like to have occur thei
should determin the effect on the financi statement as well as the implic for
other aspect of the audit
412 abus involv behavior that is defici or improp when compar with behavior
that a prudent person would consid reason and necessari busi practic
given the fact and circumst abus also includ misus of author or
posit for person financi interest or those of an immedi or close famili
member or busi associ abus doe not necessarili involv fraud violat of
law regul or provis of a contract or grant agreement
413 if dure the cours of the audit auditor becom awar of abus that could be
quantit or qualit materi to the financi statement auditor should
appli audit procedur specif direct to ascertain the potenti effect on the
financi statement or other financi data signific to the audit object after
perform addit work auditor mai discov that the abus repres
potenti fraud or illeg act becaus the determin of abus is subject
auditor ar not requir to provid reason assur of detect abus
develop element of a find
414 audit find mai involv defici in intern control fraud illeg act
violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus the element
need for a find depend entir on the object of the audit thu a find
or set of find is complet to the extent that the audit object ar satisfi
when auditor identifi defici auditor should plan and perform procedur to
develop the element of the find that ar relev and necessari to achiev the
audit object the element of an audit find ar discuss in paragraph 415
through 418
415 criteria the law regul contract grant agreement standard measur
expect perform defin busi practic and benchmark against which
perform is compar or evalu criteria identifi the requir or desir state
or expect with respect to the program or oper criteria provid a context
for evalu evid and understand the find
public sector fraud financi transact
11904 2011 fraud examin manual
416 condit condit is a situat that exist the condit is determin and
document dure the audit
417 caus the caus identifi the reason or explan for the condit or the factor
or factor respons for the differ between the situat that exist condit
and the requir or desir state criteria which mai also serv as a basi for
recommend for correct action common factor includ poorli design
polici procedur or criteria inconsist incomplet or incorrect
implement or factor beyond the control of program manag auditor
mai assess whether the evid provid a reason and convinc argument for
why the state caus is the kei factor or factor contribut to the differ
418 effect or potenti effect the effect is a clear logic link to establish the impact or
potenti impact of the differ between the situat that exist condit and
the requir or desir state criteria the effect or potenti effect identifi the
outcom or consequ of the condit when the audit object includ
identifi the actual or potenti consequ of a condit that vari either
posit or neg from the criteria identifi in the audit effect is a measur
of those consequ effect or potenti effect mai be us to demonstr the
need for correct action in respons to identifi problem or relev risk
consider of fraud and illeg act
427 under both the aicpa standard and gaga auditor should plan and perform
the audit to obtain reason assur about whether the financi statement ar
free of materi misstat whether caus by error or fraud recogn the
possibl that a materi misstat due to fraud could be present is import
for achiev thi object howev absolut assur is not attain and thu
even a properli plan and perform audit mai not detect a materi misstat
result from fraud
428 under both the aicpa standard and gaga auditor should design the audit to
provid reason assur of detect materi misstat result from
illeg act that could have a direct and materi effect on the financi statement if
specif inform come to the auditor attent that provid evid
concern the exist of possibl illeg act that could have a materi indirect
effect on the financi statement the auditor should appli audit procedur
specif direct to ascertain whether an illeg act ha occur when an
illeg act ha or is like to have occur auditor should determin the effect on
the financi statement as well as the implic for other aspect of the audit
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11905
report standard for financi audit chapter 5
gaga report standard for financi audit includ four aicpa gener accept
standard of report and eight other standard specif to govern financi audit the
addit gaga standard relat to
report auditor complianc with gaga
report on intern control and on complianc with law regul and provis
of contract or grant agreement
report defici in intern control fraud illeg act violat of provis of
contract or grant agreement or abus
commun signific matter in the auditor report
report on restat of previouslyissu financi statement
report view of respons offici
report confidenti or sensit inform and
distribut report
report defici in intern control fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus
510 for financi audit includ audit of financi statement in which auditor
provid an opinion or disclaim auditor should report as applic to the
object of the audit and base upon the audit work perform 1 signific
defici in intern control identifi those consid to be materi
weak 2 all instanc of fraud and illeg act unless inconsequenti and 3
violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus that could have a
materi effect on the financi statement
fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus
515 under aicpa standard and gaga auditor have respons for detect
fraud and illeg act that have a materi effect on the financi statement and
determin whether those charg with govern ar adequ inform about
fraud and illeg act gaga includ addit report standard when auditor
conclud base on suffici appropri evid that ani of the follow either
ha occur or is like to have occur thei should includ in their audit report
the relev inform about
a fraud and illeg act that have an effect on the financi statement that is more
than inconsequenti
public sector fraud financi transact
11906 2011 fraud examin manual
b fraud and illeg act that have an effect on the financi statement that is more
than inconsequenti determin of financi statement amount or other
financi data signific to the audit and
c abus that is materi either quantit or qualit
516 when auditor detect violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or
abus that have an effect on the financi statement that is less than materi but
more than inconsequenti thei should commun those find in write to
offici of the audit entiti determin whether and how to commun to
offici of the audit entiti fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract
or grant agreement or abus that is inconsequenti is a matter of profession
judgment auditor should document such commun
517 when fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or
abus either have occur or ar like to have occur auditor mai consult with
author or legal counsel about whether publicli report such inform would
compromis investig or legal proceed auditor mai limit their public
report to matter that would not compromis those proceed and for
exampl report onli on inform that is alreadi a part of the public record
report find directli to parti outsid the audit entiti
518 auditor should report known or like fraud illeg act violat of provis of
contract or grant agreement or abus directli to parti outsid the audit entiti
in the follow two circumst
a when entiti manag fail to satisfi legal or regulatori requir to
report such inform to extern parti specifi in law or regul auditor
should first commun the failur to report such inform to those charg
with govern if the audit entiti still doe not report thi inform to the
specifi extern parti as soon as practic after the auditor
commun with those charg with govern then the auditor should
report the inform directli to the specifi extern parti
b when entiti manag fail to take time and appropri step to respond to
known or like fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant
agreement or abus that 1 is like to have a materi effect on the financi
statement and 2 involv fund receiv directli or indirectli from a
govern agenc auditor should first report manag failur to take
time and appropri step to those charg with govern if the audit
entiti still doe not take time and appropri step as soon as practic after
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11907
the auditor commun with those charg with govern then the
auditor should report the entiti failur to take time and appropri step
directli to the fund agenc
519 the report in paragraph 518 is in addit to ani legal requir to report
such inform directli to parti outsid the audit entiti auditor should
compli with these requir even if thei have resign or been dismiss from
the audit prior to it complet
520 auditor should obtain suffici appropri evid such as confirm from
outsid parti to corrobor assert by manag of the audit entiti that it
ha report such find in accord with law regul and fund
agreement when auditor ar unabl to do so thei should report such inform
directli as discuss in paragraph 518
present find in the auditor report
521 in present find such as defici in intern control fraud illeg act
violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus auditor should
develop the element of the find to the extent necessari to achiev the audit
object clearli develop audit find as discuss in paragraph 414 through
418 assist manag or oversight offici of the audit entiti in understand
the need for take correct action if auditor suffici develop the element of
a find thei mai provid recommend for correct action
522 auditor should place their find in perspect by describ the natur and
extent of the issu be report and the extent of the work perform that
result in the find to give the reader a basi for judg the preval and
consequ of these find auditor should as applic relat the instanc
identifi to the popul or the number of case examin and quantifi the result
in term of dollar valu or other measur as appropri if the result cannot be
project auditor should limit their conclus appropri
field work standard for perform audit chapter 7
gaga ha adopt four field work standard for perform audit the field work
standard for perform audit relat to plan the audit supervis staff obtain
suffici appropri evid and prepar audit document
public sector fraud financi transact
11908 2011 fraud examin manual
audit risk
705 audit risk is the possibl that the auditor find conclus
recommend or assur mai be improp or incomplet as a result of
factor such as evid that is not suffici andor appropri an inadequ audit
process or intent omiss or mislead inform due to misrepresent
or fraud the assess of audit risk involv both qualit and quantit
consider factor such as the time frame complex or sensit of the
work size of the program in term of dollar amount and number of citizen serv
adequaci of the audit entiti system and process to detect inconsist
signific error or fraud and auditor access to record also impact audit risk
audit risk includ the risk that auditor will not detect a mistak inconsist
signific error or fraud in the evid support the audit audit risk can be
reduc by take action such as increas the scope of work ad expert
addit review and other resourc to the audit team chang the
methodolog to obtain addit evid higher qualiti evid or altern
form of corrobor evid or align the find and conclus to reflect
the evid obtain
plan
711 auditor should assess audit risk and signific within the context of the audit
object by gain an understand of the follow
a the natur and profil of the program and the need of potenti user of the
audit report
b intern control as it relat to the specif object and scope of the audit
c inform system control for purpos of assess audit risk and plan
the audit within the context of the audit object
d legal and regulatori requir contract provis or grant agreement
potenti fraud or abus that ar signific within the context of the audit
object and
e the result of previou audit and attest engag that directli relat to
the current audit object
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11909
legal and regulatori requir provis of contract or grant agreement fraud or abus
730 in plan the audit auditor should assess risk of fraud occur that is
signific within the context of the audit object audit team member should
discuss among the team fraud risk includ factor such as individu incent
or pressur to commit fraud the opportun for fraud to occur and
ration or attitud that could allow individu to commit fraud auditor
should gather and assess inform to identifi risk of fraud that ar signific
within the scope of the audit object or that could affect the find and
conclus for exampl auditor mai obtain inform through discuss with
offici of the audit entiti or through other mean to determin the suscept
of the program to fraud the statu of intern control the entiti ha establish to
detect and prevent fraud or the risk that offici of the audit entiti could overrid
intern control an attitud of profession skeptic in assess these risk assist
auditor in assess which factor or risk could significantli affect the audit
object
731 when auditor identifi factor or risk relat to fraud that ha occur or is like
to have occur that thei believ ar signific within the context of the audit
object thei should design procedur to provid reason assur of
detect such fraud assess the risk of fraud is an ongo process throughout
the audit and relat not onli to plan the audit but also to evalu evid
obtain dure the audit
732 when inform come to the auditor attent indic that fraud that is
signific within the context of the audit object mai have occur auditor
should extend the audit step and procedur as necessari to 1 determin whether
fraud ha like occur and 2 if so determin it effect on the audit find if
the fraud that mai have occur is not signific within the context of the audit
object the auditor mai conduct addit audit work as a separ engag
or refer the matter to other parti with oversight respons or jurisdict
report standard for perform audit chapter 8
accord to gaga the report standard for perform audit relat to the form of
the report the report content and report issuanc and distribut
public sector fraud financi transact
11910 2011 fraud examin manual
report find
818 auditor should report defici in intern control that ar signific within the
context of the object of the audit all instanc of fraud illeg act unless thei
ar inconsequenti within the context of the audit object signific violat
of provis of contract or grant agreement and signific abus that have
occur or ar like to have occur
fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus
821 when auditor conclud base on suffici appropri evid that fraud illeg
act signific violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or
signific abus either ha occur or is like to have occur thei should report
the matter as a find
822 when auditor detect violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or
abus that ar not signific thei should commun those find in write to
offici of the audit entiti unless the find ar inconsequenti within the
context of the audit object consid both qualit and quantit factor
determin whether or how to commun to offici of the audit entiti fraud
illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or abus that is
inconsequenti is a matter of the auditor profession judgment auditor should
document such commun
823 when fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or
abus either have occur or ar like to have occur auditor mai consult with
author or legal counsel about whether publicli report such inform would
compromis investig or legal proceed auditor mai limit their public
report to matter that would not compromis those proceed and for
exampl report onli on inform that is alreadi a part of the public record
report find directli to parti outsid the audit entiti
824 auditor should report known or like fraud illeg act violat of provis of
contract or grant agreement or abus directli to parti outsid the audit entiti
in the follow two circumst
a when entiti manag fail to satisfi legal or regulatori requir to
report such inform to extern parti specifi in law or regul auditor
should first commun the failur to report such inform to those charg
with govern if the audit entiti still doe not report thi inform to the
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11911
specifi extern parti as soon as practic after the auditor
commun with those charg with govern then the auditor should
report the inform directli to the specifi extern parti
b when entiti manag fail to take time and appropri step to respond to
known or like fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant
agreement or abus that 1 is signific to the find and conclus and
2 involv fund receiv directli or indirectli from a govern agenc
auditor should first report manag failur to take time and appropri
step to those charg with govern if the audit entiti still doe not take
time and appropri step as soon as practic after the auditor
commun with those charg with govern then the auditor should
report the entiti failur to take time and appropri step directli to the
fund agenc
825 the report in paragraph 824 is in addit to ani legal requir to report
such inform directli to parti outsid the audit entiti auditor should
compli with these requir even if thei have resign or been dismiss from
the audit prior to it complet
826 auditor should obtain suffici appropri evid such as confirm from
outsid parti to corrobor assert by manag of the audit entiti that it
ha report such find in accord with law regul and fund
agreement when auditor ar unabl to do so thei should report such inform
directli as discuss in paragraph 824
fals claim and statement
intention fals statement such as fals elig declar for govern benefit
and fals claim mai be offens themselv or could be part of broader scheme involv
misappropri contract or procur fraud and corrupt
feder law prohibit fals claim
there ar a number of feder statut relat to fals claim and statement made to the
feder govern among the most us ar
fals fictiti or fraudul claim 18 us code 287
fals statement 18 us code 1001
conspiraci to defraud the govern 18 us code 286
public sector fraud financi transact
11912 2011 fraud examin manual
the major fraud act 18 us code 1031
obstruct of feder audit 18 us code 1516
these statut ar discuss in greater detail in the law section there ar also a number of
civil remedi discuss in the law section includ the civil fals claim act program
fraud civil remedi and the civil monetari penalti law cmpl
under 18 us code 1001 a fals statement ca n be oral written sworn or unsworn sign
or unsign the person must make the fals statement knowingli and willfulli which is
satisfi by show that the person act deliber and with knowledg that the
represent wa fals conceal by failur to fulli disclos requir inform is also
a violat the statement need not be made directli to the govern it can be made to a
thirdparti as long as it involv a matter within the jurisdict of ani government
depart or agenc
the statement must be materi but there is no requir that the govern suffer an
actual loss the materi of the fals statement is judg by the capabl of the statement
to influenc govern action
exampl of fals claim
some exampl of fals claim and statement includ
falsifi contractor qualif
fals certif or assur
fals record or invoic
invoic from nonexist compani
claim made in duplic or alter invoic
bill for fictiti employe
bill for good and servic not provid
inflat cost or substitut of cheaper good
other exampl of fals claim and statement might includ fals statement about
employe fictiti transact and falsifi document
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11913
fals statement concern employe
exampl
a meat pack compani in nebraska pled guilti to social secur number misus
social secur benefit fraud harbor alien and file fals employ document the
compani wa fine 103000 the settlement came after feder agent raid the plant
arrest more than 300 peopl of those arrest most agre to deport without
hear the compani admit to harbor alien but it claim that illeg worker
were never hire knowingli
fictiti transact
exampl
a former supervisori account in the environment protect agenc pled guilti to
defraud the epa of 28000 she admit that she enter fals inform into the
epa integr financi manag system result in her receiv 23 us
treasuri check which she later deposit into her credit union account after receiv the
fund she made entri into the financi report system to balanc the account
fals document
exampl
a former real estat salesperson wa indict and arrest for submit fals statement to
a mortgag corpor in an attempt to qualifi a veteran for a vaguarante loan the
indict charg that the individu deposit fund into a credit union account belong
to the veteran then submit a document to the mortgag corpor reflect the fals
and fictiti account balanc the loan defaul ted and result in a loss to the va of
44708
detect
the ultim detect method for fals statement is the examin of sourc document
thi audit approach is call trace or insideout that is from the sourc document
out to the report or financi statement
howev the auditor might be alert to the possibl of fals statement if ani of the
follow red flag ar present
public sector fraud financi transact
11914 2011 fraud examin manual
failur to produc document in a time manner
failur to respond to inquiri in a time manner
inadequaci in report requir for exampl untim report incomplet
report and other
failur to have an adequ inform gather and retriev system
alter or miss document
photocopi or duplic document
failur to have adequ support document for report and summari data
failur to produc document in a time manner
thi might be an indic that there ar no sourc document to substanti the summari
data for exampl if cost ar submit for reimburs and the cost have not been
incur then there will be no support data
failur to respond to inquiri in a time manner
thi might also be an indic that there is no sourc document it can also be an
indic that the inform is not readili retriev thi area should howev be
approach with caution if new and differ inform is request the contractor or
agenc might have to redesign it system in order to retriev the request inform
caus an unanticip time delai it is import the request for propos includ
adequ specif for respond to data request
inadequaci in report requir
if the requir report ar consist late incomplet or unsatisfactori thi might be an
indic that the sourc data is either unavail nonexist or it cannot be retriev
sourc data is deriv from sourc document if the sourc document is fals
then summar the correspond data becom an increasingli more difficult problem
failur to have adequ inform gather and retriev system
thi along with the red flag concern the sourc document assist the auditor in
determin whether or not the scope of the audit should be increas and if so in
what area
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11915
alter or miss document
fraud ar often conceal by alter or misplac support document the tenac
of the auditor to obtain and examin the sourc document will go a long wai in prove
fals statement
photocopi or duplic document
transact should be author and record base on origin document not
duplic duplic or photocopi document is subject to alter and
manipul
failur to have adequ support document for report and summari data
for support document to be adequ it must be suffici compet and relev
in addit the auditor must appli common sens to the sourc document for exampl ar
the amount too high or too low do thei includ odd time place andor peopl
these ar all indic that there might be fals statement therefor these red flag might
alert the auditor to select a larger sampl of sourc document for examin
beneficiari fraud
beneficiari fraud tend to be perpetr by individu without collus or briberi the
motiv for thi type of fraud is person gain or reduct of loss by the perpetr
an exampl of thi type of fraud might includ a taxpay who claim an unearn tax credit
on hi feder incom tax return thi person ha perpetr a fraud against the
govern
some report case typifi these fraud ar
social secur fraud
fals claim for benefit
supplement secur incom ssi fraud
fraudul social secur number
improp bill procedur
fals medicar claim
kickback
public sector fraud financi transact
11916 2011 fraud examin manual
scheme
social secur fraud
exampl
an indiana woman wa sentenc to 512 year incarcer suspend order to
make restitut of 40800 and fine 10 000 for conceal her mother death and
forg and cash her social secur benefit check an outofst rel had told
polic it wa difficult to believ that her mother who wa in her seventi wa alwai
indispos when thei call polic found the woman remain in a padlock mobil home
next to the woman hous
exampl
a washington dc woman wa found to have wrongfulli convert 34 social secur
widow benefit check made payabl to her de ceas mother therebi improperli receiv
13400 from the social secur administr aggrav circumst were found
in that she wrongfulli convert an addit 190 social secur check and attempt to
conceal her misconduct by ly to the ssa field repres regard the whereabout of
her deceas mother the administr law judg found that the woman wa liabl
under the program fraud civil remedi act for have submit claim she knew were
fals she therefor had to pai the maximum amount of penalti and assess which
total 196800
fals claim for benefit
exampl
a new jersei council woman admit to steal more than 17000 in social secur
disabl benefit from 2007 to 2009 accord to her attornei she had been unabl to
work becaus of surgeri and pain in her back and had receiv disabl benefit of 600
per month for a total of for six year howev she had been work at her famili
restaur for a portion of the time that she wa claim disabl she wa ask to help
out there after her mother death in 2007 on a temporari basi which over time becam
on a daili basi she resign from her post repaid the monei and wa sentenc to on
year probat
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11917
supplement secur incom ssi fraud
exampl
a california woman wa convict of murder three of seven ssi beneficiari found
buri in the yard of her board hous she had been charg with murder all seven
boarder plu two found elsewher for their benefit the oig investig who assist
in identifi the victim and the theft of their benefit check also prove that the woman
had imperson on of the victim in attempt to obtain dalman a drug found in
seven of the bodi she wa sentenc to life imprison without possibl of parol
fraudul social secur number
exampl
nine individu were sentenc to prison in illinoi for term rang from 2 to nearli
5 year for a seri of scheme through which thei defraud sever insur compani
thei obtain approxim 500000 by submit fals claim under fraudul
ssn in 27 incid in sever citi throughout the unit state the claim were base
on automobil and slipandfal accid that were either stage or never occur in
addit three of the defend two of whom were insur compani employe stole
blank check from an insur compani and cash them on forg endors for
68000 the group move from citi to citi us fals name and ssn which made
them difficult to find or identifi
improp bill procedur
exampl
a utah physician wa convict on 32 feder count of mail fraud submit fals
claim and aid and abet although he wa exclud from particip in the
medicar and state health care program in 1987 for similar crime he continu to
submit claim under the name and provid number of physician who perform servic
at hi clinic he also upcod claim and bill for servic not render he wa sentenc
to 56 month in prison and 3 year probat upon releas fine 50000 and assess a
special victim assess fee
public sector fraud financi transact
11918 2011 fraud examin manual
fals medicar claim
exampl
a speech therapist wa sentenc in minnesota to 16 month incarcer for caus the
submiss of fals medicar claim he contract with a therapi compani to bill
medicar and medicaid for hi work in sever nurs home the compani report that
he overst time spent with patient claim up to 20 hour a dai he claim to
provid speech therapi to a patient sever dai after the patient death and to nurs
home resid he had never met he wa also observ us flash card with a blind
resid he wa order to pai restitut ion of 40000 and a fine of 25000
kickback
exampl
the former bill clerk and 14 former patient of a georgia chiropractor were sentenc in
a kickback scheme cost medicar and more than 30 insur compani million of
dollar all were incarcer and order to pai fine and restitut the chiropractor
and hi offic manag wife had paid employe 10 percent of each week revenu and
patient 33 percent of whatev the carrier paid on their claim claim were submit for
patient and their famili regardless of whether thei were treat in on instanc bill
were submit for 169 person supposedli trea ted in on dai more than 40 person have
been sentenc thu far includ the chiropractor and hi wife who earlier receiv lengthi
jail sentenc and were order to pai 22 million in restitut
detect
as with fals statement perpetr by manag the best detect method for
beneficiari fraud will requir the examin of sourc document or develop comput
program to identifi fraudul pattern
in either a perform audit or a financi audit the fraud examin should includ some
step to determin if there is a high occurr rate for beneficiari fraud by select a
random sampl of recipi beneficiari and examin the document support the
benefit the auditor might be abl to estim the potenti of beneficiari fraud scheme
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11919
govern initi to reduc fraud
the depart of defens dod
thi depart long notori for it wast and abus ha dramat increas it fraud
detect and prevent effort in recent year a full complement of auditor and
investig ar assign to detect and prevent fraud contract offic ar train to
recogn and requir to promptli report ani possibl fraudul situat major
govern contractor ar assign a dod auditor who work onsit increas the
chanc of possibl procur fraud be report the measur taken to combat fraud
in thi agenc have proven quit effect with increas prosecut and recoveri
within the dod sever investig agenc exist
defens crimin investig servic
air forc offic of special investig
armi crimin investig command
naval crimin investig servic
in addit to their other investig duti each of these agenc pursu fraud case
involv militari personnel civilian employe and contractor
voluntari disclosur
the voluntari disclosur program wa begun by dod in 1986 and allow contractor to
inform dod of irregular while the program doe not state that voluntari disclosur will
exempt contractor from prosecut or suspens it doe note that voluntari disclosur
and full cooper ar strong indic of an attitud of contractor integr even in the
wake of disclosur of potenti crimin liabil
certain criteria exist for contractor to claim thei made a voluntari disclosur while
voluntari disclosur of wrongdo mai not exempt a corpor from prosecut it
certainli is a contribut factor in the decis of whether to prosecut the criteria includ
that
the admiss must come from the corpor not an individu employe
ani disclosur precipit by the knowledg that new of the fraud mai soon leak out
and caus a govern investig would not allow the contractor to claim voluntari
disclosur
after the disclosur ha been made the corpor must take immedi step to
public sector fraud financi transact
11920 2011 fraud examin manual
correct the damag done the govern and disciplin the offend parti
full cooper with the govern investig is essenti
defens contract audit agenc dcaa
the dcaa is essenti an audit agenc that review procur contract it ha the
author to subpoena contractor record if fraud is suspect govern supplier with
larg contract usual ar assign their own dcaa auditor the defens contract audit
manual explain fraud report procedur for dcaa auditor report of fraud ar pass
to dcaa counsel and the assist director and from there to the appropri dod or
feder investig branch dcaa auditor ar train to look for
poor intern control
bad financi situat
inadequ account record
poor timekeep system
a mix of commerci fixedpric and costtyp contract
a background of fraud
manag domin by on or a few individu
individu with lavish lifestyl beyond their incom
no or few intern and extern audit
defens logist agenc dla
larger go vernment contractor have staff from thi agenc station in their facil their
purpos there is to serv as contract administr and inspect personnel if a dla
employe work in thi capac suspect contract or procur fraud a report is made
to dod legal personnel fraud case ar investig by the defens logist agenc
crimin investig activ dcia
the depart of justic
the unit state depart of justic doj is the feder govern execut
depart that is respons for enforc the law and administr justic the doj is
head by the unit state attornei gener unit state attornei which ar under the
direct of the attornei gener serv as the nation litig thei conduct most of the
trial work in which the unit state is a parti includ the prosecut of fraud case
thei also indict individu negoti settlement and recov damag
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11921
the doj and the feder govern have increas their effort to curb fraud and abus in
the feder spend in 2006 for exampl the depart of justic doj form the
nation procur fraud task forc to promot the earli detect prevent and
prosecut of procur fraud sinc it creation more than 300 procur fraud
case have result in crimin convict and the recoveri of hundr of million of
dollar in civil settlement and judgment also presid obama recent clarifi hi
posit on procur fraud by order an overhaul of the feder contract system
vow to strengthen oversight to maxim transpar and account
furthermor accord to a report issu by the offic of the attornei gener nation
prioriti for the investig and prosecut of white collar crime procur fraud
ha been a primari area of investig effort by the doj sinc 1980
such effort ar necessari becaus the feder govern spend trillion of dollar each
year on a wide varieti of program eg nation defens and homeland secur social
secur medicar and medicaid antipoverti program interest on the nation debt
educ veteran spend unemploy benefit farm subsidi etc and such
expenditur creat numer opportun for corrupt player to commit procur
fraud against the govern accord to the govern account offic gao
loss from fraud misus and other type of improp payment ar about 100 billion a
year
moreov feder expenditur ar increas dure fiscal year fy 2009 the feder
govern spent about 352 trillion up 18 percent from fy 2008 and the feder
govern is project to spend 36 trillion in fy 2010 thu the threat of govern
fraud scheme is also increas and as a result there is a grow need to detect prevent
and prosecut thi type of fraud
the govern messag is clear offend will be prosecut and punish to the full
extent of the law
divis
the doj is compris of sever divis includ the crimin divis and the civil
divis
the crimin divis which is head by an assist attornei gener is respons for
enforc feder crimin law
public sector fraud financi transact
11922 2011 fraud examin manual
within the justic depart crimin divis two offic ar primarili occupi with
whitecollar crime the public integr secti on and the fraud section the public integr
section review antifraud program involv whitecollar crime by public offici the
fraud section duti includ
investig and prosecut complex sensit or multidistrict case involv major
whitecollar crime either develop by the section or as request by us attornei
offic
provid train to feder state and local investig and prosecutor
develop and implement nation whitecollar crime enforc polici
the civil divis of the doj repres the feder govern in civil case accord to
it websit the civil divis litig reflect the divers of govern activ
involv for exampl the defens of challeng to presidenti action nation secur
issu benefit program energi polici commerci issu such as contract disput
bank insur patent fraud and debt collect all manner of accid and liabil
claim enforc of immigr law and civil and crimin violat of consum
protect law
the depart of health and human servic offic of the inspector gener
the depart of health and human servic offic of the inspector gener oig
investig feder medicaid fraud case it overse state medicaid fraud control unit it
can sanction fraudul provid by impos exclus and civil monetari penalti and it
refer it investig find to the doj
healthcar fraud and abus control program
the healthcar fraud and abus control program hcfac which is jointli direct by
the doj and the oig overse state medicaid agenc and provid ongo forum and
train for state offici on fraud control
center for medicar and medicaid servic
the center for medicar and medicaid servic cm is a feder agenc wi thin the us
depart of health and human servic it provid each state with technic assist
guidanc and oversight for medicaremedicaid fraud prevent and detect effort it
overse each state fraud and abus effort it keep the medicaid allianc for program
safeguard which provid assist against fraud and abus in work order and it
provid a nation forum for medicaid fraud and abus issu
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11923
feder investig agenc
in the unit state sever feder agenc have investig jurisdict over whitecollar
crime case some of the primari investig agenc ar discuss below
the feder bureau of investig
as the princip investig arm of the doj the feder bureau of investig fbi
investig feder fraud case and it refer it investig find to the unit state
attornei offic
the inspector gener
in the unit state mani agenc us inspector gener ig to conduct investig
of misconduct wast fraud theft and certain type of crimin activ relat to the
agenc oper
the intern revenu servic crimin investig divis
the intern revenu servic ir crimin investig divis investig potenti
crimin violat of the intern revenu code and relat financi crime
prosecut the govern employe role
the govern employe will frequent work with investig from the appropri
govern agenc some of the investig will be specialist while other handl a great
varieti of case in addit some investig ar assign to civil case while other will
special in crimin activ
common problem of investig
regardless of the profession variat mani problem ar common among these
investig sever exampl ar set forth below
lack of familiar with terminolog
mani investig assign to fraud and whitecollar crime case lack a busi
background thi is both a strength and weak it is a strength in that thei will normal
ask the same question and be confus on the same issu as a juri of laymen it is a
weak in that mani investig ar confus over account concept and the auditor
must explain these concept in nontechn languag
public sector fraud financi transact
11924 2011 fraud examin manual
wide varieti of case assign
the typic investig for a govern agenc must investig a wide varieti of case
and therefor might not be intim familiar with your type of case
case load
like auditor most govern investig have more case than thei can handl thei
therefor look for the most egregi violat or the on in which proof is easili at hand
for that reason investig tend to place more relianc on wit than on document
reluct of govern prosecutor
an investig will not investig case that prosecutor will not accept although not
prosecutor themselv investig tend to develop a sixth sens for what will be
prosecut and what will not thi issu is address below
kei issu face investig
investig ar look to maxim the costbenefit relationship of their resourc in
gener thei believ that auditor ar too readi to place undu relianc on document
and do not understand the concept of juri appeal which is detail in the next section
the typic investig will ask
what is the evid is it clear and convinc
who ar the wit ar thei credibl
what is the amount of the loss can it be proven
what is the intent of the perpetr can it be demonstr that there wa malic
aforethought
how difficult is the case to investig is it necessari to review ream of document
look for evid
overcom the reluct to investig
the auditor can best overcom reluct of the investig to work a case by us good
salesmanship in thi regard the follow suggest ar help
present your case in person not over the telephon
spend a littl time establish a relationship with the investig if you dont know him
summar your case in on sentenc if you cannot there is littl realist hope of
prosecut
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11925
after summar the case fill in the detail do not overwhelm the investig with
minutia
pledg the resourc of your agenc in help provid backup
follow up period with the investig after the case ha been refer but be
care of make a pest of yourself
offer an expert wit if necessari rememb though if you testifi in a crimin case
you might be exclud from sit in on your own case due to rule concern
wit
interview govern offici
more and more frequent high govern offici find themselv the subject of
investig into allegedli fraudul activ in todai climat of complaint and
accus a high offici mai be question intens on subject rang from
misalloc park space or person us of frequent travel mile on the trivial end to
briberi and conflict of interest on the seriou side
regardless of the serious of the alleg the accus will trigger an allout
investigationaudit into the matter thi is true whether the sourc of the alleg is a
reliabl on or an anonym tipster the issu is not the lack of discret in decid what
case to investig but how to conduct interview of senior offici
assign the interview
peopl assign to interview high offici will find that there ar both similar and
differ with normal interview
the first rule is to ensur that the interview is not subordin to the subject of the
interview thi is no problem for outsid entiti such as an independ counsel or even an
inspector gener but where auditor or investig need to interview someon far up in
their own chain of command problem mai aris
if there is ani possibl that the high offici could influenc the career of the interview
either present or in the futur someon els should be chosen agenc should be abl to
call on outsid entiti to conduct such interview where appropri in ani event ani hint
by the offici of help or harm to the interview should be document and report
public sector fraud financi transact
11926 2011 fraud examin manual
the term high offici appear to encompass a homogen group but in realiti anyon
from a naiv or brash polit appointe to a grizzl and canni veteran civil servant with
mani such interview under hi belt mai be encount the best method of interview
will therefor depend on a number of factor
is the interviewe suspect of wrongdo
is he like to be cooper ar there file or previou interview who can be
consult
is he like to be embarrass by the result of the inquiri even though not person
culpabl
these and other factor will determin whether the interview should be humbl
deferenti apologet matter of fact or aggress obvious no on mode fit all subject
or all situat howev the interview should not be cow by the subject posit
although feign humil mai be appropri
the warn dilemma
a crucial element in interview a high offici as with the interview of ani public
employe is proper regard for the constitut right of the subject a seri of case in
the 1960 such as murphi v waterfront commiss of new york harbor 378 us 52 1964
garriti v new jersei 385 us 493 1967 and gardner v broderick 392 us 273 1968 ar
instruct in short the unit state suprem court held that a public employe cannot be
compel to answer jobrel question concern hi own possibl crimin conduct
under threat of disciplinari action eg remov without violat hi right under the selfincrimin
claus of the fifth amend the choic between job forfeitur and selfincrimin
said the court is inher coerciv and in effect a choic between the
rock and the whirlpool put anoth wai a public employe cannot be put in a posit
wherein he will incrimin himself if he tell the truth will subject himself to perjuri
prosecut if he li or will set himself up for a remov action if he refus to cooper
thu the issu of what warn if ani to give the subject must be address
if the high offici is reason believ to be mere a thirdparti wit no warn ar
requir and he is oblig to respond to the question in fact most agenc have a
provis in their polici and procedur manual that mandat cooper the follow
is typic
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11927
requir to cooper
employe must furnish testimoni or fulli disclos inform in their knowledg or
possess concern ani matter of offici interest to ani feder court board panel
tribun agent or offici author to conduct a particular inquiri investig hear
trial or other proceed or to act upon such testimoni or inform when direct to do
so by proper author in thi regard employe must answer ani proper question under
oath or affirm if requir includ furnish or author the releas of
inform relat to their financi affair which ha reason relationship to matter of
offici interest
an agenc tabl of offens and penalti then delin the punish for failur
to cooper
howev befor these rule can be util in a case where the offici is suspect of
wrongdo a threshold determin of whether or not the violat is potenti crimin
and not whether a prosecutor would in fact accept it must be made if the alleg is
inher administr ie noncrimin in natur such as a misus of vehicl or give
the appear of a conflict of interest the fifth amend doe not come into plai and
the offici must cooper in the same fashion as if he were a thirdparti wit instruct
is the merit system protect board 1981 decis in ashford v bureau of prison 6 mspb 389 mspr 458 81 fmsr 7044
administr warn
the offici should be advis of hi oblig to cooper via the agenc socal
administr warn which will read similar to the follow
under the applic agenc polici and procedur manual you ar requir to disclos
ani inform in your possess pertain to the matter under investig and answer
ani proper question ask of you
you mai be subject to disciplinari action for your failur or refus to answer proper
question relat to the perform of your duti as an employe you mai also be subject
to crimin prosecut for ani fals answer that you give to ani such question do you
understand thi
public sector fraud financi transact
11928 2011 fraud examin manual
it should be note that there is never a right to lie even if incorrect warn or no warn
were given onli silenc would be accept
crimin investig
if on the other hand the high govern offici is the subject of an actual or potenti
crimin investig a total differ situat aris as note abov a public employe
cannot be compel to cooper or face loss of hi job the first step mai well be
attempt to secur the voluntari cooper of the individu with clear and full knowledg
on hi part of the possibl consequ mani agenc have develop their own word
but the beckwith or civiletti warn is often us
you have the right to remain silent if your answer mai tend to incrimin you
anyth you sai mai be us as evid both in an administr proceed or ani
futur crimin proce ding involv you
if you refus to answer the question pose to you on the ground that the answer mai
incrimin you you cannot be discharg sole for remain silent howev your silenc
can be consid in an administr proceed for it evidentiari valu that is warrant
by the fact surround your case
thi warn clearli disclos it voluntari natur and the possibl advers consequ of
cooper but in realiti advers consequ for fail to cooper under these
circumst ar neglig
declin of prosecut
if the interviewe declin to cooper voluntarili the interview must make an elect if
he absolut need the statement of the offici to ascertain what occur he must forego
ani us of the statement or of ani evid deriv from the statement in a subsequ
crimin prosecut in fact the interview must secur a declin of prosecut from a
prosecutor and thu elimin the fifth amend problem the unit state court and
most state court onli confer immun to an offici who must cooper pursuant to an
agenc regul although at least on state suprem court ha mandat transact
immun in ani event a heavi burden is impos on the govern to show that it
subsequ crimin case wa not taint by the compel statement and a decis to
compel an interview will ordinarili preclud the option of crimin prosecut
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11929
to ensur that the interviewe ha been advis of hi oblig to cooper in a declin
crimin case the kalkin warn must be given immedi follow the abov
mention administr warn
you ar further advis that the answer you give to question pertain to the matter
present under investig or ani inform or evid that is gain by reason of your
answer cannot and will not be us against you in ani subsequ crimin proceed
except that you mai be subject to crimin prosecut for ani fals answer that you give to
ani question do you understand thi
failur to compli with thi elabor and complex arrai of warn requir can and
unfortun often doe ruin otherwis wellrun investig of senior offici two
addit case worth read ar kalkin v unit state 473 f2d 1391 ctcl 1973 and
weston v depart of hous and urban develop 724 f2d 943 cafc 1983 a final kei
point to rememb is that a failur to give a proper warn by ani interview with or
without offici author to bind the govern will in fact do so
legal counsel
the higher the offici to be interview the more like he is to be cogniz of hi right to
the presenc of counsel and hi abil to afford on high offici ar also frequent
shock by the fact that thei mai not be entitl to represent in fact govern
employe ar more often than not in a posit where no right to counsel in an interview
exist simpli put if the offici is be interview as a wit onli and not as a suspect
or if the matter is strictli administr or if although crimin in natur a decis ha
been made not to prosecut there is simpli no right to the presenc of an attornei or ani
other person repres
miranda warn of cours ar limit to those situat where the interviewe is in
custodi or otherwis depriv of hi freedom of action in ani signific wai ie is in jail
under arrest or in a situat that ha all the trap of a formal arrest such situat will
rare aris see beckwith v unit state 425 us 341 1976 howard v offic of personnel
manag 86 fmsr 5342 1986 ashford v bureau of prison supra
onli where crimin liabil is a possibl and the interview is thu voluntari in natur will
the offici be abl to insist on the presenc of a lawyer as a condit of hi cooper it
is import to rememb howev that even though an offici mai not have the right to
public sector fraud financi transact
11930 2011 fraud examin manual
counsel the decis as to whether or not to allow it is a tactic on and in a particular case
mai be the quickest and most effici mean to secur the desir inform
obstruct the investig
an offici who declin to be interview or to answer certain question act at hi own
peril if under order from hi own superior or on the advic of counsel in fact a superior
who tell hi employe of whatev rank that thei do not have to cooper with
investig commit action misconduct often overlook is the abil of high
offici to influenc underl to be less than forthcom or to misplac kei
document
when appropri the high offici should be remind of all public employe oblig
to assist in the factfind process interview should make no assumpt in advanc of
ani high offici integr or lack thereof final the high offici who offer the i wa
conduct my own investig stori usual get no further than did the abscam
defend
rule of procedur
those who interview high offici must avoid extrem of procedur and should as a
gener rule neither act overli belliger nor kowtow to them basic rule of procedur in
the area of warn and represent appli to these peopl as much as to the gener
popul of public employe what is differ is the high offici abil to influenc
other and their particular suscept to embarrass public and a good interview
will turn these trait to hi own advantag in hi quest for a truth recit of what did in
fact occur
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12001
