2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD/Government Fraud Auditing Standards/Developing Elements of a Finding


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Public Sector Fraud


:


Developing Elements of a Finding 
4.14 Audit findings may involve deficiencies in internal control, fraud, illegal acts, 
violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, and abuse. The elements 
needed for a finding depend entirely on the objectives of the audit. Thus, a finding 
or set of findings is complete to the extent that the audit objectives are satisfied. 
When auditors identify deficiencies, auditors should plan and perform procedures to 
develop the elements of the findings that are relevant and necessary to achieve the 
audit objectives. The elements of an audit finding are discussed in paragraphs 4.15 
through 4.18. 
4.15 Criteria: The laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements, standards, measures, 
expected performance, defined business practices, and benchmarks against which 
performance is compared or evaluated. Criteria identify the required or desired state 
or expectation with respect to the program or operation. Criteria provide a context 
for evaluating evidence and understanding the findings. 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1904                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
4.16 Condition: Condition is a situation that exists. The condition is determined and 
documented during the audit. 
4.17 Cause: The cause identifies the reason or explanation for the condition or the factor 
or factors responsible for the difference between the situation that exists (condition) 
and the required or desired state (criteria), which may also serve as a basis for 
recommendations for corrective actions. Common factors include poorly designed 
policies, procedures, or criteria; inconsistent, incomplete, or incorrect 
implementation; or factors beyond the control of program management. Auditors 
may assess whether the evidence provides a reasonable and convincing argument for 
why the stated cause is the key factor or factors contributing to the difference. 
4.18 Effect or potential effect: The effect is a clear, logical link to establish the impact or 
potential impact of the difference between the situation that exists (condition) and 
the required or desired state (criteria). The effect or potential effect identifies the 
outcomes or consequences of the condition. When the audit objectives include 
identifying the actual or potential consequences of a condition that varies (either 
positively or negatively) from the criteria identified in the audit, “effect” is a measure 
of those consequences. Effect or potential effect may be used to demonstrate the 
need for corrective action in response to identified problems or relevant risks. 
 



:


develop element of a find
414 audit find mai involv defici in intern control fraud illeg act
violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus the element
need for a find depend entir on the object of the audit thu a find
or set of find is complet to the extent that the audit object ar satisfi
when auditor identifi defici auditor should plan and perform procedur to
develop the element of the find that ar relev and necessari to achiev the
audit object the element of an audit find ar discuss in paragraph 415
through 418
415 criteria the law regul contract grant agreement standard measur
expect perform defin busi practic and benchmark against which
perform is compar or evalu criteria identifi the requir or desir state
or expect with respect to the program or oper criteria provid a context
for evalu evid and understand the find
public sector fraud financi transact
11904 2011 fraud examin manual
416 condit condit is a situat that exist the condit is determin and
document dure the audit
417 caus the caus identifi the reason or explan for the condit or the factor
or factor respons for the differ between the situat that exist condit
and the requir or desir state criteria which mai also serv as a basi for
recommend for correct action common factor includ poorli design
polici procedur or criteria inconsist incomplet or incorrect
implement or factor beyond the control of program manag auditor
mai assess whether the evid provid a reason and convinc argument for
why the state caus is the kei factor or factor contribut to the differ
418 effect or potenti effect the effect is a clear logic link to establish the impact or
potenti impact of the differ between the situat that exist condit and
the requir or desir state criteria the effect or potenti effect identifi the
outcom or consequ of the condit when the audit object includ
identifi the actual or potenti consequ of a condit that vari either
posit or neg from the criteria identifi in the audit effect is a measur
of those consequ effect or potenti effect mai be us to demonstr the
need for correct action in respons to identifi problem or relev risk
