2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD/False Claims and Statements


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Public Sector Fraud


:


False Claims and Statements 
Intentionally false statements (such as false eligibility declarations for government benefits 
and false claims) may be offenses themselves or could be part of broader schemes involving 
misappropriation, contract or procurement fraud, and corruption. 
 
Federal Laws Prohibiting False Claims 
There are a number of federal statutes related to false claims and statements made to the 
federal government. Among the most useful are: 
• False, Fictitious, or Fraudulent Claims (18, U.S. Code, § 287) 
• False Statements (18, U.S. Code, § 1001) 
• Conspiracy to Defraud the Government (18, U.S. Code, § 286) 
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1912                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The Major Fraud Act (18, U.S. Code, § 1031) 
• Obstruction of Federal Audit (18, U.S. Code, §1516) 
 
These statutes are discussed in greater detail in the Law section. There are also a number of 
civil remedies discussed in the Law section including the Civil False Claims Act, Program 
Fraud Civil Remedies, and the Civil Monetary Penalty Law (CMPL). 
 
Under 18 U.S. Code, § 1001, a false statement ca n be oral, written, sworn or unsworn, signed 
or unsigned. The person must make the false statement “knowingly and willfully,” which is 
satisfied by showing that the person acted deliberately and with knowledge that the 
representation was false. Concealment by failure to fully disclose required information is also 
a violation. The statement need not be made directly to the government; it can be made to a 
third-party as long as it involves a matter within the jurisdiction of any governmental 
department or agency.  
 
The statement must be material, but there is no requirement that the government suffer an 
actual loss. The materiality of the false statement is judged by the capability of the statement 
to influence government action. 
 
Examples of False Claims 
Some examples of false claims and statements include: 
• Falsified contractor qualifications. 
• False certifications or assurances. 
• False records or invoices. 
• Invoices from nonexistent companies. 
• Claims made in duplicate or altered invoices. 
• Billing for fictitious employees. 
• Billing for goods and services not provided. 
• Inflated costs or substitution of cheaper goods. 
 
Other examples of false claims and statements might include false statements about 
employees, fictitious transactions, and falsified documents. 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1913 
False Statements Concerning Employees 
 
EXAMPLE 
A meat packing company in Nebraska pled guilty to Social Security number misuse, 
Social Security benefits fraud, harboring aliens, and filing false employment documents. The 
company was fined $103,000. The settlement came after federal agents raided the plant, 
arresting more than 300 people. Of those arrested, most agreed to deportation without 
hearings. The company admitted to harboring aliens, but it claimed that illegal workers 
were never hired knowingly.  
 
Fictitious Transactions 
 
EXAMPLE 
A former supervisory accountant in the Environmental Protection Agency pled guilty to 
defrauding the EPA of $28,000. She admitted that she entered false information into the 
EPA’s Integrated Financial Management System resulting in her receiving 23 U.S. 
Treasury checks, which she later deposited into her credit union account. After receiving the 
funds, she made entries into the financial reporting system to balance the accounts. 
 
False Documentation 
 
EXAMPLE 
A former real estate salesperson was indicted and arrested for submitting false statements to 
a mortgage corporation in an attempt to qualify a veteran for a VA-guaranteed loan. The 
indictment charged that the individual deposited funds into a credit union account belonging 
to the veteran, then submitted a document to the mortgage corporation reflecting the false 
and fictitious account balance. The loan defaul ted and resulted in a loss to the VA of 
$44,708.  
 
Detection 
The ultimate detection method for false statements is the examination of source documents. 
This auditing approach is called “tracing” or “inside-out,” that is, from the source document 
out to the report or financial statement. 
 
However, the auditor might be alerted to the possibility of false statements if any of the 
following red flags are present: 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1914                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Failure to produce documents in a timely manner. 
• Failure to respond to inquiries in a timely manner. 
• Inadequacies in reporting requirements (for example, untimely reports, incomplete 
reports, and others). 
• Failure to have an adequate information gathering and retrieval system. 
• Altered or missing documents. 
• Photocopied or duplicate documents. 
• Failure to have adequate supporting documentation for reports and summary data. 
 
Failure to Produce Documents in a Timely Manner 
This might be an indication that there are no source documents to substantiate the summary 
data. For example, if costs are submitted for reimbursement, and the costs have not been 
incurred, then there will be no supporting data. 
 
Failure to Respond to Inquiries in a Timely Manner 
This might also be an indication that there is no source documentation. It can also be an 
indication that the information is not readily retrievable. This area should, however, be 
approached with caution. If new and different information is requested, the contractor or 
agency might have to redesign its system in order to retrieve the requested information, 
causing an unanticipated time delay. It is important the requests for proposals include 
adequate specifications for responding to data requests. 
 
Inadequacies in Reporting Requirements 
If the required reports are consistently late, incomplete, or unsatisfactory, this might be an 
indication that the source data is either unavailable, nonexistent, or it cannot be retrieved. 
Source data is derived from source documentation. If the source documentation is false, 
then summarizing the corresponding data becomes an increasingly more difficult problem. 
  
Failure to Have Adequate Information Gathering and Retrieval Systems 
This, along with the red flags concerning the source documents, assists the auditor in 
determining whether or not the scope of the audit should be increased, and if so, in  
what areas. 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1915 
Altered or Missing Documents 
Frauds are often concealed by altering or misplacing supporting documentation. The tenacity 
of the auditor to obtain and examine the source documentation will go a long way in proving 
false statements. 
 
Photocopied or Duplicate Documents 
Transactions should be authorized and recorded based on original documentation, not 
duplicates. Duplicates or photocopied documentation is subject to alteration and 
manipulation. 
 
Failure to Have Adequate Supporting Documentation for Reports and Summary Data 
For supporting documentation to be adequate, it must be sufficient, competent, and relevant. 
In addition, the auditor must apply common sense to the source document. For example, are 
the amounts too high or too low, do they include odd times, places, and/or people? 
 
These are all indicators that there might be false statements. Therefore, these red flags might 
alert the auditor to select a larger sample of source documents for examination.  
 
 



:


fals claim and statement
intention fals statement such as fals elig declar for govern benefit
and fals claim mai be offens themselv or could be part of broader scheme involv
misappropri contract or procur fraud and corrupt
feder law prohibit fals claim
there ar a number of feder statut relat to fals claim and statement made to the
feder govern among the most us ar
fals fictiti or fraudul claim 18 us code 287
fals statement 18 us code 1001
conspiraci to defraud the govern 18 us code 286
public sector fraud financi transact
11912 2011 fraud examin manual
the major fraud act 18 us code 1031
obstruct of feder audit 18 us code 1516
these statut ar discuss in greater detail in the law section there ar also a number of
civil remedi discuss in the law section includ the civil fals claim act program
fraud civil remedi and the civil monetari penalti law cmpl
under 18 us code 1001 a fals statement ca n be oral written sworn or unsworn sign
or unsign the person must make the fals statement knowingli and willfulli which is
satisfi by show that the person act deliber and with knowledg that the
represent wa fals conceal by failur to fulli disclos requir inform is also
a violat the statement need not be made directli to the govern it can be made to a
thirdparti as long as it involv a matter within the jurisdict of ani government
depart or agenc
the statement must be materi but there is no requir that the govern suffer an
actual loss the materi of the fals statement is judg by the capabl of the statement
to influenc govern action
exampl of fals claim
some exampl of fals claim and statement includ
falsifi contractor qualif
fals certif or assur
fals record or invoic
invoic from nonexist compani
claim made in duplic or alter invoic
bill for fictiti employe
bill for good and servic not provid
inflat cost or substitut of cheaper good
other exampl of fals claim and statement might includ fals statement about
employe fictiti transact and falsifi document
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11913
fals statement concern employe
exampl
a meat pack compani in nebraska pled guilti to social secur number misus
social secur benefit fraud harbor alien and file fals employ document the
compani wa fine 103000 the settlement came after feder agent raid the plant
arrest more than 300 peopl of those arrest most agre to deport without
hear the compani admit to harbor alien but it claim that illeg worker
were never hire knowingli
fictiti transact
exampl
a former supervisori account in the environment protect agenc pled guilti to
defraud the epa of 28000 she admit that she enter fals inform into the
epa integr financi manag system result in her receiv 23 us
treasuri check which she later deposit into her credit union account after receiv the
fund she made entri into the financi report system to balanc the account
fals document
exampl
a former real estat salesperson wa indict and arrest for submit fals statement to
a mortgag corpor in an attempt to qualifi a veteran for a vaguarante loan the
indict charg that the individu deposit fund into a credit union account belong
to the veteran then submit a document to the mortgag corpor reflect the fals
and fictiti account balanc the loan defaul ted and result in a loss to the va of
44708
detect
the ultim detect method for fals statement is the examin of sourc document
thi audit approach is call trace or insideout that is from the sourc document
out to the report or financi statement
howev the auditor might be alert to the possibl of fals statement if ani of the
follow red flag ar present
public sector fraud financi transact
11914 2011 fraud examin manual
failur to produc document in a time manner
failur to respond to inquiri in a time manner
inadequaci in report requir for exampl untim report incomplet
report and other
failur to have an adequ inform gather and retriev system
alter or miss document
photocopi or duplic document
failur to have adequ support document for report and summari data
failur to produc document in a time manner
thi might be an indic that there ar no sourc document to substanti the summari
data for exampl if cost ar submit for reimburs and the cost have not been
incur then there will be no support data
failur to respond to inquiri in a time manner
thi might also be an indic that there is no sourc document it can also be an
indic that the inform is not readili retriev thi area should howev be
approach with caution if new and differ inform is request the contractor or
agenc might have to redesign it system in order to retriev the request inform
caus an unanticip time delai it is import the request for propos includ
adequ specif for respond to data request
inadequaci in report requir
if the requir report ar consist late incomplet or unsatisfactori thi might be an
indic that the sourc data is either unavail nonexist or it cannot be retriev
sourc data is deriv from sourc document if the sourc document is fals
then summar the correspond data becom an increasingli more difficult problem
failur to have adequ inform gather and retriev system
thi along with the red flag concern the sourc document assist the auditor in
determin whether or not the scope of the audit should be increas and if so in
what area
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11915
alter or miss document
fraud ar often conceal by alter or misplac support document the tenac
of the auditor to obtain and examin the sourc document will go a long wai in prove
fals statement
photocopi or duplic document
transact should be author and record base on origin document not
duplic duplic or photocopi document is subject to alter and
manipul
failur to have adequ support document for report and summari data
for support document to be adequ it must be suffici compet and relev
in addit the auditor must appli common sens to the sourc document for exampl ar
the amount too high or too low do thei includ odd time place andor peopl
these ar all indic that there might be fals statement therefor these red flag might
alert the auditor to select a larger sampl of sourc document for examin
