2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD/Beneficiary Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Public Sector Fraud


:


Beneficiary Fraud 
Beneficiary frauds tend to be perpetrated by individuals, without collusion or bribery. The 
motive for this type of fraud is personal gain (or reduction of loss) by the perpetrator. 
 
An example of this type of fraud might include a taxpayer who claims an unearned tax credit 
on his federal income tax return. This person has perpetrated a fraud against the 
government. 
 
Some reported cases typifying these frauds are: 
• Social Security frauds 
• False claims for benefits 
• Supplemental Security Income (SSI) fraud 
• Fraudulent Social Security numbers 
• Improper billing procedures 
• False Medicare claims 
• Kickbacks 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1916                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Schemes 
Social Security Frauds 
 
EXAMPLE 
An Indiana woman was sentenced to 5-1/2 years incarceration, suspended, ordered to 
make restitution of $40,800, and fined $10, 000 for concealing her mother’s death and 
forging and cashing her Social Security benefits checks. An out-of-state relative had told 
police it was difficult to believe that her mother, who was in her seventies, was always 
indisposed when they called. Police found the woman’s remains in a padlocked mobile home 
next to the woman’s house. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Washington D.C. woman was found to have wrongfully converted 34 Social Security 
widow’s benefit checks made payable to her de ceased mother, thereby improperly receiving 
$13,400 from the Social Security Administration. Aggravating circumstances were found 
in that she wrongfully converted an additional 190 Social Security checks and attempted to 
conceal her misconduct by lying to the SSA field representative regarding the whereabouts of 
her deceased mother. The Administrative Law Judge found that the woman was liable 
under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act for having submitted claims she knew were 
false. She therefore had to pay the maximum amount of penalties and assessments, which 
totaled $196,800.  
 
False Claims for Benefits 
 
EXAMPLE 
A New Jersey Council woman admitted to stealing more than $17,000 in Social Security 
disability benefits from 2007 to 2009. According to her attorney, she had been unable to 
work because of surgeries and pain in her back and had received disability benefits of $600 
per month for a total of for six years. However, she had been working at her family’s 
restaurant for a portion of the time that she was claiming disability. She was asked to help 
out there after her mother’s death in 2007 on a temporary basis, which over time became 
on a daily basis. She resigned from her post, repaid the money, and was sentenced to one 
year probation. 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1917 
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) Fraud 
 
EXAMPLE 
A California woman was convicted of murdering three of seven SSI beneficiaries found 
buried in the yard of her boarding house. She had been charged with murdering all seven 
boarders, plus two found elsewhere, for their benefits. The OIG investigators who assisted 
in identifying the victims and the theft of their benefits checks also proved that the woman 
had impersonated one of the victims in attempting to obtain Dalmane, a drug found in 
seven of the bodies. She was sentenced to life imprisonment without possibility of parole.   
 
Fraudulent Social Security Numbers 
 
EXAMPLE 
Nine individuals were sentenced to prison in Illinois for terms ranging from 2-½ to nearly 
5 years for a series of schemes through which they defrauded several insurance companies. 
They obtained approximately $500,000 by submitting false claims under fraudulent 
SSNs in 27 incidents in several cities throughout the United States. The claims were based 
on automobile and slip-and-fall accidents that  were either staged or never occurred. In 
addition, three of the defendants, two of whom were insurance company employees, stole 
blank checks from an insurance company and cashed them on forged endorsements for 
$68,000. The group moved from city to city using false names and SSNs, which made 
them difficult to find or identify.  
 
Improper Billing Procedures 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Utah physician was convicted on 32 federal counts of mail fraud, submitting false 
claims, and aiding and abetting. Although he was excluded from participating in the 
Medicare and state health care programs in 1987 for similar crimes, he continued to 
submit claims under the names and provider numbers of physicians who performed services 
at his clinic. He also upcoded claims and billed for services not rendered. He was sentenced 
to 56 months in prison and 3 years probation upon release, fined $50,000 and assessed a 
special victim’s assessment fee.  
 
Public Sector Fraud Financial Transactions   
1.1918                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
False Medicare Claims 
 
EXAMPLE 
A speech therapist was sentenced in Minnesota to 16 months incarceration for causing the 
submission of false Medicare claims. He contracted with a therapy company to bill 
Medicare and Medicaid for his work in several nursing homes. The company reported that 
he overstated time spent with patients, claiming up to 20 hours a day. He claimed to 
provide speech therapy to a patient several days after the patient’s death, and to nursing 
home residents he had never met. He was also observed using flash cards with a blind 
resident. He was ordered to pay restitut ion of $40,000 and a fine of $25,000.  
 
Kickbacks 
 
EXAMPLE 
The former billing clerk and 14 former patients of a Georgia chiropractor were sentenced in 
a kickback scheme costing Medicare and more than 30 insurance companies millions of 
dollars. All were incarcerated and ordered to pay fines and restitution. The chiropractor 
and his office manager wife had paid employees 10 percent of each week’s revenues, and 
patients 33 percent of whatever  the carriers paid on their claims. Claims were submitted for 
patients and their families regardless of whether they were treated. In one instance, bills 
were submitted for 169 persons supposedly trea ted in one day. More than 40 persons have 
been sentenced thus far, including the chiropractor and his wife, who earlier received lengthy 
jail sentences and were ordered to pay $2.2 million in restitution.  
 
Detection 
As with false statements perpetrated by management, the best detection methods for 
beneficiary fraud will require the examination of source documents or developing computer 
programs to identify fraudulent patterns. 
 
In either a performance audit or a financial audit, the fraud examiner should include some 
steps to determine if there is a high occurrence rate for beneficiary fraud. By selecting a 
random sample of recipient beneficiaries and examining the documentation supporting the 
benefits, the auditor might be able to estimate the potential of beneficiary fraud schemes.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1919 



:


beneficiari fraud
beneficiari fraud tend to be perpetr by individu without collus or briberi the
motiv for thi type of fraud is person gain or reduct of loss by the perpetr
an exampl of thi type of fraud might includ a taxpay who claim an unearn tax credit
on hi feder incom tax return thi person ha perpetr a fraud against the
govern
some report case typifi these fraud ar
social secur fraud
fals claim for benefit
supplement secur incom ssi fraud
fraudul social secur number
improp bill procedur
fals medicar claim
kickback
public sector fraud financi transact
11916 2011 fraud examin manual
scheme
social secur fraud
exampl
an indiana woman wa sentenc to 512 year incarcer suspend order to
make restitut of 40800 and fine 10 000 for conceal her mother death and
forg and cash her social secur benefit check an outofst rel had told
polic it wa difficult to believ that her mother who wa in her seventi wa alwai
indispos when thei call polic found the woman remain in a padlock mobil home
next to the woman hous
exampl
a washington dc woman wa found to have wrongfulli convert 34 social secur
widow benefit check made payabl to her de ceas mother therebi improperli receiv
13400 from the social secur administr aggrav circumst were found
in that she wrongfulli convert an addit 190 social secur check and attempt to
conceal her misconduct by ly to the ssa field repres regard the whereabout of
her deceas mother the administr law judg found that the woman wa liabl
under the program fraud civil remedi act for have submit claim she knew were
fals she therefor had to pai the maximum amount of penalti and assess which
total 196800
fals claim for benefit
exampl
a new jersei council woman admit to steal more than 17000 in social secur
disabl benefit from 2007 to 2009 accord to her attornei she had been unabl to
work becaus of surgeri and pain in her back and had receiv disabl benefit of 600
per month for a total of for six year howev she had been work at her famili
restaur for a portion of the time that she wa claim disabl she wa ask to help
out there after her mother death in 2007 on a temporari basi which over time becam
on a daili basi she resign from her post repaid the monei and wa sentenc to on
year probat
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11917
supplement secur incom ssi fraud
exampl
a california woman wa convict of murder three of seven ssi beneficiari found
buri in the yard of her board hous she had been charg with murder all seven
boarder plu two found elsewher for their benefit the oig investig who assist
in identifi the victim and the theft of their benefit check also prove that the woman
had imperson on of the victim in attempt to obtain dalman a drug found in
seven of the bodi she wa sentenc to life imprison without possibl of parol
fraudul social secur number
exampl
nine individu were sentenc to prison in illinoi for term rang from 2 to nearli
5 year for a seri of scheme through which thei defraud sever insur compani
thei obtain approxim 500000 by submit fals claim under fraudul
ssn in 27 incid in sever citi throughout the unit state the claim were base
on automobil and slipandfal accid that were either stage or never occur in
addit three of the defend two of whom were insur compani employe stole
blank check from an insur compani and cash them on forg endors for
68000 the group move from citi to citi us fals name and ssn which made
them difficult to find or identifi
improp bill procedur
exampl
a utah physician wa convict on 32 feder count of mail fraud submit fals
claim and aid and abet although he wa exclud from particip in the
medicar and state health care program in 1987 for similar crime he continu to
submit claim under the name and provid number of physician who perform servic
at hi clinic he also upcod claim and bill for servic not render he wa sentenc
to 56 month in prison and 3 year probat upon releas fine 50000 and assess a
special victim assess fee
public sector fraud financi transact
11918 2011 fraud examin manual
fals medicar claim
exampl
a speech therapist wa sentenc in minnesota to 16 month incarcer for caus the
submiss of fals medicar claim he contract with a therapi compani to bill
medicar and medicaid for hi work in sever nurs home the compani report that
he overst time spent with patient claim up to 20 hour a dai he claim to
provid speech therapi to a patient sever dai after the patient death and to nurs
home resid he had never met he wa also observ us flash card with a blind
resid he wa order to pai restitut ion of 40000 and a fine of 25000
kickback
exampl
the former bill clerk and 14 former patient of a georgia chiropractor were sentenc in
a kickback scheme cost medicar and more than 30 insur compani million of
dollar all were incarcer and order to pai fine and restitut the chiropractor
and hi offic manag wife had paid employe 10 percent of each week revenu and
patient 33 percent of whatev the carrier paid on their claim claim were submit for
patient and their famili regardless of whether thei were treat in on instanc bill
were submit for 169 person supposedli trea ted in on dai more than 40 person have
been sentenc thu far includ the chiropractor and hi wife who earlier receiv lengthi
jail sentenc and were order to pai 22 million in restitut
detect
as with fals statement perpetr by manag the best detect method for
beneficiari fraud will requir the examin of sourc document or develop comput
program to identifi fraudul pattern
in either a perform audit or a financi audit the fraud examin should includ some
step to determin if there is a high occurr rate for beneficiari fraud by select a
random sampl of recipi beneficiari and examin the document support the
benefit the auditor might be abl to estim the potenti of beneficiari fraud scheme
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11919
