2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD/Prosecution: The Government Employee’s Role


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Public Sector Fraud


:


Prosecution: The Government Employee’s Role 
The government employee will frequently work with investigators from the appropriate 
government agency. Some of the investigators will be specialists, while others handle a great 
variety of cases. In addition, some investigators are assigned to civil cases, while others will 
specialize in criminal activity. 
 
Common Problems of Investigators 
Regardless of the professional variations, many problems are common among these 
investigators. Several examples are set forth below. 
 
Lack of Familiarity with Terminology 
Many investigators assigned to fraud and white-collar crime cases lack a business 
background. This is both a strength and weakness. It is a strength in that they will normally 
ask the same questions and be confused on the same issues as a jury of laymen. It is a 
weakness in that many investigators are confused over accounting concepts, and the auditor 
must explain these concepts in nontechnical language.  
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1924                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Wide Variety of Case Assignments 
The typical investigator for a government agency must investigate a wide variety of cases, 
and therefore might not be intimately familiar with your type of case.  
 
Case Loads 
Like auditors, most government investigators have more cases than they can handle. They 
therefore look for the most egregious violations, or the ones in which proof is easily at hand. 
For that reason, investigators tend to place more reliance on witnesses than on documents.  
 
Reluctance of Government Prosecutors 
An investigator will not investigate cases that prosecutors will not accept. Although not 
prosecutors themselves, investigators tend to develop a “sixth sense” for what will be 
prosecuted and what will not. This issue is addressed below. 
  
Key Issues Facing Investigators  
Investigators are looking to maximize the cost-benefit relationship of their resources. In 
general, they believe that auditors are too ready to place undue reliance on documentation, 
and do not understand the concept of “jury appeal,” which is detailed in the next section.  
 
The typical investigator will ask: 
• What is the evidence? Is it clear and convincing? 
• Who are the witnesses? Are they credible? 
• What is the amount of the loss? Can it be proven? 
• What is the intent of the perpetrator? Can it be demonstrated that there was malice 
aforethought? 
• How difficult is the case to investigate? Is it necessary to review reams of documents 
looking for evidence? 
 
Overcoming the Reluctance to Investigate 
The auditor can best overcome reluctance of the investigator to work a case by using good 
salesmanship. In this regard, the following suggestions are helpful: 
• Present your case in person, not over the telephone. 
• Spend a little time establishing a relationship with the investigator if you don’t know him.  
• Summarize your case in one sentence. If you cannot, there is little realistic hope of 
prosecution. 
  
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1925 
• After summarizing the case, fill in the details. Do not overwhelm the investigator with 
minutia. 
• Pledge the resources of your agency in helping provide backup.  
• Follow up periodically with the investigator after the case has been referred, but be 
careful of making a pest of yourself.  
• Offer an expert witness if necessary. Remember, though, if you testify in a criminal case, 
you might be excluded from sitting in on your own case due to rules concerning 
witnesses.  
 
 



:


prosecut the govern employe role
the govern employe will frequent work with investig from the appropri
govern agenc some of the investig will be specialist while other handl a great
varieti of case in addit some investig ar assign to civil case while other will
special in crimin activ
common problem of investig
regardless of the profession variat mani problem ar common among these
investig sever exampl ar set forth below
lack of familiar with terminolog
mani investig assign to fraud and whitecollar crime case lack a busi
background thi is both a strength and weak it is a strength in that thei will normal
ask the same question and be confus on the same issu as a juri of laymen it is a
weak in that mani investig ar confus over account concept and the auditor
must explain these concept in nontechn languag
public sector fraud financi transact
11924 2011 fraud examin manual
wide varieti of case assign
the typic investig for a govern agenc must investig a wide varieti of case
and therefor might not be intim familiar with your type of case
case load
like auditor most govern investig have more case than thei can handl thei
therefor look for the most egregi violat or the on in which proof is easili at hand
for that reason investig tend to place more relianc on wit than on document
reluct of govern prosecutor
an investig will not investig case that prosecutor will not accept although not
prosecutor themselv investig tend to develop a sixth sens for what will be
prosecut and what will not thi issu is address below
kei issu face investig
investig ar look to maxim the costbenefit relationship of their resourc in
gener thei believ that auditor ar too readi to place undu relianc on document
and do not understand the concept of juri appeal which is detail in the next section
the typic investig will ask
what is the evid is it clear and convinc
who ar the wit ar thei credibl
what is the amount of the loss can it be proven
what is the intent of the perpetr can it be demonstr that there wa malic
aforethought
how difficult is the case to investig is it necessari to review ream of document
look for evid
overcom the reluct to investig
the auditor can best overcom reluct of the investig to work a case by us good
salesmanship in thi regard the follow suggest ar help
present your case in person not over the telephon
spend a littl time establish a relationship with the investig if you dont know him
summar your case in on sentenc if you cannot there is littl realist hope of
prosecut
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11925
after summar the case fill in the detail do not overwhelm the investig with
minutia
pledg the resourc of your agenc in help provid backup
follow up period with the investig after the case ha been refer but be
care of make a pest of yourself
offer an expert wit if necessari rememb though if you testifi in a crimin case
you might be exclud from sit in on your own case due to rule concern
wit
