2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD/Interviewing Government Officials


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Public Sector Fraud


:


Interviewing Government Officials 
More and more frequently, high government officials find themselves the subjects of 
investigations into allegedly fraudulent activities. In today’s climate of complaints and 
accusations, a high official may be questioned intensely on subjects ranging from 
misallocating parking spaces or personal use of frequent traveler miles on the trivial end to 
bribery and conflict of interest on the serious side.  
 
Regardless of the seriousness of the allegations, the accusation will trigger an all-out 
investigation/audit into the matter. This is true whether the source of the allegation is a 
reliable one or an anonymous tipster. The issue is not the lack of discretion in deciding what 
“cases” to investigate, but how to conduct interviews of senior officials. 
 
Assigning the Interview 
People assigned to interview high officials will find that there are both similarities and 
differences with “normal” interviews. 
 
The first rule is to ensure that the interviewer is not subordinate to the subject of the 
interview. This is no problem for outside entities such as an independent counsel or even an 
inspector general, but where auditors or investigators need to interview someone far up in 
their own chain of command, problems may arise. 
 
If there is any possibility that the high official could influence the career of the interviewer, 
either presently or in the future, someone else should be chosen. Agencies should be able to 
call on outside entities to conduct such interviews where appropriate. In any event, any hint 
by the official of help (or harm) to the interviewer should be documented and reported. 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1926                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The term “high official” appears to encompass a homogenous group, but, in reality, anyone 
from a naive or brash political appointee to a grizzled and canny veteran civil servant with 
many such interviews under his belt may be encountered. The best method of interviewing 
will therefore depend on a number of factors: 
• Is the interviewee suspected of wrongdoing? 
• Is he likely to be cooperative? (Are there files or previous interviewers who can be 
consulted?) 
• Is he likely to be embarrassed by the results of the inquiry even though not personally 
culpable? 
 
These and other factors will determine whether the interviewer should be humble, 
deferential, apologetic, matter of fact, or aggressive. Obviously, no one mode fits all subjects 
or all situations. However, the interviewer should not be cowed by the subject’s position, 
although feigning humility may be appropriate. 
 
The Warning Dilemma 
A crucial element in interviewing a high official, as with the interview of any public 
employee, is proper regard for the Constitutional rights of the subject. A series of cases in 
the 1960s — such as Murphy v. Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor, 378 U.S. 52 (1964), 
Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493 (1967) and Gardner v. Broderick,  392 U.S. 273 (1968) — are 
instructive. In short, the United States Supreme Court held that a public employee cannot be 
compelled to answer job-related questions concerning his own possible criminal conduct 
under threat of disciplinary action, e.g., removal, without violating his rights under the Self-Incrimination 
Clause of the Fifth Amendment. The choice between job forfeiture and self-incrimination, 
said the Court, is inherently coercive and, in effect, a choice “between the 
rock and the whirlpool.” Put another way, a public employee cannot be put in a position 
wherein he will incriminate himself if he tells the truth, will subject himself to perjury 
prosecution if he lies, or will set himself up for a removal action if he refuses to cooperate. 
Thus, the issue of what warning(s), if any, to give the subject must be addressed. 
   
If the high official is reasonably believed to be merely a third-party witness, no warnings are 
required, and he is obligated to respond to the questions. In fact, most agencies have a 
provision in their policies and procedures manual that mandates cooperation. The following 
is typical: 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1927 
Requirement to Cooperate
 
Employees must furnish testimony, or fully disclose information in their knowledge or 
possession, concerning any matter of official interest, to any federal court, board, panel, 
tribunal, agent, or official authorized to conduct a particular inquiry, investigation, hearing, 
trial or other proceeding, or to act upon such testimony or information, when directed to do 
so by proper authority. In this regard, employees must answer any proper questions, under 
oath or affirmation if required, including furnishing or authorizing the release of 
information related to their financial affairs, which has reasonable relationship to matters of 
official interest. 
 
An agency’s table of offenses and penalties then delineates the punishment for failure  
to cooperate. 
 
However, before these rules can be utilized in a case where the official is suspected of 
wrongdoing, a threshold determination of whether or not the violation is potentially criminal 
(and not whether a prosecutor would in fact accept it), must be made. If the allegation is 
inherently administrative, i.e., noncriminal, in nature, such as a misuse of vehicles or giving 
the appearance of a conflict of interest, the Fifth Amendment does not come into play and 
the official must cooperate in the same fashion as if he were a third-party witness. Instructive 
is the Merit Systems Protection Board’s 1981 decision in Ashford v. Bureau of Prisons, 6 MSPB 389, MSPR 458, 81 FMSR 7044. 
 
Administrative Warnings 
The official should be advised of his obligation to cooperate via the agency’s so-called 
“administrative warning,” which will read similar to the following:   
 
Under [the applicable agency policies and procedures manual] you are required to disclose 
any information in your possession pertaining to the matter under investigation and answer 
any proper questions asked of you. 
 
You may be subject to disciplinary action for your failure or refusal to answer proper 
questions relating to the performance of your duties as an employee. You may also be subject 
to criminal prosecution for any false answer that you give to any such questions. Do you 
understand this? 
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1928                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
It should be noted that there is never a right to lie, even if incorrect warnings or no warnings 
were given. Only silence would be acceptable. 
 
Criminal Investigations 
If, on the other hand, the high government official is the subject of an actual or potential 
criminal investigation, a totally different situation arises. As noted above, a public employee 
cannot be compelled to cooperate or face loss of his job. The first step may well be 
attempting to secure the voluntary  cooperation of the individual with clear and full knowledge 
on his part of the possible consequences. Many agencies have developed their own wording, 
but the “Beckwith” or “Civiletti” warning is often used: 
 
You have the right to remain silent if your answers may tend to incriminate you. 
 
Anything you say may be used as evidence both in an administrative proceeding or any 
future criminal procee ding involving you. 
 
If you refuse to answer the questions posed to you on the grounds that the answers may 
incriminate you, you cannot be discharged solely for remaining silent. However, your silence 
can be considered in an administrative proceeding for its evidentiary value that is warranted 
by the facts surrounding your case. 
 
This warning clearly discloses its voluntary nature and the possible adverse consequences of 
cooperation. But in reality, adverse consequences for failing to cooperate under these 
circumstances are negligible. 
 
Declination of Prosecution 
If the interviewee declines to cooperate voluntarily, the interviewer must make an election. If 
he absolutely needs the statement of the official to ascertain what occurred, he must forego 
any use of the statement (or of any evidence derived from the statement) in a subsequent 
criminal prosecution. In fact, the interviewer must secure a declination of prosecution from a 
prosecutor and thus eliminate the Fifth Amendment problem. (The United States courts and 
most state courts only confer immunity to an official who must cooperate pursuant to an 
agency’s regulations, although at least one state’s supreme court has mandated transactional 
immunity.) In any event, a heavy burden is imposed on the government to show that its 
subsequent criminal case was not tainted by the compelled statement, and a decision to 
compel an interview will ordinarily preclude the option of criminal prosecution. 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1929 
To ensure that the interviewee has been advised of his obligation to cooperate in a declined 
criminal case, the “Kalkines” warning must be given immediately following the above-
 mentioned administrative warning:  
 
You are further advised that the answers you give to questions pertaining to the matter 
presently under investigation or any information or evidence that is gained by reason of your 
answers, cannot and will not be used against you in any subsequent criminal proceedings, 
except that you may be subject to criminal prosecution for any false answer that you give to 
any questions. Do you understand this? 
 
Failure to comply with this elaborate and complex array of warning requirements can, and 
unfortunately often does, ruin otherwise well-run investigations of senior officials. Two 
additional cases worth reading are Kalkines v. United States, 473 F.2d 1391 (CtCl, 1973) and 
Weston v. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 724 F.2d 943 (CAFC, 1983). A final key 
point to remember is that a failure to give a proper warning by any interviewer, with or 
without official authority to bind the government, will in fact do so. 
 
Legal Counsel 
The higher the official to be interviewed, the more likely he is to be cognizant of his right to 
the presence of counsel and his ability to afford one. High officials are also frequently 
shocked by the fact that they may not be entitled to representation. In fact, government 
employees are more often than not in a position where no right to counsel in an interview 
exists. Simply put, if the official is being interviewed as a witness only (and not as a suspect) 
or if the matter is strictly administrative, or if, although criminal in nature, a decision has 
been made not to prosecute, there is simply no right to the presence of an attorney (or any 
other personal representative).  
 
Miranda warnings, of course, are limited to those situations where the interviewee is “in 
custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom of action in any significant way,” i.e., is in jail, 
under arrest, or in a situation that has all the trappings of a formal arrest. Such situations will 
rarely arise. See Beckwith v. United States, 425 U.S. 341 (1976); Howard v. Office of Personnel 
Management, 86 FMSR 5342 (1986); Ashford v. Bureau of Prisons, supra. 
 
Only where criminal liability is a possibility and the interview is thus voluntary in nature will 
the official be able to insist on the presence of a lawyer as a condition of his cooperation. It 
is important to remember, however, that even though an official may not have the right to 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1930                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
counsel, the decision as to whether or not to allow it is a tactical one and, in a particular case, 
may be the quickest and most efficient means to secure the desired information. 
 
Obstructing the Investigation 
An official who declines to be interviewed or to answer certain questions acts at his own 
peril if under orders from his own superior or on the advice of counsel. In fact, a superior 
who tells his employees of whatever rank that they do not have to cooperate with 
investigations commits actionable misconduct. Often overlooked is the ability of high 
officials to influence underlings to be less than forthcoming or to “misplace” key 
documents.  
 
When appropriate, the high official should be reminded of all public employees’ obligation 
to assist in the fact-finding process. Interviewers should make no assumption in advance of 
any high official’s integrity or lack thereof. Finally, the high official who offers the “I was 
conducting my own investigation” story usually gets no further than did the “Abscam” 
defendants. 
 
Rules of Procedure 
Those who interview high officials must avoid extremes of procedure and should, as a 
general rule, neither act overly belligerent nor kowtow to them. Basic rules of procedure in 
the areas of warnings and representation apply to these people as much as to the general 
population of public employees. What is different is the high official’s ability to influence 
others and their particular susceptibility to embarrassing publicity, and a good interviewer 
will turn these traits to his own advantage in his quest for a truthful recitation of what did in 
fact occur. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2001 



:


interview govern offici
more and more frequent high govern offici find themselv the subject of
investig into allegedli fraudul activ in todai climat of complaint and
accus a high offici mai be question intens on subject rang from
misalloc park space or person us of frequent travel mile on the trivial end to
briberi and conflict of interest on the seriou side
regardless of the serious of the alleg the accus will trigger an allout
investigationaudit into the matter thi is true whether the sourc of the alleg is a
reliabl on or an anonym tipster the issu is not the lack of discret in decid what
case to investig but how to conduct interview of senior offici
assign the interview
peopl assign to interview high offici will find that there ar both similar and
differ with normal interview
the first rule is to ensur that the interview is not subordin to the subject of the
interview thi is no problem for outsid entiti such as an independ counsel or even an
inspector gener but where auditor or investig need to interview someon far up in
their own chain of command problem mai aris
if there is ani possibl that the high offici could influenc the career of the interview
either present or in the futur someon els should be chosen agenc should be abl to
call on outsid entiti to conduct such interview where appropri in ani event ani hint
by the offici of help or harm to the interview should be document and report
public sector fraud financi transact
11926 2011 fraud examin manual
the term high offici appear to encompass a homogen group but in realiti anyon
from a naiv or brash polit appointe to a grizzl and canni veteran civil servant with
mani such interview under hi belt mai be encount the best method of interview
will therefor depend on a number of factor
is the interviewe suspect of wrongdo
is he like to be cooper ar there file or previou interview who can be
consult
is he like to be embarrass by the result of the inquiri even though not person
culpabl
these and other factor will determin whether the interview should be humbl
deferenti apologet matter of fact or aggress obvious no on mode fit all subject
or all situat howev the interview should not be cow by the subject posit
although feign humil mai be appropri
the warn dilemma
a crucial element in interview a high offici as with the interview of ani public
employe is proper regard for the constitut right of the subject a seri of case in
the 1960 such as murphi v waterfront commiss of new york harbor 378 us 52 1964
garriti v new jersei 385 us 493 1967 and gardner v broderick 392 us 273 1968 ar
instruct in short the unit state suprem court held that a public employe cannot be
compel to answer jobrel question concern hi own possibl crimin conduct
under threat of disciplinari action eg remov without violat hi right under the selfincrimin
claus of the fifth amend the choic between job forfeitur and selfincrimin
said the court is inher coerciv and in effect a choic between the
rock and the whirlpool put anoth wai a public employe cannot be put in a posit
wherein he will incrimin himself if he tell the truth will subject himself to perjuri
prosecut if he li or will set himself up for a remov action if he refus to cooper
thu the issu of what warn if ani to give the subject must be address
if the high offici is reason believ to be mere a thirdparti wit no warn ar
requir and he is oblig to respond to the question in fact most agenc have a
provis in their polici and procedur manual that mandat cooper the follow
is typic
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11927
requir to cooper
employe must furnish testimoni or fulli disclos inform in their knowledg or
possess concern ani matter of offici interest to ani feder court board panel
tribun agent or offici author to conduct a particular inquiri investig hear
trial or other proceed or to act upon such testimoni or inform when direct to do
so by proper author in thi regard employe must answer ani proper question under
oath or affirm if requir includ furnish or author the releas of
inform relat to their financi affair which ha reason relationship to matter of
offici interest
an agenc tabl of offens and penalti then delin the punish for failur
to cooper
howev befor these rule can be util in a case where the offici is suspect of
wrongdo a threshold determin of whether or not the violat is potenti crimin
and not whether a prosecutor would in fact accept it must be made if the alleg is
inher administr ie noncrimin in natur such as a misus of vehicl or give
the appear of a conflict of interest the fifth amend doe not come into plai and
the offici must cooper in the same fashion as if he were a thirdparti wit instruct
is the merit system protect board 1981 decis in ashford v bureau of prison 6 mspb 389 mspr 458 81 fmsr 7044
administr warn
the offici should be advis of hi oblig to cooper via the agenc socal
administr warn which will read similar to the follow
under the applic agenc polici and procedur manual you ar requir to disclos
ani inform in your possess pertain to the matter under investig and answer
ani proper question ask of you
you mai be subject to disciplinari action for your failur or refus to answer proper
question relat to the perform of your duti as an employe you mai also be subject
to crimin prosecut for ani fals answer that you give to ani such question do you
understand thi
public sector fraud financi transact
11928 2011 fraud examin manual
it should be note that there is never a right to lie even if incorrect warn or no warn
were given onli silenc would be accept
crimin investig
if on the other hand the high govern offici is the subject of an actual or potenti
crimin investig a total differ situat aris as note abov a public employe
cannot be compel to cooper or face loss of hi job the first step mai well be
attempt to secur the voluntari cooper of the individu with clear and full knowledg
on hi part of the possibl consequ mani agenc have develop their own word
but the beckwith or civiletti warn is often us
you have the right to remain silent if your answer mai tend to incrimin you
anyth you sai mai be us as evid both in an administr proceed or ani
futur crimin proce ding involv you
if you refus to answer the question pose to you on the ground that the answer mai
incrimin you you cannot be discharg sole for remain silent howev your silenc
can be consid in an administr proceed for it evidentiari valu that is warrant
by the fact surround your case
thi warn clearli disclos it voluntari natur and the possibl advers consequ of
cooper but in realiti advers consequ for fail to cooper under these
circumst ar neglig
declin of prosecut
if the interviewe declin to cooper voluntarili the interview must make an elect if
he absolut need the statement of the offici to ascertain what occur he must forego
ani us of the statement or of ani evid deriv from the statement in a subsequ
crimin prosecut in fact the interview must secur a declin of prosecut from a
prosecutor and thu elimin the fifth amend problem the unit state court and
most state court onli confer immun to an offici who must cooper pursuant to an
agenc regul although at least on state suprem court ha mandat transact
immun in ani event a heavi burden is impos on the govern to show that it
subsequ crimin case wa not taint by the compel statement and a decis to
compel an interview will ordinarili preclud the option of crimin prosecut
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11929
to ensur that the interviewe ha been advis of hi oblig to cooper in a declin
crimin case the kalkin warn must be given immedi follow the abov
mention administr warn
you ar further advis that the answer you give to question pertain to the matter
present under investig or ani inform or evid that is gain by reason of your
answer cannot and will not be us against you in ani subsequ crimin proceed
except that you mai be subject to crimin prosecut for ani fals answer that you give to
ani question do you understand thi
failur to compli with thi elabor and complex arrai of warn requir can and
unfortun often doe ruin otherwis wellrun investig of senior offici two
addit case worth read ar kalkin v unit state 473 f2d 1391 ctcl 1973 and
weston v depart of hous and urban develop 724 f2d 943 cafc 1983 a final kei
point to rememb is that a failur to give a proper warn by ani interview with or
without offici author to bind the govern will in fact do so
legal counsel
the higher the offici to be interview the more like he is to be cogniz of hi right to
the presenc of counsel and hi abil to afford on high offici ar also frequent
shock by the fact that thei mai not be entitl to represent in fact govern
employe ar more often than not in a posit where no right to counsel in an interview
exist simpli put if the offici is be interview as a wit onli and not as a suspect
or if the matter is strictli administr or if although crimin in natur a decis ha
been made not to prosecut there is simpli no right to the presenc of an attornei or ani
other person repres
miranda warn of cours ar limit to those situat where the interviewe is in
custodi or otherwis depriv of hi freedom of action in ani signific wai ie is in jail
under arrest or in a situat that ha all the trap of a formal arrest such situat will
rare aris see beckwith v unit state 425 us 341 1976 howard v offic of personnel
manag 86 fmsr 5342 1986 ashford v bureau of prison supra
onli where crimin liabil is a possibl and the interview is thu voluntari in natur will
the offici be abl to insist on the presenc of a lawyer as a condit of hi cooper it
is import to rememb howev that even though an offici mai not have the right to
public sector fraud financi transact
11930 2011 fraud examin manual
counsel the decis as to whether or not to allow it is a tactic on and in a particular case
mai be the quickest and most effici mean to secur the desir inform
obstruct the investig
an offici who declin to be interview or to answer certain question act at hi own
peril if under order from hi own superior or on the advic of counsel in fact a superior
who tell hi employe of whatev rank that thei do not have to cooper with
investig commit action misconduct often overlook is the abil of high
offici to influenc underl to be less than forthcom or to misplac kei
document
when appropri the high offici should be remind of all public employe oblig
to assist in the factfind process interview should make no assumpt in advanc of
ani high offici integr or lack thereof final the high offici who offer the i wa
conduct my own investig stori usual get no further than did the abscam
defend
rule of procedur
those who interview high offici must avoid extrem of procedur and should as a
gener rule neither act overli belliger nor kowtow to them basic rule of procedur in
the area of warn and represent appli to these peopl as much as to the gener
popul of public employe what is differ is the high offici abil to influenc
other and their particular suscept to embarrass public and a good interview
will turn these trait to hi own advantag in hi quest for a truth recit of what did in
fact occur
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12001
