2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


ZZ_Miscellaneous


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence

UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR 
 
Much of our understanding of human behavior ca n be attributed to B.F. Skinner, described 
by many as one of the greatest social scientists of the twentieth century. Skinner promised 
that he would revolutionize not just psychology, but all of human society with his theories of 
behaviorism. According to Skinner, human behavior should be approached scientifically. 
Instead of worrying over men’s souls or quibbling about what makes up the Self, 
behaviorists would deal with what people actually do. By analyzing people’s actions, the 
behaviorist could then alter or direct any behavior for the greater good of all. Criminal 
behavior could be modified into productive action; rearing a family would cease to be a 
continual game of trial and error — the pitfalls would be replaced by basic behavioral 
principles. 
 
Skinner’s accomplishments may have fallen short of this lofty goal. But while he’s not as 
widely recognized as Sigmund Freud, Skinner’s influence permeates many areas, often 
without being overtly attributed to the methods Skinner proposed in Walden Two  (1948) and 
Science and Human Behavior  (1953). When lawyers argue the mitigating or exonerating 
circumstances of a client’s case, they often use behaviorist ideas; entire theories of 
management rest on the assumption that incentives and promotion are not just the best way to 
sell something; they’re the best way to  ensure that employees work properly. 
 
 
Behavioral Analysis and the Detection of Fraud 
When a detective searches for a suspect’s motive, the detective is using behaviorist methods 
of analysis. The suspect, it is assumed, was stimulated by some arrangement of factors. Many 
courses in criminology are built around the fundamental premise that crimes are particular 
sorts of behavior and best understood as the product of operant conditioning. Fraud 
examiners often use the same methods in approaching a case. When money is missing, the 
examiner traces the known flow of funds and then asks, “Who had the opportunity and the 
motive to get at this money?” Even without being conscious of the fact, the examiner is 
performing a behaviorist analysis on the crime. 
 
Ultimately, the question of fraud and behavior comes down to this—what can we do about it?  
We know that people commit these crimes at an alarming rate. Incidents range from the 
clerk who skims a few hundred dollars off a business’s daily deposits, to multimillion-dollar 
scam artists who destroy entire organizations. There’s a world of difference between the 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.102   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
skimming clerk and the scamming financial executive — so can we even analyze the two 
people within the same system of fraud? 
 
A fraud examiner working with behaviorist principles knows that the difference between 
crimes lies in the different behaviors. The man who plays million-dollar games with other 
people’s money is stimulated and reinforced by a distinct set of factors, and so too is the 
clerk who builds a family nest egg from his three-figure thefts. So when an examiner is asked 
to go beyond crime-solving and to consult on fraud prevention, the job demands a thorough 
analysis of behavior. 
 
It is important to think of employment as a system of behavior because so much fraud 
occurs in workplace environments, and because such thinking highlights the connection 
between economics and people’s actions. For both the crook and the dedicated worker, 
money exerts a powerful influence, and this is not likely to change. The resourceful 
employer, then, should consider the best way to establish a positive set of relations between 
employees and the funds flowing through the company. The more rigorously we understand 
how people behave, the better equipped we are to change the way they behave. 
 
Behavioral studies such as those conducted by Skinner show that punishment is the least 
effective method of changing behavior. Punishing brings “a temporary suppression of the 
behavior,” but only with constant supervision and application. In repeated experiments, 
Skinner found that punishment — either applying a negative stimulus, or taking away a 
positive one — effectively extinguished a subject’s behavior, but that the behavior returned 
“when the punishment was discontinued... and eventually all responses came out” again. 
The subject would suppress the behavior as long as the punishment was applied directly and 
continually, but as soon as the punishment was withdrawn for a while, the behavior was 
attempted again; if there was no punishment following the attempt, the subject began to 
behave as before.  
 
Behaviorally, reinforcement and punishment are distinguished by the ways that positive and 
negative forces are applied. A positive reinforcement presents a positive stimulus in exchange for 
the desired response. Fathers say to their sons, “You’ve cleaned your room. Good. Here’s 
the key to the car.” The behavior (cleaning) is given in return for the car. A negative 
reinforcement, on the other hand, withdraws a negative stimulus in exchange for the response. 
So the father says, “I’ll stop hassling you if you clean this room.” The negative (hassling) is 
withdrawn when the appropriate behavior is performed.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.103  
Reinforcing and Punishing 
REINFORCEMENT Presents positive stimuli Withdraws negative stimuli 
PUNISHMENT Presents negative stimuli Withdraws positive stimuli 
 
In an act of punishment, the polarities, so to speak, are reversed. Faced with an undesired 
behavior, the punisher presents a negative stimulus. A father, hearing his son tell a 
particularly raunchy story, puts a bar of soap into the boy’s mouth. Punishment may also be 
administered by withdrawing a positive stimulus. “Your room is still filthy,” the father tells 
his languid child, “so you can’t use the car.” The boy suffers from thwarted desire.  
 
Punishment fights a losing battle in manipulating behavior because it works by providing 
negative consequences—administering unpleasantries and taking away desirables. A car or 
the thrill of a racy story doesn’t become less attractive for its use in punishment; its power to 
stimulate is simply squelched. Reinforcement, on the other hand, proceeds, like the old song, 
to “accentuate the positive.” Skinner concludes that  behavior is most effectively modified by 
managing and modifying desires through reinforcement; he wants to replace destructive 
behaviors with productive ones, instead of trying to punish an already existing impulse. 
 
Behaviorism points toward a number of alternatives to punishment. Chief among these is to 
modify the circumstances  surrounding the act. If an employee is experiencing financial problems, 
there may be ways a company can help alleviate pressures through credit counseling, pay 
advances, or low-interest loans, thereby alleviating financial difficulties without the employee 
resorting to fraud. In other instances, employees engage in fraud because they feel underpaid 
or unappreciated.  
 
Emotions, according to Skinner, are a predisposition for people’s actions. Anger is not itself 
a behavior, but a state of being that predisposes people to do things like yell or fight. Anger 
is a part of a person’s response, to the extent that an angry man is more likely to get in a 
shouting match with his friends. And since the emotional associations of any event are 
important factors in conditioning behavior, the associations can be manipulated in 
conditioning the behavior. That’s why advertisers use cute babies to sell toilet paper—the 
image associates the toilet paper with the emotions evoked by the baby. A company portrays 
its founder as a father figure for a similar reason. When managers are faced with disgruntled 
employees, they can modify these emotional circumstances, not just with “image” work, but 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.104   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
with adequate compensation and recognition of workers’ accomplishments. Incentive 
programs and task-related bonuses follow this principle, assuming that employees who feel 
challenged and rewarded by their jobs will produce more work at a higher quality, and are 
less likely to violate the law. 
 
Another non-punitive approach drives the undesirable behavior into extinction by 
preventing the expected response. This is a specialized version of modifying the 
circumstances. Businesses perform an extinction strategy by implementing a system of 
internal controls. In requiring several signatures for a transaction, for example, a bank 
prevents any one employee from gaining access to money. This approach doesn’t involve 
reinforcements or punitive measures; it simply modifies the structure in which acts take 
place. The perception of internal controls provides a particularly strong deterrent to fraud 
because it obstructs the operant behavior that has heretofore been linked with positive 
reinforcement. We prevent the act by blocking the expected response. Criminal behavior is 
discouraged because crime doesn’t pay. 
 
A related strategy overcomes improper behavior by encouraging the behavior’s “opposite.” 
Skinner says we can condition incompatible behavior  that interferes with the person’s usual acts. 
Instead of punishing a child’s emotional tantrums, for example, the behaviorist rewards the 
child for controlling emotional outbursts; we drive the tantrums into extinction by not 
responding, and reinforce the stoical behavior. A destructive behavior is offset by an 
incompatible productive one. Since fraud involves dishonesty, secretiveness, and antagonistic 
behaviors, the astute manager finds ways to reward the opposite behaviors — honesty, 
openness, and cooperation.  
 
Of course, it’s easier to list these strategies in a few paragraphs than it is to implement them. 
Even the most seemingly simple acts can become tangled as people and circumstances 
interact. A perfectly sound theoretical reinforcement—an employee incentive program, 
perhaps—may be viewed with suspicion by disgruntled workers. Behavioral modification is 
never easy, Skinner says; reinforcements “must  be sensitive and complex” because people’s 
lives are complicated and their behaviors sensitized. For example, people in groups often 
interact in alarming and unstable ways. Skinner demonstrates this tendency with the example 
of a whipping-boy game played by eighteenth-century sailors. The sailors tied up a group of 
young boys in a straight line, restraining each boy’s left hand and placing a whip in the right 
hand. The first boy in line was given a light blow on the back and told to do the same to the 
person immediately in front of him. Each boy hit the next in line, and each one was hit in 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.105  
turn. As Skinner reports, “It was clearly in the interest of the group that all blows be gentle, 
[but] the inevitable result was a furious lashing.” 1 Each boy in the line hit a little harder than 
he had been hit himself; so after a few cycles, the last blows would, in fact, be furious 
(especially since each swing was preceded by pain, creating an emotional disposition of anger 
and anxiety). Whipping sessions aren’t a likely happening in most companies, but people 
often exhibit a similar inclination toward catalyzed reactions: whispering sessions gradually 
evolve into full-blown discussions that echo into the hallways; minor financial indiscretions 
grow into large-scale larceny.2 
 
Ideally, behavioral managers could anticipate this catalyzing and redirect the energies, but 
what if that is not an option? Though the do llar amounts (and the audacity) of some white-
 collar crimes boggle the average observer’s mind, the crime remains an act of behavior and 
thus should be approachable by the same method used to analyze a $4,500 credit card fraud. 
The perpetrator may be described as “obse ssive” and “megalomaniacal,” but he is still 
behaving in a network of actions, with his behavior subject to operant conditioning.  
 
The dollar amounts are in fact misleading. Once the stakes reach a certain level, it’s not even 
plausible to look for explanations involving a lack of respect or appreciation. Wheeler-dealers 
and armchair analysts often aver that “It’s not really the money,” and they’re right. 
High-dollar criminals describe their machinations as a “kick” or thrill; they feel like they’re 
playing a game, and it’s the game of their lives. Behaviorists agree. Money is a “generalized 
reinforcer,” linked with many positive factors  directly and often taking on a symbolic power 
of its own, thereby yielding a condition of strength. Skinner says, “We are automatically 
reinforced, apart from any particular deprivation, when we successfully control the physical 
world.” 3 So we need not be starving in order to act, especially with the sense of control —
symbolic and literal — gained by acquiring money. Game-playing exerts something similar on 
its participants; someone who manipulates a chess board or a deck of cards successfully 
gains a sense of strength over external events. We can play the game “for its own sake” 
because it yields the impression of strength. Imagine, then, the behavioral stroke that 
happens when the game’s power is combined with the power of money as a generalized 
reinforcer, and both of these factors are played out with real people and settings. The 
                                                 
1 Skinner, B.F. Science and Human Behavior. Macmillan Publishing: New York, 1953. p. 309. 
2 Compare the excuse “Everybody does it.” It’s often tr ue that an impressive number of other people in the 
perpetrator’s peer group were themselves breaking the law, a condition catalyzed by intense interaction and 
resulting in more serious crimes. 
3 Skinner, p. 77. 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.106   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
dealmaker is racing through a thicket of reinforcements, and the greater the risk—financial, 
legal, or personal—the greater the thrill. The stimulus isn’t the money as a thing in itself, any 
more than money for its own sake prompts the miser. In either case, the condition of 
strength (we might even call it “power”) feeds the behaving person; money just happens to 
be the reinforcer par excellence of our culture.  
 
Dealing with high-stakes criminals will remain difficult, despite our understanding of their 
behavior. Not just because the amounts of money and the networks of action are so 
complex, but because the conditioning is so intense. How, for example, can you replace the 
kick of scoring a $35-million-dollar take in a three-day scam? Can a career con be prompted 
to give up the deceitful practices that have marked his experience? Finding genuine and 
specific answers may be delayed for some time, but they will likely follow the same pattern 
we’ve discussed with other crimes:  
• Modifying the circumstances of the behavior by, for example, making legitimate 
businesses a more opportune place for daring and innovative techniques  
• Extinguishing the criminal behavior by preventing its success using regulation, controls, 
and supervision  
• Encouraging behaviors incompatible with criminal activity, through educational practices 
and demonstrating “values” that call the criminal lifestyle, however flashy, into question  
 
The specific measures will be particular to the crime. The actions dictate the response. But 
whether we’re dealing with a working mother’s credit card fraud, or Bernie Madoff’s palatial 
schemes, our methods can be behavioral. Fraud examiners may never eradicate crime 
completely, but by approaching criminal acts scientifically, we can become more successful 
in anticipating and preventing the acts.  
 
Conclusion 
To successfully recognize, detect, and prevent fraud, the examiner has to take into account 
as many variables as possible, and has to learn a great deal about how human beings—as 
individuals and in groups—behave.  
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.107  
All the efforts of behavioral engineering notwithstanding, the question of behavior finally 
rests with the person who behaves. In Walden Two, the founder of Skinner’s utopian 
community admits that there is only so much that can be done by cultural design:  
 
You can’t foresee all future circumstances, and you can’t specify adequate future conduct. 
You don’t know what will be required. Instea d, you have to set up certain behavioral 
processes which will lead the individual to design his own “good” conduct when the time 
comes. We call that sort of thing “self-control.” 4  
 
No substitute exists for the conscious individual making a choice to act. And no science can 
predict or shape behavior with pure accuracy. There are just too many factors at work in the 
network of actions. However, self-control is a behavior that is guided by conditioning in the 
same way any other act would be.  
 
It does little good, for example, to tell an alcoholic “Stop drinking; control yourself.” The 
command alone has little force, even if the alcoholic wants to stop drinking. Family 
members can suggest that the man simply throw away his bottles, but “the principal 
problem,” Skinner interjects, “is to get him to do it.” 5 The family can, however, help 
condition the alcoholic’s self-control by regis tering disapproval of drinking, by reinforcing 
the man’s successful resistance to drink, and by encouraging the man to do things 
incompatible with a drinking life. They can’t fo llow the man through every step of his life; he 
has to resist the impulse to sneak a sip on his own. But the behavior of resistance is 
strengthened by his family members’ intervention.  “Self-control” as a behavior is shaped by 
“variables in the environment and the history of the individual.” 6 
 
Understanding why people do certain things allows us to go beyond a simplistic insistence 
that criminals “control themselves.” We will in stead have to consider how this control can 
be conditioned, preventing the behavior directly when possible, but ultimately relying on 
each individual having adequately absorbed the principles of self-control. 
 
                                                 
4 Id. at p. 96. 
5 Id. at p. 240. 
6 Ibid. Family members in this type of situation often ask the alcoholic “Don’t you see what you’re doing?” The 
answer may sometimes be “No,” because self-knowledge is  a discriminative behavior—an act of cognition that 
labels and organizes information. As a behavior, self-knowledge is of course influenced by conditioning; we 
recognize or “know” what we’ve been conditioned to  know. Thus, treatment programs often encourage 
patients to reflect on their behavior in certain ways, conditioning a self-knowledge that will contribute to self-
 control. 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.108   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Why People Obey the Law 
Now that we have a general understanding of at least some of the reasons why humans 
behave the way they do, let us turn our discussion to why people obey (and contrarily break) 
the law. In his book Why People Obey the Law, Tom Tyler studies the two principal types of 
law-abiding people. 
 
Obviously, some people choose to obey the la w while others choose to break it. Many 
otherwise law-abiding members of society evade taxes, occasionally use a controlled 
substance, commit fraud, or even drive under the influence of alcohol. According to studies 
by Tyler, the instrumental and the normative perspectives attempt to explain why some 
follow the law to the letter while others obey selectively. 
 
Instrumental Perspective  
According to this theory, people obey the law because they fear punishment. When 
reviewing the incarceration rates in this country, it is not difficult to discern that this is the 
perspective most adhered to by policymakers. 
 
A person of this belief might exceed the speed limit, thinking that the benefit of saved time 
outweighs the risk of the potential speeding ticket. These types are unlikely to rob a bank, 
though, considering that success is doubtful and the penalty is steep. They weigh the pros 
and cons of compliance with the law and act accordingly. 
 
Normative Perspective 
The focus of this perspective is what one considers just and moral. When people believe 
compliance is their moral obligation, commitment to the law is voluntary, regardless of fear 
of punishment.  
 
People of this belief may indulge in illegal drugs but refrain from stealing; one being morally 
acceptable in their view and the other not. Others  may obey all laws out of the belief that the 
authorities are just. In any case, compliance is unforced and voluntary. 
 
Naturally, the authorities prefer voluntary compliance. From their point of view, the 
normative is preferable to the instrumental perspective since the former does not require 
                                                 
7 Tyler, Tom R. Why People Obey the Law. 1990. Yale University Press: New Haven. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.109  
enforcement. If the public already believes in the government’s moral right to govern, the 
authorities’ job is made much easier.  
 
Morality, however, can work against the government as it did with the U.S. public’s moral 
indignation over the Vietnam conflict, for instance. Those who viewed the government’s 
authority as legitimate supported the war, regardless of their own views as to its necessity. 
Others considered the ongoing struggle useless and wrong and opposed it. 
 
Another significant difference between the instrumental and the normative perspectives is 
whether one focuses on procedures rather than results. Those adhering to the normative 
point of view will, for example, be more concerned with being treated justly in court rather 
than with winning or losing their case. They will contentedly await judgment if dealt with 
fairly. People of this opinion are interested in neutrality, lack of bias, honesty, politeness, and 
respect for one’s rights. The “due process,” then, is most effective in promoting compliance 
to those of this view. The instrumentalist, on the other hand, focuses on the outcome of his 
case and is less concerned with procedures. In his mind, a procedure is fair if it is favorable. 
 
Legitimacy  
By definition, effective leadership must produce compliance with a leader’s decisions. 
However, it is sometimes the case that when new legislation or policy is introduced, public 
support and compliance do not occur. Supreme Court decisions, notably on school prayer, do 
not necessarily produce general public acceptance of or adherence to policy. Likewise, if a 
company introduces a new policy that no employee may take a gift (no matter how small) from 
a potential vendor, many employees will continue to take small gifts anyway. 
 
Altering citizens’ behavior by manipulating access to valued resources or threatening to 
impose sanctions is known as social control. Once again, the concept is that reward and 
punishment are what cause people to obey the law. People maximize their personal gain and 
comply based on deterrence. Of course, life is more complicated than reward and 
punishment. Otherwise, the job of law enforcement would be easy. But social control 
appeals to authorities. The public understands deterrence, rewards, and punishment. In 
contrast, emphasizing the normative approach places power not in authorities, but in the 
people whose voluntary compliance is sought. 
 
In studying general compliance with the law, sociologists have found that deterrence does 
not fully explain why people obey the law. Citizens choose to obey the law when the chances 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.110   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
of being caught violating it are virtually zero, as when one might come upon a stop sign in a 
deserted street. Almost all Americans pay their income taxes in a voluntary system, even 
though the chances of being caught shaving taxes owed are small. Yet citizens break the law 
when it is risky to do so, as when they buy illegal drugs or embezzle thousands of dollars 
from their company. 
 
In a democracy, the legal system cannot function if it can influence people only by 
manipulating rewards and costs. The resources required to enforce such a regime are too 
high. Deterrence is expensive to enforce and does not guarantee an adequate level of 
obedience. Drunk driving is a good example. Studies show that an extremely high 
investment of resources is needed to convince people that the likelihood of being caught and 
punished for driving drunk is high. Public campaigns against drunk driving tend to 
temporarily reduce the number of DUIs or DWIs. As long as citizens think the chances of 
being caught are rising, the incidences of drunk driving remain lower. However, as soon as 
public perception of increased vigilance against drunk driving lessens, the number of arrests 
goes up again. Likewise, as is discussed later  in the “Fraud Prevention Programs” chapter, 
increasing the perception of detection is a powerful anti-fraud program. If an employee 
thinks that his company is not paying attention to occupational fraud, then some employees 
are more likely to try to get away with it.  
 
Consider the use of marijuana, an illegal yet still popular drug. If the reason people abstain 
from using this drug is that they believe in complying with the law, then obviously in their 
eyes the authorities have legitimacy. However, if they forgo marijuana use because it violates 
their moral values, then it is their convictions that are the deciding factor. If fear of legal 
punishment stops them, then deterrence carries greater weight with them. And if they refrain 
out of fear of social ostracism, then the social group’s influence prevails. 
 
A person’s own normative values have the final say about appropriate behavior. Unlike the 
reward and punishment approach, one’s own values are what produce compliance or 
noncompliance with the law in the end. Psychologists refer to this as “internalized 
obligations,” for which citizens take personal responsibility. 
 
Voluntary Compliance 
Voluntary compliance matters only to the extent to which it produces obedience that goes 
beyond self-interest, measured by most of us by reward and punishment. A normative 
speeder, for instance, will accept being a few minutes late to his appointment in order to 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.111  
obey the speed limit, thus making the roads safer for everyone. A normative employee will 
accept a salary freeze and not steal from the company to make up for the raise he was 
promised. In other words, these people will act against their own best interests if they feel 
compliance with the rule is of greater moral import.  
 
Of course government authorities recognize that without the good will of the public, they 
could not function. Their aim must be to maximize compliance and minimize hostility 
toward laws, while gaining legitimacy in the eyes of the public. Any leader who wants to 
effectively govern must have legitimacy with his subordinates. The same is true for 
employers, managers, teachers, and army sergeants. Otherwise, compliance will not occur. 
 
Due to its significant social impact, social scientists and politicians have found legitimacy to 
be an issue of major concern. It is seen as a reservoir of loyalty from which leaders can draw. 
Opinion polls on the public’s attitude toward the law and the government are really about 
public confidence in the government’s legitimacy. If the public does not have confidence in 
the legal system, obedience to laws is unlikely. 
 
Studies show that both children and adults feel a strong obligation to obey the law. Whether 
we can attribute this to their normative values or the legitimacy of the authorities is the real 
question. Naturally, those who view the authorities as legitimate are more likely to comply. 
This leads to the conclusion that normative support of the system results in compliant 
behavior. 
 
Measuring Legitimacy and Compliance 
A study by Tyler (called the Chicago Study) focused on six laws with which people deal on a 
daily basis: disturbing the peace, littering, dr iving while intoxicated, speeding, shoplifting, and 
parking illegally. Participants were asked how often they had broken these laws in the past 
year. Most admitted to parking illegally (51 pe rcent) and speeding (62 percent), but very few 
admitted to shoplifting (3 percent). Twenty-seven percent confessed to disturbing the peace, 
25 percent to littering, and 19 percent admitted to having driven while under the influence. 
 
The second wave of interviews, in which participants were asked about a shorter time frame, 
produced similar results. To measure fear of punishment, respondents were asked how likely 
they thought it was that they would be arrested or issued a citation if they violated these six 
laws. Eighty-three percent thought it was likely they would be caught driving drunk; 78 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.112   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
percent thought the same for parking violations and shoplifting; 72 percent for speeding; 35 
percent for disturbing the peace; and 31 percent for littering. 
 
Participants were then gauged for peer approval. For shoplifting, 89 percent said that they 
thought that the five adults they know best would disapprove. Eighty-six percent said the 
same for drunk driving, as did 51 percent for littering, 52 percent for speeding, 44 percent 
for illegal parking, and 53 percent for disturbing the peace. 
  
The next question was designed to measure respondents’ morality. They were asked whether 
each offense was “wrong.” Almost every one of the participants felt that any violations of 
the six laws were wrong. Speeding came out as the least immoral and shoplifting the most, 
with 99 percent of participants considering it morally objectionable. 
 
One sees that citizens seem to view the breaking of laws as a violation of their personal 
morality. Interestingly, most believe the chances of getting caught are high. And since peer 
disapproval levels are relatively light, one can gather that the social group is the source of the 
least amount of pressure to obey laws. 
 
More than four out of five participants felt a person should obey the law “even if it goes 
against what they think is right.” Almost as many  respondents felt that disobeying the law is 
seldom justified and that obedience and respect for authority are the most important virtues 
children should learn. 
 
Legitimacy and Compliance 
Legitimacy is regarded as the essential ingredient in what gives governments and leaders 
authority. The idea is that if the authorities have legitimacy, the public will obey the law. 
Tyler’s Chicago Study, however, was designed to put this concept to the test. 
 
The study did show that legitimacy is related to compliance. Participants who attributed 
greater legitimacy to authorities were more likely to obey the law, for instance. This does not 
prove a causal relationship, though. The results of the study were analyzed to account for 
demographic and sociological factors. This “regression analysis” suggests that legitimacy has 
a significant effect on compliance, regardless of the other factors. 
 
Certainly, legitimacy’s impact on a person is in fluenced by his personal experiences with 
police and courts. A person who feels mistreated by the authorities is certainly less likely to 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.113  
have confidence in their legitimacy and therefore is less likely to obey laws. In such cases, 
peer approval seems to take on greater importance in those people’s thinking. One more 
interesting result was that those participants who considered themselves politically liberal 
were more likely than those who regarded themselves as moderate to base compliant 
behavior on feelings of legitimacy. 
 
Implications of the Chicago Study 
Authorities do not take compliance with the law for granted. They often find that occasional 
noncompliance must be tolerated. Sometimes noncompliance is so widespread that it casts 
doubt upon the effectiveness and validity of the law itself. Prohibition, for example, was 
widely and often openly violated before its repeal. The results of the study suggest that 
normative values are more influential upon compliance than the reward and punishment 
approach. This is consistent with Skinner’s behavioral theories discussed previously. 
 
Again, the study shows that people have a high level of normative commitment to abide by 
the law. Most participants felt that breaking the law was morally wrong and that laws 
should be obeyed even when one does not agree with them—the “my country, right or 
wrong” approach. Authorities who can tap into  and encourage those views will of course 
inspire compliance. Employees who have a strong sense of loyalty to their employer will 
not violate company policies because such acts would be a betrayal to the company. 
 
The Psychological Variables 
The Chicago Study was designed to gauge the gap between citizens’ concerns for favorable 
outcomes and procedural fairness. It also measures the extent to which fairness influences 
reactions to experience. The experience in question is of the everyday, average-citizen 
variety—the type of encounter most of us have  with authorities over relatively minor 
matters. Participants reported calling the police for a number of reasons: accidents, 
disturbances, suspicious activities, and crimes against property or violent crimes. The 
majority of callers felt it was important for the police to solve their problem, whether it was 
serious or not. 
 
Police response time was satisfactory to most respondents. Only 15 percent felt that the 
police did not respond quickly enough. Nearly 70 percent knew what actions the police had 
taken to solve the problem, and almost two-thirds of those said that the police settled the 
situation. The 43 percent who said that the police failed to solve their problem admitted that 
they did do everything they could. All in all, 71 percent said they were satisfied with the 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.114   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
outcome of their call. Most respondents also  felt that they were treated quite well by the 
police. Eighty-six percent expressed overall satisfaction with their politeness, concern for 
their rights, propriety, attentiveness, honesty, and willingness to consider their opinions. 
 
Respondents who were stopped by the police naturally had less magnanimous feelings 
toward them. Still, 73 percent of those who received tickets for minor offenses considered 
the outcome fair, acknowledging that the ticket was deserved.  
 
Satisfaction levels of participants who had to go to court were similarly high: 80 percent 
considered their treatment fair. However, 36 percent stated that they believed the judge 
could have reached a better outcome. Overall, though, participants were content with these 
elements of our justice system. 
 
Legitimacy and Experience 
People will accept unfavorable rulings if they believe they were dealt with fairly. Thus, fair 
procedures can cushion the blow of an outcome that is to one’s disadvantage, without 
damaging the authorities’ legitimacy. Of course, fair procedures can only go so far. If fair 
procedures consistently produce unfavorable results, the fairness of the procedures 
themselves will come into question. 
 
People place importance on procedure for several reasons, the first of which is simplicity. 
Often, the result itself is difficult to classify as fair or unfair. People therefore focus on the 
steps that lead up to the outcome. Another reason such emphasis is placed on procedures is 
that, with as much religious and ethnic diversity that the United States has, people do not 
always concur on what is fair. Although most people may not necessarily agree upon the 
outcome, they are usually of one mind as to the justice of the procedures. 
 
The procedural aspects of the law and how the public perceives them must be of great 
importance to authorities. Of course, policymakers must have a good idea of what the public 
considers fair. If the public perceives a court’s legal actions as just, they will support the 
outcome although it might not be to their advantage. Plea bargaining, for example, is often 
justified based on outcome. But if the inconsistency in plea agreements is seen as unfair, 
support for the legal system will weaken. Likewise, no-fault insurance may make sense in 
economic terms, but may dilute the basic principle underlying our legal system: those 
individuals are responsible for their own actions. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.115  
The same is true in the corporate environment. Employees will often accept unpopular 
company policies if the employees feel that the policy is applied “fairly.” For instance, 
employees may be upset that the company provides only three paid sick days, but if the rule 
is applied to all employees in an equal manner, most employees will live with the policy. 
However, if some employees are allowed additional sick days and others are not, employees 
begin to resent the policy and the company. In other words, these employees feel they are 
being treated unfairly. 
 
The Meaning of Procedural Justice 
An important issue left unaddressed until now is how people decide which procedures are 
fair and which are not. Previous efforts to study this question have focused on control. Two 
areas of control with which people are generally concerned are: decision control  (control over 
the actual decisions made) and process control (control over the opportunity to state  
one’s case). 
 
To better illustrate, let us take the example of an attorney representing a client in court. 
While the client surrenders control of the case to his attorney, he may still seek to maintain 
as much control as he can through control of the process. According to the instrumental 
perspective, he will value the opportunity to testify only insofar as it helps to achieve a 
beneficial outcome to his case. Studies show, however, that most of us appreciate the chance 
to air our views, regardless of whether it influences the outcome or not. From this, one can 
conclude that process control has an independent impact on how one perceives fairness and 
whether one is satisfied with the outcome (one’s satisfaction with the outcome and one’s 
opinion of fair procedures depends largely on one’s degree of control). 
 
Again, one must ask what criteria people use to decide whether a procedure is fair. G.S. 
Leventhal proposed six standards for evaluating the fairness of a procedure:  
• Representativeness 
• Consistency 
• Suppression of bias 
• Accuracy 
• Correctability  
• Ethicality 
 
Representativeness  relates to those parties whose concerns are affected throughout the 
allocation process. Consistency  refers to the uniform and unbiased treatment of all of the 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.116   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
affected parties. Suppression of bias  guarantees that those involved with the outcome have no 
personal, vested interest in the case. This also prohibits a participant’s reliance on previously 
formed opinions rather than just the evidence at hand, as when a juror convicts because he 
believes most defendants are guilty. Accuracy  refers to objective high quality. Correctability  
involves the checks and balances provided in the system, which allow unfair decisions to be 
corrected, such as the appeals process. Ethicality, of course, involves the degree to which 
procedures meet generally held ethical standards of fairness and morality. Torture, for 
instance, is a violation of ethicality, as it is a breach of basic moral codes. 
 
Studies measuring the importance of Leventhal’s six criteria show that people place the most 
importance on consistency. Accuracy, representativeness, and suppressing bias are also 
highly valued. 
 
Based on Tyler’s Chicago Study, the author’s hypothesis is that in encounters with the police, 
people are more concerned with fairness than with the policeman’s adherence to formal 
issues of rights (i.e., ethicality). In the courtroom, however, ethical standards and rights 
receive greater emphasis. 
 
People’s views on procedural fairness are affected  by two factors: background characteristics 
and prior views. Race, education, income, sex, age, and political views are the most 
important background characteristics. Those who are liberal and better educated will place 
the most emphasis on ethicality when deciding if a procedure is just. Minorities are more 
likely to focus on consistency and suppression of bias, though. Prior views, formed perhaps 
from past experiences, carry more weight than background characteristics. Any background 
characteristic is certain to be overridden by one’s prior views on a subject. 
 
Influence of Control on the Meaning of Procedural Justice 
The Chicago Study assessed process control by questioning respondents about how much 
opportunity they had to state their case or present their problem. Decision control was 
measured by asking how much influence participants had over the determinations made by 
the third party in control. Most participants fe lt they had a high (43 percent) to moderate (20 
percent) level of process control. In contrast, a number of participants felt they had little 
decision control (about half said “not much at all”).  
 
The Chicago Study thus leads one to conclude that process control judgments is the deciding 
factor when assessing procedural justice in terms of control. Process control judgments are 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.117  
also important in assessing how experience affects people’s evaluation of  procedural justice. 
Ergo, respondents are more concerned with their opportunities to speak out rather than 
their influence over the outcome. The belief of citizens that their views are being weighed 
and considered by the authorities and that the authorities are dealing fairly with them 
reinforces their belief in their own process and decision control. 
 
In the employment context, the study tends to support the idea that employees should be 
involved in the development of policies and procedures. Instead of just distributing a fraud 
policy or an ethics policy, send out a questionnaire asking employees for their ideas on how 
fraud and corruption can be prevented in the company. If employees feel they have some 
control over the rules, they will be more likely to obey and follow them. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.201  
THEORIES OF CRIME CAUSATION 
 
Understanding human behavior and why people obey the law helps explain some of the 
reasons people commit fraud. However, there have been a number of theorists who have 
attempted to explain specifically why people commit crimes. In more sophisticated sciences, 
such as chemistry and physics, theories build on one another as new facts emerge from 
studies prompted by the reigning theories. In criminology (as in virtually all the social 
sciences), theories compete with one another for acceptance, with none of them adequately 
satisfying either practitioners or scholars in the field. 
 
The reason for this jumble of interpretations of criminal activity in large part lies in the fact 
that human beings, unlike inanimate objects, think for themselves. You can push a rock in a 
certain direction and it will (all other things being equal) move in that direction. But you 
cannot predict as simple a matter as the direction in which a human being might decide to 
proceed when confronted with a choice. Perhaps you can guess that he will go to the right 
because you know that this is the direction in which the store he wants to go to lies. But any 
human being, for reasons that satisfy him, can decide on any given day that he prefers to go 
to the left, perhaps just to saunter around or to get extra exercise, or for no particular reason 
that seems evident to him or to others.  
 
Imagine how much more difficult it is to try to predict very complicated human behaviors, 
such as criminal acts. 
 
The following sections summarize some of the better-known criminological theories, both 
past and present. 
 
 
Classical Criminology 
Classical criminology, based on the philosophical principle of utilitarianism, has its roots in 
the belief that human beings are rational and calculating creatures and therefore do things in 
order to avoid pain and produce pleasure. Some of the components of classical 
criminological theory are: 
• People have free will, which they can use to elect to engage in either criminal or 
noncriminal behavior. 
• Criminal behavior will be more attractive if the gains are estimated to be greater than  
the losses. 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.202   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• The more certain, severe, and swift the reaction to crime, the more likely it is that the 
penalties will control the behavior. 
 
Two theorists’ names are associated with classical criminology: the Italian Cesare Beccaria 
and the Englishman Jeremy Bentham. Bentham, marvelously eccentric, willed that his body 
be preserved and placed in the entryway to the University of London and brought to the 
table when the faculty meets. His wishes were carried out, and the body can still be seen 
today by anyone visiting the school. 
 
The policy implications of classical criminological thought, which are prominent today in 
theories grouped under the heading of “rational choice,” are that penalties should be 
established that make the anticipated results of criminal behavior less appealing than the 
prospects of the losses, such as the loss of freedom. The theory also has a benevolent 
component in that it suggests that penalties that are too severe serve no purpose, since they 
are needlessly excessive for the deterrence they seek to achieve. 
 
Utilitarianism  remains a much-favored approach to crime, with its assumption that offenders 
will calculate potential gains and losses before they decide to disobey the law. The U.S. 
Sentencing Commission proposals are based almost totally on the idea of classical 
criminology, mandating that monetary penalties be calculated at a level that will induce 
companies to conclude that breaking the law is not fiscally appealing. 
 
There are several major difficulties inherent in the theory, though. The first, of course, is that 
many people do not stop and add up the gains and losses of lawbreaking before they engage 
in it. Second, the impact of penalties can be very different for different people; the thought 
of a week in prison may be awful to one person, but a piece of cake to another. Third, it is 
very difficult to know whether the penalty will in fact result from the behavior; most 
offenders optimistically assume that they will not be caught. 
 
 
Routine Activities Theory 
Routine activities theory, a variation of classical theory, holds that both the motivation to 
commit crime and the supply of offenders is constant. There will always be a certain number 
of people, motivated by greed, lust, and other forces, who incline toward lawbreaking. The 
determining factor, particularly in predatory crimes such as those involving violence and 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.203  
theft, are the activities of potential victims. There are three important elements that  
influence crime: 
• The availability of suitable targets, such as companies and individuals 
• The absence of capable guardians, such as auditors and security personnel 
• The presence of motivated offenders, such as unhappy or financially  
challenged employees 
 
 
Biological Theories 
Biological theories  maintain that criminal behavior is not the result of choice (the calculation of 
benefits and potential losses), but rather is caused by the physical traits of those who commit 
crime. The foundations of biological theory were laid by Cesare Lombroso, an Italian doctor, 
who insisted that there were born criminals— people who were atavistic, or a throwback to 
more primitive human types. Lombroso spent his career measuring the bodies of offenders 
and concluded that they were marked by a high degree of asymmetry, with such things as 
sloping foreheads and other “anomalies.” Later critics would point out that Lombroso used 
no control group—that is, he did not measure people who were not criminals. If he had 
done so, he would have found that they shared equally in those kinds of traits that 
Lombroso presumed were indicative of criminal propensities. 
 
Biological theory continues to flourish today, with theorists seeking to locate genetic 
distinctions between those who break the law and those who obey it. In their book, The Bell 
Curve, Richard Herrnstein and Charles Murray argue that low intelligence and crime are 
intimately connected and that low intelligence (as measured by I.Q. scores) is genetically 
transmitted. Some scholars in the field savaged the Herrnstein-Murray position, but it 
received a good deal of media attention. 
 
Biological theorists now take a much less deterministic position than Lombroso. They will 
point to this or that human characteristic and say that it, given certain environmental 
circumstances, is apt to produce illegal acts. Put another way, they report that they have 
found a large number of offenders with a biological trait, but that there are many more that 
have the trait who never get into any trouble with the law. 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.204   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Psychological Theories 
Theories rooted in psychology are based on the view that criminal behavior is the product of 
mental processes. The psychoanalytical ideas of Sigmund Freud focus on early childhood 
development and on unconscious motivations — that is, motivations of which the offender 
himself is not aware. Freud identified a three-part structure to human personality: the id (the 
drive for food, sex, and other life-sustaining things), the superego (the conscience that 
develops when learned values become incorporated into a person’s behavior), and the ego 
(the “I,” or the product of the interaction between what a person wants and what his 
conscience will allow him to do to achieve what he wants). 
 
Cognitive Theories 
Cognitive theories  stress inadequate moral and intellectual development as lying at the root of 
criminal acts. There are also personality theories, which illustrate the belief that traits such as 
extroversion are responsible for a significant amount of crime. 
 
Integrated Theories 
Integrated theories  draw from choice theory, biological theory, and psychological theory. One 
such argument is put forward by James Q. Wilson and Richard J. Herrnstein in their book 
Crime and Human Nature. Wilson and Herrnstein maintain that while criminal activity is a 
choice, this choice is heavily influenced by biological and psychological factors. They also 
explore social factors. The factors include family life, schools, and gang membership. 
 
Conditioning Theory 
H. J. Eysenck, working with what he calls conditioning theory, argues that the failure of a person 
to incorporate satisfactorily the dictates of society represents the major explanation for 
subsequent criminal behavior. Eysenck maintains that extroverted persons, both normal and 
neurotic, are more difficult to condition — that is, to train—than introverted persons, and 
that extroverts therefore get into more trouble than introverts. 
 
Another psychological theme is that frustration is the precursor of aggression. The theory 
suggests that the expression of aggression, such as a fraud perpetrator “getting back” at his 
employer, will alleviate the frustration and allow the organism to return to a more 
satisfactory state. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.205  
Social Structure Theories 
These theories concentrate on the kinds of societies that generate particular levels of crime. 
Why is crime so low in Japan and so high in the United States? Why do South American 
countries typically have high rates of homicide while England’s homicide rate is relatively 
low? There are various kinds of sociological theories, all based on similar premises but with 
differing emphases. 
 
As a group, social structure theories suggest that forces operating in the lower-class areas of 
the environment push many of their residents into criminal behavior. Social structure 
theorists challenge those who would suggest that crime is an expression of psychological 
imbalance, biological traits, personal choice, etc. They argue that people living in equivalent 
social environments seem to behave in a similar, predictable fashion. 
 
Theory of Anomie 
Strain theories are a branch of the social structure theory. Strain theorists view crime as a direct 
result of the frustration and anger people experience over their inability to achieve the social 
and financial success they desire. The best-known strain theory is Robert Merton’s theory of 
anomie. Robert Merton, a Columbia University sociologist, maintained that the discrepancy 
between what people are indoctrinated into desiring and the ways that are available to them 
to achieve such ends is the cornerstone for explanation of criminal behavior. More 
information about Merton is contained in the “Organizational Crime” chapter. 
 
Merton’s theory of anomie (that is, normlessn ess) was derived from the work of Emile 
Durkheim, a French sociologist who adopted the term in his effort to explain suicide rates 
among different social groups. For Merton, anomie  in the United States was characterized by 
an almost overpowering emphasis on the acquisition of things and on the fact that social 
status and importance is usually measured in terms of money.  
 
People can obtain money and material goods, Merton noted, by conforming—that is, by 
working at jobs and engaging in other legal enterprises that pay off. They can also withdraw 
from the fray, saying that they will not be driven by a desire for goods, but will opt out of 
the game that dominates society. The most withdrawn often tend to be those who employ 
illegal drugs to provide their satisfactions. Then there are the innovators —those who refuse to 
play by the accepted rules of the game, but turn to outlawed methods in order to accomplish 
what society has told them that they must achieve to be acceptable members. 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.206   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Social Process Theories 
Not all sociologists believe that a person’s social structure alone controls the direction of his 
values, attitudes, and behavior. After all, most people who reside in even the most 
deteriorated urban areas are law-abiding citizens. Social process theories hold that criminality is a 
function of individual socialization and the social-psychological interactions people have 
with the various organizations, institutions, and processes of society. 
 
Though they differ in many respects, the various social process theories all share one basic 
concept: all people, regardless of their race, cl ass, or gender, have the potential to become 
delinquents or criminals. 
 
Social Learning Theories 
Social learning theories  hold that criminal behavior is a function of the way people absorb 
information, viewpoints, and motivations from others, most notably from those with whom 
they are close, such as members of their peer group. Social learning theorists believe that all 
people have the potential to commit crime if they are exposed to certain kinds of 
circumstances. All people raised in France by French parents learn to speak that language; 
Poles learn to speak Polish. So too will a person raised with attitudes that favor criminal acts 
respond by committing such acts, and the person raised and living in an environment where 
criminal activity would be unthinkable will avoid crime;  indeed, crime might not even occur 
to him as a solution to whatever problem is confronting him. 
 
Theory of Differential Association 
The theory of differential association is undoubtedly the best-known among all explanations 
offered in the United States to account for crime, though it too has been widely criticized on 
the grounds that it is just about impossible to test. 
 
The theory first appeared as a systematic formulation in 1939 in the third edition of Edwin 
H. Sutherland’s Principles of Criminology. Later, Sutherland would make his best-known 
contribution to criminology by coining the phrase white-collar crime  and writing a 
monograph on the subject. Sutherland was particularly interested in fraud committed by 
the elite upper-world business executive, either against shareholders or the public. 
Sutherland said, “General Motors does not have  an inferiority complex, United States Steel 
does not suffer from an unresolved Oedipus problem, and the DuPonts do not desire to 
return to the womb. The assumption that an offender may have such pathological 
distortion of the intellect or the emotions seems to me absurd, and if it is absurd regarding 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.207  
the crimes of businessmen, it is equally absurd regarding the crimes of persons in the 
economic lower classes.” 1 
 
The theory of differential association begins by asserting that criminal behavior is learned. 
Explicating that idea, Sutherland specifies as a second point that criminal behavior is learned 
in interaction with other persons in a process of communication. If individuals acquiring 
criminal habits or propensities were exposed to situations, circumstances, and interactions 
totally of a criminal nature, it would be relatively easy to comprehend how this process of 
communication operates. In view of the enormous variation in standards and personalities to 
which any individual in our society is exposed, it becomes exceedingly difficult to discern 
those critical elements that induce criminal behavior without the intervention of some 
additional principle. 
 
Sutherland’s third point is that criminal beha vior is acquired through participation within 
intimate personal groups. This particular stress suggests that the roots of crime must be 
sought in the socializing experiences of the individual. Unfortunately, the process of 
socialization is far from being adequately understood. Sutherland’s fourth point indicates 
that the criminal learning process includes not only techniques of committing crime, but also 
the shaping of motives, drives, rationalizations, and attitudes. Crime techniques often 
involve a high degree of skill; picking pockets (and not getting caught) demands considerable 
adroitness, and being a successful prostitute demands knowing how to hustle customers, 
collect money, buy police protection, and deal with a drunken or violent john. 
 
Fifth, Sutherland narrows his focus by indicating the kinds of pressures that move the 
learning process in the direction of acceptance of illegal pursuits. Careful to keep within the 
legal definitions of behavior, Sutherland stipulates that the specific direction of motives and 
drives is learned from definitions of the legal codes as favorable or unfavorable. 
 
And sixth, he sets out his core point by establishing the principle of “differential 
association.” According to this postulate, a person becomes a criminal because of an excess 
of definitions favorable to violation of the law over definitions unfavorable to violation of 
the law. Then, as a means of demonstrating with greater clarity the character of associations 
that have a subsequent effect on behavior, Sutherland states his seventh point— that 
differential association may vary in frequency, duration, priority, and intensity. But there is 
                                                 
1 Quoted in Geis, Gilbert. On White-collar Crime.  (Lexington: Lexington Books, 1982). 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.208   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
no suggestion regarding which of these elements is apt to be more important than the 
others. Frequent contacts may promote feelings of boredom and indifference; one intense 
experience may overwhelm all prior learning, or it may not. The axiom hardly helps us much 
in unraveling the causal contents of crime. 
 
Sutherland’s eighth point concerns the nature of  learning and, again, is primarily a didactic 
statement of common behavioral science understanding rather than a contribution that 
moves the theory very far forward: learning criminal and delinquent behavior, Sutherland 
asserts, involves all the mechanisms that are involved in any other learning. The key problem 
is not that Sutherland is wrong; it is that he casts into the spotlight a theoretical problem that 
has plagued students of human behavior since time immemorial. If crime is to be 
understood as learned like anything else—say, basketball skills, cooking, patriotism, and 
flirting—then any theory that can unravel its in gredients will at the same time have to set 
before us an understanding of all human action. Sutherland’s propositions can hardly 
pretend to approach so stunning an intellectual achievement, and in this respect, can be 
regarded as extraordinarily overambitious or, perhaps, simplistic. 
 
As his next to last proposition, Sutherland stresses that learning differs from pure 
imitation. His last point is a worthwhile reminder that while criminal behavior is an 
expression of general needs and values, it is not explained by these general needs and 
values because noncriminal behavior is an expression of the same needs and values. This 
injunction indicates that the generalizations sometimes employed to account for crime? 
such as the view that people steal because they crave esteem or are greedy, or kill because 
they are unhappy?have little scientific merit. People, both criminals and noncriminals, are 
motivated by much the same needs and values. They become or do not become criminals 
on the basis of their unique responses to common drives for prestige, happiness, success, 
power, wealth, and numerous other human aspirations. An individual may feel a pressing 
need for money and take an extra weekend job pumping gas, or try to borrow from a 
friend, or shrug his shoulders and figure that this time he’ll do without. Another person, 
feeling the same need, may hold up a fast food outlet. 
 
Social Control Theory  
Travis Hirschi, in his 1969 book, Causes of Delinquency, first articulated the social control theory. A 
particularly important reason for the current dominance of control theory as the 
interpretative scheme for understanding crime and delinquency is that, unlike theories such 
as differential association, it offers a considerable number of testable propositions. Such 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.209  
propositions take the form of if-then statements: if something exists or is done, then it 
foretells that something will follow. Such formulations allow for experimental testing  
and rebuttal. 
 
Control theory takes its cue from a classic of sociology, Emile Durkheim’s Suicide, in which 
the French theoretician wrote:  
 
The more weakened the groups to which [the individual belongs], the less he depends on 
them, the more he consequently depends on him self and recognizes no other rules of conduct 
than what are founded on his private interests (Durkheim, 1951, p. 209). 
 
Essentially, control theory argues that the institutions of the social system train and press 
those with whom they are in contact into patterns of conformity. Schools train for 
adjustment in society, peers press the ethos of success and conventional behavior, and 
parents strive to inculcate law-abiding habits in their youngsters—even, Hirschi stresses, 
parents who themselves play fast and loose with the rules. The theory rests on the thesis that 
to the extent that a person fails to become attached to the variety of control agencies of the 
society, his chances of violating the law are increased. This doctrine edges very close to being 
self-evident in its insistence that close affiliation with law-abiding people, groups, and 
organizations is predictive of law-abiding behavior; however, it is notably rich with 
subordinate statements, some of them far from obvious. 
 
Four aspects of affiliation are addressed by the theory:  
• Attachment 
• Commitment 
• Involvement 
• Belief  
 
Attachment  refers primarily to affection-type ties with people such as parents, teachers, and 
peers. Commitment refers to cost factors involved in criminal activity. People are committed to 
conventional behavior and probably have invested something — fiscally and emotionally — in 
their ultimate success — an investment that they are wary of risking by means of a criminal 
act. Commitment might involve things such as obtaining a better job or seeing one’s children 
succeed. Involvement concerns matters such as time spent on the job — that is, participation in 
activities related to future goals and objectives. Belief refers to a conviction about the 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.210   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
legitimacy of conventional values, such as the law in general and criminal justice 
prescriptions in particular. 
 
Hirschi insists that there is no important relationship between social class and delinquency 
and crime; thus, a person in any class—lower, middle, or upper—who defaults on liaisons 
with the important formative agencies in our society will be more apt to find himself on a 
path that ends in crime. Among the important considerations, control theory stresses 
strongly, is “the bond of affection for conventional persons.” “The stronger this bond, the 
more likely the person is to take it into account when and if he contemplates a criminal act” 
(Hirschi, 1969, p. 83). What essentially happens, the theory suggests, is that people 
confronted with the possibility of behaving in a law-violative manner are likely to ask of 
themselves: “What will my wife — or my mother and father — think if they find out?” To the 
extent that individuals believe that other people whose opinions are important to them will 
be disappointed or ashamed, and to the extent that they care deeply that these people will 
feel this way, they will be constrained from engaging in the sanctioned behavior. 
 
Differential Reinforcement Theory 
Differential rei nforcement theory  is another attempt to explain crime as a type of learned behavior. 
It is a revision of Sutherland’s work that in corporates elements of psychological learning 
theory popularized by B. F. Skinner and the social learning theory discussed above. The 
theory was summarized by Ronald Akers in his 1977 work, Deviant Behavior: A Social Learning 
Approach. 
 
According to these behavioral theorists, people learn social behavior by operant conditioning —
 behavior controlled by stimuli that follow the behavior. Behavior is reinforced when positive 
rewards are gained or punishment is avoided (negative reinforcement). It is weakened by 
negative stimuli (punishment) and loss of reward (negative punishment). Whether deviant or 
criminal behavior is begun or persists depends on the degree to which it has been rewarded 
or punished and the rewards or punishments attached to its alternatives. This is the theory of 
differential reinforcement. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.301  
PUNISHMENT AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM 
 
The criminal justice system involves people and agencies that apprehend and adjudicate 
presumed law-breakers and sanction those who either plead guilty or are convicted of 
violating the law. With white-collar crime, nolo  pleas (nolo contendere : I do not choose to 
dispute the allegations) are also common. Almost invariably, such pleas can reasonably be 
regarded as evidence of criminal guilt. They are generally resorted to in an attempt by the 
defendant to avoid the stigma of a criminal label and to undercut the strength of a possible 
civil suit.  
 
The use of the word system in regard to criminal justice can be misleading since it implies that 
there exists an integrated network of cooperating organizations dedicated to a common 
overarching goal. In actual fact, this is far from true. The jurisdictional morass that marks the 
administration of criminal justice demonstrates that it is far from being a coherent system. 
The police typically are under local control. In most cities, they come under the jurisdiction 
of the mayor or the city manager, though, on rare occasions (such as in St. Louis), law 
enforcement falls under state jurisdiction. The trial courts generally are operated by the 
counties, which also employ prosecutors. The counties—there are slightly more than 3,000 
of them in the United States—also are responsible for the running of the jails, which house 
people awaiting trial that cannot raise or are not allowed bail, and those who are confined on 
misdemeanor charges. In addition, county personnel, in the form of sheriff’s forces, are 
largely responsible for law enforcement in nonurban areas. In some cities, they serve as the 
local police under contractual arrangements. The state runs the appellate courts and the 
prisons where the more serious offenders are housed. In addition, private companies, such 
as the Corrections Corporation of America, have recently begun to take over the operation 
of some holding facilities — both jails and prisons — as part of a profit-making program that 
is legitimized by claims of greater efficiency and lower costs. 
 
In 2008, over 7.3 million people were on probation, in jail or prison, or on parole at year 
end. Criminal justice agencies in the United States employ 2.4 million people. The system 
cost taxpayers more than $68 billion in 2006, and that expense has been rising astronomically 
in the wake of laws that mandate tougher penalties. Because of the fear of such penalties, 
there are fewer plea bargains and more trials. Longer sentences also have come with the 
three-strikes laws that have overtaxed existing penal facilities.  
  
Punishment and the Criminal Justice System Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.302   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Calculated on a per capita basis, the operation of the criminal justice system in the United 
States costs each taxpayer somewhat more than $200 a year, an amount very similar to what 
is paid for transportation and health care. 
 
Besides local, state, and county law enforcement, there exists a very extensive federal criminal 
justice presence. The federal government forces primarily deal with offenses that cross state 
lines, though when public opinion is aroused, the U.S. Congress has been known to pretend 
that a crime has interstate characteristics in order to bring it under the jurisdiction of agencies 
such as the Federal Bureau of Investigations, which has considerably greater resources than 
most local constabularies. Thus, for instance, kidnapping was made a federal offense after the 
notorious Lindbergh case on the fictitious basis that child-stealers presumptively would carry 
their victim across a state boundary. 
 
Most major prosecutions for white-collar offenses  are generated by federal agencies, in part 
because the majority of laws which proscribe white-collar crime are federal statutes and rules 
of federal regulatory agencies. Additionally, most state and local authorities are more than 
willing to yield jurisdiction to police and prosecutors who have larger personnel pools that 
specialize in complex white-collar crime cases. 
 
 
Sentencing Options 
There are a variety of sanctions available to the judge and, when they are charged with 
imposing sentences, the jury as well. Among others, there is pre-trial diversion, probation, 
and incapacitation or incarceration. If the sentence is imprisonment, it may be made under 
rules that dictate a determinate sentence (such as five years) or an indeterminate sentence 
(such as five to ten years). There are some offenses where the sentence is mandatory and 
dictated by a set of guidelines that typically allow for a decrease or increase of the stipulated 
amount of time to be served if certain other circumstances are present (for instance, whether 
the offender was armed). 
 
Sentencing of white-collar offenders is often complicated by the fact that, while their 
behavior may have been notably harmful, this most likely will be their first criminal offense. 
They also typically come to court with an unblemished record of social accomplishments: 
church participation, seemingly strong family ties, and an array of civil achievements. These 
kinds of credentials work in offenders’ favor when it comes time to impose a sentence upon 
them. Studies of white-collar crime also point out that judges and defendants in such cases 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.303  
often share similar social and educational backgrounds, creating a certain empathy in the 
sentence. Note, for instance, the sentencing memorandum filed on behalf of a client who 
had committed an egregious income tax violation: 
 
In short, the court must pass sentence upon  a man with an unblemished record, whose 
character is one of the highest and whose achievements have been truly outstanding. It is 
submitted that nothing in this record suggests that [the defendant] needs prison 
rehabilitation or that he is ever likely again to break the law. In considering only this man 
as a human being, it is submitted that a prison sentence is unwarranted. The record for 
total good during a life span of 44 years weig hs heavily against the isolated transgression of 
the evasions of taxes. 1  
 
Pre-trial Diversion 
While not truly a sentence since it is not the consequence of a trial or a plea, diversion is 
often used at the local level for offenders who seem suited to what it has to offer. Under its 
terms, selected individuals will be placed into some form of treatment program after they 
have been arrested but before further proceedings. If it is assumed, for instance, that their 
troubles with the criminal law were fundamentally related to alcoholism, they may be 
ordered to attend Alcoholics Anonymous meetings a certain number of times each week for 
a specified period. Other offenders, particularly  juveniles, might be diverted to different 
kinds of counseling programs or placed in a remedial education group. Referrals to 
employment services might also be mandated. 
 
In theory, a person can be placed in a pre-trial diversion program almost indefinitely, though 
most judges will stipulate a time period. If the person successfully completes the program, a 
criminal record can be avoided. If the accused person fails in the diversion program, usually 
by nonparticipation, he can be tried for the crime that had earlier been charged against him. 
In practice, some judges demonstrate seemingly endless patience with such offenders, since 
they had originally determined that, given the situation, they did not want to imprison the 
alleged offender. 
 
Probation 
Many laypersons confuse probation  with parole. Parole refers to the status of an offender after he 
has been released from prison or jail and is placed under supervision in the community. 
                                                 
1Ibid., p. 222. 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.304   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Probation typically is a sentence imposed prior to (and instead of) incarceration. Some judges, 
however, favor what is called “shock probation.” They insist that offenders serve a brief 
time—perhaps only a week—in a penal institution in order to get a taste of what can be in 
store for them if they do not adhere to the law and to the probation conditions that are 
imposed upon them.  
 
Probation laws vary from state to state, but the offender typically is placed under the control 
and guidance of a probation officer, who is to see to it that the conditions that are 
established are met. In practice, probation officers tend to be seriously overworked and 
usually provide only minimal supervision of their charges. Most of their contact with the 
probationer may be only by way of telephone calls to the person and the person’s employer. 
Besides, probation officers are expected both to counsel and to control their roster of 
probations—roles that often are incompatible. Few probationers, for instance, will frankly 
discuss personal problems with a probation officer when they are aware that he can use what 
he learns as a basis for sending them to prison. 
 
Most probation agencies are part of the state bu reaucracy, though in larger areas they may be 
operated by the county. About 30 states combine the administration of probation and parole 
in a single agency.  
 
After a person is convicted of a crime, the probation officer is charged with investigating his 
background in order to provide information that will be helpful to the judge in determining 
what punishment to impose. The judge almost invariably will follow the recommendation of 
the probation officer, though some judges, valuing their independence, insist on reports 
without any recommended disposition. Nonetheless, probation officers soon learn what 
matters influence particular judges. If they observe, for instance, that a judge will invariably be 
lenient with an offender who attends church regularly, they will highlight that element if it is 
their own judgment that the defendant deserves a break. They also can pinpoint items that 
they know will influence a given judge to impose a harsher sentence. 
 
Probation implies a contract between the offender and the criminal justice system. Most 
probation rules require that the offender adhere to some or all of the following conditions: 
• Maintain steady employment. 
• Make restitution to the victim for losses or damages. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.305  
• Cooperate with the probation officer. This involves, among other matters, showing up 
for appointments, notifying the officer of change of address, intention to marry, a new 
job, or similar developments. 
• Meet family responsibilities. 
• Obey all laws. Many jurisdictions will incar cerate a probationer as a violator if they 
believe that he has committed another offense. They revoke his probation status, and 
thereby avoid the difficulties of a court proceeding. The probationer can fight this 
disposition and request a hearing, but few are likely to do so successfully. 
 
Rules specifically tailored to the particular offender also might be imposed. Probationers can 
be ordered to report for urinalysis or other forms of drug testing on a regular basis, or they 
can be forbidden to drive or to go to places where alcoholic beverages are served. Until 
relatively recently, most jurisdictions forbade probationers from associating with people who 
had a criminal record. But these are often the only friends a probationer might have, and the 
rule has come to be regarded by many criminal justice personnel as unreasonable and 
unlikely to be obeyed. For probation officers, the rule often affords a basis to revoke the 
freedom of an offender when they believe that he is continuing to violate the law, but they 
are unable to prove this.  
 
Sentences of probation are for a fixed period of time, with the length generally determined 
by statute and in terms of the seriousness of the offense. Violent offenders often are not 
allowed by law to be put on probation.  
 
There have been a number of innovative probation tactics, including house arrests and 
electronic monitoring.2 Under electronic monitoring, the probationer wears equipment that 
allows the probation officer to establish his whereabouts at any time. House arrest usually 
involves confinement to the place where the person lives, typically with an exception made 
for working outside at a job. 
 
Opponents of electronic monitoring see it as a “Big Brother” tactic that reminds them of the 
totalitarian regime depicted by George Orwell in his novel 1984. They also find house arrest 
too similar to the kinds of tactics typically used in some foreign countries to deal with 
“political” criminals. 
                                                 
2See Richard A. Ball, C. Ronald Huff, and J. Robert Lilly, House Arrest and Correctional Policy: Doing Time at 
Home. (Newbury Park, CA:  Sage, 1988). 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.306   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Given overcrowding problems in prisons, the lower cost of keeping such people on the streets 
offers an attractive alternative; however, there is always the risk that the offender might 
commit a serious crime, thereby eliciting severe public criticism of the judicial and probation 
authorities. A desire to protect their reputation is a major consideration in decisions to impose 
a prison term on a person who arguably could do quite well in a controlled community setting. 
 
White-collar crime offenders are usually regarded as prime candidates for probation. They 
are highly unlikely to reoffend, usually have families to support, and generally express 
remorse and say that they will never again fall into errant habits. Of course, they typically 
make a fine appearance in court: well dressed, well spoken, courteous, and contrite.  
 
White-collar offenders tend to be older and, if imprisoned, might find the atmosphere 
intolerable, though there are a number of federal prisons—scornfully called “country clubs” 
by outsiders—where the population is largely ma de up of “tame” white-collar offenders.  
 
White-collar offenders also will receive lighter sentences if they cooperate with the 
authorities and bear witness against co-conspirators. In one study, it was found that more 
than 42 percent of cooperating defendants were charged with a single offense compared to 
30 percent of uncooperative defendants. White-collar offenders also are more readily granted 
bail: just one person in eight spends any time incarcerated before trial, and for the generally 
high-status offenders, the figure is fewer than one in twenty. In a comparison group of 
“common criminals,” at least one-third spent time in jail before their trial. 3  
 
In early 2010, the SEC announced its initiative to encourage individual and company 
cooperation in investigations by offering Cooperation Agreements, Deferred Prosecution 
Agreements, and Non-Prosecution Agreements. See the updated SEC Enforcement Manual 
at http://www.sec.gov/divisions/enforce/enforcementmanual.pdf  for further details of the 
tools available to the SEC for encouraging cooperation. 
 
Shaming 
Criminologists lately have been paying a great deal of attention to the concept of reintegrative 
shaming  as a punishment that might deter an offender from further wrongdoing. Put forward 
by an Australian, John Braithwaite, (who was the first winner of the Association of Certified 
                                                 
3David Weisburd, Stanton Wheeler, Elin Waring, and Nancy Bode, Crimes of the Middle Classes: White-Collar 
Offenders in the Federal Courts (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991). 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.307  
Fraud Examiners’ Cressey Award), shaming invo lves two subtle and delicate practices. First, 
pressure is put on the offender by those closest to him, those he respects, and, sometimes, 
those he has victimized to acknowledge that what he did is wrong and to feel truly contrite 
about his deed. Second, the offender is reassured that those important to him continue to 
regard him with affection and welcome him, as a reformed person, back into the fold. 
 
Critics believe that Braithwaite’s ideas, mode led on Chinese and Japanese customs, might in 
theory be extremely effective, but that in cynical societies, such as the United States, they are 
not very likely to have much impact on hardened lawbreakers. 
 
In America, shaming has tended to take a much harsher approach. The tactic was made 
famous by Nathaniel Hawthorne in The Scarlet Letter, in which an adulterer is forced to wear 
the letter “A” sewn into her cloak. Branding on the hand or forehead was used in 
seventeenth century England for thieves and other offenders who were spared the more 
common punishment of death by hanging.  
 
Today, a form of branding characterizes responses to certain criminal offenses. Some states 
require that when an offender is released from prison after serving time for sexual assault on 
a child, members of the community where he will live must be notified of his presence 
among them. Jurisdictions increasingly are resorting to such “shaming” approaches to isolate 
offenders and warn those they presumably might harm. In l996, as a condition of probation, 
a farmer in Pittsfield, Illinois, was required to place a large sign at the entrance of his 
driveway reading: “Warning: A Violent Felon Li ves Here. Travel at Your Own Risk.” The 
offender had hit another farmer in the face with a fuel pump.  
 
Similarly, individuals convicted of drunk driving sometimes have to put special license plates 
on their cars. Shoplifters may be required to take out advertisements in their local papers 
showing their pictures and announcing their offense. 
 
Opponents of such penalties point out that there is little scientific evidence of their value 
and that their legal justification is arguable. They say that the aim of justice is not vengeance 
and humiliation, but to restore what was destroyed and to prevent an illegal act from 
recurring. They do not believe that the shaming approach that is becoming fashionable in 
the United States achieves such ends. 
  
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.308   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Corrections 
Corrections  is one of those euphemistic words that increasingly are entering the language in 
order to soften the reality of a situation. Corrections  is the general term for the process of 
administering punishment following a plea or a conviction in regard to a criminal offense. It 
most typically refers to imprisonment. People serve time in prisons most generally for 
felonies, while jails house individuals convicted of misdemeanors or those awaiting trial who 
have been unable or are not permitted to raise bail to purchase some free time. Generally, 
sentences of a year or less are served in jail; those that are longer involve prison time. 
 
The term corrections  came into usage during a period in which the ruling philosophy was that 
confinement could reform a lawbreaker. Thus, prisons for young persons were rechristened 
as reformatories. The programs—at least in blueprint— focused on education, group therapy, 
skills training, and similar projects geared toward allowing a released inmate to live in a self-fulfilling 
manner after release. Nonetheless, the core of prison existence clearly was  
punitive and most observers regarded the “rehabilitative” programs as little more than 
window-dressing.  
 
Today, the prevailing philosophy undergirding imprisonment is labeled “just deserts”; that is, 
a person who has hurt others and undermined the well-being of society has “earned” 
through his behavior the consequence of deprivation of liberty and the concomitant 
characteristics of imprisonment. There is no need, just desert advocates believe, to coat 
imprisonment with cozy descriptors; it is treatment that an offender deserves because of his 
self-interested illegal behavior. 
 
Incapacitation  is the ruling rationale of the just deserts approach. By definition, imprisonment 
reduces crime by removing the opportunity for the offender to violate the law. There is, of 
course, a considerable level of criminal activity within a correctional institution that primarily 
involves drug-taking and assaults, including sexual assaults. But at least those outside the 
prison are protected from the depredations of those inside it. The key issue is that virtually 
all individuals who are incapacitated in an institutional setting (including those sentenced 
under the three-strikes laws) will someday be released. If they are pushed further into crime 
by their prison experience, it is possible that they might commit more serious offenses upon 
their release than they would have if they were given a lesser or lighter sentence. 
 
It is sometimes argued that white-collar criminals need not be imprisoned since their 
violations most often are tied to the occupational positions they occupy, and thus their 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.309  
patterns of offending can usually be eliminated by removing them from their business or 
professional positions. Doctors will no longer violate the laws governing medical benefit 
programs if their license to practice medicine is revoked, nor will inside traders have the 
chance to carry on their illegal activities if they are barred from trading either directly or by 
proxy. 
 
The difficulty with this reasoning is that incapacitation involves questions of equity; that is, 
whether all those who violate the law are treated similarly, with no favoritism to the wealthy 
and well placed. There also is the matter of general as opposed to specific deterrence. Specific 
deterrence  refers to keeping the individual who broke the law from doing so again. General 
deterrence  involves demonstrating to others the consequences of law-breaking so that they will 
not succumb to the temptation of doing so. Those with philosophical inclinations might 
seek to puzzle out the justice of punishing one person in order to teach other people a 
lesson, but the criminal justice system, not concerned with such esoteric matters, seeks to 
serve the ends of both specific and general deterrence in its response to law violators. 
 
Types of Sentences 
Sentences that involve incapacitation can take several forms. 
 
Determinate Sentences 
A determinate sentence is one of a fixed number of years, usually set by the legislature, to be 
served upon conviction of a certain offense. In so-called “flat” determinate sentences, the 
offender must serve the entire time in prison; say five years for a fraud violation. More often 
(though decreasingly so in many jurisdictions) the flat sentence can be reduced, usually by as 
much as one-third, for “good behavior.” This ca rrot is considered important by some prison 
administrators because it offers a reward for conforming to institutional rules beyond the 
avoidance of punishments meted out within the walls, such as solitary confinement.  
 
A variation on the determinate sentencing approach is for the legislature to set a maximum 
term for any given offense and to allow the sentencing judge to exercise discretion to impose 
a time period up to that maximum. Often an accused person will enter a guilty plea during a 
bargaining session with the prosecution which will stipulate that the person will be 
recommended for a sentence less than the maximum (an agreement which judges almost 
invariably endorse) or that the person will be allowed to plead to a lesser offense than the 
more serious one in order to ensure that the sentence will not exceed a certain amount  
of time. 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.310   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Indeterminate Sentences 
Indeterminate sentences impose a range of time that can be served by the offender, say five to 
twenty years. This gap allows the correctional authorities to determine when to release the 
prisoner based upon his performance within the institution and an assessment of the 
likelihood that he will continue to pose a danger to the community. Once the most popular 
form of sentencing because it was believed that prison officials possessed the skill and 
wisdom to make accurate judgments about re-offending, indeterminate sentences have come 
into disrepute during the past decades. The objections largely have focused on the inequities 
involved—two people committing the same offense often served vastly different prison 
terms. In addition, prison authorities were deemed to use the indeterminate sentence unfairly 
to take revenge on people they did not like, as a punitive weapon rather than as a  
predictive device.4 
 
Mandatory Sentences and Three-Strikes Law 
Legislatures began adopting mandatory sentences for crimes out of dissatisfaction with what 
they regarded as too-soft judges. The move has been led by the work of the U.S. Sentencing 
Commission. A typical mandatory sentence will disallow parole in the case of certain violent 
crimes or repeat offenses. Similarly, judges will not be permitted to place certain kinds of 
offenders on probation or to suspend their sentence. Most judges, of course, regard this 
inroad against their discretionary powers and autonomy unfavorably. 
 
In one of its more controversial actions, the U.S. Sentencing Commission in November l991 
established rules for sentencing corporations for diverse white-collar offenses. The purpose 
of the rules was to “provide just punishment, adequate deterrence, and incentives for 
organizations to maintain internal mechanisms for preventing, detecting, and reporting 
criminal conduct.” The Commission’s rules reflect the following principles: First, the Court 
must, whenever practicable, order the organization to remedy any harm caused by the 
offenses. The resources expended to remedy the harm should not be viewed as punishment, 
but rather as a means of making victims whole for the harm caused. Second, if the 
organization operated primarily for a criminal purpose or primarily by criminal means, the 
fine should be set sufficiently high to divest the organization of all of its assets. Third, the 
fine range for any organization should be based upon the seriousness of the offense and the 
culpability of the organization. The seriousness of the offense generally will be reflected by 
                                                 
4See further James M. Byrne, Arthur J. Lurigio, and Joan Petersilia, eds., Smart Sentencing: The Emergence of 
Indeterminate Sentences. (Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1992) 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.311  
the highest of (a) the monetary gain, (b) the monetary loss, or (c) the amount noted in a 
guideline offense fine table. Culpability will generally be determined by the steps taken by the 
organization prior to the offense to prevent and detect criminal conduct, the level and extent 
of involvement in or tolerance of the offense by certain personnel, and the organization’s 
actions since an offense has been committed. 
 
The sentence schedule permits a court to place conditions on the way a business is run if the 
court believes that these changes are important to prevent further offending. Establishing 
more effective accounting procedures, hiring a waste control specialist, or expanding the 
board of directors beyond a group of intimates can be some of the conditions placed upon a 
corporation. On the other hand, if a company has established an internal regimen that seeks 
to control illegal actions, it can receive credit from the court for this in regard to reduction of 
a fine or other stipulated penalties. The sentencing guidelines provide, however, that a 
corporation generally is not eligible for a fine mitigation if the crime was committed by a 
more senior employee with managerial authority.5  
 
Prisons 
William Penn is widely credited with beginning the practice of imprisonment in the United 
States. In England in Penn’s time, capital puni shment was the usual response to most crime, 
with more than 250 designated offenses carrying that penalty. Some mitigation had been 
introduced by the practice of transportation, whereby selected offenders were dispatched to 
the American colonies and, after America gained its freedom from British rule, to Australia. 
 
Of the more than 1,800 prisons in the United States today, 372 are classified as maximum 
security, 480 as medium security, and 969 as minimum security. Since prison construction 
has not kept up with prison populations, overcrowding is a serious problem, and a large 
number of states are under federal court orders to reduce overcrowding and otherwise 
improve prison conditions. 
 
More than four-fifths of prison inmates have a record of prior criminal offenses. More than 
half are incarcerated for violent behavior, and nearly one in five committed the offense to 
obtain money for drugs. Almost nine out of ten jail inmates are adult males. Prior to 
incarceration, the median income of inmates was lower than $10,000 a year. 
                                                 
5For a thorough review of the U.S. Sentencing Commission’s Guidelines for organizational offenses see  
Henry J. Amoroso, “Organizational Ethos and Corporate Criminal Liability,” Campbell Law Review, 17  
(1995): 47–70. 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.312   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Today, the growth in prison populations has been particularly pronounced. In l985, there 
were 313 incarcerated people in the United States per every 100,000 people. That figure rose 
to 509 inmates per 100,000 persons in 2008. The growth largely was fueled by the 
imprisonment of drug offenders. At the end of June 2008, there were 2,310,984 people in 
federal and state prisons and local jails. This represents a rise of 0.8 percent from the end of 
2007, less than the average annual growth of 2.4 percent from 2000–2007.  
 
The total number of people in jail and prisons in the United States has tripled over the last 
several decades as politicians have pressed for tougher sentencing laws and have built more 
prisons to seek to assuage public fears about violent crime. 
 
Critics of prisons continue to argue that the rights of prisoners are too liberal. Prisoners have 
used the courts to seek to obtain greater privileges in regard to religion and speech, medical 
care, vocational and educational training, due process, and general living conditions.  
 
At the same time, prisons have become increasingly violent, particularly as ethnic and racial 
groups clash. Interethnic and racial clashes have led to suggestions that prisoners ought to be 
segregated along racial and ethnic lines to reduce outbreaks of violence.  
 
Federal prisons, which tend to be more richly funded, are regarded as superior to virtually all 
state institutions, and it is in them that most incarcerated white-collar offenders will do  
their time. 
 
There are five different security levels in order to confine offenders in an appropriate 
manner. They are: minimum security, low security, medium security, high security,  
and administrative. 
 
Rehabilitation 
Intense debate in the area of corrections has centered about the question of whether prison 
and other programs can rehabilitate those exposed to them. A famous study by Robert 
Martinson reviewed more than 200 carefully designed research studies of diverse kinds of 
treatment programs for offenders and concluded that none of them showed much, if any, 
ability to turn persons away from a life of crime.6 More recently, some scholars now 
maintain that Martinson’s research was flawed and that his conclusion was inaccurate. They 
                                                 
6Robert Martinson, “What Works? — Questions and Answers About Prison Reform,” Public Interest, 35 
(1974):22-54. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.313  
stress in particular that the error has been to look for improvement in all those who undergo 
one or another kind of treatment regimen; instead, the effort should be to determine what 
works for what kinds of people and to concentrate on these conclusions when formulating 
treatment approaches.7  
 
Certainly, some white-collar offenders have used the incarceration experience to redesign 
their lives, in a manner very much for the better. Charles W. Colson, a onetime special 
assistant to President Nixon, was described by Herbert Klein, Nixon’s intimate friend, as 
“one of the meanest people I ever knew.” Caught up in the Watergate scandal, Colson 
negotiated a guilty plea to one count of obstruction of justice in regard to his involvement in 
the burglary of the office of Daniel Ellsberg in an effort to defame Ellsberg, who had 
released the Pentagon Papers, which showed the falsity of government claims about the 
progress of the Vietnam War. Colson received a one-to-three year prison sentence and was 
fined $5,000. 
 
During his time as an inmate at the Max well federal prison, Colson formed the Prison 
Fellowship, which sought to change the lives of convicts through a combination of 
“practical assistance and relentless evangelism.” 8 So successful was Colson that two decades 
after his release he was awarded the Templeton Prize for Progress in Religion, a prize that 
carried a stipend of more than $l million. “Twenty years later I see how God has used my 
life,” Colson noted when receiving the award. “Sometimes the greatest adversities turn out 
to be the greatest blessings.” 
 
Not all white-collar offenders demonstrate so extraordinary a turnabout, but cynics are wont 
to say that if one of the problems involved in maintaining control in America’s turbulent 
prison system has its basis in the lifestyles of many offenders, a “better class of prisoners”— 
that is, more white-collar offenders—mi ght help solve part of that problem. 
 
Jails 
There almost invariably is little in the way of treatment available in jails; they simply 
warehouse prisoners. Jails originated in France in the l600s, and through the centuries, they 
                                                 
7Francis T. Cullen and Paul Gendreau, “The Effectiveness of Correctional Treatment: Reconsidered the 
‘Nothing Works’ Debate,” in Lynne Goodstein and Doris Layton MacKenzie, eds., The American Prison: 
Issues in Research and Policy (New York: Plenum Press, 1989), pp. 24–30. 
8T. Carlson, “Deliver Us From Evil:  Prison Fellowship’s Saving Gra ce,” Policy Review, 62 (1992):72–22; see 
Charles W. Colson, Born Again (Old Tappan, NJ:  Chosen Books, 1976) Colson, Life Sentence (Minneapolis:  
World Wide, 1979). 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.314   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
have been regarded as hellholes of pestilence and cruelty. In medieval England, a jail 
sentence was regarded as a sentence to death since conditions were so abominable. Today, 
more than 8 million people are placed in jails each year, some for several stays. The great 
majority are poorly educated, unemployed, impoverished, and drug ridden. 
 
Community-Based Corrections 
To ease overcrowding, community-based correctional facilities have become commonplace. 
While some people might be sentenced directly to such programs, they typically house 
individuals who have completed time inside institutional walls. Community-based programs 
emphasize the use of neighborhood residential re-entry centers (also known as halfway 
houses), comprehensive sanction centers, and home confinement.  
 
Parole  
Parole (derived from the French and meaning “word,” as in “word of honor”) is the planned 
release and community supervision of offenders before the expiration of their sentence. 
Under most state laws, an offender is eligible for parole after serving one-third of his 
sentence. Parole decisions usually are made by a board or a commission, based on its 
members’ conclusion regarding whether the offe nder will remain at liberty without violating 
the law. There is pressure on parole board members to be notably conservative in their 
actions, because any repetition of an offense by someone they release, particularly if the 
offense is heinous, will trigger community outrage against the board. On the other hand, 
overcrowded prison conditions dictate early release to make room for newcomers. 
 
Parole is considered an act of grace, and once on parole, the inmate is supposed to be  
closely supervised by a parole officer, though this rarely happens because of extraordinarily 
heavy caseloads.  
 
Pardons 
A person may apply for a pardon that, if granted, releases him from further punishment and 
restores the civil rights that are forfeited upon conviction for a crime, including the right to 
vote, to serve on a jury, or to hold public office. 
 
There are two types of pardons — (l) full and absolute and (2) conditional. Full and absolute 
pardons usually are granted only after conviction and upon a presumptive showing that the 
offender was actually innocent. The full and absolute pardon that Richard Nixon received 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.315  
from President Gerald Ford before possible criminal proceedings had begun was a rare 
exception to this rule. 
 
A conditional pardon implies guilt, and for this reason, may be rejected by the person to 
whom it is offered. The grant of a pardon or other clemency is the prerogative of the 
executive branch (the president or state governors) and may not be compelled by the 
petitioner or by the judiciary. 
 
 
Crime Statistics 
 
Uniform Crime Reports 
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) compiles statistics on the extent of crime in the 
United States in a document called the Uniform Crime Report (UCR). The report is put 
together on the basis of information voluntarily submitted by more than l5,000 law 
enforcement departments. This includes virtually every significant public policing agency in 
the country. 
 
The UCR divides crimes into Part I and Part II offenses. Part I offenses are murder and 
non-negligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny, 
arson, and auto theft. While most people would agree that these categories appear to 
incorporate most serious criminal behavior, the somewhat arbitrary nature of the categories 
should not be overlooked. In regard to rape, for instance, the category also embraces 
attempted rape, and studies have shown that men may be arrested for attempted rape for 
behaviors no more ominous (at least in comparison with forcible rape) than patting a female 
stranger on the behind in a rather menacing way. The police charge a serious crime in order 
to more readily persuade the offender to plead to a lesser offense. 
  
The inclusion of arson on the list of major offenses illustrates that political concern enters 
into the compilations. It was added to the FBI Part I tables about a decade ago when 
legislators decided that the offense needed to be highlighted and mandated that the FBI 
upgrade it. 
 
Part II offenses include most other violations, though they omit traffic offenses and pay no 
heed to serious white-collar crime. When they do mention offenses that might fall into the 
white-collar category, often what they are tabulating as offenses includes crimes that might 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.316   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
otherwise not be considered white-collar. For example, for classification purposes, forgery  
includes the passing of bad checks by drug addicts without bank accounts. When you add in 
theft of services, welfare fraud, petty confidence games, and credit card fraud, you can 
account for virtually all of the crimes charged under possible white-collar crime headings. 
 
The UCR figures are based on what is called “offenses known to the police.” Data is also 
provided on arrests, though not on whether the case is resolved by a determination of guilt. 
Rates are reported per 100,000 persons, a matter which skews the crime picture in some 
jurisdictions. In Las Vegas, for instance, the crime rate is higher per capita than it reasonably 
ought to be because the figures pay no heed to the very large tourist influx. 
 
National Crime Survey 
The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is a statistical study carried out by the 
Bureau of the Census that annually conducts interviews with 51,000 individuals about 
experiences of crime victimization. It shows UCR seriously underreporting; that is, the 
persons interviewed report a much greater amount of crime than that which figures in the 
UCR reports. About 55 percent of crimes of violence and one-quarter of thefts are found to 
be reported to the police. The NCS makes no attempt to measure any behaviors that would 
fit into the category of white-collar crime. 
 
The UCR results show that crime victims and offenders share the same demographic 
characteristics. The average victim is young, male, uneducated, and poor. A somewhat 
counterintuitive result is that as wealth increases, the likelihood of being a victim of violence 
or burglary decreases. However, wealth is correlated positively with victimization by personal 
theft and larceny. 
 
Self-Report Surveys 
Self-report surveys typically involve a questionnaire on which a respondent indicates which 
offenses he has committed and how often he has done so within a specified period of time. 
They invariably are administered to juveniles because youngsters can more readily be located 
(in classrooms, for instance) and will be more likely to cooperate with the researcher, at least 
if they are persuaded by the guarantee of anonymity. 
 
The surveys show that the most common juvenile offenses are truancy, alcohol use, and 
recourse to false identification, typically to gain entrance to a place out-of-bounds for 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.317  
underage persons or to buy liquor. Very few youngsters do not commit any offense at all 
that, if known and taken seriously, could not result in official action against them. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.401  
WHITE-COLLAR CRIME 
 
What Is White-Collar Crime? 
Since the term was first used, there have been constant disputes regarding what is (or should 
be) the definition of white-collar crime.  The designation was coined by Edwin H. Sutherland in 
December l939 during his presidential address in Philadelphia to the American Sociological 
Society. Ten years later Sutherland published a monograph, White Collar Crime, in which he 
offered an arguable, vague definition of the concept in a footnote: White-collar crime was 
said to be “Crime in the upper, white-collar class, which is composed of respectable, or at 
least respected, business, and professional men.” These crimes were confined to acts 
performed by white-collar persons in occupational roles, thereby excluding “most of their 
cases of murder, adultery, and intoxication, since these are not customarily a part of their 
occupational procedures.” 1  
 
A few pages after this definitional foray, Sutherland illustrated white-collar crime through 
examples of thefts by chain store employees and overcharges by garage mechanics and watch 
repairers. There was little consistency between his definition and his illustrations of what 
might fall within it. 
 
Nonetheless, the term white-collar crime  has been widely incorporated into popular and 
scholarly language throughout the world, though the designation economic crime  is sometimes 
used as well. The difficulty with economic crime  is that so many illegal acts, including murder, 
are often committed in order to achieve economic gain. The United Nations, for its part, 
adopted the phrase abuse of power  for those behaviors that correspond to white-collar crimes 
as defined by Sutherland. In addition, other designations, such as upperworld crime, crimes by the 
powerful, avocational crime, crime in the suites, and organizational crime, are sometimes employed to 
designate more or less the same phenomena as white-collar crime. 
 
A major difficulty with the concept as formulated by Sutherland is that he is designating an 
offense category that has no equivalent in the law. Certain statute offenses can be identified 
as those that by and large will be committed by persons in the elite classes — offenses such as 
anti-trust violations and insider trading — but what is to be done definitionally with, say, the 
proofreader, who is paid little more than minimum wage and learns from information that 
he is working on of a merger between the company and one of its strong competitors. He 
                                                 
1Edwin H. Sutherland, White-Collar Crime (New York:  Dryden Press, 1949), p. 9. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.402   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
buys stock and reaps a considerable profit, but is then caught and prosecuted as an inside 
trader. Is this person to be regarded as a white-collar criminal? Numerous further examples 
of situations that are definitionally ambiguous can be offered. 
 
The Dictionary of Criminal Justice Data Terminology, published by the Federal Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, defines white-collar crime as “nonv iolent crime for financial gain committed by 
means of deception by persons whose occupational status is entrepreneurial, professional, or 
semi-professional and utilizing their special occupational skills and opportunities; also 
nonviolent crime for financial gain utilizing deception and committed by anyone having 
special technical and professional knowledge of business and government, irrespective of the 
person’s occupation.” 
 
This definition certainly catches in its net a wide array of wrongdoers. But critics fault it for 
its explicit omission of violent offenses. What about a doctor who knowingly performs 
unnecessary surgery in order to collect a large fee and ends up causing the patient to die? Or 
a surgeon who kills a patient because of his incompetence? Or how about the numerous 
deaths and injuries from toxic wastes, polluted air, and violations of health and safety 
regulations? Are such results not the product of white-collar crime? 
 
Though there is no consensus within the scholarly community, one definition today of 
white-collar crime is that proposed by Albert J. Reiss, Jr. and Albert Biderman: 
 
White-collar crime violations are those violations of law to which penalties are attached that 
involve the use of a violator’s position of econom ic power, influence, or trust in the legitimate 
economic or political institutional order for the purpose of illegal gain, or to commit an 
illegal act for personal or organizational gain. 2   
 
Opportunity is an important ingredient of white-collar crime. An unemployed youth needing 
funds might turn to armed robbery or burglary. He is in no position to violate the anti-trust 
laws, though doing so might well provide him with a great deal more funds and lesser 
likelihood of being caught. The bank president or the company chief executive, for their 
part, can deal with a personal cash shortage through a variety of illegal tactics that are tied to 
their business position. Criminals will often commit offenses in ways with which they are 
most familiar, ways that they can most easily accomplish, and those that have the lowest 
                                                 
Albert J. Reiss, Jr., and Albert Biderman, Data Sources on White-Collar Law-Breaking (Washington, DC:  
National Institute of Justice, U. S. Department of Justice, 1980). 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.403  
likelihood of dire consequences. An often-unheralded bonus of social status is access to 
opportunities for less dirty, “more decent” kinds of crime. 
 
 
Public Perceptions of White-Collar Crime 
Studies indicate that white-collar offenses, particularly those that inflict physical harm, are 
seen by the public to be as serious as more traditional kinds of crime — those offenses that, 
as one early criminologist noted, carry a “brimstone smell.” 
 
A poll by the National Survey of Crime Severity gathered the opinions of 60,000 
respondents l8 years of age or older about a list of criminal acts. Each respondent was asked 
to rate the crimes listed. The results showed, among other things, that fraud by a grocer and 
a $l0 embezzlement were perceived to be as serious as an obscene phone call. Acceptance of 
a bribe by a city politician and an armed robbery that netted $l,000 were also rated at about 
the same level. The following table presents the results of the study, showing the crimes in 
order of increasing seriousness and indicating the white-collar offenses in boldface type. 
 
National Survey of Crime Severity Ratings: Selected Offense Stimuli  
 
Ratings  Offense Stimuli 
  1.9 An employee embezzles $10 from his employer. 
  1.9 A store owner knowingly puts large eggs into containers marked  
“extra large.” 
  1.9 A person makes an obscene phone call. 
  3.1 A person breaks into a home and steals $100. 
  3.2 An employer illegally threatens to fire employees if they join a  
labor union. 
  3.6 A person knowingly passes a bad check. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.404   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
  3.7 A labor uni on official illegally threatens to organize a strike if an 
employer hires nonunio n workers. 
  5.4 A real estate agent refuses to sell a house to a person beca use of that 
person’s race. 
  5.4 A person threatens to harm a victim unless the victim gives him money. The 
victim gives him $10 and is not harmed.  
  5.7 A theater owner knowingly shows pornographic movies to a minor. 
  6.1 A person cheats on his federal income tax return and avoids paying 
$10,000 in taxes. 
  6.1 A person runs a prostitution racket. 
  6.2 A person beats a victim with his fists. The victim requires treatment by a 
doctor but not hospitalization. 
  6.2 An employee embezzles $1,000 from his employer. 
  6.4 An employer refuses to hire a qualified person because of that  
person’s race. 
  6.5 A person uses heroin. 
  6.9 A factory knowingly gets rid of its waste in a way that pollutes the 
water supply of a city. As a result, one person becomes ill, but does not 
require medical treatment. 
  6.9 A person beats a victim with his fists. The victim requires hospitalization.  
  8.0 A person steals an unlocked car and sells it. 
  8.2 Knowing that a shipment of cooking oil is bad, a store owner decides 
to sell it anyway. Only one bottle is sold and the purchaser is treated by 
a doctor but not hospitalized. 
  8.6 A person performs an illegal abortion. 
  9.0 A city official takes a bribe from a company for his help in getting a 
city building contract for the company. 
  9.0 A person, armed with a lead pipe, robs a victim of $1,000.  
  9.2 Several large companies illegally fix the retail prices of their products. 
  9.4 A person robs a victim of $10 at gunpoint. No physical harm occurs.  
  9.4 A public official takes $1,000 of public money for his own use. 
  9.6 A police officer knowingly makes a false arrest. 
  9.6 A person breaks into a home and steals $1,000. 
10.0 A government official intentionally hinders the investigation of a 
criminal offense. 
10.9 A person steals property worth $10,000 from outside a building.  
11.2 A company pays a bribe to a legislator to vote for a law favoring  
the company. 
11.8 A man beats a stranger with his fists. The victim requires hospitalization. 
12.0 A police officer takes a bribe not to interfere with an illegal gambling 
operation. 
12.0 A person gives the floor plans of a bank to a bank robber. 
13.3 A person, armed with a lead pipe, robs a victim of $10. The victim is injured 
and requires hospitalization. 
13.5 A doctor cheats on claims he makes to a federal health insurance plan 
for patient services. He gains $10,000. 
13.9 A legislator takes a bribe from a company to vote for a law favoring the 
company. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.405  
14.6 A person, using force, robs a victim of $10. The victim is hurt and requires 
hospitalization. 
15.5 A person breaks into a bank at night and steals $10,000.  
15.7 A county judge takes a bribe to give a light sentence in a criminal case.
 16.6 A person, using force, robs a victim of $1,000. The victim is hurt and requires 
treatment by a doctor but not hospitalization. 
17.8 Knowing that a shipment of cooking oil is bad, a store owner decides 
to sell it anyway. Only one bottle is sold and the purchaser dies. 
19.5 A person kills a victim by recklessly driving an automobile. 
19.7 A factory knowingly gets rid of its waste in a way that pollutes the 
water supply of a city. As a result, 20 people become ill but none 
require medical treatment. 
19.9 A factory knowingly gets rid of its waste in a way that pollutes the 
water supply of a city. As a result, one person dies. 
20.1 A man forcibly rapes a woman. Her physical injuries require treatment by a 
doctor but not hospitalization. 
33.8 A person runs a narcotics ring. 
39.1 A factory knowingly gets rid of its waste in a way that pollutes the 
water supply of a city. As a result, 20 people die. 
43.9 A person plants a bomb in a public building. The bomb explodes and one 
person is killed. 
72.1 A person plants a bomb in a public building. The bomb explodes and 20 
people are killed. 
 
Source: The National Survey of Crime Severity by Marvin Wolfgang, Robert Figlio, Paul Tracy, and 
Simon Singer (1985). Washington, D.C.; U.S. Government Printing Office (Pp. vi–x). 
 
 
Crimes of the Middle Classes — A Look at White-Collar Crime 
Surveys carried out subsequently provide essentially the same result—that the public as a 
whole regards some white-collar offenses as serious matters. The difficulty with such 
surveys, however, is that they fail to convey in any effective manner the complexity of the 
white-collar offenses and the status of the offenders. It is one thing for a respondent to say 
that he regards toxic waste offenses that produce death as very serious violations, but quite 
another for that person to regard the corporate executive responsible for such matters as an 
“evil” person. Because of this, white-collar offe nders receive much less severe penalties than 
the street people who commit the offenses that the public generally regards to be as serious 
as theirs. 
 
The debate over just what constitutes a white-collar crime, and what drives the white-collar 
criminal, has been raging ever since Sutherland’s seminal work. The authors of Crimes of the 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.406   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Middle Classes3 offer a contribution that for the most part avoids theory-building, offering 
instead a statistical report of offenders convicted in federal court. 
 
Using federal court records, and an unprecedented access to probation officers’ 
presentencing investigation reports (PSIs), the authors determined that most people 
convicted of white-collar crimes are not upper class; that social status has only an indirect 
significance; and that, once a conviction is attained, higher status often means a stiffer 
sentence. The most important factor is “how personal situations and organizational 
opportunities combine” to make crime possible and attractive to average Americans. 4 White-
 collar crime does have a unique place in criminology, but the split is not between an 
underworld of the desperate poor and an elite universe of high-stakes shysters. White-collar 
crime has some relation to both of these mythological worlds, but is largely the province of 
the middle classes, where organizational position is more important than pedigree and 
personal situations are more forceful than sociological trends. 
 
Profiles of Offenders 
The wide array of crimes called “white-collar”—f rom anti-trust and securities violations to 
bank embezzlement and credit fraud—makes a ssembling a profile of the typical offender 
difficult, but not impossible. Most defendants are white males, with a modera te social status. 
They are slightly more likely than the general population to have a high school diploma (78 
percent versus 69 percent), or a college degree (24.7 percent versus 19 percent for the 
general public). The majority, then, are not highly educated, and in at least one category—
 owning one’s home—the offenders fall behind the average citizen: while 55 percent of 
Americans own their homes, only 45.3 percent of the offenders do. Social status is a factor 
in white-collar criminality, but as the authors point out, “The position conferred by status, 
rather than status itself, empowers the offender.” 5 So a corporate manager, who was 
promoted from inside the company with only a ninth-grade education and who doesn’t own 
his home, is not as atypical an offender as might be supposed. The key is that, by his 
position in his company, he has the opportunity and means to commit a crime.  
 
                                                 
3 Weisburd, David, et al. Crimes of the Middle Classes. White-Collar Offenders in the Federal Courts.  New Haven: Yale 
UP, 1991 
4 Weisburd, p. xiv. 
5 Weisburd, p. 61. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.407  
Cressey Study 
Donald R. Cressey found in a 1953 study of embezzlers that most of those he examined 
“had lived beyond their means for some time before deciding to embezzle.” 6 Crimes extends 
this statement more generally, remarking, “The most interesting fact about the white-collar 
offenders’ aggregate financial status is not the value of their assets but the extent of their 
liabilities.” Offenders often “have the material goods associated with successful people, but 
may barely be holding their financial selves together.” 7 These people have assembled a 
structure of respectability, but it is often built on the sands of debt. The Cressey Study is 
discussed in more detail in the chapter on “Occupational Fraud.” 
 
Effect of Status 
What is loosely called “class” or “social status” does have an effect on crimes. For example, 
one defendant used his position as chairman of a local bank board to set up loans for his 
ailing wood chip company. The loans would never have been approved without the 
chairman’s influence, and he never reported them in his proxy statement to the bank’s 
shareholders. Ultimately, the bank lost close to $6 million. In this case, the chairman’s class 
standing made a difference. His ruse squares with the documented knowledge that officers 
and managers commit the business crimes with the widest impact (in terms of dollar 
amounts and victimization), while owners and workers generally commit narrower schemes. 
 
Organizational Opportunity 
Of all factors, organizational opportunity remains the determinant aspect of white-collar 
crime. Against Sutherland’s emphasis on an elite group running high-class sting operations, 
Crimes shows that organization and complexity make a larger difference than the offender’s 
social status. In a fascinating case, a church group used its daycare center to defraud the 
federal government of approximately $1 million.  Their arrangement with the Department of 
Agriculture required the daycare’s administrators to submit monthly vouchers reporting the 
number of meals they had served and the cost of food and labor. When auditors descended 
upon the scam, they found that for about $79,000 in actual expenses, the administrators had 
submitted almost $1 million in food costs, and $400,000 for labor. Teachers said they 
sometimes brought food to the center themselves because the children weren’t being fed 
properly. There were also reports that “mor ning snacks were never served unless the 
government inspectors were expected, that the same children were run through serving lines 
                                                 
6 Weisburd, p. 65n. 
7 Weisburd, p. 65. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.408   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
twice when inspectors were present, and that some children were bused in from other 
daycare centers on inspection days.” 8 The example shows, according to the authors, that a 
criminal’s position in an organization and his ability to organize the scam have far more 
bearing on the crime than social status or class alone. 
 
The Middle Class 
People of moderate social standing are in fact more likely than members of the upper class 
to commit highly organized crimes from within a corporate structure.9 Some offenders do fit 
the stereotype of “respectability and high social status” in white-collar crime, but most of 
them are solidly middle class. “They appear to represent the very broad middle of the 
society, much above the poverty line but for the most part far from elite social status,” the 
authors say. Offenders “are mostly commonplace, not unlike the average American in most 
respects, though perhaps more often with personal lives that are in some state of disarray. 
The single quality that distinguishes them from other Americans is that they have been 
convicted of a federal crime.” 10 
 
Methodology 
All the conclusions in the Crimes of the Middle Classes are qualified. The authors and 
researchers drew from the federal court records of seven districts11 and obtained access to 
the pre-sentencing reports (PSIs) prepared by probation officers. PSIs had never been 
available to researchers before, and the close reading of these documents formed a central 
part of the project. Admittedly, the crimes and specific cases studied were selected, not 
drawn from a random sample. Eight crimes were targeted as “white-collar”: securities 
violations, anti-trust suits, bribery and influence-peddling, embezzlement, mail or wire fraud, 
tax fraud, false claims and statements (in official documents), and credit fraud. Certain 
violations—such as RICO charges against organized crime and breaking importation laws—
 were excluded, judged to lie outside the parameters of what most people think of as white-
 collar activity.  
                                                 
8 Weisburd, p. 94. 
9 The authors opine that “the individualism and in dependence” of professions like doctors or lawyers 
discourage their involvement in the organizational network that drives these crimes, though we are warned that 
“the growing participation of profes sionals in large private organizations” (such as HMOs) may change both 
the opportunity for and attitude toward criminal activity (89-91). 
10 Weisburd, p. 73. 
11 The districts and “central cities” were as follows:  Central California (Los Angeles), Northern Georgia 
(Atlanta), Northern Illinois (Chicago), Maryland (Balti more), Southern New York (Manhattan and the Bronx), 
Northern Texas (Dallas), and Western Washington (Seattle). A detailed discussion of the sampling process is 
included as Appendix 1. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.409  
Even within their eight categories, the authors didn’t examine every single case, deciding to 
focus on no more than 30 cases within each category in order to facilitate the close reading 
of PSIs. They warn that their findings were taken from studying people actually convicted, 
so the results don’t take into account how often charges are actually filed and followed up by 
prosecution. By dealing with the convicted, they focused on the treatment of people already 
inside the federal system.  
 
Finally, the long-range nature of the project meant that the study’s sample years — 
1976–1978 — were considerably past before the findings were published. The sentencing 
guidelines handed down in 1984 and adopted in 1987 make some material that judges 
considered at their discretion (like the dollar amount of a crime) a mandatory element of 
sentencing. At the same time, the Sentencing Act systematically excludes  judgments based on 
a defendant’s “moral character,” which had previously been a standard in assessments. 
Wheeler and company write that these developments will have to be accommodated in 
future studies, but they don’t expect that such trends will seriously affect the general picture 
they present. “For example, we see no reason to believe that the role of organizational 
opportunity in white-collar crime... is any different in substance in 1990 than it was in the 
late 1970s, although the particular organizations singled out for public inquiry and 
prosecution may well have changed.” 12  
 
With these qualifications in mind, it remains useful to consider the findings of this report. 
The following chart summarizes the ranking of offenders by social status and in respect to 
certain demographic features.  
 
Offenders Ranked by Status, with Selected Demographic Information 
 
High  
 
 
•Anti-trust 
 
 
 
•Securities  
These offenders committed the crimes with the largest dollar impact, and the 
widest geographic scope. They are overwhelmingly white (99%-plus) and male 
(99.1% for anti-trust, 97.8% for securities). The groups are equally likely to 
hold a college degree (40.9% in either case), and their frauds were usually 
occupational in nature. There are revealing contrasts when these two types of 
offenders are compared: 
 
1) Almost 97% of anti-trust offenders had been steadily employed in the 
                                                 
12 Weisburd, p.xv. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.410   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
years preceding their crime, while only about 60% of the securities 
offenders had continually held a job. 
2)  The anti-trusters had a median ratio of assets to liabilities of $200,000 
(assets) to $40,000 (liabilities); the securities offenders medianly held 
$57,500 in assets with $54,000 in liabilities. 
3) Anti-trust violators were more likely to own their own homes (73.5% vs. 
58.2%) and to be married (95.7% vs. 80.7%) than securities offenders.  
Middle  
 
•Tax fraud 
 
 
•Bribery  
These offenders are mainly white males, around 45 years old. Their crimes are 
not usually occupational—just 15% for tax fraud and less than 18% for 
bribery. Roughly 57% of offenders owned their own homes, and about 28% 
held a college degree. Their median assets ranged from $45,000–$49,500; 
median liabilities were between $19,000 and $23,500. The authors remark that 
although tax fraud is a typical white-collar crime, “two-thirds of the tax 
offenders work in the manufacturing or nonprofessional service sectors.” 
Low  
 
•Credit fraud 
 
•Mail fraud 
 
•False claims  
This group was not as likely to be white—71.5% for credit fraud, 76.8% for 
mail fraud, 61.8% for false claims—or male—84.8% for credit fraud, 82.1% 
for mail fraud, 84.7% for false claims. They were generally younger than the 
other category offenders (less than 40 years old); less likely to be married 
(about 50%); and less likely to own their own home (roughly 34–45% across 
the three crime types). Their net worth, as per the ratio of assets to liabilities, 
was remarkably low: $7,000/$7,000 for credit fraud; $2,000/$3,500 for mail 
fraud; $4,000/$5,000 for false claims. 
Outside Hierarchy  
 
 
•Bank embezzlement  
These offenders were placed outside the rankings because they were 
dramatically younger (a mean age of 31) and more likely to be female (44.8% 
female/55.2% male) than the other gr oups. While nearly 25% of the low-
 status group was unemployed at the time of their crime, only 3% of 
embezzlers were without a job (just slightly above the 2.8% rate for high-
 status offenders). They are the group least likely to have a college degree 
(12.9%) or to own their own home (28.4%). Their median net worth was 
$2,000 in assets with $3,000 in liabilities. Male embezzlers were usually 
managers of a local banking operation, while females were most often tellers 
or clerical workers.  
 
However difficult it may prove to be to sort out the demography of Crimes, the strength of 
the analysis lies in its tracing of the path of criminals through the federal system. Following 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.411  
their core group from offense to conviction, the authors report on general trends in the 
treatment and sentencing of white-collar criminals. The most surprising conclusion states 
that people of higher social status, once convicted, are more likely than similar offenders to 
receive prison time and to be fined. 
 
Cooperating Defendants 
Some standard assumptions still apply. For example, informing on one’s cohorts does help. 
Over 42 percent of cooperating defendants were charged with a single violation, while only 
30 percent of uncooperative defendants were so lucky. Also, white-collar defendants receive 
bail rather easily: just one person in eight spends any time incarcerated before trial, and for 
the generally high-status anti-trust defendants, the figure is fewer than one in 20. By 
comparison, in a control group of “common criminals” (i.e., people convicted of the 
“nonviolent economic crimes” of postal theft or postal fraud), at least 1/3 of the defendants 
spent time in jail before going to trial.  
 
Pleas by White-Collar Defendants 
White-collar defendants are more likely to insist on a trial than other offenders. In at least 90 
percent of federal cases, defendants will plead guilty, avoiding the expense and effort of a 
trial. But, over 18 percent of defendants in the Crimes sample (as opposed to the usual ten 
percent) pled “Not Guilty.” In cases like bank embezzlement, usually “simple cases with 
clear evidence,” plea bargains are easily negotiated and “prosecutors may actively seek guilty 
pleas.” 14 The decision on how to plead varies with the offender as much as the offense. For 
example, female bank tellers were especially prone to plead “Not Guilty,” while many of the 
male embezzlers—generally “higher-level officials involved in more complex crimes”—
 proceeded to trial. Of all white-collar defendants, securities offenders are the ones most 
likely to insist on their day in court. Evidently, both the government and the defendants in 
these cases feel more strongly about their chances to win.  
 
Judgments 
Judgments against white-collar defendants often  involve an assessment of personal suffering. 
It is widely held that, when convicted of a crime, these people suffer a greater blow 
                                                 
13 Postal theft and postal forgery were selected as economic crimes without a direct link to violence. Other 
common crimes, such as burglaries or larceny, are state offenses, and thus are not appropriate to this study of 
the federal system. Postal theft involves acts like stealing government-issued checks, such as welfare payments; 
postal forgery involves the act of cashing these items. Clearly, the choice of these crimes (and not others) for 
comparison is debatable. 
14 Weisburd, p. 114. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.412   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
personally and professionally than street criminals. Many observers think this suffering 
should be acknowledged in assessing a sentence. One federal judge is quoted as saying: 
 
The white-collar criminal by virt ue of his conviction has suffered a loss of position, usually 
loss of employment, sometimes status in his profession, other times the ability to ever find 
employment in anything requiring a fidelity bond or what have you. Whereas the common 
street criminal hasn’t had a career loss of a similar nature; indeed, in some areas the 
conviction of a crime is some sort of a badge of maturity. 15  
 
Personal Suffering 
Examining PSIs, the authors found that in about 65 percent of the cases overall, personal 
suffering was said to have played an overwhelming role in the defendant’s case. Securities 
offenders and embezzlers topped the list, with 70 and 87 percent of these people 
(respectively) reporting some hardship. Of course, the reports involved statements by the 
defendants or their families, which could be self-serving.  
 
And in actually looking at objective material—such as the loss of employment, marital 
separations and divorce, or mental health problems—the authors found the results 
“ambiguous.” Credit fraud perpetrators, for example, seldom reported any suffering, but 
they had a 20 percent divorce rate during the time of their prosecution, the highest in the 
study. And there were often large gaps between different types of crimes. Compared to the 
securities offenders, with a 70 percent rate of suffering, only about 24 percent of anti-trust 
offenders had similar complaints. The discrepancy may lie in how different crimes are 
viewed. “Anti-trust violators, who steal for their companies and actually provide the 
services they say they do,” aren’t seen as harshly as “those who steal from their 
companies.” 16 Securities offenders are stigmatized “b ecause their crimes are often against 
their own clients,” while bank embezzlers (with over 87 percent reported suffering) are 
judged with particular strictness “because they steal from their employers.” 17 
 
In summary, the authors believe that the extra legal suffering of white-collar defendants has 
some validity, but it’s not always possible to be sure that prosecution alone caused the 
hardship. The contradictory images of these criminals as both exceptionally privileged and 
                                                 
15 Weisburd, p. 116. 
16 Weisburd, p. 124. 
17 Weisburd, p. 125. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.413  
especially harassed “overstate their real experience in the legal system.” Neither factor is as 
great as the standard rhetoric might suggest.  
 
Imprisonment 
Crimes does find that the highest status group—an ti-trust violators — were the least likely to 
receive prison time (about 1 in 5) and to draw the shortest sentence (1.8 months). Securities 
fraud led the group, with over 67 percent doing time, followed by tax fraud (58.9 percent) 
and mail fraud (55.1 percent). But in considering all offenders in all groups, the authors 
discovered that the higher an individual’s status, the more likely the person was to be 
imprisoned: “All else being equal, doctors will have about a 30 percent greater likelihood of 
being imprisoned [for a white-collar crime] than truck drivers and almost a 13 percent 
greater likelihood than managers.” 18 Judges seem to find people of higher prestige more at 
fault, or in other words, more blameworthy, in the commission of their crimes. 
 
One remarkable variable in determining the severity of punishment was where the case was 
tried. The districts of Maryland, Northern  Illinois, and Northern Texas tended toward 
harsher sentences; Northern Georgia and Southern New York handed down the lightest 
ones. 
 
More often than prison, the punishment of  choice for white-collar criminals is the 
imposition of fines. Whereas 6 percent of the “common criminals” in the survey received 
fines, all of the anti-trust violators did; embezz lers were the least likely group to be fined, but 
even so, their 15 percent rate far exceeded the norm. For fines as well as imprisonment, 
higher status usually meant a higher penalty. Analysis showed that “white defendants, those 
with more impeccable records, and those who have higher class positions are more likely to 
be fined.” 19 But while the decision to fine seems based on status, the actual levies are often 
comparatively low. For anti-trust suits, the mean fine was $9,808; for embezzlement, it was 
just $1,397. Even well-off offenders got off light: a man convicted of fixing the price of 
candy bars in an eastern state, with a net worth exceeding $190,000, was fined $3,500; 
another defendant, whose net worth approached $1.4 million, was fined $5,000 for credit 
fraud. Only 4 percent of offenders were ever given the statute’s maximum penalty. 
 
                                                 
18 Weisburd, p. 143. 
19 Weisburd, p. 157. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.414   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Obviously, most white-collar crimes don’t even  approach the billion-dollar levels of the 
stereotype. An accurate picture actually looks rather mundane. “For every truly complicated 
and rarified offense,” according to Wheeler and his colleagues, “there are many others that 
are simple and could be carried out by almost anyone who can read, write, and give an 
outward appearance of stability.” 20 More than anything else — more than status, or class 
position, or heritage — the white-collar criminal needs an opportunity and some sort  
of organization.  
 
Contributing Factors 
The authors posit several factors which have contributed to the rising problem of  
economic crime: 
• America’s economy increasingly runs on credit, which often means rising personal debt. 
The offenders in the sample often showed serious discrepancies “between their 
resources and their commitments.” 21  
• New information technologies mean that the opportunity for wrongdoing is growing, 
and many of the techniques are not widely comprehended by businesses or individuals.  
• Government programs distributing large amounts of money make an enticing target  
for defalcations. 
• The importance of credentials in a professionalized society may influence individuals “to 
inflate the credentials, or to make them up when they do not exist.” This tendency 
involves everything from cheating on school entrance exams to falsifying  
credit applications. 
• Most broadly, the authors observe an American culture based on affluence and ever-
 higher levels of success. “The continued pressure of a value system that rewards 
economic affluence or its visible by-products has its effects on the broad middle of 
American society.” 22 Television and advertising in general promise that no one has to 
settle for second best, prompting those who find themselves running behind to fudge 
the difference, crossing ethical and sometimes legal lines. 
 
Conclusion 
Curbing this pernicious trend will not be easy, but there are ways. Since organizational 
opportunity determines so much criminal activity, the foremost deterrent is to pay 
heightened attention to “where the money is and how it flows” within any group. Obviously, 
                                                 
20 Weisburd, p. 171. 
21 Weisburd, p. 183. 
22 Weisburd, p. 184. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.415  
most businesses have some system of financial control, but the authors say that 
“organizational intelligence” is often less than stellar. Offenders are not usually “the highly 
sophisticated swindlers” from the mass media,  just “average people in a financial jam who 
see a way out through fraud.” 23  
 
Furthermore, like many analysts these days, the Crimes team believes it is far too easy to 
acquire money and goods on credit. Tightening the restrictions on credit cards and loans 
would directly address the role that debt plays in many schemes. 
 
Finally, these authors center the problem of white-collar crime around values. As long as the 
places where citizens learn their priorities — schools, families, neighborhoods, mass media —
emphasize high-pressure risk-taking and material affluence over “honesty and moral 
integrity,” many people will go for the gold, even if they have to steal it. It will never be easy, 
they acknowledge, to balance a market-based economy which requires competition, with an 
equal insistence on forthrightness and fair play. 
 
                                                 
23 Weisburd, p. 190. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.501  
ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME 
 
Most criminologists have adopted the distinction first made by Marshall B. Clinard (a 
recipient of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners’ Cressey Award) and Richard 
Quinney between occupational crime  and organizational crime. Organizational crime is that which 
is committed by businesses, particularly corporations, and government. Occupational crime 
involves offenses against the law by individuals in the course of their occupation. An  
anti-trust offense would be an organizational crime; accepting or offering bribes is an 
occupational offense. 
 
Organizational crime occurs in the context of  complex relationships and expectations among 
boards of directors, executives, and managers on the one hand, and among parent 
corporations, corporate divisions, and subsidiaries on the other. White-collar crime is 
distinguished from lower socioeconomic crimes in terms of the structure of the violation 
and the fact that administrative and civil penalties are more likely to be used as punishment 
than are criminal penalties. 
 
While corporations cannot be jailed, they may be confined. Most corporate lawbreakers are 
handled by government regulatory agencies like the Federal Trade Commission, the 
Environmental Protection Agency, and the Food and Drug Administration. Enforcement 
measures might include warning letters, consent agreements or decrees not to repeat the 
violation; orders of regulatory agencies to  compel compliance, seizure, or recall of  
goods; administrative or civil monetary penalties; and court injunctions to refrain from 
further violations. 
 
Corporate crime is certainly not limited to the United States. Clinard and Yeager say it 
appears to be extensive in Europe, Japan, Australia, and other areas. According to Delmas-
 Marty, French multinationals violate the law in many ways. They utilize both legal and illegal 
means in tax evasion. They may transfer profits from one subsidiary to another located in a 
country that has a more lenient tax system or presents a tax haven, like Switzerland. 
According to Cosson, French manufacturing corporations also falsify their bookkeeping to 
avoid payment of industrial and commercial taxes. 
 
In Japan, the Diet (legislature) has passed a law for the punishment of crimes “relating to 
environmental pollution that adversely affects the health of persons.” Under this law, 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.502   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
intentional or negligent emission by industries of a substance that causes danger to human 
life or health is to be punished with imprisonment or fines. 
 
The Swiss banking system has often been accused of offering a hiding place for stolen or 
looted money, providing a screen for stock manipulations and shady promoters, and helping 
tax evaders to conceal both income and assets. Deposits in Swiss banks are often laundered 
to obscure their illegal origins, and then the money is made legal through new commercial 
transactions and is therefore concealed from tax authorities. 
 
 
Corporate Organization and Criminal Behavior 
Corporate offenses take place in a context of complex relationships and expectations in an 
organizational setting. It is often difficult to distinguish which corporate participants ought 
to be held personally responsible for the wrongdoing. Many offenses are the result of myriad 
decisions that are made by different individuals and passed through a chain of command. 
Not uncommonly, when corporate acts are contrary to the law, upper-level executives take 
pains to avoid learning what is going on so as to avoid responsibility if a scheme is 
uncovered. In some corporations, there is one well-paid executive who is only half in jest 
referred to as the “vice president in charge of going to jail.” 
 
The law largely treats corporations as people. They make more inviting prosecutory targets 
than individuals, most notably because they have deeper pockets and can be heavily fined to 
repay losses that have been inflicted on individuals or on the society in general.  
 
Government regulatory agencies such as the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
oversee corporate performance in areas assigned to them by Congressional mandate. 
Typically, the lawmakers enact a statute that is deliberately vague, allowing the enforcement 
agency to develop its own enforcement guidelines within the boundaries of the 
Congressional authorization. The agencies will sometimes seek to expand the reach of the 
law by selecting notably egregious cases for litigation and appeal, thereby anticipating a 
favorable ruling on what is fundamentally a somewhat novel interpretation of their mandate. 
 
The Image of the Corporation 
Large corporations have contributed significantly to industrial and commercial development 
throughout the world. Their size and resources enable them to organize and coordinate 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.503  
production and distribution. The capital resources of a large corporation provide it with the 
ability to develop, adopt, and alter technology on a mammoth scale. A considerable portion 
of the population has been accorded a high standard of living because of corporate activity. 
 
At the same time, large corporations have the power to influence the manner in which  
laws are written and to commit acts that can inflict serious harm upon the population. They 
can hire lobbyists and lawyers who manipulate definitions of wrongdoing in the 
corporations’ interests.  
 
The very largeness and remoteness of the corporation from most of us is part of the reason 
that Americans traditionally have a love-hate attitude toward such organizations. We admire 
and desire corporations’ products, but we are uneasy about their power — a power that tends 
to be used single-mindedly in the pursuit of profits. Thomas Hobbes, a seventeenth century 
English political philosopher, stands out in the crowd that has been scornful of 
corporations. Hobbes’ unsavory comparison was between corporations and ascarides — 
worms that eat at the entrails of what Hobbes called “natural man.” 1 Centuries later, Robert 
Heilbroner, an economist, would castigate “the corporation with its wealth-seeking, its 
dehumanizing calculus of plus and minus, its careful inculcation of impulses and goals that 
should at most be tolerated.” 2  
 
Corporations and their executives are often the object of deprecatory humor. As far back as 
l635, a satirist had a businessman proclaiming: “I love churches. I mean to rob my 
countrymen and build one.” 3 In more recent times, a U.S. Senator told the story of a 
corporation officer who, when asked at a committee hearing if he were not ashamed of 
double-dealing people who trusted him, was puzzled: “Who else can you cheat?” he wanted 
to know. The putdowns of the business world are part of a common folklore, reflected in 
the belief that the expression legitimate business  is an oxymoron. 
 
According to William Kristol, public hostility toward big business dates back to the Populist 
movement of the late nineteenth century and suspicions of trusts that led to the 1890 
Sherman Anti-Trust Act. People are suspicious as to whether goods produced by large 
corporations are of the highest quality or are available at the lowest possible price. In 1978, a 
                                                 
1Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan (London: Andrew Crooke, 1651). 
2Robert Heilbroner, In the Name of Profit  (New York: Doubleday, 1973), p. 223. 
3Christopher Hill, Society and Puritanism in Pre-Revolutionary England  (London: Secker & Warburg, 1964), p. 267. 
4John T. Noonan, Bribes (New York: Macmillan, 1984). 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.504   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
survey by Seymour Lipset and Gordan Schneider concluded that major industries and 
corporations had dropped in public esteem greatly during the 1970s.  
 
Clinard and Yeager 
In a comprehensive study of corporate law-breaking, Marshall Clinard (a recipient of the 
Association’s Donald Cressey Award) and Peter Yeager examined over a two-year period the 
records of 562 companies (477 of which were on the Fortune 500  list) and found that l,553 
white-collar crime cases had been filed against them. Some 60 percent of the firms had at 
least one case against them; for those companies, the average number of violations was 4.4. 
The oil, pharmaceutical, and motor vehicle industries were the most likely to be charged for 
wrongdoing, a matter that may be a function of enforcement priorities or a true reflection of 
their activities.  
 
In a study by Irwin Ross, he analyzed 1,043 companies that at one time or another had 
appeared on the Fortune  list of large industrial companies. Included in his study were five 
kinds of offenses: bribe-taking or bribe-giving by  high-level executives, criminal fraud, illegal 
campaign contributions, tax evasion, and anti-trust violations. One hundred seventeen, or 11 
percent of the corporations, were violators. 
 
The costs of corporate crimes not only include financial losses, but also injuries, deaths, and 
health hazards. Such crimes destroy public confidence in businesses and hurt the image of 
corporations. Clinard and Yeager say price-fixing offenses victimize the consumer and 
federal, state, and municipal governments while income tax crimes deprive the government 
and those dependent on it for needed revenue. 
 
Clinard and Yeager believe that corporate violations are increasingly difficult to discover, 
investigate, or prosecute successfully because of their growing complexity and intricacy. This 
is particularly true, they believe, of anti-trust cases, foreign payoffs, computer fraud, and 
illegal political contributions. In the last category, some corporations pay bonuses to their 
executives, with the understanding that part of that reward will be turned over to the coffers 
of a candidate that the corporation favors. 
 
Criminal activities involving corporations are often rooted in organizational subcultures 
and values and are developed over time. A particularly comprehensive examination of how 
                                                 
5Marshall B. Clinard and Peter C. Yeager, Corporate Crime (New York: Free Press, 1980). 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.505  
matters of life and death become embedded in routine decision-making and ultimately can 
lead to tragedy is provided in a book titled The Challenger Space Shuttle Disaster  by Diane 
Vaughan, another Cressey Award winner. 6 
 
Legal responses have been slow and ineffectual when dealing with economic organizational 
change. The law has emphasized the role of the individual actor in criminality, but has not 
examined the role of the organization in crime. Criminal activities are often rooted in 
organizational subculture and attitudes developed over time and cannot be traced to 
individuals or groups within the organization. While individuals still carry out the criminal 
enterprise, their attitudes and characteristics are of little importance, as an organization will 
replace those employees unwilling to participate in a criminal activity. 
 
 
Opportunities for Unlawful Organizational Behavior 
 
Organizational Structure 
Complex companies provide a structure that can foster misbehavior. They provide many 
settings where misconduct is possible. They isolate those settings in departments and in 
locations around a city, the country, or the world. The isolation, in turn, means that 
information about what one part of a company is doing may be unknown in another part. 
All this reduces the risk that misbehavior will be detected and punished. The larger a 
company grows, the more specialized its subunits tend to become. An internally diversified 
company may have few employees who fully understand the detailed workings. 
 
Specialized departments in a large firm compete for resources not only with other firms,  
but with departments in their own firm. The need to outperform both other businesses and 
internal units can generate sufficient pressure to lead to misconduct. Vaughan notes that 
departments often have survival concerns that conflict with the larger interests of an 
organization. When given a chance to make decisions, she writes, lower-level managers will 
tend to act not in the interest of the firm, but in the interests of their departments. 
Specialization also hides illegal activities, especially where a firm’s tasks are kept separate and 
unrelated. Employees cannot garner knowledge about all the particulars of how a firm 
works. This protects a company from the effects of personnel turnover and leaks of 
                                                 
6Diane Vaughan, The Challenger Launch Decision:  Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at NASA. 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996). 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.506   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
information because no one can offer much more than a piece of the jigsaw puzzle  
that makes up the company picture. The same secrecy, however, raises the chances  
for misconduct. 
 
Companies spell out rules in a common language to decide how tasks will be performed and 
to create common bonds that will facilitate decision making. But a company’s ability to 
coordinate all its activities varies considerably. Vaughan writes that organizational growth 
naturally leads to a progressive loss of control over departments. Executives cannot hope to 
keep track of all the units in a huge company and must rely on subordinates to carry out 
policy. Vaughan states that when the distance between top executives and subordinate units 
grows to a sufficient level, “authority leakage”  results. Such leakage means the company has 
become too unwieldy for an executive to enforce rules at all levels. “The organization, in 
short,” Vaughan writes, “can diversify beyond the capability of those at the top to master it.” 
 
Such leakage allows subsidiaries, company researchers, accountants, or other departments to 
engage in misconduct without any assurance that internal controls will check the behavior. 
In some cases, as with computer crime, detecting misconduct might be beyond the ability of 
most employees. Conversely, authority leakage and specialization can also lead an 
organization to comply with societal rules even when the organizational pressures lean 
toward misconduct. 
 
Does the existence of authority imply a loss of company control? While a company that 
cannot steer its employees’ behavior might be viewed as irrational or incompetent, the ability 
to control information flow from top to bottom may not be possible. Research and theory 
suggest, to the contrary, that information is processed selectively through a company in ways 
that tend to protect the interests of departments and to promote efficiency.  
 
Sometimes censorship of information promotes a company’s interests. In other cases, “need 
to know” policies or ignorance of rules that  are irrelevant to a department leads to 
inefficiencies. All these tendencies restrict information flow and create opportunities for one 
unit in a company to act outside the knowledge of other units. Censorship policies may 
originate in any part of a company and hide matters throughout the organization.  
The tiered structure of most organizations obscures personal responsibility and tends to 
spread it throughout the company. Thus, determining where a decision to engage in 
misconduct originated can be difficult. Author John E. Conklin put it this way: “The 
delegation of responsibility and unwritten orders keep those at the top of the corporate 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.507  
structure remote from the consequences of their decisions and orders, much as the heads of 
organized crime families remain ‘untouchable’ by law.” 
 
 
Criminogenic Organizational Structures 
Sociologist Edward Gross has asserted that all organizations are inherently criminogenic 
(that is, prone to committing crime), though not necessarily criminal. Gross makes this 
assertion because of the reliance on “the bottom line.” Without necessarily meaning to, 
organizations can invite fraud as a means of obtaining goals. Criminologist Oliver 
Williamson noted that because of a department’s concern with reaching its goals,  
managers might well tend to maximize their department’s own interests to the detriment of 
the organization. 
 
Organizations can also be criminogenic because  they encourage loyalty. According to Diane 
Vaughan, the reasons are that: 
• The organization tends to recruit and attract similar individuals. 
• Rewards are given out to those who display characteristics of the “company man.” 
• Long-term loyalty is encouraged through company retirement and benefits. 
• Loyalty is encouraged through social interaction, such as company parties and  
social functions. 
• Frequent transfers and long working hours encourage isolation from other groups. 
• Specialized job skills can discourage personnel from seeking employment elsewhere. 
 
This, in turn, causes company personnel to sometimes perceive that the organization might 
be worth committing crime to maintain and further its goals. The use of formal and informal 
rewards and punishments, plus social activities and pressures to participate, link an 
employee’s needs and goals to the success of the company. Society places value on the 
reputation of the company for which one works, reinforcing the link between an individual  
  
                                                 
7Edward Gross, “Organizational Structure and Organizational Crime.” In Gilbert Geis and Ezra Stotland 
(Eds.), White-Collar Crime: Theory and Research. Beverly Hills:  Sage, 1980, pp. 53–76. 
8Diane Vaughan, “Transaction Systems and Unlawful Organizational Behavior.” Social Problems,  29: 373–380. 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.508   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
and corporate goals. When a company achieves its goals, its employees prosper. In short, the 
interests of an organization and its employees coincide, and that situation may set the stage 
for unlawful conduct by individuals on the organization’s behalf. 
 
Vaughan writes that organizational processes create “an internal moral and intellectual 
world” that causes individuals to identify with organizational goals. Company survival comes 
to mean individual survival, and when resources become scarce, the incentive to misbehave 
increases. Of course, not all agents will act unlawfully on a company’s behalf, and how  
any employee behaves will be linked to factors that might not be related to the world of  
the organization. 
 
When the structural pressure to commit fraud exists, a firm often cannot unite its agents in 
such activities. At least three factors prevent such unity. First, the pressure to commit fraud 
might not affect departments in a company equally. A sales department that must meet 
certain goals to generate profits will feel different competitive pressure than a product 
development department in the same company that is running smoothly. Some parts of 
companies might never experience pressure to cheat, and members of those departments 
will have no motivation to engage in misconduct on a firm’s behalf. 
 
Second, even in high-pressure departments, some employees will not have knowledge of the 
difficulty of obtaining needed resources. An employee will have no motivation to commit 
fraud unless he has full information about an organization’s goals and how the department 
can achieve them. In other words, an employee usually needs a high degree of responsibility 
for a company’s success, as well as the ability to bring about those goals, before a chance to 
engage in misbehavior can occur. 
 
Third, outside societal behavior can produce values that conflict with those learned in an 
organizational environment. For example, fraternal or professional associations impart their 
own values to employees that may not coincide with a specific corporate code of honor. 
When faced with conflicting norms, Vaughan writes, employees will make their choices 
based on the rewards and punishments they perceive to accompany the alternatives. Where 
misbehavior is seen as too costly, it will not occur. Where an organization provides sufficient 
rewards to overcome the fear of punishment, misbehavior may occur despite competing 
norms. The amount of information an employee has will affect the decision on which way to 
go, as will an individual’s financial and social dependence on the firm. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.509  
The mere fact that corporate and individual goals are often joined in organizations does 
not necessarily create a climate for illegal actions. As with any major decision, complexities 
often enter the picture. Temptations vary not only among departments, but within them. 
The availability of information and individual risk-reward assessments may generate lawful 
behavior that resists organizational pressures to violate the law, as well as unlawful 
behavior in the face of organizational pressures to comply. Put plainly, the likelihood that 
organizational processes will generate misbehavior is highly variable and cannot currently 
be measured with any degree of precision. 
 
In explaining how employees are taught to make decisions that are correct from a 
corporation’s standpoint, Drucker said a natural tendency exists in every large-scale 
organization to discourage initiative and encourage conformity. Madden and Margolis say 
corporations lead new managers through an initiation period designed to weaken their ties 
with external groups, including their own families, and encourage a feeling of dependence on 
and attachment to the corporation.  
 
Geis found that individuals are trained quite often in illegal behavior as part of their 
occupational roles. Schrager and Short say criminal behavior stems more from the roles an 
employee is expected to fulfill than from individual pathology. Many executives know their 
behavior is illegal, but tend to justify their actions as simply common practice in the business 
world. Clinard and Yeager believed that in rationalizing their behavior, corporations follow a 
general tendency to obey laws selectively (i.e., obeying according to situational needs and 
determined by factors like social class and occupation). 
 
Sutherland demonstrated that corporate executives are insulated from those who might 
disagree with their beliefs because they associate almost exclusively with people who are pro-business, 
politically conservative, and generally opposed to government regulation. 
 
Silk and Vogel found that certain beliefs about government intervention in business are used 
throughout the business world to justify illegal activity by corporations. For example, some 
defend the corporation’s right to violate laws by claiming that “all legal measures proposed 
constitute government interference with the free enterprise system.”  
 
A problem common in many large corporations with intricate hierarchical structures tends to 
be a split between what the upper levels believe is going on below and the actual procedures 
being carried out. Clinard and Yeager say that the chief executive officer of a corporation is 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.510   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
often isolated, and thus messages transmitted down the line tend to become distorted. 
Clinard and Yeager found that all levels of the corporation might often agree to perpetuate 
the lack of full information, for the key to any successful conspiracy to violate the law 
probably lies in the fact that the higher-ups do not inquire about what is going on and the 
lower levels do not tell them. 
 
Often in corporations, no single individual at the highest levels may make a decision alone to 
market a faulty product or take shortcuts on product testing, Clinard and Yeager say. 
Instead, decisions are made in small steps at each level, possibly without any awareness of 
the illegal and potentially dangerous result. 
 
McCaghy says profit pressure is “the single most compelling factor behind deviance by 
industry, whether it be price fixing, the destruction of competition, or the misrepresentation 
of a product,” such as making a shoddy product that will wear out and need to be replaced. 
Clinard and Yeager say certain industries, such as the drug and chemical businesses, have 
such severe competition and strong profit drives due to demands for continual development 
of new products that they may feel pressured to falsify test data, market new products before 
their full effects are known, or engage in unethical sales techniques that can have disastrous 
effects on human beings and the environment. 
 
 
Corporate Executives and Criminal Liability 
Many of the ethical and legal problems of a corporation result from the corporate structure 
that separates ownership from management. Typical large corporations are administered by a 
group of salaried managers, with the board of directors exercising little direct power other 
than hiring or firing the managers, and thus corporate managers have great autonomy over 
decisions regarding production, investment, pricing, and marketing. 
 
Luthans and Hodgetts said that after performing a study with the American Management 
Society, 3,000 executives questioned “felt under pressure to compromise personal standards 
to meet company goals,” but that they felt “that business ethics should still be a concern.” 
 
Executives tend to believe that their jobs are at risk if they cannot show a profit to higher 
management or the board of directors, and often they are. Clinard and Yeager hold that if 
goals for managers are set too high, the employee then confronts a hard choice of risking 
being thought incompetent or taking unethical or even illegal shortcuts. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.511  
According to Clinard and Yeager, corporations often try to protect their executives from 
liability by agreeing to pay fines, court costs, and attorney’s fees with corporate funds; 
bonuses, raises, or liability insurance might offer protection to officers or directors. 
Generally, executive compensation and tenure remain untouched. There is much difficulty in 
criminal prosecution of executives because corporate violations are usually far more complex 
than conventional crimes. Also, the complexity of the legal proof required allows 
businessmen to test the limits of the law. 
 
Businessmen might have sought legal advice on loopholes in the law before committing the 
offense, Clinard and Yeager say, which may be cited as evidence that the executives thought 
they were in legal compliance. Businessmen can hire highly skilled lawyers who present 
arguments as to the client’s lack of previous convictions or unlikelihood of becoming a 
repeat offender, as well as being able to cite numerous precedents where businessmen were 
charged but not imprisoned for similar violations. 
 
Corporate offenders are usually not imprisoned with ordinary criminals, but are usually 
incarcerated in institutions designed for low-risk inmates with short sentences, presumably 
for the corporate offender’s own physical safety. Justifications used in arguing against a 
prison sentence for corporate offenders include: 
• Age and poor health 
• Personal and family reasons 
• Extent of punishment already suffered by virtue of being indicted 
• Offense was not immoral 
• Defendant has no prior record, is not a threat to society, and has been a prominent 
citizen active in community affairs 
• Incarceration would accomplish nothing (no benefit to society) 
• Defendant is repentant 
• Victimization of corporate executives solely because of their position 
 
Some corporate offenders are given community service as punishment, such as giving 
speeches about their offenses to businesses and civic groups, working in programs  
designed to aid the poor, or helping former ordinary criminal offenders secure job pledges 
from businesses. 
 
Prior to 2001, corporate offenders generally received little, if any, public attention. Coverage 
of corporate scandals was often limited to business and trade publications. However, all of 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.512   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
that changed with the Enron scandal. Suddenly, corporate offenders were front-page news, 
and prosecutors have increased their efforts in pursing corporate executives for wrongdoing 
in the corporate organization. 
 
 
Management Behavior 
Brenner and Molander found that superiors are the primary influence in unethical decision 
making. Therefore, the use of sanctions to accomplish compliance with the law is only one 
of the various forces operating within a corporation encouraging or opposing violations of 
law. Stone found that the success of law enforcement “ultimately depends upon its 
consistency with and reinforcement of the organization’s rules for advancement and reward, 
its customs, conventions, and morals.” He maintains that if the law is too much at odds with 
the corporation’s “culture,” employees will tend to cover up their tracks rather than change  
their behavior. 
 
Corporations also argue that “regulation is faulty because most government regulations are 
incomprehensible and too complex.” Conklin found that anti-trust laws are seen as 
inconsistent, hypocritical, poorly defined, and rarely enforced. Therefore, most regulations 
must be written in detail to cover as many contingencies as possible. 
 
Silk and Vogel found several other actions used by business to rationalize conduct:  
• Government regulations are unjustified because the additional costs of regulations and 
bureaucratic procedures cut heavily into profits. 
• Regulation is unnecessary because the matters being regulated are unimportant. 
• Although some corporate violations involve millions of dollars, the damage is so 
diffused among a large number of consumers that individually there is little loss. 
• Violations are caused by economic necessity; they aim to protect the value of stock, to 
ensure an adequate return for stockholders, and to protect the job security of employees 
by ensuring the financial stability of the corporation. 
 
John Braithwaite is a researcher in white-collar crime at Australian National University in 
Canberra. He is also the recipient of the 1990 Cressey Award by the Association of Certified 
Fraud Examiners for his research in international white-collar crime issues. Braithwaite views 
                                                 
9Christopher Stone, “Where the Law Ends: The Social Control of Corporate Behavior .” New York:  
Harper & Row, 1975. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.513  
white-collar crime as a product of the corporate subculture. In Braithwaite’s view, 
corporations will turn to crime as a result of “blocked opportunities.”  
 
Because white-collar crime can exist only in secrecy, deviant subcultures develop (conspiracy 
among executives, for example), lines of communication are not allowed to develop, and 
people operate within spheres of responsibility.  
 
 
Controlling Organizational Crime 
Clinard and Yeager believe corporations that do violate acceptable conduct and those that 
do not are distinguished by “corporate cultures” or ethical climates, which are the degree to 
which a corporation has made the choice to be unethical, to disregard the interests of the 
consumer and the public, and to disobey the laws that regulate its specific industry. 
 
Efforts to control corporate crime follow three approaches: voluntary change in corporate 
attitudes and structure; strong intervention of the political state to force changes in corporate 
structure, accompanied by legal measures to deter or punish; or consumer action. Voluntary 
changes would involve the development of stronger business ethics and certain corporate 
organizational reforms; government controls might involve federal corporate chartering, 
deconcentration and divesture, larger and more effective enforcement staffs, stiffer penalties, 
wider use of publicity as a sanction, and possibly the nationalization of corporations; and 
consumer group pressures may be exerted through lobbying, selective buying, boycotts, and 
the establishment of large consumer cooperatives. 
 
Clinard and Yeager suggest that a wide, comprehensive industrial code of ethics, which many 
businessmen favor, would be of great help when a businessman wished to refuse an 
unethical request, would help define more clearly the limits of acceptable or ethical conduct, 
would improve the ethical climate of the industry, and would serve to reduce cutthroat 
practices where competition is intense. Greater stockholder involvement might enable 
greater corporate compliance with the law, but in actuality, it is the management staff that 
runs the company and makes the decisions; the stockholders are primarily concerned with 
stock growth and dividends. 
 
In some cases, critical information dealing with possible law violations simply fails to reach 
the board of directors. New board members are usually nominated by the board and 
routinely approved by stockholders, making boards self-perpetuating. Board members are 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.514   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
often drawn from management. Many corporations now employ outside directors and/or 
representatives of the public interest, much like the practice abroad of naming union 
representatives to boards. These public members represent the public and consumer 
concerns, ascertain whether the corporation is complying with the law, assist and maintain 
corporate public responsibility, help monitor the internal management system to discover 
faulty workmanship and report it to the board, serve as liaisons with government agencies 
with respect to legislation or standards, and serve as a hotline to receive information  
about deviance. 
 
Clinard and Yeager found that mass media publicity about law violations probably represents 
the most feared consequence of sanctions imposed on a corporation. Publicity can also 
inform the public about the operation of regulatory controls and can enable people to 
understand the purposes of the controls. Informal publicity is ordinarily carried as news 
items from the media, while formal publicity is a requirement that a corporation must, as 
part of an enforcement action, publish an advertisement or some other statement 
acknowledging a violation and that corrective measures are being taken. 
 
If illegal behavior consistently resulted in decreased patronage or even consumer boycotts, 
consumer pressure would be an effective tool in the control of illegal corporate behavior. 
However, say Clinard and Yeager, it appears to  not be very effective. Consumers are often 
unaware when a corporation’s products are unsafe or when it has been violating anti-trust 
laws or polluting the environment. Without organized behavior, a consumer’s withdrawal of 
individual patronage is generally ineffective.   
 
Many corporations settle charges, without admitting or denying guilt, by consenting to either 
an administrative or a court-ordered decree banning future violations. In a consent 
agreement, the corporation reaches an understanding with the government agency not to 
violate the regulation again. In a decree, the agreement is ratified by the court. 
 
Sporkin says consent decrees have enabled the appointment of special officers to investigate 
and pursue claims against erring managements and others on behalf of the corporation and 
its shareholders, the placement of people independent of management and not previously 
associated with the company or the board of directors, and the appointment of special 
review or audit committees. A problem with consent orders, however, is that frequently no 
one follows up to find out whether the terms imposed are being met. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.515  
Violations of a consent order can be followed  by an injunction, as can distribution of 
adulterated, contaminated, or mislabeled products. Corporate violations of Securities and 
Exchange Act provisions can result in injunctions, as well as discriminatory labor practices, 
illegal economic actions, environmental pollution, and illegal political contributions. 
 
Criminal fines and civil and administrative penalties against corporations are forms of 
monetary penalties. For completion, criminal cases average about one year from indictment 
to conviction, civil actions about two years, and administrative cases about four months. 
Criminal action against corporations is difficult to initiate because generally government 
agencies are dependent upon the records of the corporation and its ability or willingness to 
furnish needed information.  
 
Not all experts agree that monetary penalties are appropriate. For example, a $25 million fine 
to a pauper would have no effect. One novel approach to punishing corporations was 
proposed by Coffee (1978). He advocates stock dilution or “equity fining.” Under this 
approach, the convicted corporation would issue additional shares of stock to the state equal 
to the cash value of a fine. The state could collect the equity shares and sell them, trade 
them, or keep them for their earnings power. With respect to monetary penalties, some 
argue that these sanctions are limited to a person’s own worth and therefore have limited 
utility. In 1992, Congress implemented the corporate sentencing guidelines, providing up to 
$290 million in fines for illegal corporate behavior.  
 
Some of the criteria considered when deciding to bring criminal action against a corporation 
are the degree of loss to the public, the duration of the violation, the level of complicity by 
high corporate managers, the frequency of the violation, evidence of intent to violate, 
evidence of extortion, the degree of notoriety endangered by the media, precedent in law, a 
history of serious violations by the corporation, deterrence potential, and the degree of 
cooperation demonstrated by the corporation. 
 
Rules governing industry often have been initiated by parts of the industry itself. Kolko says 
that a major achievement for corporations may have been the establishment of the Federal 
Trade Commission, which ruled out “unfair methods of competition” and served to stabilize 
the competitive game by making the biggest abuses of competition illegal.  
 
Stone says that as they age, almost all agencies show evidence of protecting the industries 
they are supposed to regulate rather than the public. Industries also gain influence over 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.516   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
agencies by creating a business-oriented atmosphere between regulators and regulatees that 
may cause the regulators to feel unwarranted confidence in the possibility of voluntary 
compliance by corporations. 
 
The Enforcement Effort: Preventing and Reducing Fraud 
While the issues involved in the enforcement effort provide a context in which to assess the 
efforts to control white-collar crime, actual techniques of prevention need to be discussed. 
There are many theories about enforcement, sanctions, and punishments that are a part of 
controlling white-collar crime. 
 
Compliance 
Enforcement strategies include two main theories: compliance and deterrence.  
 
Compliance  hopes to achieve conformity to the law without having to detect, process, or 
penalize violators. Compliance systems provide economic incentives for voluntary 
compliance to the laws and use administrative efforts to control violations before they occur. 
For example, the SEC has a host of administrative mechanisms to encourage voluntary 
compliance with its rules. The IRS also uses such measures in addition to criminal penalties. 
Most environmental crimes also are controlled by these means. In a compliance system, an 
offense is called a “technical violation.”  
 
Compliance strategies have been criticized by some criminologists. These experts believe 
that compliance has little effect, as sanctions are imposed after the infraction occurs. Since 
economic penalties are common punishments for violators, these penalties amount to little 
more than the proverbial “slap on the wrist” in  the case of large, wealthy corporations.  
 
Deterrence 
As a strategy to control crime, deterrence  is designed to detect law violations, determine who is 
responsible, and penalize offenders in order to deter future violations. Deterrence systems 
try to control the immediate behavior of individuals, not the long-term behaviors targeted by 
compliance systems.  
 
Deterrence theory assumes that humans are rational in their behavior patterns. Humans seek 
profit and pleasure while they try to avoid pain. Deterrence assumes that an individual’s 
propensity toward lawbreaking is in inverse proportion to the perceived probability of 
negative consequences.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.517  
Increased Enforcement 
Formal levels of current enforcement in white-collar crime are, by all measures, extremely 
low. One view holds that increased enforcement can only come with a complete and total 
revision of the criminal justice system. Currently, people have little fear of detection because 
they know that the police and courts cannot keep up with the pace of criminal offenses. It is 
not necessary or even desirable to advocate longer prison sentences for offenders because 
we do not have the courts and jails to accommodate them. Perhaps a better plan would be to 
sacrifice the severity of punishment for certainty. Until potential offenders have the 
perception that they will be caught and punished, we cannot expect a reversal of the  
crime trend. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs 
Although the government can provide incentives for organizations to prevent fraud, 
ultimately, it is up to management to institute prevention programs. The “Fraud Prevention 
Programs” chapter describes methods whereby management can institute policies and 
procedures to help detect and prevent fraud. 
 
 
Corporate Sentencing Guidelines 
Congress, in the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, mandated uniform sentencing 
guidelines. The Act also established the United States Sentencing Commission (USSC), 
which began studying sentences for individuals  soon after the passage of the Act. It was 
widely held in Congress that there was a great disparity of penalties for similar crimes 
committed by individuals. After three years of study, the USSC announced Sentencing 
Guidelines for Individuals. In November of 1987, these Guidelines became effective in the 
94 Federal Courts of the United States. 
 
In 1988, the United States Sentencing Commission began a study of sanctions for corporate 
wrongdoing. After three years of study and hearings, on May 1, 1991, the USSC submitted 
its Proposed Guidelines for Sentencing Organizations  to Congress. On November 1, 1991, the 
Guidelines went into effect. And in April 2010, the U.S. Sentencing Commission modified 
sentencing guidelines for organizations, especially as they relate to compliance programs. 
The changes will become effective on November 1, 2010, barring any Congressional 
modifications or rejection. 
 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.518   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Until January 2005, federal judges were required to use the Guidelines to determine whether 
a defendant had an “effective compliance program” in place to prevent the violations for 
which it was being charged. But in two key United States Supreme Court rulings, United 
States v. Booker and United States v. Fanfan, the Supreme Court ruled that the  
Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial requires that federal sentencing guidelines be advisory, 
rather than mandatory. Federal judges must still consider  the Guidelines when sentencing, but 
are not required  to sentence within the range set by the Guidelines. According to the 
guidelines, judges are still required to examine the adequacy of a company’s compliance and 
ethics program. Furthermore, judges may now mitigate punishment beyond the mandated 
level of mitigation given under the guidelines. 
 
The term organization  includes the following entities: 
• Corporations 
• Partnerships 
• Associations 
• Joint-stock companies 
• Unions 
• Trusts 
• Pension funds 
• Unincorporated organizations 
• Governments and political subdivisions thereof 
• Nonprofit organizations 
 
The introductory commentary to the Guidelines clearly states that they are designed to provide 
incentives for organizations to maintain internal mechanisms for preventing, detecting, and 
reporting criminal conduct. Among other things, the Guidelines suggest a substantial reduction 
of fines for organizations that have effective compliance programs. 
 
If an organization is found liable for an offense, the Guidelines provide for four types of 
remedies from which a judge may consider: fines,  restitution, remedial orders, and probation. 
 
Fines 
Fines are based on two factors: the seriousness of the offense and the level of culpability by 
the organization. The seriousness of the offense determines the base fine to be imposed. 
This figure can be quite high. The organization’s culpability is a measure of the actions taken 
by the organization which either mitigated or aggravated the situation. Depending on the 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.519  
culpability of the organization, the base fine can be increased by as much as 400 percent or 
reduced by as much as 95 percent.  
 
Calculating the Fine 
Under the Guidelines, an organization’s base fine is the highest of three numbers:  
• The monetary loss suffered by the victim 
• The pecuniary gain received by the defendant 
• An amount ranging from $5,000 to $72,500,00 0 as set forth in the Offense Level Scale 
Individual Guidelines, which is a table of preset penalties based on the seriousness of 
possible offenses 
 
FINE MULTIPLES 
After the base fine is established, the next step in sentencing is to calculate the culpability 
multiplier of the organization. The calculation of this multiplier is a complicated process. 
Every organization begins with a preset score of five on a scale of zero to ten. The 
organization’s score is then increased or decreased based on the presence of aggravating or 
mitigating factors. Aggravating factors increase the score (and thus increase the fine for the 
organization), while mitigating factors decrease the score. The Guidelines note four 
aggravating factors that can cause an organization’s score to increase:  
1. Involvement in or tolerance of criminal activity. Points will be added if high-level employees of 
the organization participated in, condoned, or were willfully ignorant of the offense. 
Points may also be added if there was pervasive tolerance of the offense by high-level 
employees. Depending on the size of the organization, this can add from 1 to 5 points to 
an organization’s culpability score.  
2. Prior history. If that organization has previously been found criminally guilty of similar 
acts, or if the organization has been found guilty of a civil offense for similar acts on at 
least two occasions, points may be added to the culpability score. Depending on how 
long it has been since the previous offense, up to two points can be added to the 
organization’s culpability score.  
3. Violation of a prior court order. Points are added to the organization’s culpability score if, in 
committing the offense at hand, the organization violated an injunction or other judicial 
order. Points are also added if the offense in question is similar to a prior offense for 
which the organization is already on probation, and if the commission of the current 
offense violated the probation order. This factor can add up to two points to the 
culpability score.  
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.520   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
4. Obstruction of justice. Finally, points are added to the organization’s culpability score if that 
organization interfered in any way with the investigation, prosecution, or sentencing of 
the offense in question. This does not always require an affirmative act by the 
organization. For instance, if the organization knew of an attempt by some party to 
obstruct an investigation, prosecution, or sentencing, and did nothing to prevent it, then 
the organization may be found to have obstructed justice. Simply stated, if the 
organization “turns a blind eye” to any form of obstruction, it faces the possibility of 
having its fine substantially increased under the Guidelines. This factor can add up to 
three points.  
 
FINE REDUCERS 
The Guidelines provide for an organization’s fine to be increased if it acts “badly,” but also 
provides for the reduction of fines if the company is “good.” The Guidelines set forth two 
mitigating factors which will reduce an organization’s criminal fines:  
1. Self-reporting: An organization’s culpability score will be reduced if, within a reasonable 
amount of time after learning of the offense, the organization reports the offense to 
authorities and then cooperates in the investigation and accepts responsibility for its 
wrongdoing. There are three elements to the self-reporting mitigation credit: (1) reporting 
within a reasonable time, (2) cooperating in the investigation, and (3) accepting 
responsibility for the wrongdoing. The organization earns the most points (five) if it 
complies with all three elements. However, it can receive a smaller credit (two) even if it 
does not report the offense in a timely manner, as long as it cooperates in the investigation 
and admits its own wrongdoing. Even if the organization fails to cooperate, it can 
nevertheless receive some credit (one) for accepting responsibility. This usually means 
pleading guilty to the offense prior to trial.  
2. An effective program to prevent and detect violations of the law: The implementation of an 
effective compliance program is the only way an organization can mitigate potential fines 
before violations actually occur. It can knock up to three points (out of a possible ten) 
off of an organization’s culpability score. The elements of an effective compliance 
program under the Guidelines are discussed below.  
 
Every organization begins with a culpability score of 5 under the Guidelines. Each aggravating 
factor raises the culpability score, and each mitigating factor diminishes it. After all the factors 
have been considered, a final score is determined. Each score corresponds to a range of 
multipliers that determine how much the fine should be increased or decreased. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.521  
TABLE OF MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM MULTIPLIERS FROM THE GUIDELINES 
The organization’s fine is multiplied by the minimum and maximum multipliers for its 
culpability score to determine the possible range of fines. 
 
Culpability  
Score  
10 or more 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 or less 
Multiplier 
Minimum  
2.00 
1.80 
1.60 
1.40 
1.20 
1.00 
.80 
.60 
.40 
.20 
.05
 Maximum 
Multiplier  
4.00 
3.60 
3.20 
2.80 
2.40 
2.00 
1.60 
1.20 
.80 
.40 
.20
  
Assuming an organization had been fined $1 00,000, its culpability score could have a 
tremendous impact. If the organization’s culpability score was zero as a result of self-reporting 
and having an effective compliance program in place, that organization’s fine range 
would be between $5,000 and $20,000. (Determined by multiplying $100,000 by .05 and .20, 
respectively.) On the other hand, if the presence of aggravating factors had left the 
organization with a culpability score of ten, its fine range would be $200,000 to $400,000. 
Thus, in the case of a $100,000 base fine, there is a potential swing of $395,000 in the fine 
the organization will have to pay.  
 
Departures 
Courts are permitted to impose fines outside the range prescribed by the Guidelines if there 
are special aggravating or mitigating circumstances in the case that would make a fine within 
the range inappropriate. Sentences that fall outside the guideline range are known as 
departures. The Guidelines describe certain factors that would justify departures from the 
ordinary fine range, although the lists are not exhaustive.  
 
UPWARD DEPARTURES 
When a court imposes a fine that is greater than the maximum fine provided by the 
Guidelines, this is known as an upward departure. The Guidelines list the following as 
factors that could justify an upward departure: 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.522   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• The offense involved a foreseeable risk of death or bodily injury. 
• The offense constituted a threat to national security. 
• The offense presented a threat to the environment. 
• The offense presented a risk to the integrity or continued existence of a market. 
• The offense involved official corruption. 
• The organization’s culpability score was reduced  because it had an effective compliance 
program, but the program was only implemented because of a court order or 
administrative order. In cases such as this, the court can impose an upward departure to 
offset all or part of the reduction. 
• The organization’s culpability score is greater than ten. 
 
DOWNWARD DEPARTURES 
The Guidelines list the following factors that could justify a downward departure:  
• Substantial assistance to the authorities in the investigation or prosecution of another 
organization or individual.  
• The organization is a public entity. 
• Members or beneficiaries (other than share holders) of the organization are direct victims 
of the offense. A downward departure in these cases may be warranted because a fine 
might increase the burden on the victims. 
• The organization has agreed to pay remedial costs that greatly exceed the organization’s 
gain from the offense. 
• The organization has an exceptionally low culpability score because: there was no 
involvement by anyone with substantial authority in the organization; there was an 
effective compliance program in place; and the base fine was determined by some means 
other than the organization’s gain from the offense. 
 
Restitution 
The Guidelines require that, whenever possible, the organization must pay full restitution to 
the victims of the crime. Restitution is not viewed as a form of punishment in the 
Guidelines, but rather as a means of remedying the harm caused by the offense.  
 
Remedial Orders 
The Guidelines also provide for the imposition of remedial orders, which require an 
offending organization to fix a harm it has already caused (to the extent that the harm is not 
fixed by the payment of restitution) and prevent any future harms from occurring.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.523  
Probation 
Finally, courts are required to impose probation on offending organizations under the 
following circumstances: 
• To secure payment of restitution, enforcement of a remedial order, or to ensure 
completion of community service 
• To safeguard the organization’s ability to pay a monetary penalty that was not fully paid 
at the time of sentencing 
• When an organization with at least 50 employees did not have an effective program to 
detect and prevent violations of law 
• When the organization was adjudicated within the past five years to have committed 
misconduct similar to any part of the misconduct of the offense in question 
• When a high-level employee was involved in the offense in question and was criminally 
convicted of similar conduct within the past five years 
• When such an order is necessary to ensure changes are made to reduce the likelihood of 
future criminal conduct 
• When the sentence does not include a fine 
• When such an order is necessary in order to accomplish one or more purposes of 
sentencing set forth in 18, U.S.C., § 3553(a)(2)  
 
When the offending organization has committed a felony, probation must run for at least 
one year. In no case may probation run for more than five years. The Guidelines also 
recommend conditions for probation in various circumstances. These conditions include:  
• Publicizing the nature of the offense, the organization’s conviction, the punishment 
imposed, and the steps taken to prevent the recurrence of a similar offense 
• Providing periodic reports to the court of the organization’s financial condition  
and expenses 
• Requiring the organization to submit to examinations of the organization’s business 
records and to interviews of knowledgeable employees 
• Requiring the organization to notify the court upon learning of a material adverse change 
to its financial condition or the commencement of any major legal proceedings, 
including bankruptcy, or any investigation by authorities 
• Requiring periodic payments under the court’s specifications, with priority in the order 
of restitution, fine, and any other monetary sanction 
• Developing a program to avoid violations of law and a schedule to implement it 
• Notifying the organization’s employees and shareholders of its violation and its program 
to avoid and detect violations of law 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.524   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Reporting to the court on the organization’s implementation of a program to avoid and 
detect violations of law and disclosing any investigation by authorities 
 
If an offending organization violates its probation, this may result in: 
• Resentencing 
• The terms of probation being extended 
• The imposition of more restrictive conditions  
 
 
Prosecuting Organizational Fraud 
In response to the high-profile corporate frauds of Enron, WorldCom, Global Crossing, and 
others, the Department of Justice (DOJ) instituted policies for imposing criminal penalties 
against business organizations. In January 2003, then Deputy Attorney General Larry 
Thompson issued a DOJ memorandum entitled “Principles of Federal Prosecution of 
Business Organization” (the Thompson Memorandum).  
 
The Thompson Memorandum explained the Depart ment’s position regarding the factors it 
considered in choosing to prosecute corporations and under what conditions an 
organization may reduce liability for cooperating with the government. One of the factors 
prosecutors considered in reaching their charging decisions was a company’s willingness to 
cooperate in the investigation. The Thompson Memorandum provided that in assessing a 
company’s cooperation, prosecutors were to consider whether the company waived its 
attorney-client privileges and attorney work product protections. The Thompson 
Memorandum also made clear that businesses perceived as not having fully cooperated 
would more likely face criminal indictment, prosecution, and sanctions. 
 
Following its issuance, many criticized the Thompson Memorandum because it seemed to 
imply that companies that refused to turn over privileged documents to the government 
could be considered uncooperative. In an attempt to appease critics, then Deputy Attorney 
General Paul McNulty issued a revised memo (the McNulty Memorandum) for federal 
investigation and prosecution of business organizations. The McNulty Memorandum revised 
the DOJ’s prior guidance outlined in the Thompson Memorandum that addressed the 
practice of federal prosecutors seeking waiver as an element of a company’s cooperation. 
The McNulty Memorandum provided specific criteria prosecutors were required to consider 
and procedures they were required to follow before seeking waiver of privileges or work 
product protection.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.525  
On August 28, 2008, the Department of Justice (DOJ) issued guidelines that revised the 
McNulty Memorandum on how federal prosecutors investigate, charge, and prosecute 
corporate crimes. Unlike the McNulty and Thompson Memorandums, these guidelines are a 
part of the U.S. attorney’s manual, which provides internal DOJ guidance but does not 
create any enforceable law. 
 
In an effort to stop congressional action, the guidelines bar prosecutors from judging 
corporate cooperation for leniency on whether an entity is willing to waive the attorney-client 
privilege or work product protection. The guidelines also state that prosecutors can no 
longer seek disclosure of information that is either privileged or protected work product. In 
addition, the guidelines provide that when evaluating a corporation’s cooperation, 
prosecutors may no longer consider whether a company is advancing legal fees for its 
employees, whether a corporation has sanctioned or retained culpable employees, or whether 
a corporation has entered into joint defense agreements.  
 
Even though most observers agree that the guidelines are a significant improvement over the 
McNulty Memorandum, many contend that comprehensive legislation is still needed to 
make the DOJ’s reforms permanent and prevent a relapse in department policy, and to bar 
similar waiver policies adopted by other federal agencies, such as the Securities Exchange 
Commission and the Internal Revenue Service.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.601  
OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD 
 
Occupational fraud is committed largely by individuals or small groups of individuals in 
connection with their occupation. It can include violations of law by businessmen, 
politicians, labor union leaders, lawyers, doctors, pharmacists, and employees who embezzle 
money from their employers or steal merchandise and tools.  
 
Gary Green, in honing the white-collar crime concept, uses the term occupational crime,  which 
he defines as “any act punishable by law which is committed through opportunity created in 
the course of an occupation which is legal.” Green further delineates occupational crime into 
four categories: 
• Crimes for the benefit of an employing organization (organizational occupational crime) 
• Crimes by officials through exercise of their state-based authority (state authority 
occupational crime) 
• Crimes by professionals in their capacity as professionals (professional  
occupational crime) 
• Crimes by individuals as individuals  
 
Some scholars debate whether individuals should be held responsible for crimes committed 
on behalf of their organizations. Although some direct benefit accrues to the perpetrator, far 
more benefit accrues to the organization. Regardless of whether the organization is held 
liable, the fraud is a direct result of some human action or interaction. In the words of Parisi, 
“If [an organization] is like a gun, then there must be someone comparable to a triggerman.” 
 
 
Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse 
 
Edwin H. Sutherland 
Relatively little research has been done on the subject of occupational fraud and abuse. 
Much of the current literature is based upon the early works of Edwin H. Sutherland. As 
previously discussed in the “Theories of Crime Causation” chapter, Sutherland believed 
that the learning of criminal behavior occurs with other persons in a process of 
communication. Therefore, he reasoned, criminality cannot occur without the assistance of 
other people. Sutherland further theorized that the learning of criminal activity usually 
occurred within intimate personal groups. This explains, in his view, how a dysfunctional 
parent is more likely to produce dysfunctional offspring. Sutherland believed that the 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.602   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
learning process involves two specific areas: the techniques to commit the crime, and the 
attitudes, drives, rationalizations, and motives of the criminal mind. One can see how 
Sutherland’s differential association theory fits with occupational offenders. Organizations 
that have dishonest employees will eventually infect a portion of honest ones. It also goes 
the other way: honest employees will eventually  have an influence on some of those who 
are dishonest.  
 
Donald R. Cressey 
During the 1940s at Indiana University, one of Sutherland’s brightest students was Don ald 
R. Cressey (1919–1987). While much of Suther land’s research concentrated on upper-world 
criminality, Cressey took his own studies in a different direction. Working on his Ph.D. in 
criminology, he decided his dissertation would focus on embezzlers. To serve as a basis for 
his research, Cressey interviewed about 200 people who had been incarcerated for 
embezzling funds.  
 
Cressey’s Hypothesis 
Cressey was intrigued by embezzlers, whom he called “trust violators.” He was especially 
interested in the circumstances that led them to be overcome by temptation. For that reason, 
he excluded from his research those employees who took their jobs for the purpose of 
stealing — a relatively minor number of offenders at that time. Upon completion of his 
interviews, he developed what still remains the classic model for the occupational offender. 
His research was published in Other People’s Money: A Study in the Social Psychology of 
Embezzlement. 
 
Cressey’s final hypothesis was:  
 
Trusted persons become trust violators when they conceive of themselves as having a 
financial problem which is non-shareable, are aware this problem can be secretly resolved by 
violation of the position of financial trust, and are able to apply to their own conduct in 
that situation verbalizations which enable them to adjust their conceptions of themselves as 
trusted persons with their conceptions of themselves as users of the entrusted funds or 
property. 1  
 
                                                 
1 Donald R. Cressey, Other People’s Money  (Montclair: Patterson Smith, 1973) p. 30. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.603  
Over the years, the hypothesis has become better known as the fraud triangle.  One leg of the 
triangle represents a perceived non-shareable financial need. The second leg represents perceived 
opportunity, and the final leg stands for rationalization. The role of the non-shareable  problem is 
important. According to Cressey, “When the trust violators were asked to explain why they 
refrained from violation of other positions of trust they might have held at previous times, 
or why they had not violated the subject position at an earlier time, those who had an 
opinion expressed the equivalent of one or more of the following quotations: (a) ‘There was 
no need for it like there was this time.’ (b) ‘The idea never entered my head.’ (c) ‘I thought it 
was dishonest then, but this time it did not seem dishonest at first.’” 2 
 
 
 
 
“In all cases of trust violation encountered, the violator considered that a financial problem 
which confronted him could not be shared with persons who, from a more objective point 
of view, probably could have aided in the solution of the problem.” 3 
 
Non-shareable Financial Problems 
That which is considered “non-shareable” is whol ly in the eyes of the potential occupational 
offender, Cressey said. “Thus a man could lose  considerable money at the race track daily 
but the loss, even if it construed a problem for the individual, might not constitute a non-
 shareable problem for him. Another man might define the problem as one which must be 
                                                 
2 Cressey, p. 33. 
3 Cressey, p. 34. 
 
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.604   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
kept secret and private, that is, as one which is non-shareable. Similarly, a failing bank or 
business might be considered by one person as presenting problems which must be shared 
with business associates and members of the community, while another person might 
conceive these problems as non-shareable.” 4 
 
In addition to being non-shareable, the problem that drives the fraudster is described as 
“financial” because these are problems that can generally be solved by the theft of cash or 
other assets. A person with large gambling debts, for instance, would need cash to pay those 
debts. Cressey did note, however, that there are some non-financial problems that could be 
solved by misappropriating funds through a violation of trust. For example, a person who 
embezzles in order to get revenge on his employer for perceived “unfair” treatment uses 
financial means to solve what is essentially a non-financial problem.  
 
Through his research, Cressey also found that the non-shareable problems encountered by 
the people he interviewed arose from situations that could be divided into six basic 
categories: violation of ascribed obligations, problems resulting from personal failure, 
business reversals, physical isolation, status gaining, and employer-employee relations. All of 
these situations dealt in some way with status-seeking or status-maintaining activities by the 
subjects. In other words, the non-shareable problems threatened the status of the subjects, 
or threatened to prevent them from achieving a higher status than the one they occupied at 
the time of their violation. 
 
THE IMPORTANCE OF SOLVING THE PROBLEM IN SECRET 
Since Cressey’s study was done in the early 1950s, the workforce was obviously different 
than today’s workforce. But the employee faced  with an immediate, non-shareable financial 
need hasn’t changed much over the years. That employee still must find a way to relieve the 
financial pressure that bears down upon him. Simply stealing money, however, is not 
enough; Cressey found it was crucial that the employee be able to resolve the financial 
problem in secret.  
 
As we have seen, the non-shareable financial problems identified by Cressey all dealt in some 
way with questions of status; the trust violators were afraid of losing the approval of those 
around them and so were unable to tell others about their financial problems. If they could 
not share the fact that they were under financial pressure, it follows that they would not be 
                                                 
4 Cressey, p. 35. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.605  
able to share the fact that they were resorting to illegal means to relieve that pressure. To do 
so would be to admit that the problems existed in the first place.  
 
The interesting thing to note is that it is not the embezzlement itself that creates the need for 
secrecy in the perpetrator’s mind; it is the circumstances that led to the embezzlement (a 
violation of ascribed obligation, a business reversal, etc.). Cressey said: 
 
“In all cases [in the study] there was a distinct feeling that, because of activity prior to the 
defalcation, the approval of groups important to the trusted person had been lost, or a 
distinct feeling that present gr oup approval would be lost if certain activity were revealed 
[the non-shareable financial problem], with the result that the trusted person was effectively 
isolated from persons who could assist him in solving problems arising from that activity.” 
 
Although the clear conception of a financial problem as non-shareable does not invariably 
result in trust violation, it do es establish in trusted persons a desire for a specific kind of 
solution to their problems. The results desired in the cases encountered were uniform: the 
solution or partial solution of the problem by the use of funds which can be obtained in an 
independent, relatively secret, safe, and sure method in keeping with the ‘rationalizations’ 
available to the person at the time. 5  (emphasis added)  
 
Perceived Opportunity 
According to the fraud triangle model, the presence of a non-shareable financial problem by 
itself will not lead an employee to commit fraud. The key to understanding Cressey’s theory 
is to remember that all three elements must be present for a trust violation to occur. The 
non-shareable financial problem creates the motive for the crime to be committed, but the 
employee must also perceive that he has an opportunity to commit the crime without being 
caught. This perceived opportunity  constitutes the second element. 
 
In Cressey’s view, there were two components of the perceived opportunity to commit a 
trust violation: general information and technical skill. General information  is simply the 
knowledge that the employee’s position of trust  could be violated. This knowledge might 
come from hearing of other embezzlements, from seeing dishonest behavior by other 
employees, or just from generally being aware of the fact that the employee is in a position 
where he could take advantage of his employer’s faith in him. Technical skill  refers to the 
                                                 
5 Cressey, p. 66–67. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.606   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
abilities needed to commit the violation. These are usually the same abilities that the 
employee needs to have to obtain and keep his position in the first place. Cressey noted that 
most embezzlers adhere to their occupational routines (and their job skills) in order to 
perpetrate their crimes.6 In essence, the perpetrator’s job will tend to define the type of 
fraud he will commit. “Accountants use checks which they have been entrusted to dispose 
of, sales clerks withhold receipts, bankers manipulate seldom-used accounts or withhold 
deposits, real estate men use deposits entrusted to them, and so on.” 7 
 
Obviously, the general information and technical skill that Cressey identified are not unique 
to occupational offenders; most if not all em ployees have these same characteristics. But 
because trusted persons possess this information and skill, when they face a non-shareable 
financial problem they see it as something that they have the power to correct. They apply 
their understanding of the possibility  for trust violation to the specific crises they are faced 
with. Cressey observed, “It is the next step whic h is significant to violation: the application 
of the general information to the specific situation, and conjointly, the perception of the fact 
that in addition to having general possibilities for violation, a specific position of trust can be 
used for the specific purpose of solving a non-shareable problem.” 8 
 
Rationalizations 
The third and final factor in the fraud triangle is the rationalization. Cressey pointed out that 
the rationalization is not an ex post facto means of justifying a theft that has already occurred. 
Significantly, the rationalization is a necessary component of the crime before  it takes place; in 
fact, it is a part of the motivation for the crime. Because the embezzler does not view 
himself as a criminal, he must justify his misdeeds before he ever commits them. The 
rationalization is necessary so that the perpetrator can make his illegal behavior intelligible to 
himself and maintain his concept of himself as a trusted person.9 
 
After the criminal act has taken place, the rationalization will often be abandoned. That is, of 
course, because of the nature of us all; the first time we do something contrary to our 
morals, it bothers us. As we repeat the act, it becomes easier. One hallmark of occupational 
fraud and abuse offenders is that once the line is crossed, the illegal acts become more or 
less continuous. So an occupational fraudster might begin stealing with the thought that “I’ll 
                                                 
6 Cressey, p. 84. 
7 Cressey, p. 84. 
8 Cressey, p. 85. 
9 Cressey, pp. 94–95. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.607  
pay the money back,” but after the initial theft is successful, he will usually continue to steal 
past the point at which there is any realistic possibility of repaying the stolen funds. 
 
Cressey found that the embezzlers he studied generally rationalized their crimes by viewing 
them as (1) essentially non-criminal, (2) justified, or (3) part of a general irresponsibility for 
which they were not completely accountable. He also found that the rationalizations used 
by trust violators tended to be linked to their positions and to the manner in which they 
committed their violations. He examined this by dividing the subjects of his study into three 
categories: independent businessmen, long-term violators, and absconders. He discovered 
that each group had its own types of rationalizations. 
 
INDEPENDENT BUSINESSMEN 
The independent businessmen in Cressey’s study were people who were in business for 
themselves and who converted “deposits” that had been entrusted to them. 11 Perpetrators in 
this category tended to use one of two common excuses: (1) they were “borrowing” the 
money they converted or (2) the funds entrusted to them were really theirs—you can’t steal 
from yourself. Cressey found the “borrowing” rationalization was the one most frequently 
used. These perpetrators also tended to espouse the idea that “everyone” in business 
misdirects deposits in some way, which therefore made their own misconduct less wrong 
than “stealing.” 12 Also, the independent businessmen almost universally felt their illegal 
actions were predicated by an “unusual situati on,” which Cressey concluded was in reality a 
non-shareable financial problem.  
 
LONG-TERM VIOLATORS 
Cressey defined long-term violators as individuals who converted their employer’s funds, or 
funds belonging to their employer’s clients, by taking relatively small amounts over a period 
of time.13 Similar to independent businessmen, the long-term violators generally preferred 
the “borrowing” rationalization. Other rationalizations of long-term violators were 
described, too, but they almost always were used in connection with the “borrowing” theme: 
(1) they were embezzling to keep their families from shame, disgrace, or poverty; (2) theirs 
was a case of “necessity”; their employers were cheating them financially; and (3) their 
employers were dishonest toward others and deserved to be fleeced. Some even pointed out 
                                                 
10 Cressey, p. 93. 
11 Cressey, p. 101–102. 
12 Cressey, p. 102. 
13 Cressey, p. 102. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.608   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
that it was more difficult to return the funds than to steal them in the first place, and claimed 
that they did not pay back their “borrowings”  because they feared that would lead to 
detection of their thefts. A few in the study actually kept track of their thefts, but most only 
did so at first. Later, as the embezzlements escalated, it is assumed that the offender would 
rather not know the extent of his “borrowings.”  
 
All of the long-term violators in the study expressed a feeling that they would like to 
eventually “clean the slate” and repay their de bt. This feeling usually arose even before the 
perpetrators perceived that they might be caught. Cressey pointed out that at this point, 
whatever fear the perpetrators felt in relation to their crimes was related to losing their social 
status by the exposure of their non-shareable problem, not the exposure of the theft itself or 
the possibility of punishment or imprisonment. This is because their rationalizations still 
prevented them from perceiving their misconduct as criminal. “The trust violator cannot 
fear the treatment usually accorded to criminals until he comes to look upon himself as  
a criminal.” 14 
 
Eventually, most of the long-term violators finally realized they were “in too deep.” It is at 
this point that the embezzler faces a crisis. While maintaining the borrowing rationalization 
(or other rationalizations, for that matter), the trust violator is able to maintain his self-image 
as a law-abiding citizen; but when the level of theft escalates to a certain point, the 
perpetrator is confronted with the idea that he is behaving in a criminal manner. This is 
contrary to his personal values and the values of the social groups to which he belongs. This 
conflict creates a great deal of anxiety for the perpetrator. A number of offenders described 
themselves as extremely nervous and upset, tense, and unhappy.15 
 
Without the rationalization that they were borrowing, long-term offenders in the study 
found it difficult to reconcile converting money, while at the same time seeing themselves as 
honest and trustworthy. In this situation, they have two options: (1) they can readopt the 
attitudes of the (law-abiding) social group with which they identified before the thefts began, 
or (2) they can adopt the attitudes of the new category of persons (criminals) with whom 
they now identify.16 From his study, Cressey was able to cite examples of each type of 
behavior. Those who sought to readopt the attitudes of their law-abiding social groups “may 
report their behavior to the police or to their employer, quit taking funds or resolve to quit 
                                                 
14 Cressey, pp. 120–121. 
15 Cressey, p. 121. 
16 Cressey, p. 122.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.609  
taking funds, speculate or gamble wildly in order to regain the amounts taken, or “‘leave the 
field’ by absconding or committing suicide.” 17 On the other hand, those who adopt the 
attitudes of the group of criminals to which they now belong “may become reckless in their 
defalcations, taking larger amounts than formerly with less attempts to avoid detection and 
with no notion of repayment.” 18 
 
ABSCONDERS 
The third group of offenders Cressey discussed was absconders — people who take the money 
and run. Cressey found that the non-shareable problems for absconders usually resulted 
from physical isolation. He observed that these people, “usually are unmarried or separated 
from their spouses, live in hotels or rooming houses, have few primary group associations of 
any sort, and own little property. Only one of the absconders interviewed had held a higher 
status position of trust, such as an accountant, business executive, or bookkeeper.” 19 He also 
found that the absconders tended to have lower occupational and socio-economic status 
than the members of the other two categories.  
 
Because absconders tended to lack strong social ties, Cressey found that almost any financial 
problem could be defined as non-shareable for these persons, and also that rationalizations 
were easily adopted because the persons only had to sever a minimum of social ties when 
they absconded.20 The absconders rationalized their conduct by noting that their attempts to 
live honest lives had been futile (hence their low status). They also adopted an attitude of not 
caring what happened to them, and a belief that they could not help themselves because they 
were predisposed to criminal behavior. The latter two rationalizations, which were adopted 
by every absconder in Cressey’s study, allowed them to remove almost all personal 
accountability from their conduct.21 
 
In the 1950s, when this data was gathered by Cressey, embezzlers were considered persons 
of higher socioeconomic status who took funds over a limited period of time because of 
some personal problem such as drinking or gambling, while “thieves” were considered 
persons of lower status who took whatever funds were at hand. Cressey noted, “Since most 
absconders identify with the lower status group, they look upon themselves as belonging to a 
                                                 
17 Cressey, p. 121. 
18 Cressey, p. 122.  
19 Cressey, p. 128. 
20 Cressey, p. 129.  
21 Cressey, pp. 128–129. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.610   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
special class of thieves rather than trust violators. Just as long-term violators and 
independent businessmen do not at first consider the possibility of absconding with the 
funds, absconders do not consider the possibility of taking relatively small amounts of 
money over a period of time.” 22 
 
Conjuncture of Events 
Perhaps the most important conclusion to be drawn from the Cressey study was that it took 
all three elements — perceived non-shareable fi nancial problem, perceived opportunity, and 
the ability to rationalize — for the trust violation to occur.  
  
“The three events make up the conditions under which trust violation occurs and the term 
cause may be applied to their conjuncture since trust violation is dependent on that 
conjuncture. Whenever the conjunc ture of events occurs, trust violation results, and if the 
conjuncture does not take place there is no trust violation.” 23  
 
Conclusions 
Cressey’s classic fraud triangle helps explain the nature of many — but not all—occupational 
offenders. For example, although academicians have tested his model, it has still not fully 
found its way into practice in terms of developing fraud prevention programs. Our sense 
tells us that one model — even Cressey’s — will not fit all situations. Plus, the study is nearly 
half a century old. There has been considerable social change in the interim. And now, many 
anti-fraud professionals believe there is a new breed of occupational offender—one who 
simply lacks a conscience sufficient to overcome temptation.  
 
Dr. Steve Albrecht 
The Albrecht Study 
Another pioneering researcher in occupational fraud and abuse is Dr. Steve Albrecht of 
Brigham Young University. Albrecht and two of  his colleagues, Keith R. Howe and Marshall 
B. Romney, conducted an analysis of 212 frauds in the early 1980s under a grant from the 
Institute of Internal Auditors Research Foundation, leading to their book entitled Deterring 
Fraud: The Internal Auditor’s Perspective. The study’s methodology involved obtaining 
demographics and background information on the frauds through the use of extensive 
                                                 
22 Cressey, p. 133. 
23 Cressey, p. 139. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.611  
questionnaires. The participants in the survey were internal auditors of companies that had 
experienced frauds. 
 
Albrecht’s research included an examination of  comprehensive data sources to assemble a 
complete list of pressure, opportunity, and integrity variables, resulting in a set of 50 possible 
red flags or indicators of occupational fraud and abuse. These variables fell into two 
principle categories: perpetrator characteristics and organizational environment. The purpose 
of the study was to determine which of the red flags were most important to the commission 
(and therefore to the detection and prevention) of fraud. The red flags ranged from 
unusually high personal debts to belief that one’s  job is in jeopardy, from no separation of 
asset custodial procedures to not adequately checking a potential employee’s background. 24  
 
The researchers gave participants both sets of 25 motivating factors and asked which factors 
were present in the frauds they had dealt with. Participants were asked to rank these factors 
on a seven-point scale indicating the degree to which each factor existed in their specific 
frauds. The ten most highly ranked factors from the list of personal characteristics, based on 
this study, were:  
 
1. Living beyond their means 
2. An overwhelming desire for personal gain 
3. High personal debt 
4. A close association with customers 
5. Feeling pay was not commensurate with responsibility 
6. A wheeler-dealer attitude 
7. Strong challenge to beat the system 
8. Excessive gambling habits 
9. Undue family or peer pressure 
10. No recognition for job performance25 
 
These motivators are very similar to the non-shareable financial problems Cressey identified.  
 
The ten most highly ranked factors from the list dealing with organizational  
environment were:  
  
                                                 
24 While such red flags may be present in many occupational fraud cases, one must re-emphasize Albrecht’s caution that 
the perpetrators are hard to profile and fraud is difficult to predict. To underscore this point, Albrecht’s research does not 
address — and no current research has been done to determine — if nonoffenders have many of the same characteristics. If 
so, then the list may not be discriminating enough to be useful. In short, while one should be mindful of potential red flags, 
they should not receive undue attention absent other compelling circumstances. 
25 Albrecht, p. 32. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.612   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
1. Placing too much trust in key employees 
2. Lack of proper procedures for authorization of transactions 
3. Inadequate disclosures of personal investments and incomes 
4. No separation of authorization of transactions from the custody of related assets 
5. Lack of independent checks on performance 
6. Inadequate attention to details 
7. No separation of custody of assets from the accounting for those assets 
8. No separation of duties between accounting functions 
9. Lack of clear lines of authority and responsibility 
10. Department that is not frequently reviewed by internal auditors26 
 
All of the factors on this list affect employees’ opportunity to commit fraud without being 
caught. Opportunity, as you will recall, was the second factor identified in Cressey’s fraud 
triangle. In many ways, the study by Albrecht, et al., supported Cressey’s model. Like 
Cressey’s study, the Albrecht study suggests there are three factors involved in occupational 
frauds: “. .. it appears that three elements must be present for a fraud to be committed: a 
situational pressure (non-shareable financial pressure), a perceived opportunity to commit 
and conceal the dishonest act (a way to secretly resolve the dishonest act or the lack of 
deterrence by management), and some way to rationalize (verbalize) the act as either being 
inconsistent with one’s personal level of integrity or justifiable.” 27 
 
The Fraud Scale 28  
To illustrate the concept, Albrecht developed the Fraud Scale, which included the 
components of situational pressures, perceived opportunities, and personal integrity. When 
situational pressures and perceived opportunities are high and personal integrity is low, 
occupational fraud is much more likely to occur than when the opposite is true.29 
 
 
                                                 
26 Albrecht, p. 39 
27 Albrecht, p. 5. 
28 Albrecht, et.al., p. 5. 
29 Albrecht, et.al., p. 6. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.613  
Albrecht describes situational pressures as “t he immediate problems individuals experience 
within their environments, the most overwhelming of which are probably high personal 
debts or financial losses.” 30 Opportunities to commit fraud, Albrecht says, may be created 
by individuals, or by deficient or missing internal controls. Personal integrity “refers to the 
personal code of ethical behavior each person adopts. While this factor appears to be a 
straightforward determination of whether the person is honest or dishonest, moral 
development research indicates that the issue is more complex.” 31 
 
In addition to its findings on motivating factors of occupational fraud, the Albrecht study 
also disclosed several interesting relationships between the perpetrators and the frauds they 
committed. For example, perpetrators of large frauds used the proceeds to purchase new 
homes and expensive automobiles, recreation property, expensive vacations, support 
extramarital relationships, and make speculative investments. Those committing small 
frauds did not.32 Perpetrators who were interested primarily in “beating the system” 
committed larger frauds. However, perpetrators who believed their pay was not adequate 
committed primarily small frauds. Lack of segregation of responsibilities, placing 
undeserved trust in key employees, imposing unrealistic goals, and operating on a crisis 
basis were all pressures or weaknesses associated with large frauds. College graduates were 
less likely to spend the proceeds of their loot to take extravagant vacations, purchase 
recreational property, support extramarital relationships, and buy expensive automobiles. 
Finally, those with lower salaries were more likely to have a prior criminal record.33 
 
Richard C. Hollinger 
The Hollinger-Clark Study 
In 1983, Richard C. Hollinger of Purdue University and John P. Clark of the University of 
Minnesota published federally funded research involving surveys of nearly 10,000 American 
workers. Their book, Theft by Employees, reached a different conclusion than Cressey. They 
concluded that employees steal primarily as a result of workplace conditions, and that the 
true costs of the problem are vastly understated: “In sum, when we take into consideration 
the incalculable social costs... the grand total paid for theft in the workplace is no doubt 
grossly underestimated by the available financial estimates.” 34 
                                                 
30 Albrecht, p. 5. 
31 Albrecht, p. 6. 
32 Albrecht, p. 42. 
33 Albrecht, p. xiv. 
34 Richard C. Hollinger and John P. Clark, Theft by Employees  (Lexington: Lexingtion Books, 1983), p. 6. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.614   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Hypotheses of Employee Theft 
In reviewing the literature on employee theft, Hollinger and Clark concluded that experts 
had developed five separate but interrelated sets of hypotheses of employee theft. The first 
is external economic pressures, such as the “non-shareable financial problem” that Cressey 
described. The second hypothesis was that contemporary employees, specifically young 
ones, are not as hardworking and honest as those in past generations. The third theory, 
advocated primarily by those with years of experience in the security and investigative 
industry, is that every employee can be tempted to steal from his employer. The theory 
basically assumes that people are greedy and dishonest by nature. The fourth theory was 
that job dissatisfaction is the primary cause of employee theft, and the fifth, that theft 
occurs because of the broadly shared formal and informal structure of organizations—that 
is, over time, the group norms, whether good or bad, become the standard of conduct. 
The sum of their research generally concluded that the fourth hypothesis was correct. 
 
EMPLOYEE DEVIANCE 
Employee theft is at one extreme of employee deviance, which can be defined as conduct 
detrimental to the organization and to the employee. At the other extreme is 
counterproductive employee behavior such as goldbricking and abuse of sick leave. 
Hollinger and Clark defined two basic categories of employee deviant behavior: (1) acts by 
employees against property, and (2) violations of the norms regulating acceptable levels of 
production. The former includes misuse and theft of company property such as cash or 
inventory. The latter involves acts of employee deviance that affect productivity. 
 
Hollinger and Clark developed a written questionnaire that was sent to employees in three 
different sectors: retail, hospital, and manufacturing. The employees were presented with 
lists of category 1 and category 2 offenses and were asked which offenses they had been 
involved in, and with what frequency. The researchers eventually received 9,175 valid 
employee questionnaires, representing about 54 percent of those sampled. Below are the 
results of the questionnaires. The first table represents category 1 offenses?acts against 
property.35 Hollinger and Clark found that approximately one-third of employees in each 
sector admitted to committing some form of property deviance.  
 
                                                 
35 Hollinger and Clark, p. 6. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.615  
 
The following is a summary of the Hollinger and Clark research with respect to production 
deviance. Not surprisingly, they found that this form of employee misconduct was two to 
three times more common than property violations.36 
 
                                                 
36 Hollinger and Clark, p. 42. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.616   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
 
JOB SATISFACTION AND DEVIANCE 
The research of Hollinger and Clark strongly suggests that employees who are dissatisfied 
with their jobs?across all age groups, but especially younger workers?are the most likely to 
seek redress through counterproductive or illegal behavior in order to right the perceived 
“inequity.” Other writers, notably anthropol ogist Gerald Mars and researcher David 
Altheide, have commented on this connection. Mars observed that among both hotel dining 
room employees and dock workers it was believed that pilferage was not theft, but was “seen 
as a morally justified addition to wages; indeed, as an entitlement due from exploiting 
employers.” 37 Altheide also documented that theft is often perceived by employees as a 
“way of getting back at the boss or supervisor.” 38 Jason Ditton documented a pattern in U.S. 
industries called “wages in kind,” in which employees “situated in structurally disadvantaged 
parts [of the organization] receive large segments of their wages invisibly.” 39 
 
                                                 
37 Hollinger and Clark, p. 77. 
38 Hollinger and Clark, p. 86. 
39 Hollinger and Clark, p. 86. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.617  
EMPLOYEE PERCEPTION OF CONTROL  
The researchers also examined the perception—not necessarily the reality—of employees 
believing they would be caught if they committed theft. “We find that perceived certainty of 
detection is inversely related to employee theft for respondents in all three industry 
sectors—that is, the stronger the perception that theft would be detected, the less the 
likelihood that the employee would engage in deviant behavior.” 40  
 
This finding is significant and consistent with other research. It suggests that increasing the 
perception of detection may be the best way to deter employee theft, while increasing the 
sanctions that are imposed on occupational fraudsters will have a limited effect. Recall that 
under Cressey’s model, embezzlers are motiva ted to commit illegal acts because they face 
some financial problem that they cannot share with others because it would threaten their 
status. It follows that the greatest threat to the perpetrator would be that he might be caught 
in the act of stealing because that would bring his non-shareable problem out into the open. 
The possibility of sanctions is only a secondary concern. The perpetrator engages in the 
illegal conduct only because he perceives there is an opportunity to fix his financial problem 
without getting caught.  Therefore, if an organization can increase in its employees’ minds the 
perception that illegal acts will be detected, it can significantly deter occupational fraud. Put 
simply, occupational fraudsters are not deterred by the threat of sanctions because they do 
not plan on getting caught. 
 
Control in the workplace, according to Hollinger and Clark, consists of both formal and 
informal social controls. Formal controls can be described as external pressures that are 
applied through both positive and negative sanctions; informal controls consist of the 
internalization by the employee of the group norms of the organization. These researchers, 
along with a host of others, have concluded that—as a general proposition—informal social 
controls provide the best deterrent. “These da ta clearly indicate that the loss of respect 
among one’s acquaintances was the single most effective variable in predicting future deviant 
involvement.” Furthermore, “... in general, the probability of suffering informal sanction is 
far more important than fear of formal sanctions in deterring deviant activity.” 41 Again, this 
supports the notion that the greatest deterrent to the fraudster is the idea that he will be 
caught, not the threat of punishment by his employer. 
 
                                                 
40 Hollinger and Clark, p. 117. 
41 Hollinger and Clark, p. 121. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.618   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
OTHER CONCLUSIONS 
Hollinger and Clark reached several other conclusions based on their work. First, they found 
that “substantially increasing the internal security presence does not seem to be appropriate, 
given the prevalence of the problem. In fact, doing so may make things worse.” Second, they 
concluded that the same kinds of employees who engage in other workplace deviance are 
also principally the ones who engage in employee theft. They found persuasive evidence that 
slow or sloppy workmanship, sick-leave abuses, long coffee breaks, alcohol and drug use at 
work, and coming in late and/or leaving early were more likely to be present in the 
employee-thief. 
 
Third, the researchers hypothesized that if efforts are made to reduce employee theft 
without reducing its underlying causes (e.g., employee dissatisfaction, lack of ethics), the 
result could create a “hydraulic effect.” That is, tightening controls over property deviance 
may create more detrimental acts affecting the productivity of the organization — if we push 
down employee theft, that action may push up goldbricking. Fourth, they asserted that 
increased management sensitivity to its employees will reduce all forms of workplace 
deviance. Fifth, they concluded special attention should be afforded young employees, as 
these are the ones statistically the most likely to steal. It must be pointed out, however, that 
although the incidence of theft is higher among younger employees, the losses associated 
with those thefts are typically lower than losses caused by more senior employees who have 
greater financial authority. 
 
Hollinger and Clark asserted that management must pay attention to four aspects of policy 
development: (1) a clear understanding regarding theft behavior, (2) continuous 
dissemination of positive information reflective of the company’s policies, (3) enforcement 
of sanctions, and (4) publicizing the sanctions. 
 
The researchers summed up their observations by saying, “perhaps the most important 
overall policy implication that can be drawn … is that theft and workplace deviance are in 
large part a reflection of how management at all levels of the organization is perceived by the 
employee. Specifically, if the employee is permitted to conclude that his contribution to the 
workplace is not appreciated or that the organization does not seem to care about the theft 
of its property, we expect to find greater involvement. In conclusion, a lowered prevalence 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.619  
of employee theft may be one valuable consequence of a management team that is 
responsive to the current perceptions and attitudes of its workforce.” 42 
 
2008-2009 Integrity Survey 
In January 2009, K PMG released its report on its 2008–2009 Integrity Survey. The results of 
the survey were based on responses from 5,065 U.S. employees, spanning all levels of job 
responsibility, 16 job functions, 13 industry sectors, and 4 thresholds of organizational size. 
According to the results of the survey, nearly three out of four employees (74 percent) 
reported that they have observed misconduct in the workplace in the prior 12-month period, 
with almost half of employees (46 percent) reporting that what they have observed was 
serious misconduct that could cause a “significant  loss of public trust if discovered.” KPMG 
conducted similar surveys in 2000 and 2005; in all three surveys, the reported levels of 
overall misconduct remained largely consistent, with 74 percent in 2005 and 76 percent in 
2000 reporting that they had observed misconduct in the prior year. Similarly, the three 
surveys have revealed consistent levels of serious misconduct, with 50 percent in 2005 and 
49 percent in 2000, characterizing the misconduct they observed as capable of causing a 
“significant loss of public trust if discovered.” Although the level of observed misconduct 
has remained constant, employees reported that the conditions that facilitate management’s 
ability to prevent, detect, and respond to fraud and misconduct within companies is 
improving. Employees who worked in companies with comprehensive ethics and 
compliance programs reported more favorable results across the board than did those who 
work in companies without such programs. For instance, employees who work in companies 
with such programs reported fewer observations of misconduct and higher levels of 
confidence in management’s commitment to integrity. 
 
2010 Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse 
Occupational fraud and abuse is a widespre ad problem that affects practically every 
organization, regardless of size, location, or industry. In 1996, the ACFE released the first 
Report to the Nation on O cc upational Fraud and Abuse, which was intended to shed light on the 
immense and largely undefined costs that occupational fraud imposes on organizations. The 
stated goals of the first Report  were to:  
• Summarize the opinions of experts on the percentage and amount of organizational 
revenue lost to all forms of occupational fraud and abuse. 
• Examine the characteristics of the employees who commit occupational fraud and abuse. 
                                                 
42 Hollinger and Clark, p. 144. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.620   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Determine what kinds of organizations are victims of occupational fraud and abuse. 
• Categorize the ways in which serious fraud and abuse occurs. 
 
All of the enumerated goals of the first Report  fell under one larger and more all-
 encompassing mission: to better educate the public and anti-fraud professionals about the 
threat of occupational fraud. Since that time, with each subsequent edition of the Report to the 
Nation, that has remained our primary goal.  
 
We released updated editions of the Report  in even years between 2002and 2008. Like the 
first study, each subsequent edition has been based on detailed case information about 
specific frauds provided by the CFEs who investigated those cases. Each Report  has been 
structured along the same lines, focusing on the methods used by employees, managers, and 
executives to defraud their organizations; the losses caused by those frauds; and the 
characteristics of both the perpetrators and the victims of these crimes.  
 
The 2010 edition of our Report  is based on 1,843 actual cases of occupational fraud. For the 
first time ever, we have widened our study to include cases from countries outside the 
United States; thus, the study is now titled Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse. 
This expansion allows us to more fully explore the truly global nature of occupational fraud 
and provides an enhanced view into the severity and impact of these crimes. 
 
The following is an excerpt containing some of the more significant findings of our study. 
Copies of the entire Report to the Nations can be downloaded or viewed at no charge on the 
ACFE’s website, www.ACFE.com.  
 
Measuring the Cost of Occupational Fraud 
Measuring the cost of occupational fraud is an important, yet incredibly challenging, 
endeavor. Arguably, the true cost is incalculable. The inherently clandestine nature of fraud 
means that many cases will never be revealed, and, of those that are, the full amount of 
losses might not be uncovered, quantified, or reported. Consequently, any measurement of 
occupational fraud costs will be, at best, an estimate. Nonetheless, determining such an 
approximation is critical to illustrate the pandemic and destructive nature of white-collar 
crime.  
 
We asked each CFE who participated in our survey to provide his best estimate of the 
percentage of annual revenues that the typical organization loses to fraud in a given year. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.621  
The median response was that the average organization annually loses 5% of its revenues to 
fraud. Applying this percentage to the 2009 estimated Gross World Product of $58.07 
trillion would result in a projected total global fraud loss of more than $2.9 trillion. 
 
Note that this estimate is based solely on the opinions of 1,843 anti-fraud experts, rather 
than any specific data or factual observations; accordingly, it should not be interpreted as a 
literal representation of the worldwide cost of occupational fraud. However, because there is 
no way to precisely calculate the size of global fraud losses, the best estimate of anti-fraud 
professionals with a frontline view of the problem may be as reliable a measure as we are 
able to make. In any event, it is undeniable that the overall cost of occupational fraud is 
immense, certainly costing organizations hundreds of billions or trillions of dollars each year. 
 
Distribution of Dollar Losses  
Of the 1,843 cases of occupational fraud that comprised our study, 1,822 included the total 
dollar loss. The median loss for all schemes in the study was $160,000. As the following 
chart shows, almost one-fourth of all cases in the 2010 study involved losses of at least $1 
million. The distribution of dollar losses among cases in the 2010 study was similar to the 
distribution in our 2008 Report. In both studies, more than 60% of schemes caused the 
victim organization to suffer a loss of at least $100,000. 
 
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.622   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
How Occupational Fraud Is Committed 
Previous ACFE research has identified three primary categories of occupational fraud used 
by individuals to defraud their employers. Asset misappropriations are those schemes in 
which the perpetrator steals or misuses an organization’s resources. These frauds include 
schemes such as skimming cash receipts, falsifying expense reports, and forging company 
checks. 
 
Corruption schemes involve the employee’s use of his influence in business transactions in a 
way that violates his duty to the employer for the purpose of obtaining a benefit for himself 
or someone else. Examples of corruption schemes include bribery, extortion, and a conflict 
of interest.  
 
Financial statement fraud schemes are those involving the intentional misstatement or 
omission of material information in the organization’s financial reports. Common methods 
of fraudulent financial statement manipulation include recording fictitious revenues, 
concealing liabilities or expenses, and artificially inflating reported assets.  
 
As indicated in the following charts, asset misappropriations are by far both the most 
frequent and the least costly form of occupational fraud. On the other end of the spectrum 
are cases involving financial statement fraud. These schemes were present in less than 5% of 
the cases reported to us, but caused a median loss of more than $4 million. Corruption 
schemes fell in the middle category in both respects, occurring in just under one-third of all 
cases involved in our study and causing a median loss of $250,000. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.623  
Occupational Frauds by Category—Frequency 43 
 
 
Occupational Frauds by Category—Median Loss  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
43 The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because several cases involved multiple schemes from 
more than one category. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.624   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
SUB-CATEGORIES OF ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION 
With nearly 90% of occupational frauds involving some form of asset misappropriation, it is 
instructional to further delineate the methods used by employees to embezzle organizational 
assets. We divided asset misappropriation schemes into nine sub-categories, as illustrated in 
the table below. The first eight sub-categories represent schemes targeting cash; these frauds 
account for approximately 85% of all asset misappropriations. 
 
Two of the sub-schemes — skimming and cash larceny — involve pilfering incoming cash 
receipts, such as sales revenues and accounts receivable collections. The next five sub-categories — 
billing, expense reimbursement, check tampering, payroll, and fraudulent 
register disbursement schemes — involve fraudulent disbursements of cash. The eighth form 
of cash misappropriation targets cash the organization has on hand, such as petty cash funds 
or cash in a vault. The final sub-category of asset misappropriations covers the theft or 
misuse of non-cash assets, including inventory, supplies, fixed assets, investments, 
intellectual property, and proprietary information. The table below provides the frequency 
and median loss associated with each asset misappropriation sub-category. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.625  
The sum of percentages in this table exceeds 100% because several cases involved asset misappropriation schemes from more than one category. 
 
As previously mentioned, our 2010 data include fraud cases from countries throughout the 
world, while our 2008 data contain only U.S.-based cases. In the following charts, we isolated 
the U.S. cases from our current study to make a more direct comparison to our 2008 data. 
Interestingly, while financial statement fraud remained the least common and most costly 
form of fraud among U.S. cases, there was a much lower percentage of financial statement 
cases in this study (four percent) as compared to 2008 (ten percent). Additionally, the 
median losses for all three categories of fraud were notably smaller in 2010 than they were in 
2008. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.626   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Occupational Frauds by Category (U.S. Only)—Frequency 44  
 
 
Occupational Frauds by Category (U.S. Only)—Median Loss  
 
Duration of Fraud Schemes  
In addition to examining the monetary cost of the fraud cases reported to us, we analyzed 
the length of time these schemes lasted before being detected. The median duration—the 
time period from when the fraud first occurred to when it was discovered — for all cases in 
our study was 18 months. Not surprisingly, cases involving financial statement fraud—the 
most costly form of fraud—lasted the long est, with a median duration of 27 months. 
Fraudulent register disbursements, on the other hand, were not only the least costly form of 
fraud in our study, but also tended to be detected the soonest. 
                                                 
44The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% becausese veral cases involved schemes from more than 
one category. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.627  
Median Duration of Fraud Based on Scheme Type  
 
Detection of Fraud Schemes 
One of the principal goals of our research is to identify how past frauds were detected so 
that organizations can apply that knowledge to their future anti-fraud efforts. Tips were by 
far the most common detection method in our study, catching nearly three times as many 
frauds as any other form of detection. This is consistent with the findings in our prior 
reports. Tips have been far and away the most common means of detection in every study 
since 2002, when we began tracking the data.  
 
Management review and internal audit were the second and third most common forms of 
detection, uncovering 15% and 14% of frauds, re spectively. It is also noteworthy that 11% 
of frauds were detected through channels that lie completely outside of the traditional anti-
 fraud control structure: accident, police notificat ion, and confession. In other words, 11% of 
the time, the victim organization either had to stumble onto the fraud or be notified of it by 
a third party in order to detect it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.628   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Initial Detection of Occupational Frauds 45 
 
SOURCE OF TIPS  
Not surprisingly, employees were the most common source of fraud tips. However, 
customers, vendors, competitors, and acquaintances (i.e., non-company sources) provided at 
least 34% of fraud tips, which suggests that fraud reporting policies and programs should be 
publicized not only to employees, but also to customers, vendors, and other external 
stakeholders. 
 
While tips have consistently been the most common way to detect fraud, the impact of tips 
is, if anything, understated by the fact that so many organizations fail to implement fraud 
reporting systems. Such systems enable employees to anonymously report fraud or 
misconduct by phone or through a web-based portal, otherwise known as hotlines. The 
ability to report fraud anonymously is key because employees often fear making reports due 
to the threat of retaliation from superiors or negative reactions from their peers. Also, most 
third-party hotline systems offer programs to raise awareness about how to report 
misconduct. Consequently, one would expect that the presence of a fraud hotline would 
enhance fraud detection efforts and foster more tips. 
 
                                                 
45 The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because in some cases respondents identified more than 
one detection method.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.629  
Percent of Tips by Source 46 
 
 
Geographic Location of Organizations 
As mentioned previously, for the first time in the history of our research on occupational 
fraud, we opened up our study to include fraud cases investigated by CFEs outside the 
United States. As a result, the cases discussed in this Report  represent frauds perpetrated in 
106 countries around the world. We received information on the location of 1,797 of the 
cases that were reported to us. Of these, 43% occurred outside the United States, providing 
us with a true insight into the global plague of occupational fraud.  
 
The chart below shows the number and median loss of the cases reported to us, broken 
down by region. For victim organizations with locations in more than one country, we asked 
survey participants to choose the location where the primary perpetrator was located. For 
example, a fraud perpetrated at a European arm of a Japanese company would be classified 
as occurring in Europe. Similarly, a case involving fraud perpetrated at the Canadian office 
of a South American company would be considered a fraud that occurred in Canada. The 
regional breakdowns on case data throughout this Report  should consequently be read within 
this framework. Additionally, due to the large number of U.S. cases reported, we separated 
North America into the United States and Canada, and grouped the remaining countries by 
continent.  
 
 
                                                 
46 The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because in some cases respondents identified more than 
the source of the initial tip. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.630   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Geographical Location of Victim Organizations  
 
Victims of Occupational Fraud 
As part of our survey, we asked each respondent to provide demographic information about 
the organization that was defrauded. We believe it is useful to measure the different ways in 
which occupational fraud impacts different types of organizations. Our hope is that this 
analysis may enable organizations to better identify where to strengthen or focus their anti-
 fraud efforts based on the experiences of other similar organizations. 
 
TYPES OF VICTIM ORGANIZATIONS  
More than 40% of victim organizations in our study were privately owned businesses, and 
nearly one-third were publicly traded companies, meaning that almost three-quarters of the 
victims represented in our study came from for-profit enterprises. Sixteen percent of the 
frauds reported to us occurred at government agencies. Not-for-profit organizations were 
the least represented category, with less than 10% of frauds taking place at these entities. 
 
Organization Type of Victim—Frequency  
 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.631  
In addition to experiencing the most frauds, private and public companies were also victims 
to the costliest schemes in our study; the me dian loss for the cases at these businesses was 
$231,000 and $200,000, respectively. In cont rast, the losses experienced by government 
agencies and not-for-profit organizations were about half as much. Government agencies 
had a median loss of $100,000, while not-for-profits lost a median of $90,000.  
 
Organization Type of Victim —Median Loss  
 
SIZE OF VICTIM ORGANIZATIONS 
Continuing the trend observed in our prior studies, small organizations — those with fewer 
than 100 employees — suffered the greatest percentage of the frauds in our 2010 study, 
accounting for more than 30% of the victim organizations. However, the variation between 
size categories is relatively small, with 23% of victims having between 100 and 999 
employees, 26% having 1,000 to 9,999 employees, and 21% having more than 10,000 
employees. 
 
This relatively small disparity contrasts with our previous studies, in which small 
organizations were involved in a much higher percent of frauds than any other category. 
Additionally, our research has historically shown that smaller organizations suffer 
disproportionately large losses due to occupational fraud. Organizations with fewer than 100 
employees experienced the greatest median loss of all categories of victim organizations in 
our 2008 study. The same was true in our 2006 study. 
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.632   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Size of Victim Organization — Frequency  
 
Size of Victim Organization — Median Loss  
 
INDUSTRIES OF VICTIM ORGANIZATIONS 
We looked at the industry classification of the organizations victimized by the fraud cases in 
our study. It is important to view this data as a representation of the companies that had 
CFEs investigate internal fraud cases within the last two years, rather than as an indication of 
which industries are more or less likely to be victimized by fraud. However, the following 
tables do draw attention to some differences in the frequency and cost associated with 
occupational frauds among different sectors. For example, the banking and financial services 
industry had the most cases, accounting for more than 16% of the frauds reported to us. The 
period of time covered by our survey — calendar years 2008 and 2009 — was filled with news 
stories of fraud in the banking sector, so this finding is not unexpected. In contrast, the 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.633  
mining industry experienced the fewest frauds in our study, but those cases caused a median 
loss of $1 million—by far the largest of  any of the industries we examined.47  
 
Industry of Victim Organization—Sorted by Frequency  
 
 
  
                                                 
47 There was a small sample of only 12 cases in this industry, which may imp act the reliability of the 
media n loss data. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.634   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Industry of Victim Organization — Sorted by Median Loss  
 
VICTIM’S ANTI-FRAUD CONTROLS AT TIME OF FRAUD 
We asked survey participants which of several common anti-fraud controls were in place at 
the victim organization during the perpetration of the fraud. A distinction should be made 
between the following data and the prior discussion on fraud detection methods. The 
following analysis covers the mere presence of each control — not necessarily its role in 
detecting the fraud once it started. More than three-quarters of the victim organizations in 
our study had their financial statements audited by external auditors, while two-thirds had 
dedicated internal audit or fraud examination departments, and almost 60% had independent 
audits of their internal controls over financial reporting. Additionally, nearly 70% of the 
organizations had a formal code of conduct in place at the time of the fraud, though only 
39% extended that to include a formal anti-fraud policy. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.635  
As mentioned in our discussion on fraud detection method, tips are the number one means 
by which fraud is detected. However, less than half of the victim organizations in our study 
had a hotline in place at the time the fraud occurred. There is evidence that the presence of a 
hotline improves organizations’ ability to detect fraud and limit fraud losses, which should 
cause more organizations to implement fraud hotlines. 
 
Frequency of Anti-Fraud Measures 48  
 
 
ANTI-FRAUD CONTROLS IN SMALL BUSINESSES  
We have long hypothesized that many small companies are particularly susceptible to fraud, 
at least partially due to the limited resources they devote to anti-fraud controls. To test this 
theory, we compared the presence of anti-fraud controls at those companies with fewer than 
100 employees to the controls at companies with more than 100 employees. Our findings 
confirm what we suspected: The small companies in our study did indeed have fewer 
controls in place than the larger organizations — a factor that may contribute to the 
disproportionate impact of fraud on these companies. While discrepancies in levels of 
certain controls are somewhat expected given the associated costs or resources required to 
enact them, the gap between controls in small businesses as opposed to larger organizations 
is striking. For example, it would be expected that small businesses would have a lower rate 
of external audits and that fewer small companies would have a formal internal audit or 
                                                 
48The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because many victim  organizations had more than one 
anti-fraud control in place at the time of the fraud. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.636   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
fraud examination function. But even less expensive controls were often absent in small 
businesses. While 64% of large companies had so me sort of management review of controls, 
processes, accounts, or transactions, less than half as many small businesses had the same 
type of monitoring in place. Likewise, formal codes of conduct and anti-fraud policies cost 
very little to implement, but serve as an effective way to make a clear and explicit statement 
against fraudulent and unethical conduct within an organization. Yet only 41% and 16% of 
small businesses had these policies (respectively) in place when the fraud occurred —
numbers dwarfed by the 83% and 50 % rates of larger organizations. 
 
Perhaps most concerning is that only 15% of small businesses had a hotline in place, 
compared to 64% of larger organizations. As previously discussed, our research shows that 
hotlines are consistently the most effective fraud detection method. Further, the median loss 
for frauds at companies with hotlines was 59% smaller than the median loss for frauds at 
organizations without such a mechanism. Arguably, enacting hotlines would go a long way in 
helping small-business owners protect their assets from dishonest employees. 
 
Frequency of Anti-Fraud Controls by Size of Victim Organization  
 
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CONTROLS  
We compared the median loss experienced by those organizations that had a particular anti-
 fraud control against the median loss for those organizations without that control at the time 
of the fraud. Hotlines were the control with the greatest associated reduction in median loss, 
reinforcing their value as an effective anti-fraud measure. Employee support programs, 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.637  
surprise audits, and fraud training for staff members at all levels were also associated with 
median loss reductions of more than 50%. In terestingly, financial statement audits—the 
most commonly implemented control—was among the controls with the smallest associated 
reduction in median loss.  
 
Median Loss Based on Presence of Anti-Fraud Controls  
 
 
The Perpetrators 
We asked respondents to provide information about the fraud perpetrators in their cases so 
we could better understand how occupational fraud levels and losses are related to 
demographic information such as age, job type, gender, education, and position of authority. 
In cases where there were multiple offenders, the responses relate to the principal 
perpetrator—the person identified by the CFE as the primary culprit in the case. The 
following is a summary of the data we received.  
 
PERPETRATOR’S POSITION 
We asked survey respondents whether the perpetrator was an employee, a manager, or an 
owner/executive. Below we see that the distribution of cases based on the perpetrator’s 
position was fairly similar to what we found in our 2008 study, although the 2010 
distribution was slightly more skewed toward employees and managers. Not surprisingly, 
there was a strong correlation between the perpetrator’s position of authority and the losses 
caused by fraud. The median loss in owner/executive frauds was more than three times the 
loss caused by managers, and more than nine times higher than losses in employee fraud 
cases.  
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.638   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Number of Perpetrators - Frequency  
 
 
PERPETRATOR’S GENDER 
Two-thirds of the frauds in our study were committed by males, which is a higher percentage 
than we encountered in 2008, but consistent with the overall trend noted in prior reports 
that most occupational frauds are committed by men. 
 
Perpetrator’s Gender  
 
 
THE PERPETRATOR’S AGE 
The distribution of perpetrators based on their age was similar to our 2008 study, but the 
2010 perpetrators tended to be slightly younger. Our past reports have generally shown the 
highest levels of fraud to occur in the 36–5 0 age range, but this year we found more than 
half of all cases were committed by individuals between the ages of 31 and 45. Generally 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.639  
speaking, median losses tended to rise with the age of the perpetrator, which is consistent 
with our prior research. The most notable difference between 2008 and 2010 is the losses 
caused by perpetrators older than 60. In each study, however, we were dealing with fewer 
than 40 cases in that category. Given the small sample size, we believe this is more likely to 
be an anomaly than an indication of any particular trend.  
 
Age of Perpetrator — Frequency  
 
 
Age of Perpetrator — Median Loss  
 
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.640   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
PERPETRATOR’S CRIMINAL AND EMPLOYMENT HISTORY 
Only 7% of the fraud perpetrators in our study had been previously convicted of a fraud-related 
offense, which was virtually identical to our finding in 2008. Eighty-six percent had 
never been charged with or convicted of a prior offense. The low rate of prior convictions 
suggests that criminal background checks may have some effect in preventing fraud, but the 
effect is probably limited. 
 
Perpetrator’s Criminal History — Frequency  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.641  
In addition to criminal history, past employment issues may indicate that an employee is 
more likely to engage in fraudulent conduct in the future. Of the respondents in our survey, 
791 were able to provide information about the perpetrator’s prior employment history. 
Among those cases, about 8% of perpetrators had been previously punished and 10% had 
been previously terminated for fraud-related conduct. 
 
Perpetrator’s Employment History — Frequency  
 
 
BEHAVIORAL RED FLAGS DISPLAYED BY PERPETRATORS 
While a fraud is ongoing, the perpetrator often displays certain behaviors or characteristics 
that might indicate he has a heightened risk of committing fraud. On their own, these 
behavioral red flags do not prove an individual is engaged in a fraud, but they should raise 
warning signals to the individual’s coworkers and managers, as well as the organization’s 
anti-fraud staff. When these red flags exist alongside other indicators of misconduct, this can 
be a strong clue that something is wrong. As discussed earlier in this report, occupational 
frauds often last for months or years before they are caught, so the ability to detect frauds as 
early as possible can have a big effect in limiting losses. 
 
We presented survey respondents with a list of common behavioral red flags and asked them 
to identify which of these warning signs had been displayed by the perpetrator prior to 
detection of the fraud. As shown in the following chart, the most common red flags 
displayed by perpetrators were living beyond financial means (43% of cases), experiencing 
financial difficulties (36%), excessive control i ssues with regard to their jobs (23%), and an 
unusually close association with vendors or customers (22%). This distribution is very similar 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.642   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
to what we found in our 2008 study. As we continue to track this data in future studies, we 
hope to be able to identify consistent relationships between behavioral warning signs and the 
occurrence of occupational fraud. Ideally, this data will help organizations build better fraud-detection 
programs that incorporate behavioral data, in addition to more standard anti-fraud 
controls. 
 
Behavioral Red Flags Present During Fraud Scheme — Sorted by Frequency 49  
 
We also broke down the distribution of red flags based on the type of fraud. Different forms 
of occupational fraud result from different factors and circumstances, which we would 
expect to show up in the fraudsters’ behavior. As the following chart illustrates, individuals 
who engaged in financial statement frauds were much more likely than other perpetrators to 
exhibit control issues or to be under excessive pressure to perform within their organization. 
Meanwhile, living beyond one’s means and experi encing financial difficulties were not as 
common among financial statement fraudsters as others. This makes sense, because while 
asset misappropriations and corruption schemes are almost always committed to enrich the 
fraudster, in many financial statement schemes, other factors—such as meeting earnings 
                                                 
49 The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because in many cases perpetrators displayed more than 
one behavioral red flag. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.643  
forecasts or hitting budget targets — may be as much of a motivator as personal financial 
gain. An unusually close association with a vendor or customer was noted as a red flag in 
45% of corruption cases, which is not surprising given that most corruption frauds involve 
bribery or some kind of illicit benefit. A “wheeler-dealer” attitude was also more common in 
corruption cases than in other forms of fraud, and 42% of all corruption perpetrators were 
identified as living beyond their means. Among those who misappropriated assets, living 
beyond one’s means and financial difficult ies were the two most common red flags. 
 
Behavioral Red Flags of Perpetrators Based on Scheme Type 50  
 
 
 
                                                 
50 The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because in many cases perpetrators displayed more than 
one behavioral red flag. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.701  
FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS 
 
Fraud prevention requires a system of rules, which, in their aggregate, minimize the 
likelihood of fraud occurring while maximizing the possibility of detecting any fraudulent 
activity that may transpire. The potential of being caught most often persuades likely 
perpetrators not to commit the fraud. Because of this principle, the existence of a thorough 
control system is essential to fraud prevention. 
 
 
Responsibility for Fraud Prevention 
 
Vicarious or Imputed Liability 
Corporations and other organizations can be held liable for criminal acts committed as a 
matter of organizational policy. Fortunately, most organizations do not expressly set out to 
break the law. However, corporations and other organizations may also be held liable for the 
criminal acts of their employees if those acts are done in the course and scope of their employment 
and for the ostensible purpose of benefiting the corporation. An employee’s acts are considered to be 
in the course and scope of employment if the employee has actual authority  or apparent authority  
to engage in those acts. Apparent authority means that a third party would reasonably believe 
the employee is authorized to perform the act on behalf of the company. Therefore, an 
organization could be held liable for something an employee does on behalf of the 
organization even if the employee is not authorized to perform that act.  
 
An organization will not be vicariously liable for the acts of an employee unless the 
employee acted for the ostensible purpose of benefiting the corporation. This does not mean 
the corporation has to receive an actual benefit from the illegal acts of its employee. All that 
is required is that the employee intended  to benefit the corporation. 
 
A company cannot seek to avoid vicarious liability for the acts of its employees by simply 
claiming that it did not know what was going on. Legally speaking, an organization is 
deemed to have knowledge of all facts known by its officers and employees. That is, if the 
government can prove that an officer or employee knew of conduct that raised a question as 
to the company’s liability, and the government ca n show that the company willfully failed to 
act to correct the situation, then the company may be held liable, even if senior management 
had no knowledge or suspicion of the wrongdoing.  
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.702   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
In addition, the evolving legal principle of “conscious avoidance” allows the government to 
prove the employer had knowledge of a particular fact, which establishes liability by showing 
that the employer knew there was a high probability the fact existed and consciously avoided 
confirming the fact. Employers cannot simply turn a blind eye when there is reason to 
believe that there may be criminal conduct within the organization. If steps are not taken to 
deter the activity, the company itself may be found liable.  
 
The corporation can be held criminally responsible even if those in management had no knowledge or 
participation  in the underlying criminal events and even if there were specific policies or 
instructions prohibiting the activity undertaken by the employees. The acts of any employee, 
from the lowest clerk to the CEO, can impute liability upon a corporation. In fact, a 
corporation can be criminally responsible for the collective knowledge  of several of its employees 
even if no single employee intended to commit an offense. Thus, the combination of vicarious 
or imputed corporate criminal liability and the Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations creates 
an extraordinary risk for corporations today. 
 
Responsibility (and Liability) of a Corporation’s Directors and Officers 
Although many companies do not realize it, the current legal environment imposes a 
responsibility on companies to ferret out employee misconduct and to deal with any known 
or suspected instances of misconduct with efficient and decisive measures. 
 
First, the doctrine of accountability suggests that officers and directors aware of potentially 
illegal conduct by senior employees may be liable for any recurrence of similar misconduct, and 
may have an obligation to halt and cure any continuing effects of the initial misconduct. 
 
Second, the Corporate Sentencing Guidelines, which are discussed in more detail below, 
provide stiff penalties for corporations that fail to take voluntary action to redress apparent 
misconduct by senior employees. 
 
Third, the Private Securities Litigation Reform  Act of 1995 now requires, as a matter of 
statute, that independent auditors look for, and assess, management’s response to indications 
of fraud or other potential illegality. Where the corporation does not have a history of 
responding to indications of wrongdoing, the auditors may not be able to reach a conclusion 
that the company took appropriate and prompt action in response to indications of fraud. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.703  
Fourth, the Delaware Court of Chancery in In re Caremark Internationa l, Inc. Derivative Litigation, 
698 A.2d 959 (Del Ch. 1996), stated that, in its view, a director’s duty of care includes a duty to 
attempt in good faith to ensure corporate information and reporting systems exist. These 
systems must be reasonably designed to provide senior management and the board of directors 
with timely, accurate information that would permit them to reach informed judgments 
concerning the corporation’s compliance with law and its business performance. 
 
The court in Caremark  also stated that the failure to create an adequate compliance system, 
under some circumstances, could render a director liable for losses caused by non-compliance 
with applicable legal standards. Therefore, directors should make sure that their companies 
have a corporate compliance plan in place to detect misconduct and deal with it effectively. 
The directors should then monitor the company’s adherence to the compliance program. 
Doing so will help the corporation avoid fines under the Sentencing Guidelines and help 
prevent individual liability on the part of the directors and officers. 
 
The Treadway Commission 
The National Commission on Fraudulent Financial Reporting (commonly known as the 
Treadway Commission) was established in 1987 with the purpose of defining the 
responsibility of the auditor in preventing and detecting fraud. The commission was formed 
by the major professional auditing organizations—the American Institute of CPAs, the 
Institute of Internal Auditors, and the National Association of Accountants. The Treadway 
Commission made several major recommendations that, in combination with other 
measures, are designed to reduce the probability of fraud in financial reports: 
• A mandatory independent audit committee  made up of outside directors 
• A written charter that sets forth the duties and responsibilities of the audit committee  
• The audit committee should have adequate resources and authority  to carry out its 
responsibilities 
• The audit committee should be informed, vigilant, and effective 
 
COSO Recommendations 
The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations was formed to support the implementation of 
the Treadway Commission. In 1992, the Committee issued Internal Control—Integrated 
Framework. This report was a collaborative effort of  the American Accounting Association, 
the American Institute of CPAs, the Financial Executives Institute, the Institute of Internal 
Auditors, and the Institute of Management Accountants. The report is meant to apply to all 
entities, public and private, regardless of size.  
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.704   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The COSO report complements Treadway’s recommendation to the SEC that public 
companies’ management reports include an acknowledgment for responsibility  for internal 
controls and an assessment of effectiveness in meeting those responsibilities. The report 
provided the following definition: 
 
Internal Control is a broadly defined process … designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
achievement of objectives in the following categories:  
? Reliability of financial reporting 
? Effectiveness and efficiency of operations  
? Compliance with applicable laws and regulations 
 
COSO also identified five interrelated components of internal control. The effectiveness of 
internal controls can be determined from an assessment of whether these five components are 
in place and functioning effectively. The five components are control environment, risk 
assessment, control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. 
 
Control Environment 
The control environment  sets the moral tone of an organization, influencing the control 
consciousness of the organization and providing a foundation for all other control 
components. This component takes into account whether managers and employees within 
the organization exhibit integrity in their activities.  
 
COSO envisions that upper management will be  responsible for the control environment of 
organizations. Employees look to management for guidance in most business affairs, and 
organizational ethics are no different. It is important for upper management to operate in an 
ethical manner, and it is equally important for employees to view management in a positive 
light. Managers must set an appropriate moral to ne for the operations of an organization.  
 
In addition to merely setting a good example, however, COSO suggests that upper 
management take direct control of an organization’s efforts at internal controls. This idea 
should be regularly reinforced within the organization. There are several actions that 
management can take to establish the proper control environment for an organization. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.705  
These include:  
• The establishment of a code of ethics for the organization. The code should be disseminated to all 
employees and every new employee should be required to read and sign it. The code 
should also be disseminated to contractors who do work on behalf of the organization. 
Under certain circumstances, companies may face liability due to the actions of 
independent contractors. It is therefore very important to explain the organization’s 
standards to any outside party with whom the organization conducts business.  
• Careful screening of job applicants. One of the easiest ways to establish a strong moral tone 
for an organization is to hire morally sound employees. Too often, the hiring process is 
conducted in a slipshod manner. Where permitted by law, organizations should conduct 
thorough background checks on all new employees, especially managers and those 
employees handling sensitive financial functions. In addition, it is important to conduct 
thorough interviews with applicants to ensure that they have adequate skills to perform 
the duties that will be required of them.  
• Proper assignment of authority and responsibility. In addition to hiring qualified, ethical 
employees, it is important to put these people in situations where they are able to thrive 
without resorting to unethical conduct. Organizations should provide employees with 
well-defined job descriptions and performance goals. Performance goals should be 
routinely reviewed to ensure that they do not set unrealistic standards. Training should 
be provided on a consistent basis to ensure that employees maintain the skills to perform 
effectively. Regular training on ethics will also help employees identify potential trouble 
spots and avoid getting caught in compromising situations. Finally, management should 
quickly determine where deficiencies in an employee’s conduct exist and work with the 
employee to fix the problem.  
• Effective disciplinary measures. No control environment will be effective unless there is 
consistent discipline for ethical violations. Consistent discipline requires a well-defined 
set of sanctions for violations, and strict adherence to the prescribed disciplinary 
measures. If one employee is punished for an act and another employee is not punished 
for a similar act, the moral force of the company’s ethics policy will be diminished. The 
levels of discipline must be sufficient to deter violations. It may also be advisable to 
reward ethical conduct. This will reinforce the importance of organizational ethics in the 
eyes of employees.  
 
Risk Assessment  
Risk assessment  involves an entity’s identification and assessment of the risks involved in 
achieving organizational objectives. This component involves tailoring ethics policies or 
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.706   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
compliance programs to the nature of the organization’s business. According to COSO, risk 
assessment is a three-step process: 
• Set objectives for the organization. Management should establish mission statements or similar 
expressions of organizational objectives. These statements must take into account the 
nature of the organization’s business, the industry in which the organization operates, 
and the political and economic environment in which it operates, as well as the 
organization’s resources and goals. In stating its goals, the organization should establish 
measurable criteria so that progress can be measured. Goals should not be so lofty that 
they cannot be reached considering the organization’s resources and environment. In 
setting objectives, input from all levels of management should be sought. Once an 
appropriate statement of objectives is established, it should be communicated to  
all employees.  
• Analyze potential risks of violations. COSO divides risks into two categories: external risks 
and internal risks. External risks include things like increased competition, changes in 
technology, shifting economic conditions, and new legislation. Internal risks are factors 
such as personnel changes, availability of funds for organizational projects, new 
operating systems, and the development of new products.  
• Develop a strategy to manage risks. Organizations should identify and be prepared to react to 
any external or internal risk. This means developing controls that are tailored to the 
inherent risks of the organization’s business and establishing set policies for dealing  
with violations.  
 
Control Activities  
Control activities  are the policies and procedures that enforce management’s directives. 
Management should set forth policy and procedure guidelines in a manual that is issued to 
employees. A person or persons should be designated to keep statements of policies 
updated and to make sure they are properly disseminated. All control activities should be 
closely monitored by management, and changes should be made where control failures are 
identified. Consistent with the risk analysis component, when a control failure is identified, 
the risk of additional failures should be considered in redesigning controls.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.707  
Information and Communication 
The information and communication  component relates to the exchange of information in a way 
that allows employees to carry out their responsibilities. Organizations should work to 
identify pertinent information and see that it is delivered to those who need it most. A 
proper information system will accomplish the following: 
• Assimilate important financial, operational, and compliance information. This information should 
be drawn from both internal and external sources, meaning management may have to go 
outside the organizational structure to identify pertinent information. There should be a 
means of screening incoming information so that pertinent information is maintained 
but unnecessary information is not allowed to clog channels of communication. 
Examples of pertinent information include facts on organizational performance,  
market conditions, competitor programs, economic changes, and legislative or  
regulatory changes. 
• Pass on pertinent informat ion to those who need it. Management should provide timely 
information to employees to help them carry out their duties more effectively. Important 
facts should be communicated in readily usable form. It is also important to 
communicate the importance of observing controls. Management should help employees 
understand their own roles in the internal control system and make it clear that internal 
controls have a high priority.  
• Provide for upstream communication. Communication in an organization should flow  
in all directions. Employees should be provided with clear channels for reporting 
suspected control violations. Provisions should be made for employees to make 
anonymous reports in order to avoid fears of retaliation, which can have a chilling effect 
on upstream communication. A similar reporting mechanism for customers and other 
external parties should be in place. Serious efforts should be made to follow up on  
these communications.  
 
Monitoring 
Monitoring is the process that assesses the quality of a control environment over time. This 
component should include regular evaluations of the entire control system. It also requires 
the ongoing monitoring of day-to-day activities by managers and employees. This may 
involve reviewing the accuracy of financial information, or verifying inventories, supplies, 
equipment, and other organization assets. Finally, organizations should conduct 
independent evaluations of their internal control systems. An effective monitoring system 
should provide for the free flow of upstream communication as discussed under the 
information and communication component.  
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.708   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Implementing an Effective Compliance and Ethics Program Under the Corporate Sentencing Guidelines 
To review, the United States Sentencing Commission began a study of sanctions for 
corporate wrongdoing in 1988. After three years of study and hearings, on May 1, 1991, the 
USSC submitted its Proposed Guidelines for Sentencing Organizations  to Congress. The 
introductory commentary to the Guidelines clearly states that they are designed to provide 
incentives for organizations to maintain internal mechanisms for preventing, detecting, and 
reporting criminal conduct. Among other things, the Guidelines suggest a substantial 
reduction of fines for organizations that have effective compliance programs. (See the 
chapter on “Organizational Crime” for more in formation about how penalties are calculated 
under the Guidelines.) 
 
The United States Sentencing Commission promulgated modifications to the existing 
provisions of Chapter 8 dealing with effective compliance and ethics programs for business 
organizations that became effective November 1, 2004. These provisions (contained in 
Section 8B2.1) narrowly tailor the criteria for compliance and ethics programs, thereby 
providing organizations with guidance in establishing and maintaining effective programs for 
detecting and preventing internal illegal activities, as well as mitigating sentencing culpability.  
 
Under the Guidelines, if a convicted organization has an effective compliance program in 
place at the time of the offense, the sentencing judge will consider the organization’s acts of 
due diligence in trying to prevent the illegality when deciding whether to increase or mitigate 
the sentence. The guidelines define effective compliance program as one that is reasonably 
designed, implemented, and enforced so that it generally will be effective in preventing and 
detecting criminal conduct. 
 
In April 2010, however, the U.S. Sentencing Commission modified the sentencing guidelines 
for organizations, especially as they relate to compliance programs. The most significant 
change under the modified sentencing guidelines for organizations concerns the sentence 
reduction credit for having an effective compliance program. Before the guidelines were 
modified, organizations were disqualified from receiving a reduction in sentencing for 
maintaining an effective compliance program if a “high-level person” was involved with the 
fraudulent activity. Under the modified guidelines, however, involvement of a high-level 
person is no longer an automatic bar from effective compliance program credit, but the 
amendments impose several conditions to receive a reduction under these circumstances, 
including a direct reporting requirement to the governing authority (board or audit 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.709  
committee). The changes will become effective on November 1, 2010, barring any 
Congressional modifications or rejection. 
 
As provided by the Guidelines, to have an “effective compliance and ethics program,” the 
organization shall: 
• Exercise due diligence to prevent and detect criminal conduct 
• Otherwise promote an organizational culture that encourages ethical conduct and a 
commitment to compliance with the law 
 
The Guidelines further require that such a compliance and ethics program be reasonably 
designed, implemented, and enforced so that it is generally effective in preventing and 
detecting criminal conduct. However, this Section further provides that the failure to prevent 
or detect the offense in question does not necessarily mean that the program is ineffective. 
 
In designing such a program, certain factors must be considered by each organization: 
1. Applicable industry size and practice — An organization’s failure to incorporate and 
follow industry practice or the standards called for by any applicable government 
regulation weighs against a finding that the program is effective. 
2. Size of the organization—Large organizations are expected to devote more formal 
operations and greater resources to meeting the requirements than are small 
organizations. For example, smaller organizations may use available personnel rather 
than employ separate staff to carry out ethics and compliance. 
3. Recurrence of similar misconduct — The recurrence of a similar event creates doubt as to 
whether the organization took reasonable steps to meet the requirements. 
 
To meet the two requirements of due diligence and promotion of an ethical culture, Section 
8B2.1 (b) sets forth the seven factors that are minimally required for such a program to be 
considered effective:  
1. The organization must have established standards and procedures to prevent and detect 
criminal conduct.  
2. Item 2 has three specific subparts: 
a. The organization’s governing authority shall be knowledgeable about the content and 
operation of the compliance and ethics program and shall exercise reasonable 
oversight with respect to implementation and effectiveness of the compliance and 
ethics program. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.710   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
b. High-level personnel shall ensure that the organization has an effective compliance 
and ethics program, and specific individual(s) within the organization shall be 
assigned overall responsibility for the compliance and ethics program. 
c. Specific individual(s) within the organization shall be delegated day-to-day 
operational responsibility for the compliance and ethics program. These individuals 
shall report periodically to high-level personnel and, as appropriate, to the governing 
authority (or a subgroup thereof) on the effectiveness of the program. It is also 
required that these specific individuals be given adequate resources and authority to 
accomplish their responsibilities and be given direct access to the governing 
authority. 
3. The organization shall use reasonable efforts not to include within the substantial 
authority personnel any individual whom the organization knew, or should have known, 
has engaged in illegal activities or other conducts inconsistent with an effective 
compliance and ethics program. 
4. Item 4 has two subparts: 
a. The organization shall take reasonable steps to communicate periodically and in a 
practical manner its standards and procedures, and other aspects of the compliance 
and ethics program, to the individuals referred to in subpart (b) below by conducting 
effective training programs and otherwise disseminating information appropriate to 
such individuals’ respective roles and responsibilities.  
b. The individuals referred to in subpart (a) above are the 1) members of the governing 
authority, 2) high-level personnel, 3) substantial authority personnel, 4) the 
organization’s employees, and, as appropriate, the 5) organization’s agents. 
5. The organization shall take reasonable steps to accomplish the following: 
a. Ensure that the organization’s compliance and ethics program is followed, including 
monitoring and auditing to detect criminal conduct. 
b. Evaluate periodically the effectiveness of the organization’s compliance and ethics 
program. 
c. Have and publicize a system, which may include mechanisms that allow for 
anonymity or confidentiality, whereby the organization’s employees and agents 
may report or seek guidance regarding potential or actual criminal conduct without 
fear of retaliation. 
6. The organization’s compliance and ethics program shall be promoted and enforced 
consistently throughout the organization through (a) appropriate incentives to  
perform in accordance with the program and (b) appropriate disciplinary measures for 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.711  
engaging in criminal conduct and for failing to take reasonable steps to prevent or detect 
criminal conduct. 
7. After criminal conduct has been detected, the organization shall take reasonable steps to 
respond appropriately to the criminal conduct and to prevent further similar criminal 
conduct, including making any necessary modifications to the organization’s compliance 
and ethics program. 
 
The following are some tips and suggestions for developing a compliance and ethics program 
that complies with these seven requirements: 
 
1. Establishing Standards 
The first step is to establish standards and procedures that are reasonably capable of 
preventing and detecting criminal conduct. One should start by producing a clear statement 
of management philosophy. This statement will serve as the backbone of all compliance 
procedures. This is similar to the COSO requirement that management must set the ethical 
tone for the organization.  
 
Organizations should draft clear, concise compliance standards that are consistent with 
management’s ethics policy and are relevant to business operations. A sample corporate 
compliance program is included later in this section. It should provide a framework from 
which fraud examiners can build compliance programs tailored to their own organizations.  
 
2. Assigning Responsisbility 
The Guidelines require that the company’s gove rning authority shall be knowledgeable about 
the content and operation of the compliance and ethics program and shall exercise 
reasonable oversight with respect to the implementation and effectiveness of the program. 
Governing authority  is defined as the board of directors, or if the organization does not have a 
board of directors, the highest-level governing body of the organization. 
 
It is also required that high-level personnel  shall ensure that the company has an effective 
program and that specific individuals within this group be assigned the overall responsibility 
for the program. 
 
High-level personnel are those who have “subst antial control over the organization or who 
have a substantial role in the making of policy within the organization.” Specific examples of 
high-level personnel include: 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.712   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Directors 
• Executive officers 
• Individuals in charge of major business or functional units of the organization 
• Individuals with substantial ownership interests in the organization 
 
Audit Committees 
If a board of directors exists, the board must be knowledgeable about the compliance 
program and oversee its implementation. Accordingly, it is preferable for the board of 
directors or one of the board’s committees to control the organization’s compliance 
program. For instance, many companies place their compliance programs under the control 
of audit committees. There are three principal benefits to this practice: 
• The involvement of the board of directors lends an air of authority to the compliance 
program. It clearly identifies the program as a matter of company policy. 
• The involvement of a board committee provides oversight to the operation of the 
program by personnel who are not involved in the day-to-day operation of the program. 
• Efforts to implement an effective compliance program can be documented in the 
committee’s minutes. This documentation can prove useful if the company ever has to 
defend its actions and seek mitigation of a criminal fine. 
• A member of the board should also be a member of the audit committee. This will help 
ensure that the board is knowledgeable about the content and operation of the program. 
 
Although the board and the officers may delegate the day-to-day operational responsibility 
for the program to other individuals (such as a compliance officer and his staff), these 
individuals must report periodically to the board or other high-level personnel regarding the 
effectiveness of the program. They must also have sufficient authority to ensure that 
standards are strictly adhered to as well as adequate resources to implement and monitor the 
program.  
  
3. Due Diligence in Hiring  
The Guidelines require that the organization “use reasonable efforts not to include within 
the substantial authority personnel of the organization any individual whom the organization 
knew, or should have known through the exercise of due diligence, has engaged in illegal 
activities or other conduct inconsistent with an effective compliance and ethics program.”  
 
Substantial authority personnel  is defined as individuals who exercise a substantial measure of 
discretion in acting on behalf of an organization. The term includes high-level personnel of 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.713  
the organization, individuals who exercise substantial supervisory authority (such as a plant 
manager or a sales manager), and any other individuals who, although not a part of an 
organization’s management, nevertheless exercise  substantial discretion when acting within 
the scope of their authority (such as an individual with authority in an organization to 
negotiate or set price levels or an individual authorized to negotiate or approve significant 
contracts). Whether an individual falls within this category must be determined on a case-by-
 case basis. 
 
Like COSO, the Guidelines require that organi zations hire ethical employees. This requires 
careful screening of applicants, thorough background checks (where permitted by law), and 
effective monitoring of the performance of current employees. Although the Guidelines only 
require such screening for “substantial authority personnel,” it is recommended that such 
screening be adopted for all employees. 
 
4. Communicating the Policy 
The corporate compliance policy should be communicated to everyone who can potentially 
bind a corporation through their own misconduct. This includes the following: 
• Board of directors 
• Executive officers and directors  
• Managers and supervisors 
• Low-level employees 
• Independent contractors 
 
Note in particular that organizations can be held liable for the acts of independent contractors 
if the contractor is acting for the benefit of the organization. It is therefore important to 
distribute copies of the compliance program to contractors as well as employees. 
 
Training Employees 
As required by the Sentencing Guidelines, organizations must  conduct “effective training 
programs.” Organizations are also required to periodically and appropriately communicate the 
program’s compliance requirements and procedures to all employees affected by the program, 
including upper-level personnel. These programs should be designed to inform employees 
about the company’s stance on corporate complia nce. They should also inform employees 
about what kinds of acts and omissions are prohibited by the law and by the organization. The 
training should be designed to help employees identify and avoid situations that could lead to 
criminal conduct. Common training techniques include: 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.714   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Lectures 
• Training films 
• Interactive workshops 
• Computer-based courses 
 
Employees should be trained to understand the organization’s ethical policy. They  
should also be trained to identify potentially compromising situations and learn how to  
avoid them. This training should be tailored to the nature of the organization’s business, 
taking into account the external and internal risks that are inherent in that business. Training 
should also include a review of statutes and regulations that are particularly applicable to  
the organization. 
 
Training should not be a one-time event. Simply handing out a copy of the company’s 
compliance policy at the beginning of an employee’s tenure is insufficient. Organizations 
should stress compliance by regularly emphasizing their standards to all personnel. For 
example, many companies disseminate a copy of their ethics policies every six months along 
with employee paychecks.  
 
5. Achieving Compliance 
An organization is required to take reasonable measures to ensure program compliance 
through monitoring, auditing, periodically evaluating the program’s effectiveness, and having 
a publicized reporting system whereby employees and agents may retain anonymity or 
confidentiality when reporting or seeking guidance regarding actual or potential illegal 
conduct without fear of retribution. These include such things as proactive fraud detection 
and hotlines, which are discussed in more detail in the next section. 
 
6. Disciplinary Action 
Enforcing a compliance program means adhering to a system of disciplinary actions for rule 
breakers. Employees must know that if they violate the company’s compliance policy, they will 
be punished. The opportunity to commit fraud is psychologically more acceptable when 
employees believe fraud normally goes undetected and unprosecuted. New employees should 
be advised of the compliance program at the time of hire, and should sign an annual statement 
acknowledging their understanding of it. The range of possible punishments for violations of 
the policy should be spelled out. These may include:  
• Reprimand 
• Probation 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.715  
• Suspension 
• Reduction in salary 
• Demotion 
• Reimbursement of losses of damages 
• Dismissal 
• Referral for criminal prosecution or civil action 
• A combination of the above 
 
In addition, the Guidelines recommend the discipline of individuals who are responsible for 
failing to detect offenses. 
 
If a compliance program is not enforced, it is nothing more than a paper tiger. There are two 
purposes to any compliance program. The first is to prevent criminal conduct. The second is 
to mitigate any potential fines for criminal conduct by showing that the organization is 
dedicated to preventing illegal activity. If an organization does not enforce its compliance 
program, its chances of mitigating fines are nil. Therefore, organizations should adhere to 
well-defined procedures when investigating potential violations and when disciplining 
individuals for offenses. The organization’s efforts should be documented so that it can 
prove that it made every effort to enforce compliance. For every allegation of an offense, the 
company should maintain: 
• An account of the alleged offense 
• A description of the steps taken to investigate the allegation 
• A description of the actions taken by the organization in response to the violation 
 
Note, however, that the Guidelines also require that the organization promote the compliance 
and ethics program through appropriate incentives that encourage employees to perform in 
accordance with the program. Such incentives can include rewards for reporting ethical concerns 
or misconduct, or rewards for ideas for new or innovative detection and monitoring methods. 
 
7. Appropriate Responses 
After detection of an offense, the organization must take all reasonable steps to appropriately 
respond to this offense and to prevent further similar offenses—including modifying its 
program and administering appropriate discipline for the individuals responsible for the offense 
and those who failed to detect it. When a control failure is identified, changes may be necessary. 
Both COSO and the Guidelines require organizations to identify the weakness in the control 
system and make modifications to prevent similar failures in the future. The Guidelines require 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.716   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
that organizations explain the modifications they have made and demonstrate why they will  
be effective.  
 
The proposed amendments clarify subsection 8B2.1(b)(7), adding an Application Note to 
provide guidance on what actions qualify as “rea sonable steps” for the purposes of this 
subsection. First, the proposed Note states that if the criminal conduct has an identifiable 
victim(s), “the organization should take reasonable steps to provide restitution and otherwise 
remedy the harm resulting from the criminal conduct.” 1 It provides that other proper responses 
include self-reporting and cooperation with authorities. Second, the proposed Note provides 
that the organization should appraise and, if needed, alter its compliance program to guarantee 
that the compliance program is more productive. Finally, the proposed Note provides that, if 
an organization decides to alter its compliance program, it may take the added step of retaining 
an autonomous monitor to guarantee sufficient appraisal and application of the changes. 
 
Periodic Assessment 
The Guidelines also require that the organization periodically assess the risk that criminal 
conduct will occur and modify its actions and its compliance and ethics program accordingly. In 
doing so, the organization should assess the following: 
• The nature and seriousness of criminal conduct that could occur 
• The likelihood that certain criminal conduct may occur because of the nature of the 
organization’s business 
• The prior history of the organization, which may indicate the types of criminal conduct 
that the company should be trying to prevent 
 
Moreover, the proposed amendments add an Application Note that clarifies the requirement 
that organizations conduct periodic assessments. The Note provides that an organization, as 
part of a periodic assessment, should monitor “the nature and operations of the organization 
with regard to particular ethics and compliance functions.” 2  
 
Relation of COSO and Corporate Sentencing Guidelines 
The Guidelines and COS O focus on the development of a stronger control system. The 
Guidelines contain explicit requirements for an effective control program. COSO does not 
mandate specific actions. It only provides illustrations of what constitutes a strong control 
                                                 
1 Sentencing Guidelines for United States Courts, 75 Fed. Reg. at 3535. 
2 Sentencing Guidelines for United States Courts, 75 Fed. Reg. at 3535. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.717  
system. The seven minimum requirements of the Guidelines are covered within the COSO 
system. The following table summarizes the relation between the components of the two 
pronouncements. 
 
COMPONENTS COSO GUIDELINES 
Control Environment  
Managemenst • Sets the ethical tone 
• Leads by actions, such as 
rewarding ethical conduct while 
punishing unethical actions 
• Sanctions for knowing, tolerating, 
or condoning improper conduct 
• Rewards for cooperation and 
contrition 
• “Due diligence” requirement 
• Upper management oversight of 
compliance program 
Integrity and Ethical 
Values 
• Code of ethics 
• Mechanism to encourage 
employee reporting 
• Code of ethics 
• Additional reporting mechanisms 
Human Resources • Hiring those who demonstrate 
integrity 
• Consistent discipline 
• Non-delegation of authority to 
those with criminal tendencies 
• Consistent discipline 
Risk Assessment • Objectives related to operations, 
financial reporting, and 
compliance 
• Identification and analysis of 
relevant risks 
• A strategy to manage risks 
• Incentives to maintain internal 
controls 
• Identification of industry-specific 
risks 
Control Activities • Policies and procedures to help 
ensure that management’s 
directives are followed 
• Standards and procedures capable 
of reducing the prospect of 
criminal conduct 
• Determination of modifications 
needed to prevent future problems
 Information and 
Communication 
• The identification, capture, and 
communication of pertinent 
information in an appropriate 
format and time frame 
• Effective communication of 
standards and procedures to all 
employees and other agents 
• Required training and  distribution 
of publications 
• Establishment of additional 
reporting mechanisms (such as 
hotlines or helplines) 
Monitorin g  • Ongoing assessment of the 
internal control system 
• Utilization of monitoring and 
auditing systems designed to 
detect criminal conduct 
• Periodic evaluation of program 
effectiveness 
  [Fiorelli, Rooney, COSO and the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, INTERNAL AUDITOR, April 1997] 
 
Sample Corporate Compliance Policy 
A sample corporate compliance policy is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.718   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Procedures to Prevent Fraud 
The following are examples of procedures that can be implemented into a compliance 
program that are specifically designed to detect and prevent fraud. 
 
Proactive Fraud Policies 
Proactive fraud policies  are generated from the top of the operation. A proactive policy means 
that the organization will aggressively seek out possible fraudulent conduct, instead of 
waiting for instances to come to their attention. This can be accomplished by several means, 
including the use of analytical review, fraud assessment questioning, enforcement of 
mandatory vacations, job rotation, and surprise audits where possible.  
 
Use of Analytical Review 
Much internal fraud is discovered as a result of analytical review. To uncover such fraud and 
defalcations, they must materially impact the financial statements. Auditors should be 
especially mindful of the following trends: 
• Increasing expenses 
• Increasing cost of sales 
• Increasing receivables/decreasing cash 
• Increasing inventories 
• Increasing sales/decreasing cash 
• Increasing returns and allowances 
• Increasing sales discounts 
 
Fraud Assessment Questioning 
Fraud assessment questioning  is a non-accusatory interview technique used as a part of a normal 
audit. See the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  for further details. It 
operates on the theory that employees’ attitudes are a good indicator of potential problems, 
and that one of the most effective ways to deal with fraud is to ask about it. 
 
Below are some suggested questions that can be asked as a part of the normal audit. Note 
that the questions here begin with the general and proceed to the specific.  
• Part of my duty as an auditor is to find fraud, waste, and abuse. Do you understand that? 
• Do you think fraud is a problem for business in general? 
• Do you think this company has any particular problem with fraud? 
• Has anyone ever asked you to do anything that you felt was illegal or unethical? 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.719  
• If you felt that there was a problem in the company with respect to fraud, what would 
you do? 
• Do you have any indication that there is fraud occurring in the company now? 
 
Enforcement of Mandatory Vacations 
Many internal frauds require manual intervention, and are therefore discovered when the 
perpetrator is away on vacation. The enforcement of mandatory vacations will aid in the 
prevention of some frauds.  
 
Job Rotation 
Some frauds are detected during sickness or unexpected absences of the perpetrator because 
they require continuous, manual intervention. 
 
EXAMPLE  
A manager who embezzled $1.6 million from  his company said, “If the company had 
coupled a two-week vacation with four weeks of rotation to another job function, my 
embezzlement would have been impossible to cover up.” His fraud lasted three years. 
 
Surprise Audits Where Possible 
All too many fraud perpetrators know when auditors are coming, and therefore have time to 
alter, destroy, or misplace records and other evidence. A proactive fraud policy involves 
using the technique of surprise audits as much as possible. It might have a significant 
deterrent effect. 
 
Management Oversight 
It is most common for employees who steal to use the proceeds for lifestyle improvements. 
Some examples include more expensive cars, extravagant vacations, expensive clothing, new 
or remodeled homes, expensive recreational property, and outside investments. Managers 
should be educated to be observant of these signs.  
 
EXAMPLE  
Discovery of a $97,000 embezzlem ent that occurred over a two- year period resulted when 
an observant manager asked the internal auditors  to examine the responsibilities of a seven-
 year veteran of the company. The manager no ticed that this female employee had begun 
wearing designer clothes (and making a big deal about it), and was driving a new BMW. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.720   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The manager was also aware of the fact that  this employee had no outside income that 
might explain the upgrade in lifestyle. 
 
Increasing the Perception of Detection 
Most experts agree that it is much easier to prevent than detect fraud. To prevent fraud, we 
should understand something about the mind of the potential perpetrator. Increasing the 
perception of detection might be the most effective fraud prevention method. Controls, for 
example, do little good in forestalling theft and fraud, if those at risk do not know of the 
presence of possible detection. In the audit profession, this means letting employees, 
managers, and executives know that auditors are actively seeking out information concerning 
internal theft. This can be accomplished in several ways. 
 
Employee Education 
Each entity should have some policy for educating managers, executives, and employees 
about fraud. This can be done as a part of employee orientation, or it can be accomplished 
through memoranda, training programs, and other intercompany communication methods. 
The goal is to make others within the company your eyes and ears. 
 
Any education effort should be positive and not accusatory. Illegal conduct in any form 
eventually costs everyone in the company through lost profits, adverse publicity, and 
decreased morale and productivity. These facts should be emphasized in training. 
 
Minimize Employee Pressures 
Pressures, such as financial hardship or family problems, can be especially difficult to  
detect in employees. Companies can take steps to assist an employee who might be having 
difficult times. 
 
Open-Door Policies 
If employees and others can speak freely, many managers will understand the pressures and 
might be able to eliminate them before they become acute. 
 
EXAMPLE  
The controller of a small frui t-packing company in California stole $112,000 from the 
company. When asked why, he said, “Nobody at the company ever talked to me, especially 
the owners. They were unfair. They talked do wn to me, and they we re rude. They deserve 
everything they got.” 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.721  
Employee Support Programs 
Many progressive companies and agencies have realized the benefit of employee support 
programs. Some kinds of support programs include alcohol and drug assistance, and 
counseling for gambling, abortion, marital problems, and financial difficulties. 
 
Management Climate 
If the style of management is conducted by objective measures rather than by subjective 
measures, then employees will not manufacture or imagine the performance criteria 
employed by management. In addition, it is obvious that management that is perceived to be 
dishonest will beget dishonest employees. 
 
EXAMPLE  
Jim, a loan officer for a mortgage bank, received his primary compensation based on the total 
volume of loans (measured by dollars) he was able to put on the books each year. Dollar 
volume was the only criteria for the compensation. In addition, the loan officers were all in 
competition with each other for the high volume  award of the year. The pressure to earn more 
than his fellow officers became more acute each year. 
 
When the mortgage company was closed down, most of Jim’s loans were in default. Because 
Jim perceived that his job performance was based solely on volume, no attention was paid to 
the quality of the loans. In fact, it was discov ered that on several occasions, Jim coerced the 
loan processing department to close loans, even though all the requirements had not been 
completed. 
 
EXAMPLE  
A large fast food chain lost $200,000 when one of its buyers got involved with a supplier. 
The company decided to notify all of its vendors of the company’s policy prohibiting the giving 
of anything of value to influence a purchasing decision. Two vendors called in with complaints 
about competitors, resulting in the discovery of two other frauds totaling an additional 
$360,000. 
 
Monitoring Systems 
Both the Guidelines and Sarbanes-Oxley specifically mention the importance of having a 
reporting system for employees and agents of the organization to report criminal conduct. 
Confidential hotlines are one of the best ways for an organization to monitor compliance.  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.722   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Reporting Programs 
Each employee in the company should know where to report suspicious, unethical, or illegal 
behavior. A reporting program should emphasize that: 
• Fraud, waste, and abuse occur in nearly all companies. 
• Such conduct costs the company jobs and profits. 
• The company actively encourages any employee with information to come forward. 
• The employee can come forward and provide information anonymously and without 
fear of recrimination for good-faith reporting. 
• There is an exact method for reporting (i.e., a telephone number, name, or other 
information). 
• The report need not be made to one’s immediate superiors. 
 
Hotlines 
Hotlines have proved to be a very effective reporting mechanism. However, most hotline 
reports do not result in fraud cases. At the federal level, published reports indicate that about 
five percent of hotline calls result in serious allegations. With careful screening of calls and 
proper handling, spurious complaints can be effectively weeded out. There are three general 
types of hotlines. The advantages and disadvantages of each are summarized below. 
 
PART TIME, IN-HOUSE 
These hotlines are assigned to an employee with other duties. An audit or security department 
usually staffs an in-house hotline. When the employee is out, a recorder takes calls. The main 
advantage is cost. The main disadvantage is that the hotline is not staffed full-time, which can 
discourage calls. Also, some people might be reluctant to report to the company.  
 
FULL TIME, IN-HOUSE 
A full-time, in-house hotline may be feasible depending on the company size. The advantage 
is that people can make reports at any time, day or night, and talk to a person. The 
disadvantage is cost, and like the part-time line, some people might be reluctant to report 
directly to the company.  
 
THIRD PARTY 
An outside company that specializes in services of this type most often staffs a third-party 
hotline. The advantages are cost, efficiency, and anonymity. A few are staffed around the 
clock, and will provide the information immediately to the client subscriber. They also 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.723  
provide anonymity to those who might be more comfortable with it. Their disadvantage is 
that the operation is beyond the company’s control. 
 
Rewards 
Some companies have a policy of rewarding information that leads to the recovery of 
merchandise, property, or money. Others offer rewards upon the criminal conviction of the 
person(s) involved. If a reward policy exists, strict criteria should establish reward payments, 
and such proposed policies should be reviewed and approved by counsel. The amount of 
reward paid by companies varies from fixed fees to a percentage of the recovery. Studies 
indicate that rewards should not exceed a few thousand dollars.  
 
 
Fraud Prevention Standards Under Sarbanes-Oxley 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) set forth a number  of preventive measures public companies 
must take to help reduce the threat of fraud. The Act as a whole is discussed in detail in the 
Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. Here, we will cover only the portions of SOX 
that directly relate to fraud prevention.  
 
Audit Committee Responsibilities 
One of the keys to effective fraud prevention is assigning high-level personnel responsibility 
for fraud prevention efforts. This signals to employees that fraud is a serious matter and it 
helps ensure that fraud prevention issues will receive consideration at the highest levels of 
the company. SOX mandates that audit committees for publicly traded companies be 
directly responsible for two key components of an effective fraud prevention program—
 outside audits and internal reporting mechanisms. It also establishes requirements for the 
composition of audit committees to ensure that they are capable of carrying out  
their duties.  
 
Overseeing Audits 
Section 301 of the Act requires the audit committee for every publicly traded company to be 
directly responsible for hiring, paying, and overseeing the work of the company’s outside 
auditors. Auditors must report directly to the audit committee, and the committee is 
responsible for resolving disputes between auditors and the company’s management. 
 
Section 204 of SOX requires outside auditors to report certain information to the audit 
committee, including any alternative accounting treatments within GAAP that have been 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.724   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
discussed with management, the effect of using those alternative treatments, and the 
treatment preferred by the auditors. This is designed to give the audit committee a warning 
in the event that management has used questionable or overly aggressive accounting in the 
preparation of the company’s financial statements. 
 
Receiving Complaints 
Section 301 also specifies that audit committees must establish procedures for receiving and 
dealing with complaints and anonymous employee tips regarding irregularities in the 
company’s accounting methods, internal controls, or auditing matters.  
 
Composition of the Audit Committee 
The Act also sets forth certain requirements regarding the composition of audit committees. 
Under Section 301, every member of the audit committee must also be a member of the 
company’s board of directors, which ensures that the committee will have sufficient 
authority within the company to carry out its duties. Furthermore, Section 407 of the Act 
requires every public company to disclose in its SEC reports whether at least one member of 
the audit committee is a “financial expert,” and if  not, to explain the reasons why. Financial 
experts are defined by SOX as persons who, through education and professional experience, 
possess the following: (1) an understanding of generally accepted accounting principles and 
financial statements; (2) experience in prepar ing or auditing financial statements of 
comparable companies and in accounting for estimates, accruals, and reserves in those 
companies; (3) experience with internal controls; and (4) an understanding of audit 
committee functions.  
 
Finally, Section 301 expressly states that audit committees must be given sufficient authority 
and funding to hire attorneys and other advisors necessary to carry out their duties. 
 
Management Responsibilities  
Sarbanes-Oxley also places a number of requirements on manag ement related to fraud 
prevention. It makes management directly responsible for internal controls, requires 
companies to establish codes of ethics for their senior financial officers, and requires CEOs 
and CFOs to personally certify their companies’ financial reports.  
 
Management’s Responsibility for Internal Controls 
Internal controls are among the most important aspects of any fraud prevention program. 
Section 404 of SOX requires each annual report filed with the SEC to contain an internal 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.725  
control report that (1) states management’s re sponsibility for establishing and maintaining an 
adequate internal control structure and (2) contains an assessment of the effectiveness of the 
internal control structure and procedures of the company for financial reporting. 
Management’s internal control assessment must be attested to and reported on by the 
company’s outside auditors.  
 
Codes of Ethics for Senior Financial Officers 
In order to have an effective anti-fraud program, organizations must set clear standards for 
conduct; it is also critical to establish an ethical tone at the top of an organization to serve as 
a guide and example for employees. Sarbanes-Oxley addresses both of these issues by 
requiring publicly traded companies to disclose in their periodic reports whether they have 
adopted a code of ethics for their senior financial officers, and if not, to explain their 
reasoning. SOX also requires companies to make an immediate disclosure any time there is a 
change in the code of ethics or a waiver for a senior financial officer.  
 
Certification Obligations 
As part of an effort to eliminate financial statement fraud, Sarbanes-Oxley requires CEOs 
and CFOs of publicly traded companies to personally certify their companies’ annual and 
quarterly SEC filings. There are two categories of officer certifications required by SOX: 
criminal certifications, which are contained in Section 906 of the Act, and civil certifications, 
which are contained in Section 302.  
 
CRIMINAL CERTIFICATIONS 
Under Section 906, all periodic filings with the SEC must be accompanied by a statement 
which certifies that the report fully complies with the SEC’s reporting requirements and that 
the information in the report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition 
and results of operation of the company. This statement must be signed by both the CEO 
and CFO. These certifications are known as  “criminal certifications” because the Act 
imposes criminal penalties for violations of this Section, including fines of up to $1 million 
and imprisonment of up to ten years.  
 
CIVIL CERTIFICATIONS 
Section 302 requires that the CEO and CFO certify  the following six items in every annual 
and quarterly report: 
• They have personally reviewed the report. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.726   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Based on their knowledge, the report does not contain any material misstatement that 
would render the financials misleading. 
• Based on their knowledge, the financial information in the report fairly presents  in  
all material respects the financial condition, results of operations, and cash flow of  
the company.  
• They are responsible for designing, maintaining, and evaluating the company’s  
internal controls; they have designed the controls to ensure that they receive material 
information about the company; they have evaluated the controls within 90 days prior to 
the report; and they have presented their conclusions about the effectiveness of the 
controls in the report. 
• They have disclosed to the auditors and the audit committee any material weaknesses in 
the controls and any fraud, whether material or not, that involves management or other 
employees who have a significant role in the company’s internal controls.  
• They have indicated in the report whether there have been significant changes in the 
company’s internal controls, including any corrective actions with regard to significant 
deficiencies and material weaknesses. 
 
IMPACT OF CERTIFICATION OBLIGATIONS 
Sarbanes-Oxley requires CEOs and CFOs to  take personal responsibility for their 
companies’ financial statements; they cannot  delegate their responsibilities to their 
subordinates and then claim ignorance when fraud is discovered. If the financials include 
fraudulent reporting, then the senior financial officers may be held individually civilly liable 
for the misstatements.  
 
The “fairly presents” standard of item 3 is broader than what is required by GAAP. It 
essentially requires the CEO and CFO to certi fy that the company has selected appropriate 
accounting policies; has properly applied those accounting standards; and has disclosed 
financial information that reflects the underlying transactions of the company.  
 
Item 4 requires senior financial officers to take an active role in the design and maintenance 
of their companies’ internal controls. It not only requires the CEO and CFO to certify that 
they are responsible for controls, but also that they have evaluated their controls within 90 
days prior to their quarterly or annual report. This effectively requires companies to 
continually re-evaluate their control structures. Item 5 requires the CEO and CFO to report 
any material weaknesses in their company’s controls, along with any fraud involving 
management, whether it is material or not.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.727  
The overall effect of these certification requirements is to force CEOs and CFOs to take an 
active role in the anti-fraud efforts of their companies, making internal controls and fraud 
prevention a high priority.  
 
Whistleblower Protection 
A key to any fraud prevention program is the establishment of a mechanism by which fraud 
can be reported. As was stated above, Section 301 of Sarbanes-Oxley requires audit 
committees to establish mechanisms for receiving complaints about irregularities in a 
company’s accounting, auditing, or internal control systems.  
 
In order to protect those who make such reports, SOX established broad protections for 
corporate whistleblowers. Section 806 of the Act creates civil liability for publicly traded 
companies that retaliate against employees who provide information or assist in the 
investigation of securities fraud. Penalties for violating this Section include reinstatement, 
back pay with interest, and compensation for special damages such as litigation costs and 
attorney’s fees. 
 
Section 1107 makes it a crime to retaliate against a person for providing truthful information 
relating to the commission or possible commission of any federal offense. This Section 
offers much broader protection than the civil whistleblower protection afforded under 
Section 806. The whistleblower protections under Section 1107 cover all individuals, not just 
employees of publicly traded companies. They also protect individuals who provide 
information about any federal offense, not just securities fraud. Vi olations of Section 1107 are 
punishable by fines of up to $250,000 and up to ten years in prison for individuals. 
Corporations can be fined up to $500,000.  
 
Fraud Prevention Requirements for External Auditors  
Attesting to Internal Controls 
As was stated above, Section 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley requires a company’s auditors to attest 
to and report on management’s assessment of in ternal controls in each annual report filed 
with the SEC. In addition, each audit report must describe the scope of the auditor’s testing 
of the company’s internal control structure. The audit report must include an evaluation of 
whether the company’s internal controls are acceptable and a description of material 
weaknesses in the control structure or any material noncompliance with controls.  
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.728   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Restrictions on Non-Audit Activity 
In order to address concerns about potential conflicts of interest that can arise when public 
accounting firms receive consulting fees and other compensation for non-audit services 
from their audit clients, Sarbanes-Oxley established a list of activities that public accounting 
firms are now prohibited from performing on behalf of their audit clients. The list includes 
most consulting and expert services, although tax services are still permissible if they are 
approved in advance by the audit committee.  
 
 
Fraud Prevention Policy 
Another important element of an overall fraud prevention program is a written fraud policy 
that specifically spells out who in an organization handles varying fraud matters under 
differing circumstances.  
 
Fraud Policy Objectives 
A fraud prevention program will entail objectives very similar to those of internal control. 
According to the Institute of Internal Auditors’ Standards for the Professional Practice of 
Internal Auditing, the primary objectives for management to achieve proper internal controls 
include reasonable assurance that: 
• Financial and operating information is accurate and reliable. 
• Policies, procedures, plans, laws, and regulations are complied with. 
• Assets are safeguarded against loss and theft. 
• Resources are used economically and efficiently. 
• Established program/operating goals and objectives are met. 
 
A fraud prevention policy with the above-mentioned goals is the first step toward effective 
fraud deterrence.  
 
Selling Fraud Prevention to Management 
Management might not support fraud prevention for one of several reasons: 
• Management’s concerns are often on areas other than audit or fraud. They don’t typically 
understand that fraud is hidden and that losses go undetected. They also might refuse to 
believe that their own workers are capable of stealing even when studies suggest a third 
of us might do such a thing. 
• Because of the hidden nature of fraud, managers are understandably reluctant to believe 
in the presence of fraud. And if one employee is caught committing fraud, management 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.729  
might too often claim that this is an isolated problem and not worth additional 
consideration. Management must understand that when instances of fraud are detected, 
it is too late to do anything about them.  
• Management sometimes unreasonably feels that  bringing up the issue will alienate the 
work force. This problem can be addressed by reminding management that the rank-and-file workers 
appreciate working for an honest company. It is also helpful to point 
out to management what the losses might be. 
 
Many auditors complain that management does not adequately support fraud prevention 
efforts. That is largely for two reasons: either they believe that fraud is not really a problem 
in the company or they believe that even addressing the subject has a negative impact. In 
either scenario, it is difficult for the auditor to break down management’s built-in resistance 
to dealing with fraud prevention. Some of the following suggestions might be helpful in 
“selling” fraud prevention to management.  
 
The Impact on the Bottom Line 
One of the best ways to sell management on fraud prevention is by showing the impact on 
the bottom line. Fraud impacts net sales dollar for dollar. For example, if a company nets 20 
percent on sales, they must sell five items at regular prices to recover losses from the theft of 
one item. Fraud can be very expensive.  
 
The Impact of Publicity 
Many corporate executives are more sensitive to adverse publicity than almost any other 
issue. Certainly, one way to convince management of the logic of fraud prevention is to 
point out that negative publicity, even in small cases, can have a devastating impact on the 
bottom line. This negative impact can be eliminated or reduced by a proactive fraud 
prevention program.  
 
One of the more significant examples of adverse publicity can be demonstrated in the E.F. 
Hutton case. As one might recall, 20 or so executives of E.F. Hutton participated in a kiting 
scheme in the late 1980s. The fraud itself was insignificant to the bottom line, but its 
resulting impact was devastating to E.F. Hutton, which eventually sold out. This situation 
pointedly illustrates that insignificant fraud can have a very significant impact.  
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.730   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Writing the Fraud Policy 
Companies often have an ethics policy that sets forth in detail what is expected in the ethical 
climate of the company. Still other companies have a fraud policy that specifically spells out 
who handles fraud matters under what circumstances. The components of a fraud policy will 
differ from company to company. Many fraud policies have some of the following elements.  
 
Policy Statement 
The policy statement sets forth that management is responsible for fraud, and each member 
of the management team should be familiar with the types of signals present within his scope 
of responsibilities. The policy statement also designates who is in charge of investigating 
suspected irregularities.  
 
Scope of Policy 
This area of the fraud policy statement covers what constitutes an irregularity and the fact 
that the policy covers everyone from management to workers.  
 
Actions Constituting Fraud 
This area sets forth in detail what actions constitute fraudulent conduct. This is important as 
it gives management the legal grounds to investigate and punish violators. The actions listed 
can include: 
• Any dishonest or fraudulent act 
• Forgery or alteration of documents 
• Misapplication of funds or assets 
• Impropriety with respect to reporting financial transactions 
• Profiting on insider knowledge 
• Disclosing securities transactions to others 
• Accepting gifts from vendors 
• Destruction or disappearance of records or assets 
• Any similar or related irregularity 
 
Non-fraud Irregularities 
This section covers allegations of personal improprieties or irregularities and states that they 
should be resolved by management and not an auditor. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.731  
Investigation Responsibilities 
This part deals with who will investigate suspected irregularities, as well as to whom these 
irregularities will be reported (management, law enforcement, or legal counsel). 
 
Confidentiality 
Under this section, the confidential nature of the investigation is set forth. It states that the 
investigation will not be disclosed to outsiders except as required.  
 
Authorization for Investigation 
This delineates that whoever is in charge of the investigation has the authority to take 
control of and examine records.  
 
Reporting Procedures 
This part states that anyone suspecting fraud should report it and not attempt an 
investigation. It also states that management and others should not make statements 
regarding the alleged guilt of the perpetrator. 
 
Termination  
This section states that any recommendations to terminate employees should be reviewed by 
counsel and management. 
 
Communicating the Fraud Policy 
It obviously does little good to have a fraud or ethics policy if it is not communicated to the 
employees. This communication can be accomplished in several ways. Again, the 
communication of the policy should be presented in a positive, non-accusatory manner. 
 
Orientation/Annual Training 
During initial employee orientation, the fraud policy should be discussed. This is the first 
opportunity the company has to make its point, and it should be made thoroughly. 
Reminding employees via annual online or live training may reinforce the policy and 
management’s expectations that it be followed. 
 
Memoranda 
An interoffice memorandum from the chief executive officer detailing the fraud policy is a 
good idea. Once again, the policy should con centrate on the positive aspects of working for 
an ethical company.  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.732   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Posters  
Some companies might wish to use posters displayed in common areas. However, this 
should be carefully considered, as some employees might object to such tactics.  
 
Employee Morale 
If an employee is properly instructed, communication of a fraud policy can have a positive 
impact on morale. Honest workers want to work for an honest company. A fraud policy 
helps set the proper tone.  
 
Quizzes/Games 
Games may be a fun and informal way to reinforce and communicate the fraud policy in an 
organization. Quizzes with prizes may also  be used to reward those who demonstrate 
awareness of the policy. 
 
Legal Considerations 
Many companies have learned that it is best to spell out specific unacceptable conduct. If the 
type of conduct that is considered unacceptable is not accurately detailed, there might be 
legal problems in discharging a dishonest employee. Check with your counsel regarding any 
legal considerations with respect to a fraud policy. One of the most important legal 
considerations is to ensure everyone and every allegation is handled in a uniform manner. A 
sample fraud policy is contained at the end of the chapter. 
 
 
Ethics Programs 
A written ethics policy is an excellent method by which management can objectively 
communicate its philosophy and develop a successful ethics program. The policy should be 
disseminated among both new and old employees. Additionally, some companies have 
found it effective to share the ethics policy with their vendors. 
 
In most cultures, the majority of people share the same values. They agree on what is good 
and bad, what is right and wrong, and what is moral and immoral. Although all will not hold 
the same set of values, the social values of the majority will affect the beliefs and behaviors 
of all people.  
 
The collection of a person’s beliefs and morals makes up a set of principles known as ethics. 
Ethics are the judgments about right and wrong or, more specifically, a person’s moral 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.733  
obligations to society that determine a person’s actions. Determining ethical rights and 
wrongs is complicated by the fact that moral standards and generally accepted social 
behavior change with time. In addition, different groups in the same society may have 
conflicting ideas of right and wrong. These values and ethics of an individual are reflected in 
their actions as employees. There are four factors that generally affect the ethical decisions  
of employees: 
• The law and other government regulations 
• Industry and organizational ethical codes 
• Social pressures 
• Tension between personal standards and organizational needs 
 
Employees’ ethics, whatever they may be, influe nce a wide range of organizational decisions 
and actions.  
 
A common fallacy in discussions about ethics is If it’s legal, it’s ethical. A common defense to 
charges of unethical behavior is to invoke the law. This legalistic approach to ethics 
mistakenly implies that actions that are not explicitly prohibited by the law are ethical. The 
main error in this approach is that legal standards do not establish ethical principles. 
Although abiding by the law is a part of ethical behavior, laws themselves do not describe 
how an ethical person should behave. One can be dishonest, unprincipled, untrustworthy, 
unfair, and uncaring without breaking the law. Ethical people measure their conduct by basic 
principles rather than rules. Thus, in making personal or occupational decisions, the law is 
only the minimum threshold in determining what is legally possible, and does not address 
how people should behave ethically. 
 
Origins of Ethics 
There are theories that state that by the time one becomes an adult and enters the work-
 place, a basic code of ethics is already in place. Ethical character is hardwired into the 
personality before or during adolescence. By this theory, if a person did not learn to be 
ethical in childhood, there is a slim chance that he will act ethically as an adult.  
 
An opposing theory holds that operational values that guide behavior are not formed until 
early adulthood and, even after that, they are subject to change. Until one has to make 
serious, binding decisions, it is not necessary to act according to one’s beliefs. By this theory, 
as long as individuals have the capacity to reflect and make value judgments, they can modify 
their personal ethics and change their behavior.  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.734   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Business ethics programs rely on the validity of the latter theory. With the hope that adult 
behavior can be affected or modified, ethics programs are designed to steer employees in the 
right direction.  
 
Ethics’ Current Place in Business 
The decline in public attitudes about business in recent years has reinforced the importance 
of ethics in the workplace. Although there seems to be a further deterioration of public 
confidence, substantial endeavors have been made by organizations with respect to business 
ethics. These initiatives include adoption of codes of conduct, introduction of ethics into 
employee and management training, and the establishment of ethics and compliance offices.  
 
Corporate ethics initiatives have accelerated over the last decade due in part to the impact of 
the U.S. Federal Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations. These Guidelines can multiply or 
mitigate potentially devastating penalties for errant corporations, depending on their 
attempts to prevent such misconduct with effective compliance programs.  
 
Ethics Program Development 
Identifying key organizational characteristics and issues is a start to the development of an 
ethics program. These items include: 
• Understanding of why good people can commit unethical acts 
• Defining current—as well as desired—organizational values 
• Determining if organizational values have been properly communicated 
• Producing written ethics policies, procedures, or structures 
• Ascertaining how board members, stockholders, management, employees, and any other 
pertinent members of the organization define success 
• Determining if ethics is a leadership issue in the organization 
 
With a good understanding of the above-mentioned issues, a more effective ethics program 
can be built. The following 12 components are necessary to develop, implement, and 
manage a comprehensive ethics program: 
• Focus on ethical leadership 
• Vision statement 
• Values statement 
• Code of ethics 
• Designated ethics official 
• Ethics task force or committee 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.735  
• Ethics communication strategy 
• Ethics training 
• Ethics help and fraud report telephone line 
• Ethical behavior rewards and sanctions 
• Comprehensive system to monitor and track ethics data 
• Periodic evaluation of ethics efforts and data 
 
A sample of a typical Code of Business Ethics and an Annual Compliance Questionnaire are 
provided at the end of this chapter. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.736   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Sample Corporate Compliance Program 3  
 
I. SCOPE AND IMPLEMENTATION 
 
This Corporate Compliance Program (“comp liance program”) applies to corporate 
headquarters and to all groups, operating divisions, and units of, and to all employees 
and agents of, (company)  whose functions or responsibilities involve compliance with 
laws, regulations, or standards of conduct applicable to the operations or practices of the 
Corporation, in the United States or abroad. 
 
II. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT 
 
A. (Company) ’s standards of conduct for employee compliance with applicable laws and 
regulations are set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the Employee Handbook 
for Nonexempt Employees (“Employee Handbook”), which may be revised and 
supplemented from time to time. 
 
B. With the prior approval of (company)  management, the Compliance Coordinator shall, 
as may appear necessary from time to time, revise and supplement the standards of 
conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the Employee Handbook. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall, from time to time, distribute to relevant groups 
of employees materials incorporated by reference into the Business Ethics Policy, 
such as the HIMA Code of Ethics with respect to dealings with health care 
providers, professionals, and institutions. 
 
III. ROLE OF THE COMPLIANCE COORDINATOR 
 
A. The Compliance Coordinator shall have overall responsibility (1) to oversee 
compliance with the standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and 
the Employee Handbook, and with the compliance procedures established by or 
under the compliance program, and (2) to ensure the proper functioning of the 
compliance program. 
 
B. The Compliance Coordinator shall confer generally with Management about matters 
relating to the compliance program, including all matters that, under the compliance 
program, the Compliance Coordinator is required to report to the Regulatory Affairs 
Committee of the Board of Directors under ¶ XI.B of the compliance program. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall monitor developments relating to compliance 
with applicable laws, regulations, and standards of conduct, and, shall, from time to 
                                                 
3 Source: BNA/ACCA Compliance Manual:  Prevention of Corporate Liability, pp. 1900:4-11. Published by 
The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc. (800-372-1033) <http://www.bna.com> 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.737  
time, distribute to particular employees or groups of employees memoranda, news 
articles, or other informational materials that explain compliance requirements, 
report changes in requirements or industry standards, highlight the importance of 
compliance, or are otherwise relevant to their compliance responsibilities. 
 
D. The Compliance Coordinator and/or the Corporate Compliance Audit Director shall 
review, on a continuing basis, the Corporation’s internal procedures for preventing 
violations of law and shall create a compendium of such procedures, including: 
 
1. Procedures for review of proposed product labeling, promotional materials, and 
advertising materials 
 
2. Procedures for obtaining opinions of counsel on proposed transactions or 
activities that may raise questions under the anti-trust laws or other laws 
 
3. Procedures for review by regulatory affairs professionals of product testing, 
product modifications, introduction of new products, and other matters that may 
raise regulatory issues 
 
4. Procedures for timely preparation and submission of disclosures and reports 
required by law 
  
5. Internal and external programs 
 
E. The Compliance Coordinator shall (1) report to and meet with Management, as 
necessary and appropriate, with respect to any deficiencies identified or 
improvements needed in the compliance program, and (2) report to and meet with 
the Regulatory Affairs Committee of the Board of Directors as required by ¶ XI.B of 
this compliance program. 
 
F. The Compliance Coordinator shall see to it that all reports of suspected misconduct 
or impropriety relating to (company)  operations or practices are promptly, thoroughly, 
and properly investigated in accordance with a Standard Operating Procedure 
approved by Management; and that, where appropriate, disciplinary sanctions are 
imposed in accordance with ¶ IX of this compliance program. 
 
G. The Compliance Coordinator shall discharge the responsibilities assigned to him by 
or under this compliance program. 
 
H. The Compliance Coordinator shall take such other actions as are necessary and 
appropriate to implement and improve the compliance program. 
 
I.  ___________________________ is designated as the Compliance Coordinator. 
  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.738   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
IV.  DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY  
 
A. It is the policy of (company)  that substantial discretionary authority shall not be 
delegated to individuals who the Corporation knows, or through the exercise of 
diligence could know, have a propensity to engage in illegal activities. In particular, 
substantial discretionary authority shall be delegated only to individuals who the 
Corporation is confident will not engage in illegal activities. 
 
B. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, review the delegations of 
discretionary authority within the Corporation, the checks, balances, and controls 
applicable to such delegated discretionary authority, and the performance and 
background of the persons exercising such authority to determine whether any 
current delegation violates corporate policy. In conducting such review, the 
Compliance Coordinator may rely on information in personnel files, on the results of 
corporate audits, on the opinions of managers and supervisors, on consultation with 
the Corporation’s independent outside auditors, on surveys of persons outside the 
Corporation who deal with the Corporation, and on other available information. At 
least annually, the Compliance Coordinator shall report in writing to the Chief 
Executive Officer the results of that review. The Compliance Coordinator shall 
recommend to Management any needed actions. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator and the Personnel Department shall from time to time 
jointly review the Corporation’s procedures (including background and reference 
checks) and criteria for filling (whether by new hiring or by promotion from within) 
positions involving substantial discretion, so as to ensure that only persons of 
integrity are selected for such positions. The Compliance Coordinator and the 
Personnel Department shall recommend to Management any needed actions. 
 
V. COMMUNICATION OF STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES TO EMPLOYEES 
 
A. The Compliance Coordinator shall ensure, and, subject to ¶ B, at least annually shall 
certify in writing to the Chief Executive Officer, that: 
 
1. Every officer and every key employee (as determined by the Compliance 
Coordinator) of the Corporation has, within the preceding twelve months, 
acknowledged to the Compliance Coordinator in writing that he has reviewed 
and understands the Business Ethics Policy. 
 
2. Every employee of the Corporation whose function or responsibilities involve 
compliance with laws, regulations, or standards of conduct applicable to the 
operations or practices of the Corporation (other than officers and key 
employees) has, within the preceding twelve months, acknowledged to the 
Compliance Coordinator in writing that he has reviewed and understands the 
provisions of the Employee Handbook that relate to standards of conduct. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.739  
3. Every employee whose function or responsibilities involve compliance with laws, 
regulations, or standards of conduct applicable to the operations or practices of 
the Corporation who was newly hired by (company)  within the preceding twelve 
months has, within thirty days from the commencement of employment with 
(company)  (a), received the Business Ethics Policy or Employee Handbook, as 
applicable, and (b) acknowledged to the Compliance Coordinator in writing that 
he has reviewed and understands the provisions of the Business Ethics Policy or 
Employee Handbook that relate to standards of conduct, as applicable. 
 
B. If the Compliance Coordinator cannot truthfully make the certifications required by 
¶ A, he shall certify to the extent the facts permit, shall identify the employees as to 
whom the required certification cannot be given, and shall state the reasons (to the 
extent known) why the requirements of ¶ A.1-3, as applicable, have not been 
satisfied with respect to those employees, and what measure will be taken promptly 
to satisfy those paragraphs, as applicable, with respect to those employees. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall maintain records supporting the certifications 
called for by ¶ A. 
 
D. The Compliance Coordinator shall cause to be posted in prominent places 
accessible, in the aggregate, to all ( company)  employees whose functions and 
responsibilities involve compliance with laws, regulations, or standards of conduct 
applicable to the operations or practices of the Corporation, a Notice that: 
 
1. States ( company) ’s commitment to comply with all applicable laws and regulations 
and the standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the 
Employee Handbook 
 
2. Designates the Compliance Coordinators (or a designee of the Compliance 
Coordinator) to receive any reports of misconduct or impropriety relating to 
(company) ’s operations or practices of whic h any employees may have knowledge, 
whether committed by an employee of (company), an employee of another 
company or organization, an employee of a governmental agency, or any  
other person 
 
3. States that no employee will suffer any penalty or retribution for good faith 
reporting of any suspected misconduct or impropriety 
 
4. States that reports of misconduct or impropriety may be anonymous 
 
5. States that reports of misconduct or impropriety may be made directly to a 
government agency 
 
6. States that ( company)  will investigate all such reports, and that any (company)  
employee found to have engaged in misconduct will receive prompt and 
appropriate discipline, up to and including dismissal 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.740   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
7. States that the Compliance Coordinator or designee (with telephone number) is 
available for consultation on any question a ( company)  employee may have 
concerning the application to ( company) ’s operations or practices of any law, 
regulation, or standard of conduct or any other matter relating to (company) ’s 
compliance program. 
 
E. The Compliance Coordinator shall, in consultation and coordination with other units 
of the Corporation, arrange for compliance training sessions for all employees whose 
functions or responsibilities involve compliance with laws, regulations, or standards 
of conduct applicable to the operations or practices of the Corporation. Each such 
session shall include a presentation of some aspect or aspects of the laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct applicable to the employees who attend the 
session. Every such employee shall attend at least one such session during each 
twelve months of employment with ( company). Special sessions shall be held, as 
necessary and convenient, for new employees. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at 
least annually, certify to the Chief Executive Officer that (1) every such employee has 
attended at least one such compliance training session within the preceding twelve 
months, or (2) that all but certain identified employees have attended at least one 
such session, the reasons why the identified employees have not attended one, and 
the measures that will be taken to ensure that those employees promptly attend such 
a session. 
 
F. Each supervisor shall annually certify to the Compliance Coordinator in writing that 
he has personally: 
 
1. Discussed with each employee under his immediate supervision the standards of 
conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy or the Employee Handbook, as 
applicable 
 
2. Informed each employee that strict compliance with such standards of conduct is 
a condition of employment 
 
3. Informed each such employee that (company) will take disciplinary action, 
including dismissal as appropriate, for violation of such standards of conduct 
 
G. The Compliance Coordinator shall maintain a file of such certifications, and shall 
report, at least annually, to Management with respect to compliance with this 
provision of the compliance program. 
 
H. The Compliance Coordinator and the Personnel Department shall jointly develop 
and implement tests or other methods to measure the effectiveness of the 
communications of standards and procedures to employees. The Compliance 
Coordinator and the Personnel Department shall report the results of such tests or 
measures to Management. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.741  
VI. MONITORING, AUDITING, AND REPORTING 
 
A. Monitoring 
 
1. The Compliance Coordinator shall, by memorandum, at least annually advise all 
employees with supervisory responsibility of their duty to monitor all activities of 
their subordinates in the course of their employment with ( company)  to ensure 
that those activities are conducted in compliance with all applicable laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct. 
    
2. Each supervisor shall sign a copy of the memorandum referred to in ¶ 1 and 
return it to the Compliance Coordinator, who shall maintain a file of such 
memoranda. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, report to 
Management with respect to complia nce with this provision of the  
compliance program.  
 
B. Auditing 
 
1. The Corporate Compliance Audit Director shall be responsible for the conduct 
of internal non-financial audits to promote compliance with applicable laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct (other than those relating to financial 
matters). 
 
2. The Chief Financial Officer of the Company shall be responsible for the conduct 
of internal financial audits to promote compliance with applicable laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct relating to financial matters. 
 
3. Management shall arrange for the conduct of annual audits by independent 
outside auditors to promote compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and 
standards of conduct, both financial and non-financial. 
 
4. Copies of all internal and outside audit reports relating to compliance  
with laws, regulations, or standards of conduct (whether financial or non-
 financial) shall be provided to the Compliance Coordinator and to the Audit 
Committee or the Regulatory Affairs [Committee] of the Board, whichever is the 
appropriate recipient. 
 
C. Reporting 
 
1. The Compliance Coordinator shall establish and oversee a reporting system in 
which: 
 
a. Any employee may report to the Compliance Coordinator (or a designee of 
the Compliance Coordinator) any suspected misconduct or impropriety 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.742   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
relating to (company) ’s operations or practices, whether committed by an 
employee of (company), an employee of another company or organization, an 
employee of a government agency, or other person. 
 
b. No employee will suffer any penalty or retribution for good faith reporting of 
any suspected misconduct or impropriety. 
 
c. Any report of misconduct or impropriety may be anonymous. 
 
2. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, communicate to all (company)  
employees the policy of the Corporation that any employee who learns of an 
apparent violation of law, regulations, or unethical conduct relating to the 
business or activities of the Corporation shall report such violation or conduct to 
the Compliance Coordinator (or a designee of the Compliance Coordinator), and 
may do so anonymously. 
 
3. At least annually, the Compliance Coordinator shall report to Management and 
to the Regulatory Affairs Committee of the Board on the functioning of the 
reporting system. 
 
VII. DEBARRED INDIVIDUALS 
 
A. It is the policy of (company)  that the Corporation shall not knowingly employ or retain 
as a consultant, with or without pay, any individual who is publicly listed by a federal 
agency as debarred, suspended, or otherwise ineligible for federal programs. 
 
B. To carry out its policy, the Corporation shall make reasonable inquiry into the status 
of any potential employee or consultant. Such reasonable inquiry shall include review 
of the General Services Administration’s List of Parties Excluded from Federal 
Procurement Programs and information on debarments imposed by any other relevant 
 federal agency. 
 
C. The Corporation’s policy does not require the Corporation to terminate the 
employment or consultancy of individuals who become suspended, or are proposed 
for debarment during their employment or consultancy with the Corporation. The 
Corporation shall, however, remove such employees or consultants from 
responsibility for, or involvement with, governmental business until the resolution of 
such suspension or proposed debarment. 
 
D. If such employee or consultant is debarred, his employment or consultancy with the 
Corporation shall be terminated. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.743  
VIII. BUSINESS DEALINGS WITH DEBARRED INDIVIDUALS AND ENTITIES, AND EMPLOYEES AND CONSULTANTS CHARGED WITH OR CONVICTED OF CRIMES 
 
A. Debarred individuals and entities 
 
1. It is the policy of (company)  that it shall not knowingly form a contract with, 
purchase from, or enter into any business relationship with, any individual or 
business entity that is publicly listed by a federal agency as debarred, suspended, 
or proposed for debarment, other than (1) sales by the Corporation in the 
ordinary course of business and (2) purchases by the Corporation in the ordinary 
course of business of goods or services that are not specific to the Corporation’s 
medical device operations regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 
unless there is a compelling reason to do so.  
 
2. The Corporation shall make reasonable inquiry as to the status of any potential 
business partner whose relationship to the Corporation would not be within the 
scope of ¶ A(1) or ¶ A(2). Such reasonable inquiry shall include review of the 
General Services Administration’s List  of Parties Excluded from Federal 
Procurement Programs and review of information on debarments imposed by 
any other relevant federal agency. 
 
3. In the case of any decision to proceed with a business relationship not within the 
scope of ¶ A(1) or ¶ A(2) and permissible under ¶ A solely due to a compelling 
reason, the decision and the compelling reason shall be documented by the 
Compliance Coordinator. 
 
B. Individuals charged with or convicted of offenses relating to  
governmental business 
 
1. If any employee or consultant of the Corporation is charged by Indictment or 
Information with criminal offense, the Corporation shall remove that employee 
or consultant immediately from responsibility for, or involvement with, matters 
relating to the Corporation’s business. 
 
2. If the employee or consultant is convicted of an offense relating to the 
Company’s business, his employment or consultancy with the Corporation shall 
be terminated. 
 
3. With respect to any person convicted of a federal offense relating to the  
business or operations of (company), the Corporation shall have and enforce the 
following policies: 
 
a. All business relations under the Corporation’s control with such person shall 
be terminated, and such person shall not be re-employed or further retained 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.744   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
by the Corporation in any capacity. This provision does not apply to any 
relationship involving the holding of any type of securities. 
 
b. No such person, nor any other person affiliated with such person, shall share 
any office space or storage space, or any building or computer system, with 
the Corporation. 
 
c. No such person shall be permitted to enter the premises of the Corporation, 
except as required by law. 
 
IX. DISCIPLINE 
 
A. It is the policy of (company)  that the standards of conduct set forth in the Business 
Ethics Policy and in the Employee handbook shall be consistently enforced through 
appropriate disciplinary mechanisms. Disciplinary actions may be up to and including 
dismissal, and may extend, as appropriate, to individuals responsible for the failure to 
prevent, detect, or report an offense. 
 
B. The Compliance Coordinator shall, in consultation with Management and 
supervisors as appropriate, establish and administer a company-wide disciplinary 
system, including written disciplinary cases. The system shall provide for the making 
of disciplinary decisions by appropriate company officials in consultation with the 
Compliance Coordinator. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall maintain records of all disciplinary actions taken 
for violation of the standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and 
in the Employee Handbook. 
 
D. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, report to Management in 
writing on the disciplinary system. 
 
X. RESPONSE TO VIOLATIONS 
 
A. It is a policy of (company)  that, if a violation of any applicable law, regulation, or 
standard of conduct relating to the business of the Corporation is detected, the 
Corporation shall take all reasonable steps to respond appropriately to the violation 
and to prevent further similar violations, including any modifications to this 
compliance program. It is the policy of (company)  that if ( company)  learns that any 
statement previously made by ( company)  to any government agency is false or 
incorrect in any material respect, ( company)  shall voluntarily and promptly (after 
appropriate preliminary investigation) report the matter to the government agency. It 
is also the policy of (company)  that if (company)  learns of a violation of any applicable 
law or regulation that is not known to the government agency but is likely to be of 
interest to that agency, (company)  shall voluntarily and promptly (after appropriate 
investigation) report the matter to that agency. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.745  
B. Any employee of the Corporation who learns of a violation of the type referred to in 
¶ A shall report it to the Compliance Coor dinator (or designee of the Compliance 
Coordinator). Although it is preferable that any such report be made by an employee 
who identifies himself so that the matter may be investigated promptly and 
thoroughly, an employee may make such a report anonymously. Failure to report 
such a violation known to an employee may, itself, be a basis for disciplinary action. 
 
C. Whenever the Compliance Coordinator receives information regarding a possible 
violation of any applicable law or regulation, the Compliance Coordinator shall take 
appropriate steps to examine information and conduct the investigation necessary to 
determine whether an actual violation has occurred. The Compliance Coordinator 
shall recommend to Management an appropriate course of action, and Management 
shall render a timely decision with respect to such recommendation. The Compliance 
Coordinator shall prepare a memorandum reflecting the information developed, the 
recommendation made, and the Management decision rendered, and this 
memorandum shall promptly be furnished to the Audit Committee of the Board. 
 
XI. ROLE OF THE REGULATORY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
A. The Regulatory Affairs Committee shall be responsible for reviewing and suggesting 
to Management any necessary improvements in: 
 
1. The standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the 
Employee Handbook 
 
2. The compliance program generally 
 
B. The Regulatory Affairs Committee shall, at least annually: 
 
1. Receive a written report from, and meet with, the Compliance Coordinator with 
respect to the compliance program generally, including: 
 
a. The Compliance Coordinator’s review of  delegations of authority within  
the Corporation 
 
b. The certifications required by ¶ V.A of this program, and employee 
familiarity with the corporate standards of conduct generally 
 
c. The certifications required by ¶ V.D of this program, the compliance 
communications and training generally, including their effectiveness 
 
d. The certifications required by ¶ V.E of this program, the compliance by 
supervisors with ¶ VI.A.2 of this program, and the participation of 
supervisors in this program generally 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.746   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
e. The results of internal and any external audits (whether financial or non-
 financial) relating to compliance with laws, regulations, or standards of 
conduct 
 
f. The reporting system required by ¶ VI.C of this program 
 
g. The disciplinary system required by ¶ IX of this program 
 
2. Discuss with Management the compliance program and the report of the 
Compliance Coordinator. 
 
3. Report to the Board of Directors with respect to the report of the Compliance 
Coordinator and the Committee’s meetings with the Compliance Coordinator 
and Management, and with respect to the compliance program generally. 
 
C. At each meeting of the Regulatory Affairs Committee, the Compliance Coordinator 
shall report to the Committee any and all recommendations made by the Compliance 
Coordinator to Management, and decisions by Management, under ¶ X.C of this 
program since the last meeting of the Committee. 
 
D. The Regulatory Affairs Committee shall adopt a standard operating procedure for 
the performance of its responsibilities under this compliance program. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.747  
Sample Fraud Policy
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
The corporate fraud policy is established to facilitate the development 
of controls that will aid in the detection and prevention of fraud 
against ABC Corporation. It is the intent of ABC Corporation to 
promote consistent organizational behavior by providing guidelines 
and assigning responsibility for the development of controls and the 
conduct of investigations. 
 
 
SCOPE OF POLICY 
 
This policy applies to any irregularity, or suspected irregularity, 
involving employees, as well as shareholders, consultants, vendors, 
contractors, outside agencies doing business with employees of such 
agencies, and/or any other parties with a business relationship with 
ABC Corporation (also called the Company). 
 
Any investigative activity required will be conducted without regard 
to the suspected wrongdoer’s length of service, position/title, or 
relationship to the Company. 
 
 
POLICY 
 
Management is responsible for the detection and prevention of fraud, 
misappropriations, and other irregularities. Fraud is defined as the 
intentional, false representation or concealment of a material fact for 
the purpose of inducing another to act upon it to his injury. Each 
member of the management team will be familiar with the types of 
improprieties that might occur within his area of responsibility, and 
be alert for any indication of irregularity. 
 
Any irregularity that is detected or suspected must be reported 
immediately to the Director of ______ _ __ _ _ __, who coordinates all 
investigations with the Legal Department and other affected areas, 
both internal and external. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.748   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
 
ACTIONS CONSTITUTING FRAUD 
 
The terms defalcation, misappropriation, and other fiscal irregularities  refer 
to, but are not limited to: 
 
 
• Any dishonest or fraudulent act 
• Misappropriation of funds, securities, supplies, or other assets 
• Impropriety in the handling or reporting of money or financial 
transactions 
• Profiteering as a result of insider knowledge of company activities
 • Disclosing confidential and proprietary information to outside 
parties 
• Disclosing to other persons securities activities engaged in or 
contemplated by the company 
• Accepting or seeking anything of material value from contractors, 
vendors, or persons providing services/materials to the 
Company. Exception: Gifts less than $50 in value. 
• Destruction, removal, or inappropriate use of records, furniture, 
fixtures, and equipment 
• Any similar or related irregularity
  
OTHER IRREGULARITIES 
 
Irregularities concerning an employee’s moral, ethical, or behavioral 
conduct should be resolved by departmental management and the 
Employee Relations Unit of Human Resources rather than the 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ Unit.  
 
If there is any question as to whether an action constitutes fraud, con-
 tact the Director of _______ _ _ __ _ __ for guidance. 
 
 
INVESTIGATION RESPONSIBILITIES  
 
The ______ __ _ _ __ Unit has the primary responsibility for the 
investigation of all suspected fraudulent acts as defined in the policy. 
If the investigation substantiates that fraudulent activities have oc-
 curred, the _______ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Unit will issue reports to appropriate 
designated personnel and, if appropriate, to the Board of Directors 
through the Audit Committee. 
 
Decisions to prosecute or refer the examination results to the 
appropriate law enforcement and/or regulatory agencies for 
independent investigation will be made in conjunction with legal 
counsel and senior management, as will final decisions on disposition 
of the case. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.749  
 
CONFIDENTIALITY 
 
The ______ __ _ _ __ _ _ Unit treats all information received 
confidentially. Any employee who suspects dishonest or fraudulent 
activity will notify the _______ _ _ _ _ _ _ Unit immediately, and should 
not attempt to personally conduct invest igations or interviews/interrogations  
related to any suspected fraudulent act (see REPORTING 
PROCEDURES section below). 
 
Investigation results will not be disclosed or discussed  with anyone other 
than those who have a legitimate need to know. This is important in 
order to avoid damaging the reputations of persons suspected but 
subsequently found innocent of wrongful conduct and to protect 
the Company from potential civil liability. 
 
 
AUTHORIZATION FOR INVESTIGATING SUSPECTED FRAUD 
 
Members of the Investigation Unit will have: 
• Free and unrestricted access to all Company records and 
premises, whether owned or rented 
• The authority to examine, copy, and/or remove all or any 
portion of the contents of files, desks, cabinets, and other 
storage facilities on the premises without prior knowledge or 
consent of any individual who might use or have custody of any 
such items or facilities when it is within the scope of their 
investigation
  
REPORTING PROCEDURES 
 
Great care must be taken in the investigation of suspected impropri-
 eties or irregularities so as to avoid mistaken accusations or alerting 
suspected individuals that an investigation is under way. 
 
An employee who discovers or suspects fraudulent activity will 
contact the ______ __ _ __ _ _ Unit immediately. The employee or other 
complainant may remain anonymous. All inquiries concerning the 
activity under investigation from the suspected individual, his 
attorney or representative, or any other inquirer should be directed 
to the Investigations Unit or the Legal Department. No information 
concerning the status of an investigation will be given out. The 
proper response to any inquiries is: “I am not at liberty to discuss 
this matter.” Under no circumstances  should any reference be made to 
“the allegation,” “the crime,” “t he fraud,” “the forgery,” “the 
misappropriation,” or any other specific reference.  
 
The reporting individual should be informed of the following: 
• Do not contact the suspected individual in an effort to 
determine facts or demand restitution. 
• Do not discuss the case, facts, suspicions, or allegations with 
anyone unless specifically asked to do so by the Legal 
Department or ______ __ __ _ _ Unit. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.750   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
 
ACTING IN GOOD FAITH 
 
Anyone reporting any irregularity that is detected or suspected 
must be acting in good faith and have reasonable grounds for 
believing the information provided. Allegations made maliciously 
or with knowledge of their falsity will not be tolerated. People 
making such allegations may be subject to institutional disciplinary 
action and/or legal actions by the individuals accused of fraudulent 
conduct.  
 
 
WHISTLEBLOWER 
PROTECTION 
 
Employees of ABC Corporation may not retaliate against a 
whistleblower for reporting an activity which that person believes 
to be fraudulent or dishonest with the intent or effect of adversely 
affecting the terms or conditions of employment (including, but 
not limited to, threats of physical harm, dismissal, transfer to an 
undesirable job assignment, demotion, suspension, or impact on 
salary or wages). A whistleblower is defined as an employee who 
informs a manager, supervisor, or Director of _______ _ _ __ _ _ 
about an activity which that person believes to be fraudulent or 
dishonest. 
 
Whistleblowers who believe that they have been retaliated against 
may file a written complaint with the Director of ______ _ _ __ _ __. 
Any complaint of retaliation will be promptly investigated by the 
______ __ _ ___ _ and appropriate remedial  measures will be taken if 
allegations of retaliation are proven. This protection from 
retaliation is not intended to prohibit managers or supervisors from 
taking action, including disciplinary action, in the usual scope of 
their duties and based on valid performance-related factors. This 
protection against retaliation is not intended to prohibit managers 
from taking action, including disciplinary action, in the usual scope 
of their duties and on the basis of valid performance-related 
factors. 
 
 
TERMINATION 
 
If an investigation results in a recommendation to terminate an 
individual, the recommendation will be reviewed for approval by the 
designated representatives from Human Resources and the Legal 
Department and, if necessary, by outside counsel, before any such 
action is taken. The _______ _ _ __ Unit  does not have the authority 
to terminate an employee. The decision to terminate an employee is 
made by the employee's management. Should the ______ _ __ _ __ _ 
Unit believe the management decision inappropriate for the facts 
presented, the facts will be presented to executive level management 
for a decision.  
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.751  
 
ADMINISTRATION 
 
The Director of ______ _ _ _ _ _ is responsible for the administration, 
revision, interpretation, and application of this policy. The policy will 
be reviewed annually and revised as needed. 
 
 
APPROVAL 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___         ______ _ _ __ _ __ _ _ 
(CEO/Senior Vice President/Executive                    Date 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs      Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
 
4.752            2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
   
 
Fraud Policy Decision Matrix 
 Investigation Internal Finance/Executive Line Risk Legal Public Employee
  Action Required Unit Audit Accounting Mgmt Mgmt Mgmt  Relations Relations
 1.  Controls to Prevent Fraud  
2.  Incident Reporting  
3.  Investigation of Fraud  
4.  Referrals to Law Enforcement  
5.  Recovery of Monies Due to Fraud     
6.  Recommendations to Prevent Fraud   
7. Internal Control Reviews   
8. Handle Cases of a Sensitive Nature   
9. Publicity/Press Releases 
10. Civil Litigation 
11. Corrective Action/Recommendations 
  to Prevent Recurrences 
12. Monitor Recoveries   
13. Proactive Fraud Auditing 
14. Fraud Education/Training 
15. Risk Analysis of Areas of Vulnerability 
16. Case Analysis 
17. Hotline 
18. EthicsLine 
 P (Primary Responsibility)       S (Secondary Responsibility)      SR (Shared Responsibility) 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.753 
Sample Code of Business Ethics and Conduct 
 
Introduction 
This section reaffirms the importance of high standards of business conduct. Adherence to 
this Code of Business Ethics and Conduct by all employees is the only sure way we can 
merit the confidence and support of the public. 
 
Many of us came from a culture that provided answers or direction for almost every 
situation possible. Managing our business was not so complex; the dilemmas we faced 
were — for the most part — simple, making our choices relatively easy. We would probably all 
agree that managing in today’s environment is not so simple. 
 
This code has been prepared as a working guide and not as a technical legal document. Thus, 
emphasis is on brevity and readability rather than providing an all-inclusive answer to 
specific questions. For example, the term employee  is used in its broadest sense and refers to 
every officer and employee of the company and its subsidiaries. The word “law” refers to 
laws, regulations, orders, etc. 
 
In observance of this code, as in other business conduct, there is no substitute for common 
sense. Each employee should apply this code with common sense and the attitude of seeking 
full compliance with the letter and spirit of the rules presented. 
 
It is incumbent upon you, as an employee of the company, to perform satisfactorily and to 
follow our policies and comply with our rules as they are issued or modified from time  
to time. 
 
These policies and rules are necessary to effectively manage the business and meet the ever-
 changing needs of the marketplace. Good performance and compliance with business rules 
lead to success. Both are crucial since our ability to provide you with career opportunities 
depends totally upon our success in the marketplace. Nonetheless, changes in our economy, 
our markets, and our technology are inevitable. Indeed, career opportunities will vary 
between the individual companies. For these reasons, we cannot contract or even imply that 
your employment will continue for any particular period of time. While you might terminate 
your employment at any time, with or without cause, we reserve that same right. This 
relationship might not be modified, except in writing signed by an appropriate representative 
of the company. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.754   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
This Code of Business Ethics and Conduct is a general guide to acceptable and appropriate 
behavior at the company, and you are expected to comply with its contents; however, it does 
not contain all of the detailed information you will need during the course of your 
employment. Nothing contained in this code or in other communications creates or implies 
an employment contract or term of employment. We are committed to reviewing our 
policies continually. Thus, this code might be modified or revised from time to time. 
 
You should familiarize yourself with this code so that you might readily distinguish any 
proposal or act that would constitute a violation. Each employee is responsible for his 
actions. Violations can result in disciplinary action, including dismissal and criminal 
prosecution. There will be no reprisal against an employee who in good faith reported a 
violation or suspected violation. 
 
The absence of a specific guideline practice or instruction covering a particular situation  
does not relieve an employee from exercising the highest ethical standards applicable to  
the circumstances. 
 
If any employee has doubts regarding a questionable situation that might arise, that 
employee should immediately consult his supervisor or a higher-level manager. 
 
Competition and Anti-Trust 
Fair Competition 
The company supports competition based on quality, service, and price. We will conduct our 
affairs honestly, directly, and fairly. To comply with the anti-trust laws and our policy of fair 
competition, employees: 
• Must never discuss with competitors any matter directly involved in competition 
between us and the competitor (e.g., sales price, marketing strategies, market shares, and 
sales policies) 
• Must never agree with a competitor to restrict competition by fixing prices, allocating 
markets, or other means 
• Must not arbitrarily refuse to deal with or  purchase goods and services from others 
simply because they are competitors in other respects 
• Must not require others to buy from us before we will buy from them 
• Must not require customers to take from us a service they don’t want just so they can get 
one they do want 
• Must never engage in industrial  espionage or commercial bribery 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.755 
• Must be accurate and truthful in all dealings with customers and be careful to accurately 
represent the quality, features, and availability of company products and services 
 
Compliance with Laws and Regulatory Orders 
The applicable laws and regulatory orders of every jurisdiction in which the company 
operates must be followed. Each employee is charged with the responsibility of acquiring 
sufficient knowledge of the laws and orders relating to his duties in order to recognize 
potential dangers and to know when to seek legal advice. 
 
In particular, when dealing with public officials, employees must adhere to the highest ethical 
standards of business conduct. When we seek the resolution of regulatory or political issues 
affecting the company’s interests, we must do so solely on the basis of merit and pursuant to 
proper procedures in dealing with such officials. Employees may not offer, provide, or 
solicit, directly or indirectly, any special treatment or favor in return for anything of 
economic value or the promise or expectation of future value or gain. In addition, there shall 
be no entertaining of employees of the U.S. Government. 
 
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
No employee will engage in activity that might involve the employee or the company in a 
violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977. The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
requires that the company’s books and records accurately and fairly reflect all transactions 
and that we maintain a system of internal controls; that transactions conform to 
management’s authorizations; and that the accounting records are accurate. No employee 
will falsely report transactions or fail to report the existence of false transactions in the 
accounting records. Employees certifying the correctness of records, including vouchers or 
bills, should have reasonable knowledge that the information is correct and proper. 
 
Under the Act, it is also a federal crime for any U.S. business enterprise to offer a gift, 
payment, or bribe, or anything else of value, whether directly or indirectly, to any foreign 
official, foreign political party or party official, or candidate for foreign political office for the 
purpose of influencing an official act or decision, or seeking influence with a foreign 
government in order to obtain, retain, or direct business to the company or to any person. 
Even if the payment is legal in the host country, it is forbidden by the Act and violates  
U.S. law. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.756   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Conflicts of Interest 
There are several situations that could give rise to a conflict of interest. The most common 
are accepting gifts from suppliers, employment by another company, ownership of a 
significant part of another company or business, close or family relationships with outside 
suppliers, and communications with competitors. A potential conflict of interest exists for 
employees who make decisions in their jobs that would allow them to give preference or 
favor to a customer in exchange for anything of personal benefit to themselves or their 
friends and families. 
 
Such situations could interfere with an employee’s ability to make judgments solely in the 
company’s best interest. 
 
Gifts and Entertainment 
DEFINITION OF GIFTS 
Gifts are items and services of value that are given to any outside parties, but do not include 
items described below. 
• Normal business entertainment items, such as meals and beverages, are not to be 
considered gifts. 
• Items of minimal value, given in connection with sales campaigns and promotions or 
employee service, safety, or retirement awards are not to be considered gifts for purposes 
of this code. 
• Contributions or donations to recognized charitable and nonprofit organizations are not 
considered gifts. 
• Items or services with a total value under $100 per year are excluded. 
 
DEFINITION OF SUPPLIER 
“Supplier” includes not only vendors providin g services and material to the company, but 
also consultants, financial institutions, advisors, and any person or institution that does 
business with the company. 
 
GIFTS  
No employee or member of his immediate family shall solicit or accept from an actual or 
prospective customer or supplier any compensation, advance loans (except from established 
financial institutions on the same basis as other customers), gifts, entertainment, or other 
favors that are of more than token value or that the employee would not normally be in a 
position to reciprocate under normal expense account procedures. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.757 
Under no circumstances should a gift or entertainment be accepted that would influence the 
employee’s judgment. In particular, employees must avoid any interest in or benefit from any 
supplier that could reasonably cause them to favor that supplier over others. It is a violation 
of the code for any employee to solicit or encourage a supplier to give any item or service to 
the employee regardless of its value, no matter how small. Our suppliers will retain their 
confidence in the objectivity and integrity of our company only if each employee strictly 
observes this guideline. 
 
REPORTING GIFTS  
An employee who receives, or whose family member receives, an unsolicited gift  
prohibited by these guidelines should report it to his supervisor and either return it to  
the person making the gift or, in the case of a perishable gift, give it to a nonprofit  
charitable organization.  
 
DISCOUNTS 
An employee might accept discounts on a personal purchase of the supplier’s or customer’s 
products only if such discounts do not affect the company’s purchase price and are generally 
offered to others having a similar business relationship with the supplier or customer.  
 
BUSINESS MEETINGS  
Entertainment and services offered by a supplier or customer may be accepted by an 
employee when they are associated with a business meeting and the supplier or customer 
provides them to others as a normal part of its business. Examples of such entertainment 
and services are transportation to and from the supplier’s or customer’s place of business, 
hospitality suites, golf outings, lodging at the supplier’s or customer’s place of business, and 
business lunches and dinners for business visitors to the supplier’s or customer’s location. 
The services should generally be of the type normally used by the company’s employees and 
allowable under the applicable company’s expense account.  
 
Outside Employment 
Employees must not be employed outside the company: 
• In any business that competes with or provides services to the company or its 
subsidiaries  
• In a manner that would affect their objectivity in carrying out their company 
responsibilities  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.758   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Where the outside employment would conflict with scheduled hours, including overtime, 
or the performance of the company assignments; employees must not use company 
time, materials, information, or other assets in connection with outside employment 
 
Relationships with Suppliers and Customers 
Business transactions must be entered into solely for the best interests of the company. No 
employee can, directly or indirectly, benefit from his position as an employee or from any 
sale, purchase, or other activity of the company. Employees should avoid situations 
involving a conflict or the appearance of conflict between duty to the company and  
self-interest.  
 
No employee who deals with individuals or organizations doing or seeking to do business 
with the company, or who makes recommendations with respect to such dealings, should: 
• Serve as an officer, director, employee, or consultant. 
• Own a substantial interest in any competitor of the company, or any organization doing 
or seeking to do business with the company. Substantial interest means an economic 
interest that might influence or reasonably be thought to influence judgment or action, 
but shall not include an investment representing less than 1 percent of a class of 
outstanding securities of a publicly held corporation. Every employee must complete the 
Conflict of Interest Questionnaire included with this book.  
 
In addition, no employee who deals with individuals or organizations doing or seeking to  
do business with the company, or who makes recommendations with respect to such 
dealings, might: 
• Have any other direct or indirect personal interest in any business transactions with the 
company (other than customary employee purchases of company products and services 
as consumers and transactions where the interest arises solely by reason of the employee 
relationship or that of a holder of securities). 
• Provide telecommunications or information service or equipment, either directly  
or as a reseller, in a manner that would place the objectivity or integrity of the company 
in question. 
 
Our policy is that employees will not do busi ness on behalf of the company with a close 
personal friend or relative; however, recognizing that these transactions do occur, they must 
be reported on the Conflict of Interest Questionnaire. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.759 
This policy is applicable equally to the members of the immediate family of each employee, 
which normally includes your spouse, children and their spouses, and the father, mother, 
sisters, and brothers of yourself and your household. 
 
Employment of Relatives 
Relatives of employees will not be employed on a permanent or temporary basis by the 
company where the relative directly reports to the employee or the employee exercises any 
direct influence with respect to the relative’s hiring, placement, promotions, evaluations,  
or pay.  
 
Confidential Information and Privacy of Communications 
Confidential Information 
Confidential information includes all information, whether technical, business, financial, or 
otherwise concerning the company, which the company treats as confidential or secret 
and/or which is not available or is not made available publicly. It also includes any private 
information of, or relating to, customer records, fellow employees, other persons or other 
companies, and national security information obtained by virtue of the employee’s position.  
 
Company policy and various laws protect the integrity of the company’s confidential 
information, which must not be divulged except in strict accordance with established 
company policies and procedures. The obligation not to divulge confidential company 
information is in effect even though material might not be specifically identified as 
confidential, and the obligation exists during and continues after employment with  
the company.  
 
A few examples of prohibited conduct are:  
• Selling or otherwise using, divulging, or transmitting confidential company information  
• Using confidential company information to knowingly convert a company business 
opportunity for personal use 
• Using confidential company information to acquire real estate that the employee knows 
is of interest to the company  
• Using, divulging, or transmitting confidential company information in the course of 
outside employment or other relationship, or any succeeding employment or other 
relationship at any time 
• Trading in the company stocks, or the stocks of any company, based on information that 
has not been disclosed to the public or divulging such information to others so that they 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.760   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
might trade in such stock. Insider trading is prohibited by company policy and federal 
and state law. 
 
Employees shall not seek out, accept, or use any confidential company information of or 
from a competitor of the company. In particular, should we hire an employee who 
previously worked for a competitor, we must neither accept nor solicit confidential 
information concerning that competitor from our employee.  
 
Classified National Security Information 
Only employees with proper government clearance and a need to know have access to 
classified national security information. Government regulations outlined in company 
instructions for safeguarding must be followed. Disclosing such information, without 
authorization, even after leaving employment, is a violation of law and this code.  
 
Adverse information about employees having government clearance must be reported to the 
Security or Law Departments’ representatives having responsibility for clearances.  
 
Company Assets 
Cash and Bank Accounts 
All cash and bank account transactions must be handled so as to avoid any question or 
suspicion of impropriety. All cash transactions must be recorded in the company’s books  
of account.  
 
All accounts of company funds, except authorized imprest funds, shall be established and 
maintained in the name of the company or one of its subsidiaries and might be opened or 
closed only on the authority of the company’s Board of Directors. Imprest funds must be 
maintained in the name of the custodian and the custodian is wholly responsible for these 
funds. All cash received shall be promptly recorded and deposited in a company or 
subsidiary bank account. No funds shall be maintained in the form of cash, except 
authorized petty cash, and no company shall maintain an anonymous (numbered) account at 
any bank. Payments into numbered bank accounts by the company might leave that 
company open to suspicion of participation in a possibly improper transaction. Therefore, 
no disbursements of any nature might be made into numbered bank accounts or other 
accounts not clearly identified to the company as to their ownership.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.761 
No payments can be made in cash (currency) other than regular, approved cash payrolls and 
normal disbursements from petty cash supported by signed receipts or other appropriate 
documentation. Further, corporate checks shall not be written to “cash,” “bearer,” or  
similar designations.  
 
Company Assets and Transactions 
Compliance with prescribed accounting procedures is required at all times. Employees 
having control over company assets and transactions are expected to handle them with the 
strictest integrity and ensure that all transactions are executed in accordance with 
management’s authorization. All transactions shall be accurately and fairly recorded in 
reasonable detail in the company’s accounting records.  
 
Employees are personally accountable for company funds over which they have control. 
Employees who spend company funds should ensure that the company receives good value 
in return and must maintain accurate records of such expenditures. Employees who approve 
or certify the correctness of a bill or voucher should know that the purchase and amount are 
proper and correct. Obtaining or creating “false” invoices or other misleading 
documentation or the invention or use of fictitious sales, purchases, services, loans, entities, 
or other financial arrangements is prohibited.  
 
Employees must pay for personal telephone calls and use, except to the extent that 
specifically defined benefit programs or allowances otherwise provide.  
 
Expense Reimbursement 
Expenses actually incurred by an employee in performing company business must be 
documented on expense reports in accordance with company procedures. In preparing 
expense reports, employees should review these procedures for the documentation in order 
to be reimbursed for business expenses.  
 
Company Credit Card 
Company credit cards are provided to employees for convenience in conducting company 
business. No personal expenses can be charged on company credit cards except as 
specifically authorized by company procedures. Any charged personal expenses must be paid 
promptly by the employee. Company credit cards should not be used to avoid preparing 
documentation for direct payment to vendors. Where allowed by local law, charges on 
company credit cards for which a properly approved expense report has not been received at 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.762   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
the time of an employee’s termination of employment might be deducted from the 
employee’s last paycheck. The company will pursue repayment by the employee of any 
amounts it has to pay on the employee’s behalf.  
 
Software and Computers 
Computerized information and computer software appear intangible, but they are valuable 
assets of the company and must be protected from misuse, theft, fraud, loss, and 
unauthorized use or disposal, just as any other company property. 
  
Use of mainframe computers must be customer service or job related. Employees cannot 
access company records of any kind for their personal use. Misappropriation of computer 
space, time, or software includes, but is not limited to, using a computer to create or run 
unauthorized jobs, operating a computer in an unauthorized mode, or intentionally causing 
any kind of operational failure. 
 
Personal computers can be used for company-sanctioned education programs as well as 
personal use incidental to company business use with the permission of your supervisor. 
However, personal use cannot be allowed for personal financial gain. 
 
It is also understood that personal computers will occasionally be used at home with the 
permission of your supervisor.  
 
Political Contributions 
Federal law and many state laws prohibit contributions by corporations to political parties or 
candidates. The term political contributions  includes, in addition to direct cash contributions, 
the donation of property or services, and the purchases of tickets to fundraising events. 
Employees can make direct contributions of their own money, but such contributions are 
not reimbursable. In addition, employees can make contributions to a company-sponsored 
Political Action Committee. 
 
Where corporate political contributions are legal in connection with state, local, or foreign 
elections, such contributions shall be made only from funds allocated for that purpose, and 
with the written approval of the president of the company making the contribution. The 
amounts of contributions made shall be subject to inter-company allocation.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.763 
It is improper for an employee to use his position within the company to solicit political 
contributions from another employee for the purpose of supporting a political candidate or 
influencing legislation. It is also improper for an employee to make a political contribution in 
the name of the company. 
 
Employee Conduct 
Conduct on Company Business 
Dishonest or illegal activities on company premises or while on company business will not 
be condoned and can result in disciplinary action, including dismissal and criminal 
prosecution. The following illustrates activities that are against company policy, and  
that will not be tolerated on company premises, in company vehicles, or while engaged in 
company business: 
• Consumption and storage of alcoholic beverages, except where legally licensed or 
authorized by an officer of the company 
• The use of controlled substances, such as drugs or alcohol; the unlawful manufacture, 
distribution, dispensation, possession, transfer, sale, purchase, or use of a  
controlled substance 
• Driving vehicles or operating company equipment while under the influence of alcohol 
or controlled substances 
• Illegal betting or gambling 
• Carrying weapons of any sort on company premises, in company vehicles, or while on 
company business; even employees with permits or licenses cannot carry weapons on 
company property or while on company business 
 
The company reserves the right to inspect any property that might be used by employees for 
the storage of their personal effects. This includes desks, lockers, and vehicles owned by the 
company. It is a violation of company policy to store any contraband, illegal drugs, toxic 
materials, or weapons on company property.  
 
Reporting Violations  
All employees are responsible for compliance with these rules, standards, and principles. In 
the area of ethics, legality, and propriety, each employee has an obligation to the company 
that transcends normal reporting relationships. Employees should be alert to possible 
violations of the code anywhere in the company and are encouraged to report such 
violations promptly. Reports should be made to the employee’s supervisor, the appropriate 
security, audit, or legal department personnel, or elsewhere as the circumstance dictates. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.764   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Employees will also be expected to cooperate in an investigation of violations. In addition, 
any employee who is convicted of a felony, whether related to these rules or not, should also 
report that fact.  
 
All cases of questionable activity involving the code or other potentially improper actions 
will be reviewed for appropriate action, discipline, or corrective steps. Whenever possible, 
the company will keep confidential the identity of employees about or against whom 
allegations of violations are brought, unless or until it has been determined that a violation 
has occurred. Similarly, whenever possible, the company will keep confidential the identity of 
anyone reporting a possible violation. Reprisal against any employee who has, in good faith, 
reported a violation or suspected violation is strictly prohibited. 
 
All employees are required to notify the company within five (5) days of any conviction of 
any criminal statute violation occurring on the job. In addition, any employee who is 
convicted of a felony, whether related to these rules or not, should report that fact.  
 
Discipline 
Violation of this code can  result in serious consequences for the company, its image, 
credibility, and the confidence of its customers, and can include substantial fines and 
restrictions on future operations, as well as the possibility of fines and prison sentences for 
individual employees. Therefore, it is necessary that the company ensure that there will be no 
violations. Employees should recognize that it is in their best interest, as well as the 
company’s, to follow this code carefully. 
 
The amount of any money involved in a violation might be immaterial in assessing the 
seriousness of a violation since, in some cases, heavy penalties might be assessed against the 
company for a violation involving a relatively small amount of money, or no money. 
 
Disciplinary action should be coordinated with the appropriate Human Resources 
representatives. The overall seriousness of the matter will be considered in setting the 
disciplinary action to be taken against an individual employee. Such action, which might be 
reviewed with the appropriate Human Resources organization, might include: 
• Reprimand 
• Probation 
• Suspension 
• Reduction in salary 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.765 
• Demotion 
• Combination of the above 
• Dismissal 
 
In addition, individual cases might involve: 
• Reimbursement of losses or damages 
• Referral for criminal prosecution or civil action 
• Combination of the above 
 
Disciplinary action might also be taken against supervisors or executives who condone, 
permit, or have knowledge of illegal or unethical conduct by those reporting to them and do 
not take corrective action. Disciplinary action might also be taken against employees who 
make false statements in connection with investigations of violations of this code.  
 
The company in its sole discretion will determine the disciplinary action appropriate to a 
given matter. The listing of possible actions is informative only and does not bind the 
company to follow any particular disciplinary steps, process, or procedure. 
 
The company’s rules and regulations regarding proper employee conduct will not be waived 
in any respect. Violation is cause for disciplinary action, including dismissal. All employees 
will be held to the standards of conduct described in this booklet. 
 
The company never has and never will authorize any employee to commit an act that 
violates this code or to direct a subordinate to do so. With that understood, it is not possible 
to justify commission of such an act by saying someone directed it in higher management.  
 
Compliance Letter and Conflict of Interest Questionnaire 
Annually, all officers of the company will represent in writing that there are no violations of 
this code known to the officer, after the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if such violations 
have been committed, to disclose such violations in a format to be specified.  
 
Annually, each employee will review the Code of Business Ethics and Conduct, sign the 
Code’s Acknowledgment form, and complete and sign the Conflict of Interest 
Questionnaire. If the employee’s circumstances  change at any time, a new Conflict of 
Interest Questionnaire or letter of explanation must be completed. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.766   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The Code of Business Ethics and Conduct Acknowledgment form should be signed and 
given to your supervisor for inclusion in your personnel file. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.767 
 COMPANY NAME, INC. 
 
Code of Conduct Compliance Questionnaire  
 
Managerial employees are being asked to complete this Compliance Questionnaire. 
COMPANY NAME, Inc. and its subsidiaries are committed to providing a workplace where 
employees can and do act responsibly and ethically. The COMPANY NAME, Inc.  Code of 
Conduct sets out specific standards of conduct that should govern our behavior toward our 
fellow employees, suppliers, and customers. Please answer each of the following questions 
and, if necessary, provide an explanation. For any “yes” response, please explain in the extra space 
provided on the last page. 
 
Conflict of Interest 
 
1.  During fiscal 20XX, did you receive, or are you aware of anyone who received, from any person 
or company doing business with your employer any loan, gift, trip, gratuity, or other payment 
that did or could cause prejudice toward or obligation to the giver, or could be perceived by 
others as creating an obligation to the giver? (Note: Each item, or the total of items from a single vendor 
with a value of more than $50 must be reported, except that you do not need to report loans made by financial 
institutions on normal and customary terms, common  stock dividends, or insurance policy payments).  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
2.  In fiscal 20XX, did you participate in or influence, or are you aware of anyone who participated 
in or influenced, any transaction between your employer and another entity in which they or any 
member of their family had a direct or indirect financial interest?  
 
  ? Yes  ?  No  
 
3.  In fiscal 20XX, did you have a material financial interest in or hold a position of influence with, 
or are you aware of anyone who had a material financial interest in or held a position of influence 
with, any business which furnishes goods or services to your employer? ( Note: The term material 
financial interest means someone who by virtue of their stock ownership or monetary interest in a company is 
able to direct or to influence business decisions, or a commissioned sales representative; position of influence  
means someone holding an influential position such as a sole  proprietor, partner, member of a board of directors, 
an executive, or a manager.)  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.768   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
4.  For fiscal 20XX, did you use, or are you aware of anyone who used, company assets or other 
resources (including funds, equipment, supplies, or personnel) for purposes other than company 
business or company-sponsored activities?   
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
5. During fiscal 20XX, did you receive, or are you aware of anyone who received, gifts or 
entertainment from individuals or organizations having dealings with the Company, including 
but not necessarily limited to loans, any form of cash gratuities, private or personal discounts not 
sanctioned by the Company, or remuneration or service related to illegal activities?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
6. During fiscal 20XX, did you accept, or are you aware of anyone who accepted, any consideration 
or special favors from suppliers or potential suppliers that in fact or appearance could be deemed 
a bribe, kickback, or reward given to influence your business judgment?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
7. Were you involved in, or are you aware of any employee who was involved in, a conflict of 
interest situation during fiscal year 20XX?   
 
 ? Yes  ?  No   
 
8. I have read the attached Conflict of Interest Policy Statement which is set forth in the 
COMPANY NAME Inc.  [and Subsidiaries] Code of Conduct and Compliance Program. 
Accordingly, I have listed below all relationships and outside activities that require disclosure 
under the policy. I have also listed names, addresses, and the nature of the relationships of all 
persons or entities doing business with my employer from whom I or any member of my 
immediate family has received, directly or indirectly, cash or a gift of more than nominal value 
($50) during the fiscal year ended May 31, 20XX. (If there are no persons or entities to be listed, so 
indicate by writing “NONE” in the first space provided below.)  
 
Name of Person /Entity Nature of Relationship/Outside Activity 
 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.769 
Political 
 
9. In fiscal 20XX, did you receive, or are you aware of anyone who received, any payments from 
your employer for the purpose of making a contribution to any political party, candidate, or 
election committee?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No  
 
Securities Trading  
 
10.  Did you buy or sell, or are you aware of anyone who may have bought and/or sold, stock based 
on confidential information, or communicated confidential information to influence 
COMPANY NAME, Inc.  stock transactions?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No 
 
Financial Integrity  
 
11. Are you aware of any entries made in the books and records of your employer in fiscal 20XX 
that you believe are false or intentionally misleading?  
 
 ? Yes  ?  No 
 
12. Are you aware of any assets, liabilities, or transactions that you believe were improperly omitted 
from the books of your company in fiscal 20XX?   
 
 ? Yes  ?  No 
 
13.  In fiscal 20XX, are you aware of anyone seeking to influence any government official (including 
foreign officials) or government employee, or individual doing business with your company, by 
offering money, goods, or services in return for some special consideration?  
  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.770   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Other 
 
14.  Are you aware of any incident involving your employer that you feel constituted non-compliance 
with laws, regulations, policies, guidelines, procedures, or ethical principles, other than those 
matters referred to in other questions or incidents that have already been reported? ( Note: If you 
prefer to report an incident or violation anonymously, please answer this question “N O” and contact a member of 
the Ethics Committee or call the Confidential Ethics Hotline.)  
 
  ? Yes  ?  No 
 
15.  Please provide any explanations for “yes” responses. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
16.  In the space below, please provide any suggestions you may have for improving the Code of 
Conduct and Compliance Program.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ __ 
Printed Name 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ __  
Signature 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ __   
Date 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.771 
 
 COMPANY NAME, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES 
 
 Employee Company/Subsidiary Location  
   
 
 
 
 
Code of Conduct and Conflict of Interest Employee Certification 
 
I have read the COMPANY NAME, Inc.  and Subsidiaries Code of Conduct and 
Compliance Program. 
 
• I understand that the standards and policies in that Code of Conduct represent the 
policies of COMPANY NAME, Inc.  and its subsidiaries, and that violating those 
standards and policies, or any legal and regulatory requirements applicable to my job, 
may result in penalties set forth in the Code of Conduct or other appropriate sanction. 
 
• I understand that there are several sources within the company, including the Ethics 
Committee, that I can consult if I have questions concerning the meaning or application 
of the Code of Conduct or relevant legal and regulatory requirements. 
 
• I understand that it is my responsibility to disclose to an Ethics Officer, a member of the 
COMPANY NAME, Inc.  Operations Audit Department, a member of the Ethics 
Committee, or the Company’s Ethics Hotline any situation that might reasonably appear 
to be a violation of the Code of Conduct. 
 
• I have read the attached Conflict of Interest Policy Statement which is set forth in the 
COMPANY NAME, Inc.  and Subsidiaries Code of Conduct and Compliance Program. 
Accordingly, I have listed below all relationships and outside activities that require 
disclosure under the policy. I have also listed names, addresses, and the nature of the 
relationships of all persons or entities doing business with my employer from whom I or 
any member of my immediate family has received, directly or indirectly, cash or a gift of 
more than nominal value ($50) during the fiscal year ended May 31, 20XX. (If there are no 
persons or entities to be listed, so indicate by writing “NONE” in the first space provided below.) 
  
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.772   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Name of Person/Entity Address Nature of Business/Relationship 
   
   
 
• I am not aware of any exceptions to standards and policies in the Code of Conduct 
except: (if none, so indicate by writing “NONE.”) 
 
 
  
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Signature of Employee Date
  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.801 
FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT 
 
There are many things that organizations can and should do to minimize the risk that fraud 
can occur and go undetected. A fraud risk assessment can be a powerful proactive tool in the 
fight against fraud for any business.  
 
Regulators, professional standard-setters, and law enforcement authorities continue to 
emphasize the crucial role that fraud risk assessment plays in developing and maintaining 
effective fraud risk management programs and controls. 
 
 
What Is Fraud Risk? 
Cressey’s fraud triangle teaches us that there are three interrelated elements that enable 
someone to commit fraud: the motive  that drives a person to want to commit the fraud, the 
opportunity  that enables him to commit the fraud, and the ability to rationalize  the fraudulent 
behavior. The vulnerability that an organization has to those capable of overcoming all three 
elements of the fraud triangle is fraud risk. Fraud risk can come from sources both internal 
and external to the organization.  
 
Why Should an Organization Be Concerned About Fraud Risk?  
Every organization is vulnerable to fraud; there is no organization that has immunity to that 
risk. The key to reducing that vulnerability is to be consciously aware and realistic about 
what the organization’s weaknesses are. Only  then can management ensure that it can 
establish mechanisms that effectively prevent or detect fraudulent activities. 
 
Organizational stakeholders expect their stewards to be thoughtful and prudent about 
protecting the business. However, even when tales of fraudsters are getting a lot of public 
attention, many organizations still have difficulty facing the realities of how susceptible they 
really are to fraud.  
 
There are many factors that influence how at risk an organization is to fraud. Some of the 
bigger factors are:  
• The business it is in 
• The environment in which it operates 
• The effectiveness of the internal controls within the business processes 
• The ethics and values of the company and the people within it 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.802   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The Business It Is In  
The types of risks an organization faces are directly connected to the nature of the business 
in which it is engaged. For example, the inherent fraud risks faced by hospitals and medical 
practices are vastly different from those faced by banks and financial institutions.  
 
The Environment in Which It Operates  
The environment in which the organization operates has a direct impact on its vulnerability 
to fraud. Brick-and-mortar businesses have a very different risk profile than Internet 
businesses. Likewise, businesses in urban areas ha ve different risk profiles than businesses in 
rural areas. The environment in which the business operates can play a big role in 
influencing its vulnerability to fraud. 
 
The Effectiveness of Internal Controls Within the Business Processes  
A good system of internal controls, with the right balance of preventive and detective 
controls, can greatly reduce an organization’s vulnerability to fraud. Preventive controls  are those 
manual or automated processes that stop something bad from happening before it occurs. 
Detective controls  can also be manual or automated, but are designed to identify something bad 
that has already occurred. No system of internal controls can fully eliminate the risk of fraud, 
but well-designed and effective internal controls can deter the average fraudster by reducing 
the opportunity to commit the fraud. 
 
The Ethics and Values of the Company and the People Within It  
It is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to have a company made up of individuals whose 
ethics and values are fully aligned with those of the organization. The gap in that alignment 
can significantly increase an organization’s fraud risk.  
 
While many organizations have codes of conduct, those codes are not always very clear in 
drawing the definitive line between acceptable and unacceptable behavior. That lack of 
clarity leaves a lot of wiggle room for fraudsters to rationalize their actions. For example, in 
most organizations, it is generally understood that manipulating financial records is 
unacceptable behavior that will result in termination. However, it is not always apparent 
whether taking a pen or pencil home that belongs to the company is unacceptable behavior, 
or what the consequence, if any, would be.  
 
An organization that is clear and consistent about its ethics, values, and expectations for its 
people will reduce the potential fraudster’s ability to rationalize his actions. Likewise, an 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.803 
organization that demonstrates consistency and predictability in how it handles and holds 
accountable unacceptable behaviors can significantly reduce the risk of fraud.  
 
 
What Is a Fraud Risk Assessment?  
Fraud risk assessment  is a process aimed at proactively identifying and addressing an 
organization’s vulnerabilities to internal and external fraud. As every organization is 
different, the fraud risk assessment process is often more an art than a science. What gets 
evaluated and how it gets assessed should be tailored to the organization — there is no one-size-fits-all 
approach. Additionally, organizational fraud risks continually change. It is 
therefore important to think about a fraud risk assessment as an ongoing, continuous 
process, rather than just an activity.  
 
A fraud risk assessment starts with an identification and prioritization of fraud risks that 
exist in the business. The process evolves as the results of that identification and 
prioritization begin to drive education, communication, organizational alignment, and action 
around effectively managing fraud risk and identifying new fraud risks as they emerge.  
 
What Is the Objective of a Fraud Risk Assessment?  
In the simplest terms, the objective of a fraud risk assessment is to help an organization 
identify what makes it most vulnerable to fraud. Through a fraud risk assessment, the 
organization is able to identify where fraud is most likely to occur, enabling proactive 
measures to be considered and implemented to reduce the chance that it could happen. 
 
Why Should Organizations Conduct Fraud Risk Assessments?  
Every organization should conduct a fraud risk assessment and build procedures to keep the 
assessment process current and relevant. Not only is this practice good corporate 
governance, but it makes good business sense.  
 
Improve Communication and Awareness About Fraud  
Conducting a fraud risk assessment can be a great vehicle for an organization to open up 
communication and raise awareness about fraud. When employees are engaged in an open 
discussion about fraud, the conversations themselves can play a role in reducing fraud 
vulnerability. Employees are reminded that the organization does care about preventing 
fraud and are empowered to come forward if they suspect fraud is occurring in the 
organization. Open communication and awareness about fraud can also deter a potential 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.804   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
fraudster by reducing his ability to rationalize bad behavior and increasing his perception 
that someone might catch on to his actions and report him. 
 
Identify What Activities Are the Most Vulnerable to Fraud  
Management must know where the company is most vulnerable to fraud in order to prevent 
it from happening. For most companies, the normal course of business generally involves 
many different activities. However, not all of the activities that the company engages in are 
equal in terms of increasing the business’s exposure to fraud. The fraud risk assessment 
helps guide the organization to focus on the activities that really put the company at greatest 
risk.  
 
Know Who Puts the Organization at the Greatest Risk  
The actions of certain individuals can significantly increase the company’s vulnerability to 
fraud. The risk can be driven from the way in which someone makes decisions, behaves, or 
treats others within and outside the organization. The fraud risk assessment can help home 
in on those people and their activities that may increase the company’s overall fraud risk. 
 
Develop Plans to Mitigate Fraud Risk  
If management knows where the greatest fraud risks are, it can put plans in place to reduce 
or mitigate those risks. The fraud risk assessment provides a vehicle that can be used to gain 
alignment among various stakeholders and drive action to decrease fraud risk.  
 
Develop Techniques to Determine If Fraud Has Occurred in High-Risk Areas  
Assessing an area as having high fraud risk does not conclusively mean that fraud is 
occurring there. However, the fraud risk assessment is useful in identifying areas to 
proactively investigate to determine whether fraud has in fact occurred. In addition, putting 
activity in high-risk areas under increased scrutiny can deter potential fraudsters by 
increasing their perception of detection.  
 
What Makes a Good Fraud Risk Assessment?  
A good fraud risk assessment is one that fits within the culture of the organization, is 
sponsored and supported by the right people, encourages everyone to be open in their 
participation, and is generally embraced throughout the business as an important and 
valuable process. Conversely, a fraud risk assessment that is conducted without these 
conditions will have inferior results.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.805 
The Right Sponsor  
Having the right sponsor for a fraud risk assessment is extremely important in ensuring its 
success and effectiveness. The sponsor must be senior enough in the organization and 
command the respect of the employees to elicit full cooperation in the process. The sponsor 
has to be someone who is committed to learning the truth about where the company’s fraud 
vulnerabilities really are. He can’t be someone who is prone to rationalization or denial; he 
must be a truth seeker. In the ideal situation, the sponsor would be an independent board 
director or audit committee member. However, a good CEO or other internal senior leader 
can be equally as effective. 
 
An organization’s culture plays a big part in influencing fraud vulnerability and risk. If the 
company’s culture is shaped by a strong and domineering leader, it would be difficult to have 
that leader sponsor the fraud risk assessment and get candid, honest participation from the 
people in the business. Think about how effective a fraud risk assessment of Tyco 
International would have been with Dennis Kozlowski as its sponsor. Similarly, a fraud risk 
assessment of Enron would have been impossible with Kenneth Lay or Jeffrey Skilling as  
its sponsor.  
 
The right sponsor is someone who is open and willing to hear the good, the bad, and the 
ugly. For example, let’s say that the fraud risk assessment reveals that one of the greatest 
fraud risks facing the organization is bribery/corruption based on the cozy nature of one of 
the key business leaders with the company’s busi ness partners. For the assessment to be fully 
effective, the sponsor needs to be independent and open in his evaluation of the situation 
and, most importantly, appropriate in his response to the situation.  
 
Independence/Objectivity of the People Leading and Conducting the Work  
A good fraud risk assessment can be effectively conducted either by people inside the 
organization or with external resources. However, the people leading and conducting the 
fraud risk assessment need to be independent and objective throughout the assessment 
process. Additionally, they must also be perceived as independent and objective by others.  
 
The people leading and conducting the work should be thoughtful and mindful about any 
personal biases they may have regarding the organization and the people within it, taking 
steps to reduce or eliminate all biases that may affect the fraud risk assessment process. For 
example, if an employee on the fraud risk assessment team had a very bad past experience 
with someone in the accounts payable department, he might allow that experience to affect 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.806   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
his evaluation of the fraud risks related to that area of the business. To compensate for this 
bias, someone else should perform the fraud risk assessment work related to the accounts 
payable department’s activities.  
 
Cultural neutrality is an important aspect of independence and objectivity when leading or 
conducting a fraud risk assessment. Some organizations have very strong corporate cultures 
that can play a big role in influencing the way the people inside of the organization think 
about fraud risk. If people within the organization are leading and conducting the fraud risk 
assessment, they must be able to step outside of the corporate culture to assess and evaluate 
the presence and significance of fraud risks in the business.  
 
A Good Working Knowledge of the Business  
The individuals leading and conducting the fraud risk assessment need to have a good 
working knowledge of the business. Every organization is unique; even companies that 
appear similar have characteristics that make them — and their fraud risks—different from 
their competitors. Some of those differences can be obvious, while others are more subtle.  
 
To ensure a good working knowledge of the business, the fraud risk assessor must know, at 
a more than superficial level, what the business does and how it operates. He must also have 
an understanding about what makes the organization both similar to and different from 
other companies in related lines of business. 
 
Obtaining information about broad industry fraud risks from external sources can be 
extremely helpful. Such sources include industry news; criminal, civil, and regulatory 
complaints and settlements; and professional organizations, such as the Institute of Internal 
Auditors, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the Association of 
Certified Fraud Examiners.  
 
Access to People at All Levels of the Organization  
It is often said that perception is reality. In other words, how an individual perceives a 
situation is his reality of the situation. In an organization, it is important to ensure that the 
perceptions of people at all levels get a voice in the fraud risk assessment process.  
 
Leaders of a business or function often have very different perspectives from their 
subordinates about how something is perceived or executed. However, this does not always 
mean that one perspective is right and the other is wrong. What it does mean is that 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.807 
expectations and perceptions within the organization are not aligned, which could increase 
fraud risk.  
 
Engendered Trust  
If the organization and its employees do not trust the people leading and conducting the 
fraud risk assessment, they will not be open and honest about the realities of the business, its 
culture, and its vulnerability to fraud. Trust is not something that can be granted by 
authority; it must be earned by words and a ctions. As the people leading and conducting the 
fraud risk assessment engage with business, they should deliberately and carefully plan the 
initial contact with an effort to develop a rapport and gain trust.  
 
The Ability to Think the Unthinkable  
Most honest people are not naturally inclined to  think like a fraudster. In fact, many large-scale 
frauds that have occurred would have been deemed unthinkable by people closest to 
the events. A good fraud risk assessment has to allow for the people leading and conducting 
the assessment to be expansive in their consideration and evaluation of fraud risk. Thoughts 
of “it can’t happen here” should not be allowed  to moderate the evaluation of fraud risk.  
 
A Plan to Keep It Alive and Relevant  
The fraud risk assessment should not be treated as a onetime exercise that is executed, 
reported on, and then put on a shelf to collect dust. The organization should strive to keep 
the process alive and relevant through ongoing dialogue, active management of action plans, 
and development of procedures to ensure the assessment is maintained on a current basis. 
 
Considerations for Developing an Effective Fraud Risk Assessment 
A fraud risk assessment is only effective if the organization embraces it and uses the results 
to monitor, change, or influence the factors that put the company at risk for fraud.  
 
Packaging It Right  
People do not easily relate to or embrace things that they don’t understand. Every 
organization has its own vocabulary and preferred methods of communication (i.e., the 
language of the business). The notification and execution of the fraud risk assessment, 
including the reporting of the results, will only be effective if completed in the language of 
the business. For example: 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.808   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• In a creative organization where decisions are made based on qualitative assessments and 
instinct and where the majority of communication is visual, a quantitative approach to 
assessing fraud risk driven by numbers and calculations would most likely be rejected. 
• In an organization where the business is built and run on quantitative decision-making 
models, a qualitative approach with no quantitative components would most likely 
 be rejected. 
 
Therefore, the assessor must remain mindful of the language used throughout the fraud risk 
assessment. Specifically, he should stay away from technical language that will not resonate 
with people in the business. For example, many people in the business might not easily relate 
to or understand the term cash larceny. If cash larceny is one of the organization’s greatest 
fraud risks, it might be more effective to explain the concept in layman’s terms and describe 
the risk as theft of cash  instead.  
 
One Size Does Not Fit All  
Do not try to fit a round peg into a square hole; what works in one organization most likely 
will not easily work in another. Recognizing the nuances and differences of each business 
and tailoring the approach and execution to the specific organization can help make the 
fraud risk assessment successful. While a generic framework or toolset can be a valuable 
starting point for the development of the fraud risk assessment, it must be adapted to fit the 
business model, culture, and language of the organization.  
 
Keeping It Simple  
The more complicated the fraud risk assessment is, the harder it will be to execute it and 
drive action. Whether the assessor uses a generic assessment framework or develops one 
specifically for the organization, he should focus the effort and time on evaluating the areas 
that are most likely to have fraud risk.  
  
 
Preparing the Company for a Fraud Risk Assessment  
Preparing the company for the fraud risk assessment is a critical element to ensuring its 
success. The culture of the organization should play a large role in influencing the approach 
taken to prepare the company for the fraud risk assessment. The goals of the preparation 
should be to:  
• Assemble the right team to lead and conduct the fraud risk assessment. 
• Determine the best techniques to use in conducting the fraud risk assessment. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.809 
• Obtain the sponsor’s agreement on the work to be performed. 
• Educate the organization and openly promote the process. 
 
Assemble the Right Team to Lead and Conduct the Fraud Risk Assessment  
Before conducting the fraud risk assessment, the organization should build a fraud  
risk assessment team consisting of individuals with diverse knowledge, skills, and 
perspectives that will lead and conduct the fraud risk assessment. The size of the team will 
depend on the size of the organization and the methods used to conduct the assessment. 
The team should have individuals who are credible and who have experience in gathering 
and eliciting information.  
 
The team members might include internal and external resources, such as: 
• Accounting and finance personnel who are familiar with the financial reporting 
processes and internal controls 
• Non-financial business unit and operations personnel who have knowledge of day-to-day 
operations, customer and vendor interactions, and issues within the industry 
• Risk management personnel who can ensure that the fraud risk assessment process 
integrates with the organization’s enterprise risk management program 
• The general counsel or other members of the legal department 
• Members of any ethics or compliance functions within the organization 
• Internal auditors 
• External consultants with fraud and risk expertise 
• Any business leader with direct accountability for the effectiveness of the organization’s 
fraud risk management efforts 
 
Determine the Best Techniques to Use to Conduct the Fraud Risk Assessment  
There are many ways to go about conducting the fraud risk assessment. Picking a method or 
combination of methods that is culturally right for the organization will help to ensure its 
success. The assessment team should also consider the best ways to gather candid, truthful 
information from people throughout all levels of the organization, starting by understanding 
what techniques are commonly and effectively used throughout the organization.  
 
Some examples of methods that can be used to conduct the fraud risk assessment are: 
• Interviews 
• Focus groups 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.810   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Surveys 
• Anonymous feedback mechanisms  
 
Interviews  
Interviews can be an effective way to conduct a candid one-on-one conversation. The 
usefulness of interviews as a technique will depend on how willing people in the organization 
are to be open and honest in a direct dialogue with the interviewer. The assessor must 
consider whether interviews are commonly and effectively used in the organization to gather 
and elicit information. He should also speak with individuals that have previously conducted 
interviews with employees to glean lessons learned. For each potential interviewee, the 
assessor should gauge how likely and willing he would be to be open and honest—some 
people may be good interview candidates, while others may need to be engaged through a 
different approach.  
 
Focus Groups  
Focus groups enable the assessor to observe the interactions of employees as they discuss a 
question or issue. Some topics may lend themselves to being discussed in an open forum in 
which people feel comfortable among their colleagues. Additionally, when discussing tough 
or thorny issues in a group, an anonymous, real-time voting tool can be an effective way of 
opening up a dialogue among the participants.  
 
The success of a focus group will be highly dependent on the skill of the facilitator. If focus 
groups are used as part of the fraud risk assessment, they should be led by an experienced 
facilitator whom the group will relate to and trust. Getting a group to open up and talk 
honestly can be very difficult. An experienced facilitator will be able to read the group and 
use techniques, such as group icebreakers, to make the session a success. 
 
Surveys  
Surveys can be anonymous or directly attributable to individuals. Sometimes people will 
share more openly when they feel protected behind a computer or paper questionnaire. In 
an organization where the culture is not one where people open up and freely talk, an 
anonymous survey can be a great way to get feedback. However, employees can be skeptical 
about the true anonymity of a survey, especially in organizations that use surveys to solicit 
feedback anonymously but send follow-up e-mails to individual delinquent respondents. If 
the assessor determines that an anonymous survey is an appropriate technique to use in the 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.811 
fraud risk assessment, he should clearly and explicitly explain to employees how anonymity 
will be maintained.  
 
Anonymous Feedback Mechanisms  
In some organizations, anonymous suggestion boxes or similar mechanisms are used to 
encourage and solicit frequent employee feedback. In these companies, information 
pertaining to the fraud risk assessment can be requested in the same way. Additionally, use 
of an anonymous feedback mechanism can also be effective in an environment where people 
are less likely to be open and honest through other methods and techniques.  
 
One approach to effectively using the anonymous feedback technique involves establishing a 
question of the day that is prominently displayed above a collection box. An example 
question is: “If you thought fraud was occurring in the company, would you come forward? 
Why or why not?” 
 
Another approach involves using a table lineup of five to ten opaque boxes, each with a 
statement posted above it. Employees are provided with poker chips in two different colors 
and told that one color indicates “I agree” and one indicates “I disagree.” Employees are 
then encouraged to respond to each statement by putting a corresponding chip in each box 
to indicate their response. 
 
Obtain the Sponsor’s Agreement on the Work to Be Performed 
Before the fraud risk assessment procedures begin, the sponsor and the fraud risk 
assessment team need to agree on: 
• The scope of work that will be performed 
• The methods that will be used to conduct the work (e.g., surveys, interviews, focus 
groups, anonymous feedback mechanisms) 
• The individuals who will participate in the chosen methods 
• The content of the chosen methods  
• The form of output for the assessment 
 
Educate the Organization and Openly Promote the Process  
The fraud risk assessment process should be visible and communicated throughout the 
business. Employees will be more inclined to participate in the process if they understand 
why it is being done and what the expected outcomes will be.  
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.812   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Sponsors should be strongly encouraged to openly promote the process. The more 
personalized the communication from the sponsor, the more effective it will be in 
encouraging employees to participate in the process. Whether it is a video, a town hall 
meeting, or a companywide e-mail, the communication should be aimed at eliminating any 
reluctance employees have about participating in the fraud risk assessment process.  
 
 
Executing the Fraud Risk Assessment  
The execution of the fraud risk assessment can be approached in many ways. The approach 
should be tailored to the organization, but should be structured and rational to ensure its 
success.  
 
Choosing a Framework  
When conducting a fraud risk assessment, it is helpful to use a framework for performing, 
evaluating, and reporting on the results of the work. Fraud risk can be analyzed and reported 
both qualitatively and quantitatively using a consistent framework.  
 
The following sample fraud risk assessment frameworks illustrate how the elements of fraud 
risk assessment are applied under different approaches.  
 
Sample Fraud Risk Assessment Framework #1 1  
Using this framework, the fraud risk assessment team incorporates the following steps into 
the fraud risk assessment strategy: 
1. Identify potential inherent fraud risks. 
2. Assess the likelihood of occurrence of the identified fraud risks. 
3. Assess the significance to the organization of the fraud risks. 
4. Evaluate which people and departments are most likely to commit fraud and identify the 
methods they are likely to use. 
5. Identify and map existing preventive and detective controls to the relevant fraud risks. 
6. Evaluate whether the identified controls are operating effectively and efficiently. 
7. Identify and evaluate residual fraud risks resulting from ineffective or nonexistent 
controls. 
 
                                                 
1 This framework is based on information contained in Managing the Business Risk of Fraud: A Practical Guide, 
sponsored by the Institute of Internal Auditors, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and 
the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.813 
The framework begins with a list of identified fraud risks, which are assessed for relative 
likelihood and significance of occurrence. Next, the risks are mapped to people and 
departments impacted, and to relevant controls. Subsequently, the relevant controls are 
evaluated for design effectiveness and are tested to validate their operating effectiveness. 
Lastly, residual risks are identified, and a fraud risk response is developed to address them. 
The table below provides a visual representation of the steps involved in this framework, 
and can be filled in as the fraud risk assessment is performed. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment Framework 2  
Identified 
Fraud Risks and Schemes 
Likelihood Significance People 
and/or 
Departments 
Existing 
Anti-fraud 
Controls 
Controls 
Effectiveness 
Assessment 
Residual 
Risks 
Fraud Risk 
Response 
Financial Reporting:       
       
       
       
Misappropriation o f  
Assets: 
      
       
       
       
Corruption:       
       
       
       
Other Risks:       
       
       
       
 
Identify Potential Inherent Fraud Risks  
The fraud risk assessment team should brainstorm to identify the fraud risks that could apply 
to the organization. Brainstorming should include discussions regarding the following areas: 
 
                                                 
2 Managing the Business Risk of Fraud: A Practical Guide, sponsored by the Institute of Internal Auditors, the 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners, pg. 21.  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.814   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
INCENTIVES, PRESSURES, AND OPPORTUNITIES TO COMMIT FRAUD  
When assessing incentives, pressures, and opportunities to commit fraud, the fraud risk 
assessment team should evaluate: 
• Incentive programs and how they may affect employees’ behavior when conducting 
business or applying professional judgment 
• Pressures on individuals to achieve performance or other targets and how such pressures 
may influence employees’ behavior 
• Opportunities to commit fraud that arise from weak internal controls, such as a lack of 
segregation of duties 
 
RISK OF MANAGEMENT’S OVERRIDE OF CONTROLS  
When considering the potential for management’s override of controls, the fraud risk 
assessment team should keep in mind that: 
• Management personnel within the organization generally know the controls and standard 
operating procedures that are in place to prevent fraud. 
• Individuals who are intent on committing fraud may use their knowledge of the 
organization’s controls to do it in a manner that will conceal their actions. 
 
POPULATION OF FRAUD RISKS  
The fraud risk identification process requires an understanding of the universe of fraud risks 
and the subset of risks that apply to a particular organization. It includes gathering 
information about the business itself, including its business processes, industry, and 
operating environment, as well as all associated potential fraud risks. Such information can 
be obtained from external sources—such as in dustry news outlets; criminal, civil, and 
regulatory complaints and settlements; and professional organizations and associations—and 
from internal sources by interviewing and brainstorming with personnel, reviewing 
complaints on the whistleblower hotline, and performing analytical procedures. 
 
Fraud risks can be classified into three major areas: fraudulent financial reporting, asset 
misappropriation, and corruption. Potential fraud risks to consider in each category are 
discussed below. 
 
FRAUDULENT FINANCIAL REPORTING  
Potential fraudulent financial reporting risks include: 
• Inappropriately reported revenues, expenses, or both 
• Inappropriately reflected balance sheet amounts, including reserves 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.815 
• Inappropriately improved or masked disclosures 
• Concealed misappropriation of assets 
• Concealed unauthorized receipts, expenditures, or both 
• Concealed unauthorized acquisition, disposition, or use of assets 
 
ASSET MISAPPROPRIATIONS  
Potential asset misappropriation risks include misappropriation of: 
• Tangible assets 
• Intangible assets 
• Proprietary business opportunities 
 
CORRUPTION  
Potential corruption risks include: 
• Payment of bribes or gratuities to companies, private individuals, or public officials 
• Receipt of bribes, kickbacks, or gratuities 
• Aiding and abetting of fraud by outside parties, such as customers or vendors 
 
Certain other types of risks that can affect or be affected by each of the major areas of fraud 
risks include regulatory and legal misconduct, reputation risk, and risk to information 
technology (IT). 
 
REGULATORY AND LEGAL MISCONDUCT  
Regulatory and legal misconduct includes a wide range of risks, such as conflicts of interest, 
insider trading, theft of competitor trade secrets, anti-competitive practices, environmental 
violations, and trade and customs regulations in areas of import and export. Depending on 
the particular organization and the nature of its business, some or all of these risks may be 
applicable and should be considered in the fraud risk assessment process. 
 
REPUTATION RISK  
The fraud risk assessment team should ensure that consideration of reputation risk is part of 
the organization’s risk assessment process because fraudulent acts can damage an 
organization’s reputation with customers, suppliers, capital markets, and others. For 
example, fraud leading to a financial restatement can damage an organization’s reputation in 
capital markets, which can increase the organization’s cost of borrowing and depress its 
market capitalization. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.816   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
RISK TO INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
Information technology (IT) is a critical component of fraud risk assessment. Organizations 
rely on IT to conduct business, communicate, and process financial information. A poorly 
designed or inadequately controlled IT environment can expose an organization to threats to 
data integrity, threats from hackers to system security, and theft of financial and sensitive 
business information. Whether in the form of hacking, economic espionage, Web 
defacement, sabotage of data, viruses, or unauthorized access to data, IT fraud risks can 
result in significant financial and information losses. 
 
Assess the Likelihood of Occurrence of the Identified Fraud Risks  
Assessing the likelihood and significance of each potential fraud risk is a subjective process 
that allows the organization to manage its fraud risks and apply preventive and detective 
controls rationally. The fraud risk assessment team should first consider fraud risks to the 
organization on an inherent basis, or without consideration of known controls. By 
approaching the assessment in this manner, the team will be better able to consider all 
relevant fraud risks and then evaluate and design controls to address the risks. 
 
The likelihood of occurrence of each fraud risk can be classified as remote, reasonably possible, 
or probable. The fraud risk assessment team should consider the following factors in assessing 
the likelihood of occurrence of each fraud risk: 
• Past instances of the particular fraud occurring at the organization 
• Prevalence of the fraud risk in the organization’s industry 
• Internal controls environment of the organization 
• Resources available to address fraud 
• Support of fraud prevention efforts by management 
• Ethical standards of the organization 
• Number of individual transactions involved 
• Complexity of the fraud risk 
• Number of people involved in reviewing or approving a relevant process 
• Unexplained losses 
• Complaints by customers or vendors 
• Information from fraud surveys such as ACFE’s Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud 
and Abuse  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.817 
Assess the Significance to the Organization of the Fraud Risks  
The fraud risk assessment team should consider qualitative and quantitative factors when 
assessing the fraud risks to the organization. For example, a particular fraud risk that might 
only pose an immaterial direct financial risk to the organization, but that could greatly impact 
its reputation, would be deemed a more significant risk to the organization. 
 
The significance of each potential fraud can be classified as immaterial, significant, or material. 
In assessing the significance of each fraud risk, the fraud risk assessment team should 
consider the following factors: 
• Financial statement and monetary significance 
• Financial condition of the organization 
• Value of the threatened assets 
• Criticality of the threatened assets to the organization 
• Revenue generated by the threatened assets 
• Significance to the organization’s operations, brand value, and reputation 
• Criminal, civil, and regulatory liabilities 
 
Evaluate Which People and Departments Are Most Likely to Commit Fraud and Identify the Methods They Are Likely to Use  
In identifying potential fraud risks, the risk assessment team will have evaluated the 
incentives and pressures on individuals and departments to commit fraud. The team should 
use the information gained in that process to identify the individuals and departments most 
likely to commit fraud and the methods they are likely to use. This knowledge will assist the 
organization in tailoring its fraud risk response, including establishing appropriate 
segregation of duties, proper review and approval chains of authority, and proactive fraud 
auditing procedures. 
 
Identify and Map Existing Preventive and Detective Controls to the Relevant Fraud Risks  
After identifying and assessing fraud risks for likelihood of occurrence and for significance, 
the fraud risk assessment team should identify and map existing preventive and detective 
controls to the relevant fraud risks. 
 
PREVENTIVE CONTROLS  
Preventive controls, which are intended to prevent fraud before it occurs, include: 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.818   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Bringing awareness to personnel throughout the organization of the fraud risk 
management program in place 
• Performing background checks on employees (where permitted by law) 
• Hiring competent personnel and providing them with anti-fraud training 
• Conducting exit interviews 
• Implementing policies and procedures 
• Segregating duties 
• Ensuring proper alignment between an individual’s authority and his level  
of responsibility 
• Reviewing third-party and related-party transactions 
 
DETECTIVE CONTROLS  
Detective controls, which are intended to detect fraud if it does occur, include: 
• Establishing and marketing the presence of a confidential reporting system, such as a 
whistleblower hotline 
• Implementing proactive fraud detection process controls, such as reconciliations, 
independent reviews, physical inspections/counts, analysis, and audits 
• Implementing proactive fraud detection procedures, such as data analysis, continuous 
auditing techniques, and other technology tools 
• Performing surprise audits 
 
Evaluate Whether the Identified Controls Are Operating Effectively and Efficiently  
The fraud risk assessment team must ensure that there are adequate controls in place, that 
the controls are mitigating fraud risk as intended, and that the benefit of the controls exceeds 
the cost. Such an assessment requires: 
• Review of the accounting policies and procedures in place 
• Consideration of the risk of management’s override of controls 
• Interviews with management and employees 
• Observation of control activities 
• Sample testing of controls compliance 
• Review of previous audit reports 
• Review of previous reports on fraud incidents, shrinkage, and unexplained shortages 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.819 
Identify and Evaluate Residual Fraud Risks Resulting from Ineffective or Nonexistent Controls  
Consideration of the internal control structure may reveal certain residual fraud risks, 
including management’s override of established controls that has not been adequately 
mitigated due to: 
• Lack of appropriate prevention and detection controls 
• Noncompliance with established prevention and control measures 
 
These residual fraud risks should be evaluated by the fraud risk assessment team in the 
development of the fraud risk response for likelihood and significance of occurrence. 
 
Sample Fraud Risk Assessment Framework #2 — Fraud Risk Index  
The following is a suggested framework that has two components: the Fraud Risk Index, 
which looks at indicators of areas that put the organization at risk for fraud, and the 
Leadership Risk Profile, which examines the way business leaders operate to help determine 
if they behave or conduct business in a way that can increase the company’s risk of fraud. 
 
Fraud Risk Index  
The Fraud Risk Index is the overall assessment of fraud risk for the organization based on 
three components: 
• The Environmental Risk Index 
• The Culture Quotient 
• The Prevent/Detect Index 
 
THE ENVIRONMENTAL RISK INDEX  
The Environmental Risk Index is an assessment of macro-level fraud risk indicators that can 
affect the organization’s vulnerability to fraud. These include factors such as pressures on 
the business, the organization’s system of internal controls, the tone at the top, and the 
overall quality of the mechanisms that the company has in place to prevent and detect fraud.  
  
THE CULTURE QUOTIENT  
The Culture Quotient is an assessment of how the organization and its people behave or are 
perceived to behave. The Culture Quotient includes: 
• Tolerance Index — an assessment of the organi zation’s tolerance for bad behavior. An 
organization that has a high tolerance for bad behavior can significantly increase the 
company’s vulnerability to fraud risk. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.820   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Entitlement Index — an assessment that helps determine whether people in the company 
display or promote a sense of entitlement. An organization that sustains a strong sense 
of entitlement from its employees or leaders can have a higher risk of fraud.  
• Notification Index — an assessment of how likely it is that employees will come forward 
when they suspect something is wrong. An organization where there is a low probability 
that employees will come forward is at significantly greater risk of fraud than an 
organization where it is likely that employees will come forward.  
 
Both the Environmental Risk Index and Culture Quotient are elements of the Fraud Risk 
Index that are aimed at identifying and evaluating macro-level indicators of fraud risk that 
the company may be exposed to. The content and approach for performing these parts of 
the assessment should be tailored for the organization under review. 
 
THE PREVENT/DETECT INDEX  
The Prevent/Detect Index assesses the quality of the specific mechanisms that the 
organization has in place to prevent or detect potential fraud, particularly those fraud 
schemes for which the company is at the greatest risk. This component of the assessment 
can be used to identify the company’s greatest fraud risks by pinpointing areas and methods 
that provide opportunities for potential fraudsters to get something—of either real or 
perceived value—out of the business. 
 
To calculate the Prevent/Detect Index, a standard, comprehensive population of fraud 
schemes, such as the ACFE Occupational Fraud Classification System, is used to evaluate 
each scheme that applies to the business and determine which schemes are the high-risk 
schemes that the organization should focus on. For those fraud schemes that apply to the 
company, an evaluation of each scheme should be performed to identify:  
• The likelihood that the scheme could be perpetrated 
• The significance of the fraud risk to the company  
• Whether there are preventive or detective internal controls in place to moderate the risk 
to a sufficient level  
 
Leadership Risk Profile  
The Leadership Risk Profile is developed to provide a macro-level organizational view of 
which business leaders, if any, increase the organization’s vulnerability to fraud through their:  
• Leadership style 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.821 
• Operating behaviors 
• Decision-making practices 
 
The fraud risk assessment team should develop or obtain an organizational chart that shows 
the organizational structure of the business and identifies its leaders. The team should then 
develop a profile of each of the leaders and evaluate the fraud risk associated with their 
leadership styles, operating behaviors (including how they interact with their team and 
partners across the business), and decision-making practices.  
 
As part of this evaluation, the team should consider any information that indicates unique 
pressures on or incentives for each leader that could increase the organization’s fraud risk. 
Such pressures and incentives can include, but are not limited to: 
• A significant amount of personal net worth invested in the company 
• A large portion of compensation tied to activities that the leader can manipulate (e.g., 
sales volumes or other business performance measures)  
• A pending divorce 
• Recent organizational changes that have either greatly expanded or reduced/eliminated 
the leader’s span of control 
• Living larger than life 
• Dependence on drugs or alcohol 
• Gambling problems 
 
Note that a comprehensive approach to conducting a fraud risk assessment using this 
framework would include the assessment of both the Fraud Risk Index and the Leadership 
Risk Profile. However, due to the sensitive nature of the Leadership Risk Profile, the 
sponsor may decide to focus the assessment on only the Fraud Risk Index.  
 
 
Responding to Residual Fraud Risks 
Regardless of the framework used to conduct the fraud risk assessment, management will 
need to address the identified risks. Larry Cook, CFE, who is the principal author of the 
ACFE Fraud Risk Assessment Tool, suggests that management can use one or a 
combination of the following approaches to respond to the organization’s residual  
fraud risks: 
• Avoid the risk 
• Transfer the risk 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.822   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Mitigate the risk 
• Assume the risk 
 
Avoid the Risk  
Management may decide to avoid the risk by eliminating an asset or exiting an activity if the 
control measures required to protect the organization against an identified threat are too 
expensive. This approach requires the fraud risk assessment team to complete a cost-benefit 
analysis of the value of the asset or activity to the organization compared to the cost of 
implementing measures to protect the asset or activity. 
 
Transfer the Risk  
Management may transfer some or all of the risk by purchasing fidelity insurance or a bond. 
The cost to the organization is the premium paid for the insurance or bond. The covered 
risk of loss is then transferred to the insurance company, less any deductible payment 
included in the contract. 
 
Mitigate the Risk  
Management can help mitigate the risk by implementing appropriate countermeasures, such 
as prevention and detection controls. The fraud risk assessment team should evaluate each 
countermeasure to determine if it is cost effective and reasonable given the probability of 
occurrence and impact of loss. 
 
Assume the Risk  
Management may choose to assume the risk if it determines that the probability of 
occurrence and impact of loss are low. Management may decide that it is more cost effective 
to assume the risk than it is to eliminate the asset or exit the activity, buy insurance to 
transfer the risk, or implement countermeasures to mitigate the risk. 
 
Combination Approach  
Management may also elect a combination of the above approaches. For example, if the 
probability of occurrence and impact of loss are high, management may decide to transfer 
part of the risk through the purchase of insurance, as well as implement preventive and 
detective controls to mitigate the risk. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.823 
Reporting the Results of the Fraud Risk Assessment  
The success of the fraud risk assessment process hinges on how effectively the results are 
reported and what the organization then does with those results. A poorly communicated 
report can undermine the entire process and bring all momentum established to a screeching 
halt. The report should be delivered in a style most suited to the language of the business. If 
management prefers short, punchy PowerPoint presentations, the fraud risk assessment 
team should not give them a 50-page Word document.  
 
Considerations When Reporting the Assessment Results 
To maximize the effectiveness of the process, the team should consider the following points 
when developing the report of the results.  
 
Report Objective — Not Subjective — Results  
A lot of instinct and judgment goes into performing the fraud risk assessment. When 
reporting the results of the assessment, the team must stick to the facts and keep all opinions 
and biases out of the report. A report that is peppered with the assessment team’s subjective 
perspective will dilute and potentially undermine the results of the work.  
 
Keep It Simple  
The assessment results should be reported in a way that is easy to understand and that 
resonates with management. The reader of the report should be able to quickly look at and 
comprehend the results. A simple one-page visual can sometimes make the most impact.  
 
Focus On What Really Matters  
Less is often more when it comes to reporting the results of the fraud risk assessment. The 
team should take care not to turn the report into a laundry list of things that management 
will have to sort through and prioritize. Instead, the report should be presented in a way that 
focuses on what really matters, clearly highlighting those things that are most important and 
that will make the most impact on the organization’s fraud risk management efforts.  
 
Identify Actions That Are Clear and Measurable to Drive Results  
The report should include some key recommendations for action that are clear, measurable, 
and will drive results. The actions should be presented in a way that makes it apparent what 
exactly needs to be done. The report should not include recommendations that are vague or 
that wouldn’t reduce the risk of fraud. Additionally, the actions reflected in the report should 
have already been vetted with and agreed to by the recommended action owners.  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.824   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Sample Report Formats 
Below are two examples of simple formats that can be used or adapted to report on the 
results of a fraud risk assessment based on the Fraud Risk Index framework discussed earlier 
in this chapter. 
 
Graphic Report Format  
The first sample report format, shown below, would work well in an organization that uses 
dashboards or tends to be visually oriented. The gauges can be substituted with any type of 
visual representation that the organization uses in the normal course of business. This report 
should be accompanied by a one- or two-page action plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary Report Format  
The following report format is a simple one-page executive-summary-type report. It gives 
the reader a snapshot view of the results of the work, along with insight into what is driving 
the results and what actions can be taken to reduce the fraud risk. Using a simple format like 
this forces the assessment team to focus on what really matters and what will make the  
most impact. 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.825 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reporting the Leadership Risk Assessment Results  
The results of the Leadership Risk Profile should  be treated with great sensitivity. The fraud 
risk assessment team should discuss with the sponsor what the best method would be for 
conveying the results of that work. If a formal report is requested, a color-coded 
organization chart can be used as quick visual to convey the fraud risk associated with each 
leadership area across the business. 
 
 
Making an Impact with the Fraud Risk Assessment  
To make the most of the fraud risk assessment process, management should use the  
results to: 
• Begin a dialogue across the company. 
• Look for fraud in high-risk areas. 
• Hold action owners accountable for progress. 
• Keep the assessment process alive and relevant.  
 
Begin a Dialogue Across the Company  
The results of the initial fraud risk assessment can be used to begin a dialogue across the 
company that promotes awareness, education, and action planning aimed at reducing the risk 
of fraud. Engaging in an active dialogue can be an effective way to further establish 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.826   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
boundaries of acceptable and unacceptable behavior. Open communication about fraud risks 
can also increase the chances that employees will come forward if they believe they have 
witnessed potential fraud.  
 
Look for Fraud in High-Risk Areas 
An internal audit or investigative team within the organization can use the results of the 
fraud risk assessment in identifying high-risk processes or activities and unusual transactions 
that may indicate fraud. This practice can also provide some reassurance if the subsequent 
search for fraud reveals that, despite the assessed risk, fraud does not appear to be occurring 
at that point in time. Management should remember, however, that just because there is no 
evidence that fraud is occurring in the present, the risk that it could occur is not eliminated.  
 
Hold Action Owners Accountable for Progress 
It is often said that what gets measured gets done. To effectively reduce identified fraud risk, 
management must hold action owners accountable for making progress and driving impact. 
The organization should track and measure progress against agreed-upon action plans. 
Publicly celebrating the successes of action owners that make good progress can be as or 
more effective in driving the right behaviors as providing consequences for the action 
owners that fail to deliver results.  
 
Keep It Alive and Relevant  
Since there are so many factors that can affect an organization’s vulnerability to fraud risk, 
management must ensure that the fraud risk assessment stays current and relevant. Someone 
should be designated within the organization to own the fraud risk assessment process. That 
person or team should build processes to ensure that all changes in the business model, 
company operating environment, and personnel are considered relative to their impact on 
the company’s risk of fraud.  
 
 
The Fraud Risk Assessment and the Audit Process  
The fraud risk assessment should play a significant role in informing and influencing the 
audit process. In addition to being used in the annual audit planning process, the fraud risk 
assessment should drive thinking and awareness in the development of audit programs for 
areas that have been identified as having a moderate to high risk of fraud. Although auditors 
should always be on guard for things that might be indicators of fraud risk, the results of the 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.827 
fraud risk assessment can help them design audit procedures in a way that enables them to 
look for fraud in known areas of high risk.  
 
In the course of their work, auditors should validate that the organization is appropriately 
managing the moderate to high fraud risks identified in the fraud risk assessment by:  
• Identifying and mapping the existing preventive and detective controls that pertain to 
the moderate to high fraud risks identified in the fraud risk assessment 
• Designing and performing tests to evaluate whether the identified controls are operating 
effectively and efficiently 
• Identifying within the moderate to high fraud risk areas whether there is a moderate to 
high risk of management override of internal controls 
• Developing and delivering reports that incorporate the results of their validation and 
testing of the fraud risk controls 
 
The following template can be used by auditors to evaluate how effectively the moderate to 
high fraud risks are being managed by the business:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.828   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool 
 
Introduction  
The ACFE’s Fraud Risk Assessment Tool can be  used by fraud examiners to identify their 
clients’ or employers’ vulnerabilities to fraud. 
 
The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool consists of 15 modules, each containing a series of 
questions designed to help organizations zoom in on areas of risk. The fraud professional 
and the client or employer should begin the risk assessment process by working together to 
answer the questions in each module. It is important that the client or employer select 
people within the organization who have extensive knowledge of company operations, such 
as managers and internal auditors, to work with the fraud professional. Upon completion of 
all of the questions, the fraud professional should review the results of the assessment with 
the client or employer in order to: 
• Identify the potential inherent fraud risks. 
• Assess the likelihood and significance of occurrence of the identified fraud risks. 
• Evaluate which people and departments are most likely to commit fraud and identify the 
methods they are likely to use. 
• Identify and map existing preventive and detective controls to the relevant fraud risks. 
• Evaluate whether the identified controls are operating effectively and efficiently. 
• Identify and evaluate residual fraud risks resulting from ineffective or  
nonexistent controls. 
• Respond to residual fraud risks. 
 
The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool may reveal certain residual fraud risks that have not been 
adequately mitigated due to lack of, or non-compliance with, appropriate preventive and 
detective controls. The fraud professional should work with the client to develop mitigation 
strategies for any residual risks with an unacceptably high likelihood or significance of 
occurrence. Responses should be evaluated in terms of their costs versus benefits and in 
light of the organization’s level of risk tolerance. 
 
Be aware, however, that this assessment only provides a snapshot of a particular point in 
time. The dynamic nature of organizations requires routine monitoring and updating of their 
financial risk assessment processes in order for them to remain effective. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.829 
MODULE # 1 — Employee Assessment  
The employee assessment questions are designed to assess the probability of a fraudulent 
event occurring within the organization based on: 
• Internal controls.  
• Internal control environment.  
• Resources available to prevent, detect, and deter fraud. 
 
1. Are employees provided formal written job descriptions? 
In addition to clarifying what employees are responsible for, job descriptions signify what 
employees are not responsible for. Employees who perform duties outside of their job 
descriptions represent a significant red flag. 
 
2. Are employees provided with an organizational chart that shows lines of responsibility? 
Organizational charts provide employees with a snapshot of an organization’s division of 
work, levels of management, and reporting relationships. 
 
3. Does the company have written accounting policies and procedures?  
Accounting policies and procedures, including those related to fraud, should be documented, 
implemented, and communicated to employees. 
 
4. Is there a formal policy covering approval authority for financial transactions, such  as purchasing or travel?  
In order to safeguard assets and financial reporting, companies should develop and 
implement policies for determining how financial transactions are initiated, authorized, 
recorded, and reviewed. 
 
5. Does the company have an ethics statement?  
The company should implement a formal ethics statement that (1) defines conduct that is 
unethical, (2) states that unethical acts will be punished, and (3) provides information on 
reporting unethical conduct. 
 
6. Does senior management exhibit and encourage ethical behavior?  
Senior management sets the tone for ethical conduct throughout the organization. The tone 
should signal that fraud will not be tolerated. 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.830   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
7. Does the company have written fraud policies and procedures?  
The company should document and implement fraud policies and procedures that describe 
(1) fraudulent conduct, (2) punishment for engaging in fraudulent conduct, and (3) how to 
report fraudulent conduct. 
 
8. Is a senior member of management responsible for compliance with fraud policies?  
The responsibility for compliance with fraud and ethics policies should be assigned to a 
senior member of management. 
 
9. Does the organization educate employees about the importance of ethics and anti-fraud programs?  
All employees should receive training on the ethics and anti-fraud policies of the company. 
The employees should sign an acknowledgment that they have received the training and 
understand the policies. 
 
10. Does the organization provide an anonymous way to report suspected violations of the ethics and anti-
 fraud programs? 
Organizations should provide employees, vendors,  and customers with a confidential system 
for reporting suspected violations of the ethics and anti-fraud policies. 
 
11. Are fraud incidents promptly  and thoroughly investigated? 
Promptly and thoroughly investigating all reported incidents of fraud can minimize losses. 
 
12. Does the company maintain a record of fraud incidents? 
A formal record of all reported incidents of fraud, including documentation of investigative 
activities and final disposition of each incident, should be maintained. 
 
13. Does  the company conduct pre-employment background checks?  
Before offering employment to an applicant, a company should conduct a pre-employment 
background check (where permitted by law). 
 
14. Does the company have a loss prevention function?  
Responsible personnel should be trained to perform loss prevention functions. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.831 
15. Does the company have an internal audit function?  
Internal audits that focus on high-risk areas for fraud can identify new vulnerabilities, 
measure the effectiveness of internal controls, and signal that fraud prevention is a high 
priority for the company. 
 
16. Are the duties related to authorization, custody of assets, and recording or reporting of transactions 
segregated? 
The company should segregate the duties related to authorization, custody of assets, and 
recording or reporting of transactions. 
 
17. Is compliance with internal controls audited periodically?  
Periodic audits of compliance with internal controls send the message to employees that the 
company is proactive in its anti-fraud efforts. 
 
18. Do employees feel they are tr eated and compensated fairly? 
Management should establish appropriate lines  of communication with employees (such as 
surveys, exit interviews, and open-door policies) to assess their attitudes toward the 
organization. 
 
19. Do any employees have large personal debts or credit problems?  
Employees with large personal debts or credit problems are a red flag of potential fraud and 
should be monitored by management. 
 
20. Do any employees appear to be spending  far more than they are earning? 
Management should be observant of signs of employees spending far more than they are 
earning. It is common for employees who steal to use the proceeds for lifestyle 
improvements, including expensive cars and extravagant vacations. 
 
21. Do any employees gamble excessively?  
Employees who gamble excessively pose a potential fraud risk to the company and should 
be monitored by management. Employee assistance programs can be made available to help 
employees with gambling addictions. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.832   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
22. Do any employees use alcohol or drugs excessively? 
Employees who use alcohol or drugs excessively pose a potential fraud risk to the company 
and should be monitored by management. Employee assistance programs can be made 
available to help employees with alcohol or drug addictions. 
 
23. Do any employees resent their superiors? 
Employees who resent their superiors should be monitored by management, as they pose a 
potential fraud risk to the company. 
 
24. Do any employees have a close association with vendors or competitors? 
Employees with a close relationship to a vendor or competitor should be monitored for 
potential conflict of interest. 
 
25. Do any employees have outside business interests that might conflict with their duties at the company? 
Employees should be required to provide annual financial disclosures that list outside 
business interests. Outside interests that conflict with the organization’s interests should  
be prohibited. 
 
26. Is the company experiencing high employee turnover? 
High employee turnover, especially in areas particularly vulnerable to fraud, is a warning sign 
of fraud that should be investigated. 
 
27. Are employees required to take annual vacations?  
Requiring employees to take annual vacations can aid an employer in detecting an ongoing 
fraud scheme because the employer is more likely to discover a perpetrator running such a 
scheme when the perpetrator is removed from the scene. 
 
28. Is the company dominated by a small group of individuals? 
If control is centered in the hands of a few key employees, those individuals should be under 
heightened security for compliance with internal controls and other policies and procedures. 
 
29. Does the company have unrealistic productivity measurements and expectations?  
Unrealistic productivity measurements and expectations can place undue pressure on 
employees and result in employees committing fraudulent acts in order to meet them. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.833 
30. Does management fail to give employees positi ve feedback and recognition for job performance?  
Providing positive feedback and recognition to employees helps to reduce the likelihood of 
internal fraud and theft through boosting morale. Employees with positive feelings about an 
organization are less likely to commit fraud against the organization. 
 
31. Are employees afraid to deliver bad news to supervisors or management? 
Management should promote a culture in which employees aren’t afraid to deliver bad news. 
After all, the sooner management receives the bad news, the sooner it can respond. 
 
32. Is there a lack of communication between employees and management? 
Management can improve communication with em ployees by creating an atmosphere that 
encourages open communication. Employees should feel safe in sharing any thoughts, 
comments, complaints, or suggestions. 
 
33. Is there a lack of clear organizational responsibilities in the company? 
A lack of clear organizational responsibilities can lead to confusion and frustration for 
employees. Organizational charts and job descriptions can be used to clarify organizational 
responsibilities. 
 
34. Does management not seem to care about  or reward appropriate employee behavior? 
Management that does not seem to care a bout or reward appropriate employee behavior  
can contribute to low employee morale and increased risk of fraud against the company  
by employees. 
 
MODULE # 2 — Management/Key Employee Assessment  
The management/key employee assessment questions are designed to assess the probability 
of a fraudulent event occurring within the organization based on: 
• Internal controls 
• Internal control environment 
• Resources available to prevent, detect, and deter fraud 
 
1. Is the board of directors composed of mainly officers of the company or related individuals? 
The board of directors should include independent board members that are not associated 
with or employed by the company. In theory, independent directors are not subject to the 
same pressures as management and, therefore, are more likely to act in the best interest of 
shareholders. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.834   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
2. Is there an independent audit committee?  
Independent audit committee members with financial and accounting expertise can be 
instrumental in preventing and detecting financial fraud. 
 
3. Has there been high turnover of managers  and members of the board of directors? 
Management should investigate the reasons for high turnover and implement measures to 
reduce it. 
 
4. Have an unusually high number of key employees left the company recently?  
Management should investigate the reasons for their departure and implement measures to 
reduce turnover. 
 
5. Is the company involved in any litigation?  
Management should determine the reason for the litigation, monitor the filings, and take 
corrective action where necessary. 
 
6. Does the company have offshore activities or bank accounts?  
Management should determine the reason for the offshore activities and accounts, ascertain 
compliance with U.S. laws, and monitor activity closely. 
 
7. Do any of the senior managers have off shore bank accounts or business interests?  
The organization should require senior managers to file annual financial disclosure reports 
and explain the purpose of any offshore bank accounts or business interests. 
 
8. Are any key employees experiencing financial pressur es such as debts, gambling, medical bills, or divorce?  
Key employees who are experiencing financial pressures represent a potential fraud risk to 
the company and should be monitored by management. Employee assistance programs can 
be made available to help employees with alcohol, drug, and other problems. 
 
9. Do any key employees appear to be living beyond their means? 
Management should be observant of signs of employees spending far more than they are 
earning. It is common for employees who steal to use the proceeds for lifestyle 
improvements, including expensive cars, extravagant vacations, or expensive clothing. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.835 
10. Do any key employees have civil judgments or bankruptcies on record? 
Key employees who have civil judgments or bankruptcies on record represent a potential 
fraud risk to the company and should be monitored by management. 
 
11. Do any key employees have a criminal conviction? 
Key employees with known criminal convictions should be subjected to increased review by 
management for compliance with internal controls and other policies and procedures. 
 
12. Do one or two key employees appear to dominate the company?  
If control is centered in the hands of one or two key employees, then those individuals 
should be under heightened scrutiny for compliance with internal controls and other policies 
and procedures. 
 
13. Do any key employees have friends or relatives reporting directly to them?  
Organizations should prohibit key employees from  having friends or relatives report directly 
to them. 
 
14. Do any of the key employees appear to have a close association with a vendor?  
Key employees who have a close association with a vendor should be monitored for 
potential conflict of interest. 
 
15. Do any key employees have outside business interests that might conflict with their duties at the company?   
Key employees should be required to provide annual financial disclosures that list outside 
business interests. Interests that conflict with the organization’s interests should be 
prohibited. 
 
16. Do any key employees own a portion of any company that does business with this company?  
Organizations should require key employees to disclose any potential conflicts of interest 
and should closely monitor any such conflicts of interest. 
 
17. Has any key employee failed to take vacation?  
Requiring key employees to take annual vacations can aid an employer in detecting an 
ongoing fraud scheme because the employer is more likely to discover a perpetrator running 
such a scheme when the perpetrator is removed from the scene. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.836   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
18. Do any key employees have a significant amount  of their net worth invested in the company?  
Management should subject key employees with  a significant amount of their net worth 
invested in the company to increased review for compliance with internal controls, especially 
those controls related to financial reporting. 
 
19. Does the company have unusually high debts? 
Management should determine the reason for debt levels and monitor internal controls for 
financial reporting. 
 
20. Is key employee compensation prim arily based on comp any performance? 
Organizations should monitor employees whose compensation is based primarily on 
company performance for compliance with internal controls, especially controls related to 
financial reporting. 
 
21. Is there an incentive to use inappropriate means to minimize earnings for tax reasons? 
Companies should remove any incentive to use inappropriate means to manipulate  
financial information. 
 
22. Is there excessive pressure to increase the company’s stock price? 
Excessive pressure to increase the company’s stock price can result in management 
manipulating financial results in order to meet expectations. 
 
23. Has the company recently experienced large operating or investment losses? 
Large operating or investment losses ca n place undue pressure on management to 
manipulate results in order to cover up the losses. 
 
24. Does the organization have sufficient working capital? 
Insufficient working capital can place undue pressure on management to manipulate 
financial results.  
 
25. Does the organization have sufficient credit?  
A lack of sufficient credit can place undue pressure on management to manipulate financial 
results in order to obtain credit. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.837 
26. Is the organization under pressu re to report favorable earnings?  
Excessive pressure to report favorable earnings can result in management committing 
fraudulent acts in order to meet expectations. 
 
27. Does the company depend heavily on only a limited number of products or customers?  
Dependence on only a limited number of products or customers places a company at greater 
risk for fraudulent acts to occur. 
 
28. Has the company experienced diff iculty in collecting receivables? 
Cash flow problems, which are a warning sign of possible fraud, can arise when a company 
experiences difficulty in collecting receivables. 
 
29. Has the company recently expanded rapidly into new business or product lines? 
Rapid expansion into new business or product lines can place tremendous financial pressure 
on a company. 
 
30. Has the company experienced a reduction in sales volume?  
A reduction in sales volume can place undue pressure on management to manipulate 
financial results. 
 
31. Does the company have strong competitors that are outperforming?  
Strong competition can place a company at greater risk for fraudulent acts to occur. 
 
32. Is the company under pressure to  sell or merge with another company?  
Situational pressures that may lead to fraudulent acts can arise when a company is under 
pressure to sell or merge with another company. 
 
33. Does the company change auditors often? 
A frequent change in auditors is a red flag of fraud. 
 
34. Does the company delay or avoid supplying auditors with the information necessary to complete  
the audits?  
Delaying or avoiding supplying auditors with the information necessary to complete audits is 
an indicator of fraudulent activity. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.838   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
35. Does the company have problems with regulatory agencies? 
The company should determine the reasons for the problems with regulatory agencies and 
implement measures to encourage compliance with regulations. 
 
36. Does the company have poor accounting records? 
The company should implement proper accounting records. 
 
37. Does the accounting department appear to be inadequately staffed?  
The accounting department should be adequately staffed to allow for proper segregation  
of duties. 
 
38. Does the organization fail to disclose questionable or unusual accounting practices?  
Questionable or unusual accounting practices should be disclosed.  
 
39. Does the company have a number of la rge year-end or unusual transactions? 
Large year-end or unusual transactions should be investigated. 
 
40. Does the organization lack an adequate internal audit staff? 
The internal audit department should be adequately staffed. 
 
41. Does the organization lack an internal control syst em, or does it fail to enforce the existing internal 
controls? 
Organizations should establish and enforce an internal control system. 
 
MODULE # 3 — Physical Controls to Deter Employee Theft and Fraud  
The physical controls assessment questions are designed to assess the probability of a 
fraudulent event occurring within the organization based on: 
• Physical controls in place to control access to accounting records and information 
• Physical controls in place to protect the assets of the organization 
 
1. Does the organization conduct pre-employment back ground checks to identify previous dishonest or 
unethical behavior?  
Before offering employment to an applicant, a company should conduct a pre-employment 
background check (where permitted by law). 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.839 
2. Are there policies and procedures that address dishonest or unethical behavior?  
The company should document and implement policies and procedures that describe (1) 
unethical conduct, (2) punishment for engaging in unethical conduct, and (3) how to report 
unethical conduct. 
 
3. Does management support the ethics and anti-fraud policies?  
Senior management sets the tone for ethical conduct throughout the organization. The tone 
should signal that fraud will not be tolerated. 
 
4. Does the organization educate employees about the importance of ethics and anti-fraud programs?  
All employees should receive training on the ethics and anti-fraud policies of the company. 
The employees should sign an acknowledgment that they have received the training and 
understand the policies. 
 
5. Does the organization provide an anonymous way to re port suspected violations of the ethics and anti-fraud 
policies? 
Organizations should provide a system for anonymous reporting of suspected violations of 
the ethics and anti-fraud policies. 
 
6. Does the organization restrict access to areas containing sensitive documents (such as invoices, receipts, 
journals, ledgers, and checks) and maintain a sy stem for providing an audit trail of access? 
Access to areas containing sensitive documents should be restricted to those individuals 
 who need the information to carry out their jobs. Also, an audit trail of access should  
be maintained. 
 
7. Does the organization restrict access to computer systems with sensitive documents (such as accounting 
software, inventory, and payroll) and create a system to provide an audit trail of access?  
Access to computer systems should be restricted to those individuals who need the 
information to carry out their jobs. Also, an audit trail of access should be maintained. 
 
8. Does the organization restrict access to areas with high value assets, such as shipping, receiving, storerooms, 
and cash?  
Organizations should restrict access to areas with high value assets and should maintain a log 
of persons accessing such areas. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.840   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
9. Does the organization use CCTV and recording equipment to monitor entries, exits,  areas with sensitive 
or high value assets, and sales areas?  
Entries, exits, areas with sensitive or high value assets, and sales areas can be monitored 
using CCTV and recording equipment. 
 
10. Does the organization conduct random, unannounced audits of inventory, ca sh, expense, purchasing, 
billing, and other accounts by in ternal or external auditors?  
Random, unannounced audits help prevent fraud perpetrators from having time to alter, 
destroy, and misplace records and other evidence of their offenses. 
 
11. Does the organization use professional loss prevention  or security personnel to monitor physical controls?  
Professional loss prevention or security personnel can be used to monitor physical controls. 
 
12. Does the organization promptly investigate incidents of suspected or reported fraud?  
Promptly investigating incidents of suspected or reported fraud can minimize losses. 
 
MODULE # 4 — Skimming Schemes  
Skimming schemes include: 
• Collecting cash, but not recording the sale 
• Collecting cash, keeping a portion of the cash, and underreporting the sale amount 
• Collecting a customer’s payment, but not cred iting the amount to the customer’s account 
• Collecting cash and holding it in a personal interest-bearing account before depositing it 
into the company account 
 
1. Is there periodic analytical review of sales a ccounts using vertical, horizontal, and ratio analysis?  
Periodic analytical review of sales accounts using vertical, horizontal, and ratio analysis can 
highlight discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
2. Is there periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using statistical sampling?   
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using statistical sampling can highlight 
discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
3. Is there periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using trend analysis? 
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using trend analysis can highlight 
discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.841 
4. Is there periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using ph ysical inventory counts? 
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using physical inventory counts can 
highlight discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
5. Is there periodic review of the inventory and re ceiving records using verifi cation of shipping and  
requisition documents?  
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using verification of shipping and 
requisition documents can highlight discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
6. Is there periodic review of inventory accounts for write-offs?  
Inventory accounts should be reviewed periodically for write-offs. 
 
7. Is there periodic review of accounts receivable and allowance for uncollectible accounts to look for write-offs 
of accounts receivable?  
Accounts receivable and allowance for uncollectible accounts should be reviewed 
periodically for write-offs of accounts receivable. 
 
8. Is there periodic review of cash accounts for irregular entries?  
Cash accounts should be reviewed periodically for irregular entries. 
 
9. Is the company mail opened by someone other than bookkeepers, cashiers, or other accounting employees 
who make journal entries? 
Company mail should be opened by someone other than bookkeepers, cashiers, or other 
accounting employees who make journal entries. 
 
10. Do vouchers for credit and sales receipts contain serial numbers? 
Vouchers for credit and sales receipts should contain serial numbers. 
 
11. Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper restricted from preparing the bank deposit?  
The accounts receivable bookkeeper should be restricted from preparing the bank deposit. 
 
12. Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper rest ricted from collecting cash from customers? 
The accounts receivable bookkeeper should be restricted from collecting cash  
from customers. 
 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.842   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
13. Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper re stricted from access to the cash receipts?  
The accounts receivable bookkeeper should be restricted from access to the cash receipts. 
 
14. Is the cashier restricted from accessing accounts receivable records?  
The cashier should be restricted from accessing accounts receivable records. 
 
15. Is the cashier restricted from accessing bank and customer statements?  
The cashier should be restricted from accessing bank and customer statements. 
 
16. Is each of the following responsibilities assigned to a separate employee: general ledger entries, cash receipt 
entries, and accounts receivable billing?  
Having different employees perform these tasks helps minimize the potential for the 
concealment of theft. 
 
17. Does the employee who opens incoming checks place restrictive endorsements on all checks received?  
The employee who opens incoming checks should immediately stamp all incoming checks 
with the company’s restrictive endorsement to protect against unintended parties cashing  
the checks. 
 
18. Does the person who opens the mail prepare a list of all checks and cash received?  
A list of all checks and cash received should be prepared and reconciled daily against the 
bank deposit receipt and the cash receipts report. 
 
19. Does the person who opens the mail deliver all checks and cash to the person responsible for the daily 
bank deposit? 
The person who opens the mail should deliver all checks and cash to the person responsible 
for the daily bank deposit. 
 
20. Does an employee perform an independent verification  of the bank deposit ticket to the remittance list 
generated by the employee who opened the mail? 
An employee should perform an independent verification of the bank deposit ticket to the 
remittance list generated by the employee who opened the mail. 
 
21. Does the company use a lockbox service for cash receipts? 
Lockboxes decrease the potential for fraud and error by reducing employee handling of 
each transaction. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.843 
22. Does the company have a safe with restricted access? 
A safe can be used to physically secure excess cash on hand. Access to the safe should be 
restricted and an access log should be maintained. 
 
23. Is cash deposited daily? 
Daily bank deposits should be made so that excess cash does not remain on the premises.  
 
24. Are there pre-numbered cash receipts for cash sales?  
Pre-numbered cash receipts should be used for cash sales. 
 
25. Are employees who handle cash bonded? 
Employees who handle cash should be bonded in order to protect against theft. 
 
26. Is there a written policy and procedure for turning over delinquent accounts for collection?  
The company should document and implement policies and procedures for turning over 
delinquent accounts for collection. 
 
27. Is the person who handles custom er complaints independent of the ca shier or accounts receivable function? 
The person who handles customer complaints should be independent of the cashier or 
accounts receivable function. 
 
28. Is physical access to the accounting syst em restricted to only authorized persons? 
Physical access to the accounting system should be restricted to those who require it to 
perform their job functions. 
 
MODULE # 5 — Cash Larceny Schemes  
Cash larceny schemes include: 
• Stealing cash at the point of sale or register. 
• Stealing cash receipts posted to sales and receivable journals. 
• Stealing cash from bank deposits. 
 
1. Are cash register tape totals reconc iled to the amount in the cash drawer?  
Cash register tape totals should be reconciled to the amount in the cash drawer. Any 
discrepancies should be investigated. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.844   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
2. Is an employee other than the register worker responsible for preparing register count sheets and agreeing 
them to register totals?  
An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and agreeing them to register tape totals. 
 
3. Is access to registers or the cash box closely monitored? Are access codes kept secure? 
Access to registers or the cash box should be closely monitored and access codes should be 
kept secure. 
 
4. Are customer complaints regarding short change or improper posting handled by someone other than the 
employee who receives the cash?  
Customer complaints regarding short change or improper posting should be handled by 
someone other than the employee who receives the cash. 
 
5. Are register workers properly supervised? 
Register workers should be properly supervised by on-duty supervisors or CCTV recording 
of register activity. 
 
6. Are CCTV cameras and digital recorders used to monitor register areas?  
CCTV cameras and digital recorders can be used to monitor register areas. 
 
7. Is each receivable transaction reviewed for legitimacy and supporting documentation?  
Receivable transactions should be reviewed for legitimacy and supporting documentation. 
 
8. Is an independent listing of cash receipts prepared  before the receipts are submitted to the cashier or 
accounts receivable bookkeeper? 
An independent listing of cash receipts should be prepared before the receipts are submitted 
to the cashier or accounts receivable bookkeeper. 
 
9. Does a person independent of the cash receipts and accounts receivable functions compare entries to the cash 
receipts journals with the bank deposit slips and bank deposit statements?  
Companies should assign a person independent of the cash receipts and accounts receivable 
functions to compare entries to the cash receipts journals with the bank deposit slips and 
bank deposit statements. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.845 
10. Are the cash receipts, cash counts, bank deposits, deposit receipt reconciliation s, bank reconciliations, 
posting of deposits, and cash disbursements duties segregated?  
The primary way to prevent cash larceny is to segregate duties. 
 
11. Does an employee other than the cashier or accounts  receivable bookkeeper make the daily bank deposit?  
Having an employee other than the cashier or accounts receivable bookkeeper make  
the daily bank deposit is an important segregation of duties that can help to prevent  
cash larceny. 
 
12. Is job or assignment rotation mandatory for employees who handle cash receipts and accounting duties?  
Many internal fraud schemes are continuous in nature and require ongoing efforts by the 
employee to conceal defalcations. By establishing mandatory job or assignment rotation, the 
concealment element is interrupted. 
 
13. Are vacations mandatory for employees who handle cash receipts and accounting duties? 
Many internal fraud schemes are continuous in nature and require ongoing efforts by the 
employee to conceal defalcations. By establishing mandatory vacations, the concealment 
element is interrupted.  
 
14. Are surprise cash counts conducted? 
Surprise cash counts help prevent fraud perpetrators from having time to alter, destroy, and 
misplace records and other evidence of their offenses. 
 
15. Are journal entries made to  the cash accounts reviewed and analyzed on a regular basis?  
Journal entries made to the cash accounts  should be reviewed and analyzed on a  
regular basis. 
 
16. Does the company use a point of sale (POS) system?  
A POS system will allow the organization to gather sales information in a comprehensive 
and timely format. 
  
17. Does the POS system track perpetual inventory? 
The POS system should be configured to track perpetual inventory. 
  
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.846   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
18. Does the POS system track exceptions, such as voids, refunds, no sales,  overages, and shortages?  
The POS system should be configured to track exceptions, such as voids, refunds, no sales, 
overages, and shortages. 
 
19. Are register exception reports reviewed on a regular basis?  
Register exception reports should be reviewed on a regular basis by management. 
 
20. Are all employees, except for managers, prohibited from making changes to the POS system? 
All employees, except for managers, should be prohibited from making changes to the  
POS system. 
 
21. Is access to the accounts receivable subledger and the general ledger restricted to authorized employees? 
Does access leave an audit trail?  
Access to the accounts receivable subledger and general ledger should be restricted to 
authorized employees. An audit trail of who accessed the ledgers, including time and date of 
access, should be kept. 
 
MODULE # 6 — Check Tampering Schemes  
• Forged maker schemes involve forging an authorized signature on a company check.  
• Forged endorsement schemes consist of forging the signature endorsement of an 
intended recipient of a company check. 
• Altered payee schemes involve changing the payee designation on the check to the 
perpetrator or an accomplice. 
• Authorized maker schemes occur when employees with signature authority write 
fraudulent checks for their own benefit. 
  
1. Are unused checks stored in a secure container with limited access? 
Blank checks, which can be used for forgery, should be stored in a secure area such as a 
safe or vault. Security to this area should be restricted to authorized personnel. 
 
2. Are unused checks from accounts that  have been closed promptly destroyed?  
Companies should promptly destroy all unused checks from accounts that have been closed. 
 
3. Are electronic payments used where possible to limit the number of paper checks issued? 
Companies can minimize the possibility of check tampering and theft by using electronic 
payment services to handle large vendor and financing payments. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.847 
4. Are printed and signed checks mailed immediately after signing?  
Printed and signed checks should be mailed immediately after signing.  
 
5. Are new checks purchased from reputable check vendors? 
All new checks should be purchased from reputable, well-established check producers.  
 
6. Do company checks contain security features to ensure their integrity?  
Companies can reduce their exposure to physical check tampering by using checks 
containing security features, such as high-resolution microprinting, security inks, and 
ultraviolet ink. 
 
7. Has the company notified its bank to not accept checks over  a predetermined maximum amount?  
Companies should work in a cooperative effort with banks to prevent check fraud, 
establishing maximum dollar amounts above which the company’s bank will not accept 
checks drawn against the account. 
 
8. Has the company established positive pay controls with its bank by supplying the bank with a daily list of 
checks issued and authorized for payment?  
One method for a company to help prevent check fraud is to establish positive pay controls 
by supplying its banks with a daily list of checks issued and authorized for payment. 
 
9. Is the employee who prepares the check prohibited from signing the check?  
Check preparation should not be performed by a signatory on the account. 
 
10. Are detailed comparisons made between the payees  on the checks and the payees listed in the cash 
disbursements journal?  
Companies should perform detailed comparisons of the payees on the checks and the payees 
listed in the cash disbursements journal. 
 
11. Are employees responsible for handling and coding checks periodically rotated?  
Periodic rotation of personnel responsible for handling and coding checks can be an 
effective check disbursement control.  
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.848   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
12. Are bank reconciliations completed immedi ately after bank statements are received?  
Companies should complete bank reconciliations immediately after bank statements are 
received. The Uniform Commercial Code states that discrepancies must be presented to the 
bank within 30 days of receipt of the bank statement in order to hold the bank liable. 
 
13. Are bank statements and account reconciliations independently audited to confirm accuracy?  
Bank statements and account reconciliations should be independently audited for accuracy. 
 
14. Are cancelled checks independently reviewed for alterations and forgeries?  
Cancelled checks should be independently reviewed for alterations and forgeries. 
 
15. Are checks for a material amount matched to the supporting documentation?  
Checks for material amounts should be matched to the supporting documentation. 
 
16. Are voided checks examined for irregularities and to ensure they haven’t been processed? 
The list of voided checks should be verified against physical copies of the checks. Bank 
statements should be reviewed to ensure that voided checks have not been processed. 
 
17. Are missing checks recorded and stop payments issued? 
Missing checks may indicate lax control over the physical safekeeping of checks. Stop 
payments should be issued for all missing checks. 
 
18. Do questionable payees or payee ad dresses trigger review of the corresponding check and support 
documentation? 
Questionable payees or payee addresses should trigger a review of the corresponding check 
and support documentation. 
 
19. With the exception of payroll, are checks issued to employees reviewed for irregularities? 
Checks payable to employees, with the exception of regular payroll checks, should be closely 
scrutinized for schemes such as conflicts of interest, fictitious vendors, or duplicate expense 
reimbursements. 
 
20. Are two signatures required for check issuance? 
Requiring dual signatures on checks can reduce the risk of check fraud. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.849 
21. Are all company payments made by check or other recordable payment device?  
Making payments by check or other recordable payment device can reduce the risk of 
disbursement frauds. 
 
22. Are handwritten checks prohibited?  
Handwritten checks are especially vulnerable to check fraud and should be prohibited. 
 
MODULE # 7 — Cash Register Schemes  
• False refund schemes occur when an employee (1) issues a refund for fictitious 
merchandise and keeps the money or (2) overstates the amount of merchandise returned 
and skims the excess money. 
• False void schemes occur when a register worker retains a customer receipt, processes a 
fictitious voided sale, and keeps the money. 
 
1. Are refunds, voids, and discounts evaluated on a routine basis to identify patterns of activity among 
employees, departments, shi fts, merchandise, etc.?  
Companies should routinely evaluate refunds, voids, and discounts to search for patterns of 
activity that might signal fraud. 
 
2. Is there a sign posted at the register asking the customer to request and examine a sales receipt? 
Signs asking customers to request and examine sales receipts should be posted at registers. 
 
3. Are cash disbursements recorded on a pre-numbered form and reconciled daily? 
Cash disbursements should be recorded on pre-numbered forms and reconciled daily. 
 
4. Do the cash disbursement forms have  an explanation section or code? 
An explanation section or code should be included on cash disbursement forms. 
 
5. Are customers that are involved in voided sales and refunds randomly contacted to  verify the accuracy of  
the transaction?  
Customers involved in voided sales and refunds should be randomly contacted to verify the 
accuracy of the transactions. 
 
6. Is access to the necessary control keys for refunds and voids rest ricted to supervisors?  
Access to the necessary control keys for refunds and voids should be restricted  
to supervisors. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.850   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
7. Do void or refund transactions have to be  approved by a supervisor and documented?  
All void or refund transactions should be approved by a supervisor and documented. 
 
8. Is documentation of void and ref und transactions maintained on file? 
Documentation of void and refund transactions should be maintained on file. 
 
9. Is missing or altered register  tape thoroughly investigated? 
Companies should thoroughly investigate any missing or altered register tape. 
 
10. Are gaps in the register tape investigated?  
Companies should investigate any gaps in the register tape. 
 
11. Are multiple voids or refunds for amounts just under any review limit investigated? 
Multiple voids or refunds for amounts just under review limits should be investigated. 
 
12. Is an employee other than the register worker responsible for preparing register count sheets and comparing 
them to register totals?  
An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and comparing them to register totals. 
 
13. Are customer complaints regarding pa yment errors thoroughly investigated? 
Customer complaints regarding payment errors should be thoroughly investigated. 
 
14. Does each cashier have a separate access code to the register?  
Each cashier should be assigned a separate access code to the register. 
 
15. Does each cashier have a separate cash drawer?  
Each cashier should have a separate cash drawer. 
 
16. Is an over and short log kept for each person and/or register? 
An over and short log should be kept for each person and/or register. 
 
17. Are over and short incidents thoroughly investigated and monitored? 
Over and short incidents should be thoroughly investigated and monitored. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.851 
18. Are all “no sale" receipts accounted for and attached to a daily cashier’s report? 
All “no sale" receipts should be accounted for and attached to a daily cashier’s report. 
 
19. Is access to the register area restricted to authorized employees and supervisors?  
Companies should restrict access to register areas to authorized employees and supervisors. 
 
20. Are all cashiers periodically integrity shopped? 
Companies should periodically conduct integrity shopping on all cashiers. 
 
MODULE # 8 — Purchasing and Billing Schemes  
• Shell company schemes occur when an employee submits invoices for payment from a 
fictitious company controlled by the employee. 
• Pay-and-return schemes occur when an employee arranges for overpayment of a vendor 
invoice and pockets the overpayment amount when it is returned to the company. 
• Personal purchase schemes occur when an employee submits an invoice for personal 
purchases to the company for payment, or when an employee uses a company credit 
card for personal purchases. 
 
1. Does the organization have a purchasing department? 
The organization should have a purchasing department that is separate from the  
payment function. 
 
2. Is the purchasing department independent of the accounting, receiving, and shipping departments?  
The purchasing department should be independent of the accounting, receiving, and 
shipping departments. 
 
3. Do purchase requisitions require management approval?  
Management should approve all purchase requisitions. 
 
4. Do purchase orders specify a description of items, quantities, prices, and dates?  
Purchase orders should specify a description of items, quantities, prices, and dates. 
 
5. Are purchase order forms pre-numbered and accounted for? 
Purchase order forms should be pre-numbered and accounted for. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.852   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
6. Does the company maintain a master vendor file?  
The company should maintain a master vendor file. 
 
7. Are competitive bids required for all purchases? 
Companies should require competitive bids for all purchases. 
 
8. Does the receiving department prepare receiving reports for all items received? 
The receiving department should prepare receiving reports for all items received. 
 
9. Does the receiving department main tain a log of all items received?  
The receiving department should maintain a log of all items received. 
 
10. Are copies of receiving reports furnished to  the accounting and purchasing departments? 
Copies of receiving reports should be furnished to the accounting and  
purchasing departments. 
 
11. Are purchasing and receiving functions separate from invoice processing, accounts payable, and general 
ledger functions?  
Purchasing and receiving functions should be segregated from invoice processing, accounts 
payable, and general ledger functions. 
 
12. Are vendor invoices, receiving reports, and purchase orders matched before the related liability is recorded?  
Companies should match vendor invoices, receiving reports, and purchase orders before 
recording the related liability. 
 
13. Are purchase orders recorded in a purchase register or voucher register before being processed through  
cash disbursements?  
Purchase orders should be recorded in a purchase register or voucher register before being 
processed through cash disbursements. 
 
14. Are procedures adequate to ensure that merchandise purchased for direct delivery to the customer is 
promptly billed to the customer and recorded as both a receivable and a payable?  
Companies should implement procedures adequate to ensure that merchandise purchased 
for direct delivery to the customer is promptly billed to the customer and recorded as both a 
receivable and a payable. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.853 
15. Are records of goods returned to ve ndors matched to vendor credit memos? 
Records of goods returned to vendors should be matched to vendor credit memos. 
 
16. Is the accounts payable ledger or voucher register re conciled monthly to the general ledger control accounts? 
The accounts payable ledger or voucher register should be reconciled monthly to the general 
ledger control accounts. 
 
17. Do write-offs of accounts payable debit bala nces require approval of a designated manager?  
Write-offs of accounts payable debit balances should require approval of a  
designated manager. 
 
18. Is the master vendor file periodically  reviewed for unusual vendors and addresses?  
The master vendor file should be reviewed periodically for unusual vendors and addresses. 
 
19. Are vendor purchases analyzed for abnormal levels? 
Vendor purchases should be analyzed for abnormal levels. 
 
20. Are control methods in place to check for duplicate invoices and purchase order numbers? 
Companies should implement control methods to check for duplicate invoices and purchase 
order numbers. 
 
21. Are credit card statements re viewed monthly for irregularities?  
Credit card statements should be reviewed monthly for irregularities. 
 
22. Are vendors with post office box addresses verified? 
All vendors with post office box addresses should be verified. 
 
23. Are voucher payments reviewed regularly for proper documentation? 
Voucher payments should be reviewed regularly for proper documentation. 
 
24. Is access to the accounts payable subledger and the general ledger restricted? Does access create an  
audit trail? 
Access to the accounts payable subledger and the general ledger should be restricted and an 
audit trail should be created. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.854   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
MODULE # 9 — Payroll Schemes  
• Ghost employee schemes occur when a person not employed by the company is on  
the payroll. 
• Overpayment schemes occur when a company pays an employee based on falsified 
hours or rates. 
• Commission schemes occur when the amount of sales made or the rate of commission is 
fraudulently inflated. 
 
1. Is the employee payroll list reviewed periodically  for duplicate or missing Social Security numbers?  
Organizations should check the employee payroll list periodically for duplicate or missing 
Social Security numbers that may indicate a ghost employee or overlapping payments to 
current employees. 
 
2. Are personnel records maintained independ ently of payroll and timekeeping functions?  
Personnel records should be maintained independently of payroll and timekeeping functions. 
 
3. Are references checked on all new hires? 
Organizations should perform reference checks on all new hires. 
 
4. Are sick leave, vacations, and holidays re viewed for compliance with company policy? 
Sick leave, vacations, and holidays should be reviewed for compliance with company policy. 
 
5. Are appropriate forms completed and signed by the employee to authorize payroll deductions and 
withholding exemptions? 
Employees should complete and sign appropriate forms to authorize payroll deductions and 
withholding exemptions. 
 
6. Is payroll periodically compared with personnel records for terminations?  
Payroll should periodically be compared with personnel records for terminations to ensure 
that terminated employees have been removed from the payroll. 
 
7. Are payroll checks pre-numbered and issued in sequential order?  
Payroll checks should be pre-numbered and issued in sequential order. 
 
8. Is the payroll bank account reconciled by an employee who is not involved in preparing payroll checks, does 
not sign the checks, and does not handle payroll distribution?  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.855 
The payroll bank account should be reconciled by an employee who is not involved in 
preparing payroll checks, does not sign the checks, and does not handle payroll distribution. 
 
9. Are payroll registers reconciled to general ledger control accounts?  
Payroll registers should be reconciled to general ledger control accounts. 
 
10. Are canceled payroll checks examined for alterations and endorsements? 
Canceled payroll checks should be examined for alterations and endorsements. 
 
11. Is access restricted to payroll check stock and signature stamps? 
Access to payroll check stock and signature stamps should be restricted. 
 
12. Are payroll withholdings for taxes, insurance, etc. examined to determine if any employees are not having 
these items deducted from their paychecks?  
Payroll checks that do not have withholdings for taxes, insurance, etc. should  
be investigated. 
 
13. Is the employee payroll list reviewed periodically for duplicate or missing home addresses and  
telephone numbers? 
The employee payroll list should be reviewed for duplicate or missing home addresses and 
telephone numbers. 
 
14. Is the account information for automatically depo sited payroll checks reviewed periodically for  
duplicate entries? 
Account information for automatically deposited payroll checks should be reviewed 
periodically for duplicate entries. 
 
15. Is an employee separate from the payroll department assigned to distribute payroll checks?  
An employee separate from the payroll department should be assigned to distribute  
payroll checks. 
 
16. Are new employees required to furnish proof of immigration status? 
Companies must require new employees to furnish proof of immigration status. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.856   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
17. Does any change to an employee’s salary require more than one level of management approval?  
Changes to an employee’s salary should require more than one level of  
management approval. 
 
18. Does overtime have to be authorized by a supervisor? 
Overtime should be authorized by a supervisor. 
 
19. Do supervisors verify and sign  timecards for each pay period? 
Supervisors should verify and sign time timecards for each pay period. 
 
20. Are commission expenses compared to sales figures to verify amounts?  
Comparing commission expenses to sales figures to verify amounts is an important control 
procedure that can help to detect payroll fraud. 
 
21. Does someone separate from the sales department calculate sales commissions?  
Someone separate from the sales department should calculate sales commissions. 
 
MODULE # 10 — Expense Schemes  
• Mischaracterized expense schemes occur when an employee requests reimbursement for 
a personal expense, claiming the expense to be business related. 
• Overstated expense schemes occur when an employee overstates the cost of actual 
expenses and seeks reimbursement. 
• Fictitious expense schemes occur when an employee invents a purchase and seeks 
reimbursement for it. 
• Multiple reimbursement schemes occur when an employee submits a single expense for 
reimbursement multiple times. 
 
1. Are the expense accounts reviewed and analyzed periodically using historical comparisons or comparisons 
with budgeted amounts? 
Companies should periodically review and analyze expense accounts using historical 
comparisons or comparisons with budgeted amounts. 
 
2. Do employee expense reimbursement claims receive a detailed review before payment is made?  
Employee expense reimbursement claims should receive a detailed review before payment  
is made. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.857 
3. Are employees required to submit detailed expense reports?  
Employees should be required to submit detailed expense reports containing receipts, 
explanations, amounts, etc. 
 
4. Is a limit placed on expenses such  as hotels, meals, and entertainment?  
Companies should place a spending limit on expenses such as hotels, meals,  
and entertainment. 
 
5. Are receipts required for all expenses to be reimbursed? 
Companies should require receipts for all expenses to be reimbursed. 
 
6. Are supervisors required to review and approve all expense reimbursement requests?  
All expense reimbursement requests should be reviewed and approved by supervisors. 
 
7. Is there a random authentication of expense receipts and expenses claimed?  
A policy requiring the periodic review of expense reports, coupled with examining the 
appropriate detail, can help deter employees from submitting personal expenses for 
reimbursement. 
 
MODULE # 11 — Theft of Inventory and Equipment  
• Fake sale schemes occur when an accomplice of an employee “buys” merchandise, but 
the employee does not ring up the sale and the accomplice takes the merchandise 
without making any payment. 
• Purchasing schemes occur when an employee with purchasing authority uses that 
authority to purchase and misappropriate merchandise. 
• Receiving schemes occur when an employee misappropriates assets purchased by the 
company as they are received at the company. 
• False shipment schemes occur when an employee creates false sales documents and false 
shipping documents to make it appear that missing inventory was not actually stolen, but 
rather sold. 
• Misuse of company assets occurs when an employee borrows company assets for 
personal use without authorization. 
• Larceny schemes occur when an employee takes inventory from the company premises 
without attempting to conceal the theft in the accounting records. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.858   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
1. Has a recent inventory of company equipment, list ing serial numbers and descriptions, been completed? 
Companies should inventory company equipment and maintain a list of the equipment, serial 
numbers, and descriptions. 
 
2. Does the company assign an individual from  outside of the department to conduct the  
department’s inventory? 
An employee who doesn’t work in the department should be assigned to conduct the 
department’s inventory. 
 
3. Are unexplained entries to the inventory records examined for source documentation?  
Unexplained entries to the inventory records should be examined for source documentation. 
 
4. Is the company experiencing sizeable invent ory increases without comparable sales increases? 
Sizeable inventory increases without comparable sales increases may indicate an inventory 
overstatement fraud scheme and should be investigated. 
 
5. Are analytical reviews of beginning inventory, sales, cost of goods sold, and ending inventory conducted 
periodically to look for unexplained differences? 
Analytical reviews of beginning inventory, sales, cost of goods sold, and ending inventory 
should be conducted periodically. Any discrepancies should be investigated. 
 
6. Is there an unusual volume of inventory adjustments,  write-offs, or disposals?  
Any unusual volume of inventory adjustments, write-offs, or disposals should  
be investigated. 
 
7. Does the organization have writte n inventory instructions and orders?  
Organizations should document and impl ement inventory instructions and orders. 
 
8. Does someone independent of the purchasing, receiv ing, and warehousing functions physically count  
the inventory?  
Physical inventory counts should be conducted by someone independent of the purchasing, 
receiving, and warehousing functions. 
 
9. Are pre-numbered inventory tags used? 
Pre-numbered inventory tags should be used. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.859 
10. Are the inventory tags controlled and accounted for? 
Inventory tags should be controlled and accounted for. 
 
11. Do the inventory procedures prevent double counting?  
Organizations should implement inventory procedures that prevent double counting. 
 
12. Are inventory counts subject to independent recounts?  
Inventory counts should be subject to independent recounts. 
 
13. Is the inventory reasonably identifiable for prop er classification in the accounting system, such as 
description, condition, or stage of completion?  
The inventory should be reasonably identifiable for proper classification in the accounting 
system, such as description, condition, or stage of completion. 
 
14. Are differences between physical counts and invent ory records investigated be fore inventory records  
are adjusted? 
Differences between physical counts and inventory records should be investigated before 
inventory records are adjusted. 
 
15. Is scrap inventoried and is scrap disposal accounted for? 
Scrap should be inventoried and scrap disposal should be accounted for. 
 
16. Are the following duties segregated: requisition of inventory, receiving of in ventory, disbursement of 
inventory, writing off of inventory as scrap, and receipt of proceeds from the sale of scrap inventory?  
The following duties should be segregated: requisition of inventory, receiving of inventory, 
disbursement of inventory, writing off of inventory as scrap, and receipt of proceeds from 
the sale of scrap inventory. 
 
17. Is a receiving report prepared for all purchased goods?  
A receiving report should be prepared for all purchased goods. 
 
18. Are copies of receiving reports sent directly to the purchasing and ac counting departments? 
Copies of receiving reports should be sent directly to the purchasing and  
accounting departments. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.860   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
19. Is the receiving department provided with a copy of the purchase order on all items to be received? 
The receiving department should be provided with a copy of the purchase order on all items 
to be received. 
 
20. Are partial shipments annotated on purchase orders or attached as separate sheets? 
Partial shipments should be annotated on purchase orders or attached as separate sheets. 
 
21. Are overage, shortage, and damage reports completed and sent to the purchasing and  
accounting departments?  
Overage, shortage, and damage reports should be completed and sent to the purchasing and 
accounting departments. 
 
22. Are quantities of materials received counted and compared to purchase orders?  
Quantities of materials received should be counted and compared to purchase orders. 
 
23. Is there a written policy allowing management to inspect all desks, file cabinets, and other containers on 
company property? 
Companies should document and implement a written policy allowing management to 
inspect all desks, file cabinets, and other containers on company property. 
 
24. Is there an equipment removal au thorization policy requiring written management approval to remove any 
company equipment from the company premises? 
Companies should document and implement an equipment removal authorization policy 
requiring written management approval to remove any company equipment from the 
company premises. 
 
25. Is there a policy requiring the in spection of packages, boxes, and other containers before they leave the 
company premises?  
Companies should document and implement a policy requiring the inspection of packages, 
boxes, and other containers before they leave the company premises. 
 
26. Is the removal of trash and trash receptacles periodically monitored? 
Companies should periodically monitor the removal of trash and trash receptacles. 
 
27. Are the shipping and receiving areas adequately supervised to prevent theft?  
Shipping and receiving areas should be adequately supervised to prevent theft. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.861 
28. Are high value items stored in secure or continuously monitored areas?  
High value items should be stored in secure or continuously monitored areas. 
 
29. Is the shipping function separate from  the purchasing and inventory functions?  
The shipping function should be separate from the purchasing and inventory functions. 
 
30. Are shipping documents pre-numbered and accounted for?  
Shipping documents should be pre-numbered and accounted for. 
 
31. Are shipping orders matched with sales orders and contracts?  
Shipping orders should be matched with sales orders and contracts to prevent inventory and 
vendor schemes. 
 
32. Are shipments of goods required to have authorized sales orders  and contracts prior to shipping?  
Shipments of goods should be required to have authorized sales orders and sales contracts 
prior to shipping. 
 
33. Are shipping documents forwarded directly to the a ccounting department for recording inventory reduction 
and cost of sales? 
Shipping documents should be forwarded directly to the accounting department for 
recording inventory reduction and cost of sales. 
 
MODULE # 12 — Theft of Proprietary Information  
• Theft of proprietary information involves theft or disclosure of confidential or trade 
secret information for financial gain. 
 
1. Are there policies and procedures addressing the identification, classification, and handling of  
proprietary information? 
The company should implement policies and procedures addressing the identification, 
classification, and handling of proprietary information. 
 
2. Are employees who have access to proprietary information required to sign nondisclosure agreements?  
Employees who have access to proprietary information should be required to sign 
nondisclosure agreements. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.862   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
3. Are employees who have access to proprietary information required to sign no ncompete agreements to 
prevent them from working for competitors with in a stated period of time and location? 
Employees who have access to proprietary information should be required to sign 
noncompete agreements to prevent them from working for competitors within a stated 
period of time. 
 
4. Are employees provided with training to make them aware of proprietary information, their responsibility 
to protect the information, and the company policies and procedures relating to proprietary information?  
Employees should be provided with training to make them aware of proprietary information, 
their responsibility to protect proprietary information, and company policies and procedures 
relating to proprietary information. 
 
5. Is there an established procedure to identify what information should be  classified as sensitive and for  
how long? 
Companies should implement a procedure to identify what information should be classified 
as sensitive and for how long. 
 
6. Are sensitive documents properly cl assified and marked as confidential? 
Sensitive documents should be properly classified and marked as confidential. 
 
7. Is sensitive information properly secured when not being used? 
Sensitive information should be properly secured when not being used. 
 
8. Is access to sensitive information ph ysically controlled and accounted for?  
Access to sensitive information should be physically controlled and accounted for. 
 
9. Is sensitive information promptly destroyed when it is no longer needed? 
Organizations should promptly destroy sensitive information when it is no longer needed. 
 
10. Are compromises to the security of proprietary information promptly investigated to determine the source? 
Companies should promptly investigate any compromises to the security of proprietary 
information to determine the source. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.863 
11. Are employees required to use screensaver and/ or server passwords to protect unattended  
computer systems? 
Employees should be required to use screensaver and/or server passwords to protect 
unattended computer systems. 
 
12. Are confidential documents shredded when discarded? 
Confidential documents should be shredded when discarded. 
 
MODULE # 13 — Corruption  
• Bribery schemes involve the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting of a thing of value to 
influence a business decision. 
• Kickback schemes occur when vendors make undisclosed payments to employees of 
purchasing companies in order to enlist the employees in overbilling schemes. 
• Bid-rigging schemes occur when an employee fraudulently assists a vendor in winning a 
contract through the competitive bidding process. 
• Economic extortion schemes occur when an employee demands payment from a vendor 
for decisions made in the vendor’s favor. Ref usal to pay the extorter results in harm to 
the vendor. 
• Illegal gratuities schemes involve giving or receiving something of value to reward a 
business decision. 
 
1. Is there a company policy that addresses the receipt of gifts, discounts, and services offered by a supplier or 
customer?  
Organizations should implement a policy that addresses the receipt of gifts, discounts, and 
services offered by a supplier or customer. 
 
2. Is there an established bidding policy? 
Organizations should establish a bidding policy. 
 
3. Are purchases reviewed to detect out of line costs?  
Organizations should review purchases for costs that are out of line. 
 
4. Are purchases reviewed to identify favored vendors?  
Purchases should be reviewed to identify favored vendors. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.864   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
5. Are purchases reviewed to identify excessive amounts? 
Purchases should be reviewed and any excessive amounts should be investigated. 
 
6. Are pre-bid solicitation documents reviewed for any restrictions on competition?  
Pre-bid solicitation documents should be reviewed for any restrictions on competition. 
 
7. Are bid solicitation packages numbered and controlled? 
Bid solicitation packages should be numbered and controlled. 
 
8. Is communication between bidders and purchasing employees restricted? 
Companies should restrict and monitor communication between bidders and  
purchasing employees. 
 
9. Are the bids received kept confidential? 
All bids received should be kept confidential. 
 
10. Are bidders’ qualifications verified? 
Companies should verify bidders’ qualifications. 
 
11. Are contracts awarded based on predetermined criteria? 
Companies should establish predetermined criteria upon which to award contracts. 
 
12. Are purchasing account assignments rotated? 
Periodic rotation of purchasing account assignments can be an effective corruption control. 
 
13. Are vendors surveyed periodically regarding company purchasing practices?  
Organizations should periodically survey vendors regarding company purchasing practices. 
 
MODULE # 14 — Conflicts of Interest  
• Purchase schemes involve the overbilling of a company for goods or services by a 
vendor in which an employee has an undisclosed ownership or financial interest. 
• Sales schemes involve the underselling of company goods by an employee to a company 
in which the employee maintains a hidden interest. 
  
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.865 
1. Are there periodic comparisons of vendor information with employee information, such as addresses and 
telephone numbers? 
Organizations should conduct periodic comparisons of vendor information with employee 
information, such as addresses and telephone numbers. 
 
2. Are vendors who employ former company employees under in creased scrutiny? 
Vendors who employ former company employees should be under increased scrutiny for 
potential conflicts of interest. 
 
3. Does the organization have a reporting procedure for personnel to report their concerns about vendors 
receiving favored treatment? 
Organizations should provide personnel with a confidential system for reporting concerns 
about vendors receiving favored treatment. 
 
4. Are employees required to complete an annual disclo sure document that includes business ownership, 
income, and investment information? 
Employees should be required to provide annual disclosures that list business ownership, 
income, and investment information. 
 
5. Does the organization require vendors to sign an agreement allowing vendor audits?  
Organizations should require vendors to sign an agreement allowing vendor audits. 
 
6. Are vendor audits conducted by someone independent of the purchase, sales, billing, and  
receiving departments? 
Vendor audits should be conducted by someone independent of the purchase, sales, billing, 
and receiving departments. 
 
MODULE # 15 — Fraudulent Financial Reports  
• Fictitious revenue schemes involve recording fictitious revenue from the sale of goods  
or services. 
• Improper timing schemes involve recording revenues or expenses in improper 
accounting periods. 
• Understating liabilities schemes involve concealing or understating liabilities and 
expenses, capitalizing expenses, or expensing capital expenses. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.866   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Improper disclosure schemes involve the improper disclosure of material information, 
such as contingent liabilities, significant events, management fraud, related-party 
transactions, or accounting changes. 
• Improper asset valuation schemes involve the improper valuation of inventory, accounts 
receivable, fixed assets, intangibles, or other assets. 
 
1. Are the organization’s accounting records in proper form? 
Organizations should maintain accounting records in proper form. 
 
2. Does the organization employ an adequate number of accounting employees? 
The accounting department should be adequately staffed to allow for proper segregation  
of duties. 
 
3. Does the organization have an effective internal audit staff? 
An effective internal audit staff can focus on high-risk areas for fraud and can identify new 
vulnerabilities, measure the effectiveness of internal controls, and signal that fraud 
prevention is a high priority for the company. 
 
4. Are proper internal controls established and maintained? 
Organizations should establish and enforce an internal control system. 
 
5. Does the organization embrace the concept of internal controls?  
Embracing the concept of internal controls requires that senior managers and employees 
understand why internal controls are important and what adopting such measures means  
to them. 
 
6. Are senior managers visible in their support of internal controls?  
Senior managers should be visible in their support of internal controls. 
 
7. Are the organization’s financial goals and objectives realistic? 
Unrealistic financial goals and objectives can result in managers and employees committing 
fraudulent acts in order to meet them. 
 
8. Does the organization consistently achieve its financial goals and objectives? 
Any failure to meet financial goals and objectives should be researched. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.867 
9. Is the organization’s reported financial performance stable or increasing? 
Management should investigate any unstable or decreasing financial performance. 
 
10. Does the company have stable relationships with its banks?  
The company should strive to have stable relationships with its banks. 
 
11. Are there unrealistic changes or increases in financial statement account balances?  
Management should determine the reasons for any unrealistic changes or increases in 
financial statement account balances. 
 
12. Are the account balances realistic given the nature, age, and size of the company?  
Management should investigate any unrealistic account balances. 
 
13. Do actual physical assets exist in the amounts and values indicated on the financial statements?  
An inventory of physical assets should be conducted to verify that the physical assets exist in 
the amounts and values indicated on the financial statements. 
 
14. Have there been significant changes in the nature of the or ganization’s revenues or expenses?  
The organization should determine the reasons for any significant changes in the nature of 
its revenues or expenses. 
 
15. Do one or a few large transactions account for a si gnificant portion of any a ccount balance or amount?  
Situations in which one or a few large transactions account for a significant portion of any 
account balance or amount should be researched. 
 
16. Are there significant transactions that occur near the end of a period that positively impact results of 
operations, especially transactions that are unusual or highly complex? 
Any significant transactions that occur near the end of a period and positively impact results 
of operations should be scrutinized for legitimacy, especially if the transactions are unusual 
or highly complex. 
 
17. Are financial results fairly consistent across periods? 
The company should be able to explain any variances in financial results across periods. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.868   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
18. Is there an inability to generate cash flows from operations while experiencing earnings growth?  
Any inability to generate cash flows from operations while experiencing earnings growth 
should be investigated. 
 
19. Is there significant pressure to obtain additional capital necessary to stay competitive? 
Insufficient working capital can place undue pressure on management to manipulate 
financial results.  
 
20. Are reported assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that involve unusually 
subjective judgments or uncertainties?  
Significant estimates, especially those that involve unusually subjective judgments or 
uncertainties, should be reviewed for reasonableness. 
 
21. Are reported assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that are subject to 
potential significant change in the near  term in a manner that may have a financially disruptive effect on the 
organization?  
Significant estimates that are subject to potential significant change in the near term  
in a manner that may have a financially disruptive effect on the organization should  
be scrutinized. 
 
22. Is the company experiencing unusual ly rapid growth or profitability, especially when compared with that 
of other companies in the same industry? 
Unusually rapid growth or profitability, especially when compared with that of other 
companies in the same industry, is a red flag of fraud and should be investigated. 
 
23. Is the organization highly vulner able to changes in interest rates?  
The organization should increase review of its financial reporting during periods of  
high vulnerability. 
 
24. Are there unrealistically aggressive sa les or profitability incentive programs?  
Unrealistically aggressive sales or profitability incentive programs can place undue pressure 
on employees and result in employees committing fraudulent acts in order to meet them. 
 
25. Is there a threat of imminent bankruptcy, foreclosure, or hostile takeover?  
A threat of imminent bankruptcy, foreclosure, or hostile takeover places a company at 
increased risk for fraudulent activity to occur. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.869 
26. Is there a high possibility of ad verse consequences on significant pend ing transactions, such as business 
combinations or contract awards, if poor financial results are reported? 
A high possibility of adverse consequences on significant pending transactions, such as 
business combinations or contract awards, if poor financial results are reported can place 
extreme pressure on management to manipulate results. 
 
27. Is there a poor or deteriorating financial position when management has personally guaranteed significant 
debts of the entity?  
The existence of a poor or deteriorating financial position when management has personally 
guaranteed significant debts of the entity can result in management committing fraudulent 
acts in order to protect itself from financial harm. 
 
28. Does the firm continuously operate on a crisis basis or without a careful budget ing and planning process? 
A careful budgeting and planning process can help a firm to monitor progress toward its 
goals, control spending, and predict cash flow and profit. 
 
29. Does the organization have difficulty collecting receivables or have other cash flow problems? 
Management should determine the reasons for any collection or cash flow problems. 
 
30. Is the organization dependent on one or two key products or services, especially products or services that 
can become quickly obsolete? 
Dependence on one or two key products can place tremendous pressure on a company, 
exposing it to increased risk of fraud. 
 
31. Do the footnotes contain information about complex issues? 
Any complex issues should be explained in the footnotes. 
 
32. Are  there adequate disclosures in the financials and footnotes?  
Generally accepted accounting principles concerning disclosures require that financial 
statements (1) include all relevant and material information in the financials or footnotes and 
(2) not be misleading. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.901 
ETHICS FOR FRAUD EXAMINERS 
 
In this section, we have discussed a number of behavioral and ethical principles applicable to 
both organizations and individuals. As a fraud examiner, the decisions you make will be 
extremely important to your client or company as well as to the individuals you may be 
called upon to investigate. Therefore, Certified Fraud Examiners are held to a very high 
ethical standard. The following material is designed to accomplish more than a mere 
recitation of rules of professional ethics for fraud examiners. It also contains discussion and 
explanation of many features of ethics in general. The first portion deals with principles of 
moral philosophy. These represent the “high road” in the study of ethics for fraud 
examiners. The latter portion deals more specifically with rules of behavior in situations that 
characterize fraud examiners’ work. The applications of the Certified Fraud Examiner Code 
of Professional Ethics are discussed.  
 
 
What Is Ethics? 
In A Critical Introduction to Ethics, Philip Wheelwright defined ethics as: 
 
that branch of philosophy which is the systematic study of reflective choice, of the standards 
of right and wrong by which it is to be guided, and of the goods toward which it may 
ultimately be directed. 
 
This definition contains three key elements: 
• Ethics involves questions requiring reflective choice (decision problems). 
• Ethics involves guides of right and wrong (moral principles). 
• Ethics is concerned with values (goods) inherent in ethical decisions.  
 
Why does an individual or a group need a code of ethical conduct? While it has been said 
that a person should be upright and not be kept  upright, a code of conduct serves a useful 
purpose as a reference and a benchmark. A code makes explicit some of the criteria for 
conduct particular to a profession. In this way, codes of professional ethics are able to 
provide some direct solutions that might not be available from general ethics theories.  
 
Furthermore, an individual is better able to know what the profession expects when a code 
of ethical conduct is in place. From the viewpoint of an organized profession, a code is a 
public declaration of principled conduct and a means of facilitating enforcement of 
Ethics for Fraud Examiners  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.902   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
standards of conduct. Practical enforcement and profession-wide internal discipline would 
be much more difficult if members were not first put on notice of the standards.  
 
An Ethical Decision Maker’s Role 
While one of the main purposes of ethics is to guide the actions of individual decision 
makers, the role of decision maker does not fully describe a professional person’s entire 
obligation. Each person acts not only as an individual but also as a member of a profession 
and as a member of society. Hence, fraud examiners also are spectators  (observing the 
decisions of colleagues), advisors  (counseling with co-workers), instructors  (teaching students or 
new employees on the job), judges (serving on disciplinary committees), and critics  
(commenting on the ethical decisions of others). All of these roles are important in the 
practice of professional ethics.  
 
In considering general ethics, your primary goal is to arrive at a set of acceptable methods 
for making ethical decisions to fulfill all your roles. Consequently, an understanding of some 
of the general principles of ethics can serve as background in understanding the ethical 
decisions faced by CFEs, as well as the ethical guidelines provided in the Certified Fraud 
Examiner Code of Professional Ethics.  
 
Ethical Decisions 
One of the key elements in ethics is reflective choice. Ethical problems almost always involve 
projecting yourself in a future in which you have to live with your decisions. Professional 
ethics decisions usually turn on these questions: “What written and unwritten rules govern 
my behavior?” and “What are the possible consequences of my choices?”  
 
We could dispense with any discussion of ethical theories and rules if we were willing to 
accept a simple proposition: “Let conscience be  your guide.” Such a rule is appealing 
because it calls upon an individual’s own judgment, which might be based on wisdom, 
insight, adherence to custom, or an authoritative code. However, it might also be based on 
caprice, immaturity, ignorance, stubbornness, or misunderstanding. 
 
In a similar manner, reliance on the opinions of others or on the weight of opinion of a 
particular social group is not always enough. Another person or a group of people might 
perpetuate a custom or habit that is wrong. (Think about the signboard that proclaimed: 
“Wrong is wrong, even if everybody is doing it.”) To adhere blindly to custom or group 
habits is to abdicate individual responsibility. Titus and Keeton summarized this point 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.903 
succinctly: “Each person capable of making moral decisions is responsible for making his 
own decisions. The ultimate locus of moral responsibility is in the individual.” Thus, the 
function of ethical principles and rules is not to provide a simple and sure answer to all your 
problems but to provide some guides for individual decisions and actions.  
 
 
Morality, Ethics, and Legality 
Is it all right to lie to catch a crook? Consider the following story about a fraud examinati on.  
 
Abel, a fraud examiner, was hired by Megacorp, Inc. to discover the method stockroom 
employees were using to steal electronic parts from the inventory. Abel was given a cover 
identity known only to the president of Me gacorp. His application was processed through 
the personnel department in the normal manne r, and he was hired as a stockroom clerk. 
On the job, Abel preserved his false identity, infiltrated the gr oup responsible for the thefts, 
and produced sufficient evidence to have  three people arrested and indicted. 
 
While this story involves only one type of fraud (embezzlement) and one investigation 
method (undercover work), it can serve as a simple example of the moral, ethical, and legal 
issues facing fraud examiners. These issues involve principles of moral philosophy, rules of 
ethics, legal considerations, values, and above all, the problem of distinguishing right 
from wrong. One executive, upon taking office, to ld the board of directors that his would be 
an ethical administration, saying: “It is very simple. All it takes is knowing the difference 
between right and wrong.” But knowing that  difference is often the hardest part.  
 
The High Road 
Most public and many private discussions of ethics quickly become philosophical, reaching 
toward lofty principles and broad generalizations about desirable behavior. People easily cite 
well-known guides and believe the ideas in them should never be violated. Such discussions 
often take place in a vacuum, apart from real-world situations. People generally exhort 
themselves and others to observe the highest principles of moral behavior.  
 
Such considerations—the high road —are necessary if we desire to lift the discussion above 
the nitty-gritty facts of everyday problems. However, the idealistic nature of this level of 
discussion is often not sufficient to help people cope with a problem immediately at hand.  
 
Ethics for Fraud Examiners  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.904   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The high road is the realm of moral philosophy where philosophical principles guide the 
process of thinking about problems and distinguishing right from wrong. Such principles are 
necessary in the process of everyday life. Even though an individual might not know them in 
all the twists and turns familiar to philosophers, their fundamental precepts are well 
understood in our concept of common sense.  
 
Philosophy, Ethics, and Law 
Moral philosophy exists at a global level, permeating all facets of the problems of 
distinguishing right from wrong. The field deals with human judgments based on standards 
that identify good  and evil. These words mean more than just right  and wrong, but they convey 
essentially the same idea. There are two aspects of moral philosophy that are important for 
fraud examiners to consider. The first is the human judgment process, which deals with ways 
of performing analyses of (i.e., thinking about) problems. The second is the standards or 
values — such as honesty, faithfulness, and unse lfishness—that people can use to make moral 
principles useful.  
 
Ethics can be distinguished from moral philosophy by its roots in society. People are usually 
more comfortable talking about ethics than moral philosophy because ethics seems practical 
while moral philosophy seems intellectual and impractical. Ethics generally refers to a 
specific setting — a society, culture, nation, profession, or small group. In this context, ethics 
refers to behavior that conforms to some societal norms or to a written code of ethics, such 
as the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics.  
 
When faced with an ethics-related problem, it is appropriate to begin the analysis of a 
possible action by asking: “Is it legal?” Such analys is is at the most practical level. Ethics is 
somewhat less global and is connected to the setting. The law deals very specifically with 
actions that are permitted and actions that are prohibited. With all due respect to the law, it 
is the lowest reference level for moral decisions. It happens, though not frequently, that a 
law might permit an action that is prohibited by a profession’s code of ethics. Going one 
step further, a profession’s code of ethics might permit actions that a moral philosopher 
would abhor. Likewise, laws and codes of eth ics might prohibit actions that present no 
problem in moral philosophy.  
 
For example, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants had rules of ethics that 
prohibited advertising, with the exception of broad-based institutional advertising. The 
profession believed that professional dignity and objectivity were enhanced by keeping 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.905 
practitioners out of this aspect of the commercial world. The U.S. Federal Trade 
Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice, however, reached a different conclusion. 
They decided that the prohibitions against advertising were against the laws barring restraint 
of trade. The government forced the profession to eliminate the rules against advertising. 
This example illustrates the triumph of one set of values (the government’s belief that 
competition through advertising would benefit consumers) over another set (the professions’ 
belief that professional dignity should be preserved).  
 
All three areas—morality, ethics, and legality—are important for everyday decisions. It might 
not be enough to know that a contemplated action is legal or that it is permitted or 
prohibited by a group’s written code of ethics. And, while helpful, it might also not be 
enough to know that reasoning based on moral philosophy seems to identify that action as 
right or wrong. The important things to know are the distinctions between morality, ethics, 
and legality (i.e., between the philosophy, the rules, and the law). Only with this knowledge 
can a fraud examiner know where he stands when deciding upon and justifying a course  
of action.  
 
This material observes one important limitation. It confines its consideration of ethics for 
fraud examiners to matters of moral philosophy, rules of ethics, and general values. It does 
not deal with detailed matters of the law or with questions about the legality or illegality of 
actions a fraud examiner might take. This is not to say that the law is unimportant; it is just 
beyond the scope of this part of the materials.  
 
Means and Ends 
Everyone knows some saying like: “The ends j ustify the means,” or “Fight fire with fire.” 
Fraud examiners can be particularly influenced by this idea because they need to deal with 
people who do not exercise moral reasoning, follow ethical rules, or keep within the law. 
These sayings have the purpose of justifying actions that could otherwise be considered 
immoral, unethical, or illegal. (After all, the American colonists openly defied British law, 
fomented a rebellion, and fought a war. We now regard them as heroes.)  
 
 Is it all right to lie? No, except … 
 
When a moral rule appears to be inflexible, people can always think of situations in which 
they want to justify breaking the rule. For example, some people would easily conclude that 
it is all right to lie to catch a crook. After all, if the moral rules were followed by everyone, 
Ethics for Fraud Examiners  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.906   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
then there would be no crooks; thus, the fraudster’s dishonesty made it necessary for the 
fraud examiner to lie in return. The ends (catching crooks and upholding justice) justify the 
means (lying).  
 
The problem with means-ends analyses is that they are often superficial, ending with the 
needed justification but failing to consider other aspects and consequences of the actions. 
The justification of the undercover role of the fraud examiner must be carefully considered. 
In the previous example, the president of Mega corp must think about the moral, ethical, and 
legal climate of the company once it becomes known that an undercover agent was 
employed. (How many more are around? What happened to trust?)  
 
 
Some Concluding Remarks 
This brief discussion of ethics provides some guide to the ways many people approach 
difficult decision problems. The greatest task is to take general principles of moral 
philosophy and apply them to a real decision. Their application through codes of 
professional ethics is where the challenge lies.  
 
Codes of professional ethics and statutory law have two things in common. They are both 
based, more or less, on pervasive moral principles and values, and they both represent the 
aspects of behavior that a committee or legislature has chosen to put in writing. In both 
professional ethics and law, not every relevant guide for behavior has been written. 
Therefore, professional people, including fraud examiners, might find themselves on their 
own when they have to decide a proper course of conduct in a particular fact situation.  
 
Two types of ethics operate in the professional environment — general ethics (the spirit) 
and professional ethics (the rules). In their book The Philosophy of Auditing, Robert K. Mautz 
and Hussein A. Sharaf contributed the following thoughts to the association of general 
ethics and professional ethics:  
 
The theory of ethics has been a subject of interest to philosophers since the beginnings of 
recorded thought. Because philosophers are concerned with the good of all mankind, their 
discussions have been concerned with that we might call general ethics rather than the ethics 
of small groups such as the members of a given profession. We cannot look, therefore, to 
their philosophical theories for direct solutions to our special problems. Nevertheless, their 
work with general ethics is of primary impo rtance to the developm ent of an appropriate 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.907 
concept in any special field. Ethical behavior in auditing or in any other activity is no more 
than a special application of the general notion  of ethical conduct devised by philosophers for 
people generally. Ethical conduct in auditing draws its justification and basic nature from 
the general theory of ethics. Thus, we are well- advised to give some attention to the ideas 
and reasoning of some of the great philosophers on this subject.  
 
We have attended to the ideas and reasoning of philosophers, and now we turn to the 
Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics and its particular rules. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1001 
ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS 
 
I.  A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, demonstrate a commitment to 
professionalism and diligence in the performance of his or her duties. 
 
II.  A Certified Fraud Examiner shall not engage in any illegal or unethical 
conduct, or any activity which would constitute a conflict of interest. 
 
III. A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, exhibit the highest level of 
integrity in the performance of all professional assignments, and will accept 
only assignments for which there is  reasonable expectation that the 
assignment will be completed with professional competence. 
 
IV.  A Certified Fraud Examiner will comply with lawful orders of the courts, and 
will testify to matters truthfully and without bias or prejudice. 
 
 V.  A Certified Fraud Examiner, in conducting examinations, will obtain evidence 
or other documentation to establish a reasonable basis for any opinion 
rendered. No opinion shall be expressed regarding the guilt or innocence of 
any person or party. 
 
VI.  A Certified Fraud Examiner sha ll not reveal any confidential information 
obtained during a professional engagement without proper authorization. 
 
VII. A Certified Fraud Examiner shall reveal all material matters discovered during 
the course of an examination, which, if omitted, could cause a distortion of the 
facts. 
 
VIII. A Certified Fraud Examiner shall continually strive to increase the 
competence and effectiveness of professional services performed under his or 
her direction. 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1002   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics was created by the Board of 
Regents of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners and adopted January 1, 1989.  
 
 
Commitment to Professionalism and Diligence 
  
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, demonstrate commitment to  
professionalism and diligence in the performance of his or her duties. 
 
Professionalism 
Professionalism is a quality desired by most people, but it is obtained at a price. 
Professionalism exists on two basic levels: (1) for the professional group as a whole and (2) 
for the individual Certified Fraud Examiner. Consider first the professional group as  
a whole.  
 
People frequently refer to professions, professional men and women, and professional 
activities without defining the meaning of the concept “professionalism.” Some fraud 
examiners say: “I might not know how to define it, but I know it when I see it.” The U.S. 
Supreme Court once said the same thing about pornography. The five principal 
characteristics that help differentiate professional fields of endeavor from other  
vocations are:  
• A body of specialized knowledge acquired by formal education. 
• Admission to the profession governed by standards of professional qualifications. 
• Recognition and acceptance by society of professional status, and concurrent recognition 
and acceptance of social responsibility by the professional. 
• Standards of conduct governing relationships of the professional with clients, colleagues, 
and the public. 
• A national organization devoted to the advancement of the obligations of the 
professional group. 
 
Specialized Knowledge and Formal Education  
A fraud examiner’s work involves specialized knowledge derived from several other fields, 
such as accounting, auditing, criminology, investigation, and law. A profession might not 
have a body of knowledge truly unique unto itself, but it should have one that has a 
“mystique,” requiring study, comprehension,  and practice, and be over and above the 
everyday abilities other people might possess.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1003 
Continuing professional education is becoming a hallmark of professionalism. In recent 
years, ongoing efforts to increase competence and effectiveness have become required by 
some professions. The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has led the way 
with the requirements for 120 hours of extra training every three years to maintain and 
increase professional competence. A majority of the state boards of accountancy now 
require continuing education as a prerequisite for renewing CPAs’ licenses. The Association 
of Certified Fraud Examiners requires 20 hours of continuing professional education every 
12-month period, half of which must be directly related to fraud detection or deterrence.  
 
Professional Admission Standards  
The most highly esteemed professions, and some occupations that are merely regulated, 
govern admission to their ranks by qualifications contained in state law. If legal recognition 
is considered a requisite of a profession, then the number of “professions” is quite large, 
ranging from doctors of medicine to barbers. Some professions (such as Certified Internal 
Auditor or Certified Fraud Examiner) are not regulated by state or federal statutes. Many 
groups have the status of “profession” without the benefit of licensing laws, and the fraud 
examiner profession is one of these.  
 
Certification examinations are offered in many professions, such as law, medicine, real  
estate, insurance, finance, accounting management, public accounting, and internal auditing. 
The Uniform CFE Examination and certification is part of professional recognition for 
fraud examiners.  
 
Experience is required for many, but not all, professional licenses and certifications. 
Experience of one or two years is required in most states for the CPA certificate. Experience 
is required to obtain the Certified Internal Auditor designation. Designation as a Certified 
Fraud Examiner requires at least two years of experience in combination with other 
qualifications. 
 
Social Recognition: A Reciprocal Relationship  
No group of practitioners can become a “profession” merely by declaring itself to be one. 
Society must acknowledge the group as a professional body. At present, fraud examiners are 
at the stage of becoming a self-declared profession. Historically, other professions had the 
same starting point. Modern medicine overcame  its roots in magic. Accountants rose from 
the level of bookkeepers. Internal auditors advanced social goals by presenting a responsible 
front to Congress and other public bodies. The list goes on.  
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1004   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Social recognition, however, is not necessarily permanent. Society will not continue to  
honor as professional any group that fails to serve a broad-based social and public interest. 
Thus the other side to the coin of recognition is: Certified Fraud Examiners must 
reciprocate and accept the social responsibility inherent in a professional status that serves 
the public interest.  
 
Standards of Conduct 
One way to achieve the social recognition that goes with professionalism is to adhere to the 
Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics. Other professions have such codes. 
They are the written versions of moral philosophy and values especially relevant to the 
group. Fraud examiners and other professionals must observe their codes with an awareness 
of the society around them. Care must be taken that rules are not created and followed in a 
self-serving manner, inimical to behavior expected by the public.  
 
Possessing and following a set of behavior rules is one thing, possessing and following a set 
that meets public expectations is another. Other professions (law, architecture, and 
accounting, to name three) have found themselves under attack from the U.S. Federal Trade 
Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice when their rules were perceived to have 
introduced unwarranted restraints of trade. While the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of 
Professional Ethics might not seem to contain such rules, they might come under attack in 
some future, different setting. Certified Fraud Examiners must be prepared to experience 
change, when appropriate change is necessary.  
 
Individual Fraud Examiners 
When the focus of professionalism is turned to the individual Certified Fraud Examiner, its 
features for the group as a whole should not be forgotten. The individual member is 
presumed to possess a body of knowledge on his admission to the group and attainment of 
the Certified Fraud Examiner certificate. The individual is expected to adhere to the code of 
ethics and maintain membership in the national organization. Along with these features, the 
individual Certified Fraud Examiner exhibits professionalism by continually striving to 
honor the recognition granted by the public. In day-to-day life, this is accomplished by 
exercising diligence in performing Certified Fraud Examiner work.  
 
Diligence 
The “diligence in performing his or her duties” phrase in the rule refers to several activities 
that collectively define high-quality fraud examination work. They include planning 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1005 
assignments and supervising assistants and colleagues, avoiding conflicts of interest, 
performing with competence, obtaining sufficient evidence to establish a basis for opinions, 
maintaining confidential relations, and avoiding distortion of facts. These activities are the 
subjects of other rules in the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics, and 
they will be discussed in more detail later.  
 
 
Legal and Ethical Conduct and Conflict of Interest 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall not engage in any illegal or unethical conduct, or any 
activity which would constitute a conflict of interest. 
 
This rule is a composite of three prohibitions: illegal conduct, unethical conduct, and conflict 
of interest.  
 
Illegal Conduct 
The prohibition of illegal conduct seems straightforward. Some activities might be obviously 
illegal, but the legal status of others might not be so clear. A fraud examiner is always well 
advised to consult an attorney when questionable situations arise. At the same time, 
however, it might be difficult to know ahead of time whether such a consultation is 
necessary. Consider the following legal-related problems (but remember that this chapter on 
ethics is not intended to be your primary guide to legal matters).  
 
Libel and Slander 
Libel and slander can cause personal injury and subject a fraud examiner to a lawsuit for 
damages. Libel is a written defamation of so meone else’s character. Slander is a spoken 
defamation. The content of a libelous or slanderous message must: 
• Contain words that injure another person’s character or reputation or hold him up  
to ridicule. 
• Be communicated orally or in writing to other people. 
• Cause an actual damage to the person who is the subject of the communication. 
 
The risks involved in libel and slander are reasons for having the rule in the Certified Fraud 
Examiner code that prohibits expression of opinions on the guilt or innocence of people. 
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1006   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
False Imprisonment 
False imprisonment can mean more than putting a person behind bars. Courts have found 
many means of detainment to be false imprisonment, including locking an employee in a 
store, removing a distributor from a car, and detaining a witness by force. Even though 
drastic action might be essential, a fraud examiner must accomplish his task legally.  
 
Compounding a Felony 
The criminal act of compounding a felony can result from participating in a trade for 
restitution for agreeing to forgo prosecution. While plea bargains might be acceptable under 
the supervision of a court, Certified Fraud Examiners should be very careful and should 
obtain legal advice when negotiating private deals. 
 
Some rules for professionals insert the word “knowingly” in relation to illegal activities, 
saying: “One should not knowingly  be a party to an illegal activity.” The Certified Fraud 
Examiner Code does not include this way out. Certified Fraud Examiners are generally not 
entitled to claim ignorance of the law. They are expected to know a considerable amount 
of law in connection with investigations, and they are expected to know when to consult  
a lawyer.  
 
Unethical Conduct 
The prohibition of unethical conduct is complicated. These materials have presented an 
array of issues in moral philosophy and ethical thinking — intertwining considerations of 
principles and values. This latter part is set forth in the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of 
Professional Ethics. Legitimate questions ar e: “What manner of unethical conduct is 
meant by this rule? Does it refer to general matters of moral philosophy and ethics, or is its 
applicability limited only to the rules in this code?”  
 
A narrow focus on fraud examiners’ professionalism would center attention only on the 
rules in the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics. A broader social-responsibility 
focus would go beyond the code to the interaction of the fraud examiner 
with other people affected by his choices. The broader focus is more consistent with the 
concept of professionalism because the code itself is a limited set of rules. A fraud 
examiner must take personal responsibility for decisions, and be aware that other 
professionals are often criticized for adhering too rigidly to their codes. Lawyers face harsh 
criticisms when they seem to hide knowledge of criminal acts in their privileged 
communications. Doctors are often criticized for the things they tell their patients about 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1007 
terminal illnesses. Professions are criticized for having specialized rules that seem to permit 
their members to act contrary to social expectations.  
 
Conflict of Interest and “Independence” Considerations  
The term conflict of interest in the rule begs for definition. Try to enumerate the parties 
whose “interests” might conflict: The Certified Fraud Examiner, the Certified Fraud 
Examiner’s clients (for example, Client A may conflict with Client B or with Client C), the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s employer, the public (“innocent bystanders”), and law 
enforcement agencies are the first to come to mind. These parties are involved in almost 
every investigation. The lines that connect these with each other and with the fraud 
examiner could look like a spaghetti bowl of multiple relationships. Deciding  
whether a conflict or a community of interests exists depends on the facts of each 
particular situation.  
 
Nevertheless, some conflicts to avoid are clear enough. A Certified Fraud Examiner 
employed full-time by a company should not engage in other jobs that create a hardship or 
loss to the employer. A fraud examiner should not be a “double agent” employed by one 
company, but retained by another company or person to infiltrate the employer and 
transmit inside information (unless, of course, the employing company agrees to the 
arrangement in order to apprehend other parties employed by the company). A Certified 
Fraud Examiner should not accept engagements from both sides to a controversy—just 
like lawyers are prohibited from representing both parties in a transaction, lawsuit, or trial.  
 
“Conflict of interest” and “independence” are related. The American Institute of Certified 
Public Accountants (AICPA) includes independence (and avoidance of conflict of interest) 
in its Code of Professional Conduct. Some particulars from the AICPA may be relevant, in 
part, for the Certified Fraud Examiner. Consider the following from the AICPA Code of 
Professional Conduct:  
 
Independence will be considered to be im paired for audit engagements if an AICPA 
member had any of the following transa ctions, interests, or relationships: 
? Any direct or material indirect financ ial interest in the enterprise under audit 
? Any joint, closely held business investment with the enterprise under audit or with any 
officer, director, or principal stockholder thereof that was material in relation to the 
member’s net worth to the net worth of the member’s firm 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1008   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
? Any loan to or from the enterprise under audit or any officer, director, or principal 
stockholder of the enterprise  (except immaterial loans, home mortgages, and loans 
secured by property) 
? Any managerial-type connection with the enterprise under audit, such as a promoter, 
underwriter, or voting trustee, director or officer, or in any capacity equivalent to that of 
a member of management or of an employee. 
 
These rules for auditors exist specifically to convey to the public a perception of 
independence. Independence and conflict avoidance are enhanced by refraining from having 
financial and managerial interests in clients or in joint co-operation with clients’ managers 
and directors. After all, they might be a suspect in an investigation. When a Certified Fraud 
Examiner works as an employee of a company, the prohibitions about employment are not 
relevant because the employer-employee relationship is known to the employer, who is the 
client and recipient of any reports. In such cases, independence and conflict should be 
considered in relation to all the other parties involved. Certainly, a mental condition of 
objectivity and honesty then governs the relation between the Certified Fraud Examiner and 
his employer. If the CFE does have a perceived conflict, it can usually be avoided through 
adequate disclosure. 
 
 
Integrity and Competence 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, exhibit the highest level of integrity in the 
performa nce of all professional assignments, and will accept only assignments for which there 
is reasonable expectation that the assignment will be completed with professional 
competence. 
 
This rule contains two parts. The first deals with integrity and the second with competence. 
Competence here is related to diligence, as discussed previously in relation to the first rule in 
the Certified Fraud Examiner Code.  
 
Integrity 
If you were asked to name a desirable personal characteristic, integrity is one that would 
rank high on the scale, along with honesty, truthfulness, trustworthiness, and loyalty. 
Outside observers of Certified Fraud Examiners’ activity will look for signs of integrity as a 
signal that trust is warranted. However, integrity hardly exists apart from other 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1009 
characteristics well-known in moral philosophy and recognized in the Certified Fraud 
Examiner Code of Professional Ethics.  
 
Integrity requires honesty, truthfulness, trustworthiness, and confidentiality. It requires 
subordination of desires for personal gain to the interests of clients, employers, and the 
public. It requires independence of mental attitude and avoidance of conflicts of interest. 
Integrity is all these things wrapped up into one word.  
 
In addition, integrity means that a Certified Fraud Examiner ought to have a well- 
developed sense of moral philosophy—an ability to analyze situations where no rules of 
the Certified Fraud Examiner Code are specifically applicable and to be able to distinguish 
right from wrong. It does not mean, however, that a Certified Fraud Examiner must be 
perfect in all technical matters, nor does it mean that Certified Fraud Examiners and 
others cannot have honest differences of opinion. In the course of a fraud examination, 
inadvertent errors, mistakes of judgment, and other problems might cause conflict. In such 
cases, a Certified Fraud Examiner can preserve integrity either by admitting error or by 
convincingly justifying a difference of perception or opinion.  
 
Professional Competence 
Professional competence refers to how well Certified Fraud Examiners do their job. 
Determination of competence always depends on the specific facts and circumstances of the 
assignment. Competence is best understood in the context of the prudent practitioner. The idea 
of a prudent professional practitioner is present in other social science theories, for example, 
the “economic man” of economic theory and the “reasonable man” of law. This concept can 
be summarized for fraud examiners as follows:  
 
A prudent practitioner is assumed to have a knowledge of the philosophy and practice of 
fraud examinations, to have the degree of tr aining, experience, and skill common to the 
average fraud examiner, to have the ability to recognize indications of frauds, and to keep 
abreast of developments in the perpetration and detection of fraud. Competence requires the 
CFE to be acquainted with the company, activity, function, or program under 
investigation; to review the methods of control in operation; to obtain  sufficient evidence 
pertinent to the suspected fraud or illegal acti vity; to be responsive to unusual events and 
unfamiliar circumstances; to persist until any reasonable doubts about the evidence have 
been eliminated; and to exercise caution in instructing assistants and reviewing their work. 
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1010   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Professional competence also demands attention to three kinds of interference that can 
damage the independence and quality of a Certified Fraud Examiner’s work. Fraud 
examiners who permit these conditions to interfere with the assignment demonstrate less 
than the desired level of professional competence. The three types of interference are 
programming, investigation, and reporting.  
 
Programming  
Fraud examiners must remain free from interference by managers who try to restrict, specify, 
or modify the procedures they need to perform, including any attempts to assign personnel 
or otherwise to control the examination work. Occasionally, client or employer managers try 
to limit access to information or to other personnel or to limit the amount of time available 
for the assignment.  
 
Investigation  
When appropriate, Certified Fraud Examiners must have free access to books, records, 
correspondence, and other evidence. They must have the cooperation of managers or other 
employees without any attempt to interpret or screen evidence.  
 
Reporting  
Client or employer managers should not be allowed to overrule the Certified Fraud 
Examiner’s judgments on the appropriate content of a report. Integrity is destroyed and 
judgment is subordinated when the Certified Fraud Examiner is compelled to alter a report 
or to omit important information or to misstate facts. Certified Fraud Examiners must not 
let any feelings of misguided loyalty to the client, employer, or other sources of conflicts of 
interest interfere with their obligation to report fully and fairly.  
 
Professional Skepticism  
Fraud examiners must always perform their work with an attitude of skepticism, and begin 
with the belief that something is wrong or someone is committing a fraud (depending, of 
course, on the nature of the assignment and the preliminary information available). This 
attitude may make fraud examinations extensive and expensive. Relaxation of this initial 
attitude of skepticism occurs only when the evidence shows no signs of fraudulent activity. 
At no time is a Certified Fraud Examiner entitled to “assume” a fraud problem does not 
exist. Professional skepticism can be dispelled only by evidence. As a result, opinions or 
attestations about a fraud-free environment are absolutely prohibited for Certified  
Fraud Examiners. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1011 
Court Orders and Testimony 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner will comply with lawful orders of the courts, and will testify 
to matters truthfully and wi thout bias or prejudice. 
 
The essence of this rule is truth-telling. The part about complying with lawful orders of the 
courts is a direction not to flee from a summons or subpoena issued by a court. Even 
though the rule specifies “courts,” it is reasonable to extend it to other agencies that have 
the legal power to issue such orders (such as Congressional committees, grand juries, 
special prosecutors, and quasi-judicial administrative agencies). Sometimes, legal counsel 
might devise stratagems to avoid immediate service of (or attention to) a summons. Fraud 
examiners can listen to such legal advice, but they also must weigh it against their own 
knowledge of proper and legal behavior. In some cases, a second legal opinion might be 
advisable. The fraud examiner could be on shaky grounds with a defense of “my lawyer 
told me to hide” when accused of obstruction of justice. (The lawyer might be in the cell 
next door.)  
 
Truthful testimony often presents strategic problems. A fraud examiner, even one who is an 
attorney, should always be represented by counsel in a courtroom, deposition, or other 
testimony setting. The lawyer’s own saying is : “An attorney who represents himself has a 
fool for a client.” Counsel is invaluable for protecting a fraud examiner witness from 
improper questioning.  
 
When testimony is sought in examination or cross-examination, a Certified Fraud Examiner 
should always respond to the questions that are asked—no more and no less. The attorney 
conducting the examination has the responsibility to ask the right questions, and the fraud 
examiner’s counsel has the responsibility to object to misleading, improper, or irrelevant 
questions. The fraud examiner’s counsel also has the obligation to correct any problems with 
the cross-examination. A “helpful” fraud exam iner who tries to embellish the answers with 
additional material might offend the court or do unintentional harm to the case being made 
for one party or the other. Of course, a fraud examiner may invoke his own Constitutional 
rights, upon the advice of counsel.  
 
Answers should always be delivered without bias or prejudice. It is the lawyer’s job to be 
biased and prejudiced—in the context of the ad versary judicial system—establishing the case 
for his own client or for the government. The greatest danger for delivering biased or 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1012   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
prejudicial testimony exists when the broad question is: “Tell the court about your findings 
in your fraud examination.” This is an open- ended invitation to spill the beans. If counsel 
does not object, the Certified Fraud Examiner is in the spotlight. However, responding to 
such an invitation amounts to delivering a report, and the next rule in the Certified Fraud 
Examiner Code of Professional Ethics can be used as a guide.  
 
 
Reasonable Evidential Basis for Opinions   
 
A fraud examiner, in conducting examinations, will obtain evidence or other 
documentation to establish a reasonable basis for any opinion render ed. No opinion shall 
be expressed regarding the guilt or innocence of any person or party.  
 
Evidential Basis for Opinions 
The accounting profession has similar rules, some of which are in its codes of ethics, some 
in its technical practice standards. Here is a sample of its provisions:  
 
Sufficient competent evidential matter is to be obtained through in spection, observation, 
inquiries and confirmations to afford a reasonable basis for an opinion regarding the 
financial statements under examination. [AICPA Generally Accepted Auditing 
Standards] 
 
Internal auditors should collect, analyze, inte rpret, and document information to support 
audit results. [The Institute of Internal Auditors, Inc., Standards for the 
Practice of Internal Auditing]  
 
A member shall obtain sufficient relevant data to afford a re asonable basis for conclusions 
or recommendations in relation to any professional services performed. [AICPA Code of 
Professional Conduct] 
 
A practitioner should obtain sufficient relevant data to afford a reasonable basis for 
conclusions or recommendations. [AICPA Management Advisory Services 
Standards]  
 
Sufficient evidence shall be obta ined to provide a reasonable ba sis for the conclusion that is 
expressed in the report. [AICPA Attestation Standards] 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1013 
Sufficient competent evidence should be obta ined to provide a reasonable basis for the 
examination report. [AICPA Standards for Examinations of Prospective 
Financial Information]  
 
Clearly, the accounting profession considers “sufficient relevant data (evidence)” a 
compelling standard of practice, if not a matter of professional ethics. Evidence can be 
defined as all the information that influences a decision maker in reaching decisions that can 
take the form of a report, a set of recommendations, or similar products.  
 
Evidence might be quantitative or qualitative; it may be objective or it may have subjective 
qualities; it may be absolutely compelling to a decision or it may be only mildly persuasive. 
The Certified Fraud Examiner’s task is to  collect and evaluate a sufficient amount of 
relevant evidence to afford a reasonable and logical basis for decisions.  
 
Auditors sometimes say they gather evidence to show that financial statements are 
presented properly or that control procedures are operating effectively. They are following 
a time-tested method of investigation that consists of three parts:  
• Recognize the problem or issue subject to investigation. 
• Gather sufficient relevant evidence about it. 
• Analyze the evidence and reach a conclusion about the problem or issue. 
 
Most auditors’ propositions are expressed positively, such as: “The cash balance is 
accurately stated.” However, an auditor will actu ally seek evidence to show that the cash 
balance is not  properly stated. Imagine a cash balance that is the sum of 110 separate bank 
accounts. An audit team will probably sample these accounts instead of looking at all of 
them. The auditors look for evidence that some of these cash balances are misstated. If 
they fail to find any misstatements in a sufficiently large sample, they have not proved that 
the total is proper, but they have no reason to believe that it is materially misstated. 
 
A literal report on this kind of work would be called “negative assurance,” in which an auditor 
would say: “Nothing came to my attention to make me believe the cash balance is materially 
misstated.” This statement of negative assurance is an accurate report of the audit process. As 
long as the “attention” consists of sufficient re levant evidence, the report is useful. Auditors 
might not know without any doubt that the balance is proper, but they are entitled to act as 
though it is because they have analyzed sufficient relevant evidence.  
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1014   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Some fraud examinations can take on this same character. Certified Fraud Examiners will be 
assigned to seek the truth about some business records or to try to determine whether some 
control procedures have failed. The Certified Fraud Examiner will seek evidence of 
misstatement or failure, and, if none is found, will report the positive results.  
 
In other cases, a client or employer might already know that fraud, thefts, shortages, control 
failures, or other such events have occurred. The Certified Fraud Examiner’s assignment is 
to then determine how the improper activity is being carried out, by whom, and to what 
extent. This kind of fraud investigation demands sufficient evidence, examples, and suitable 
documentation to prove the how/whom/extent findings. In these cases, the “negative 
assurance” type of conclusion is not appropria te. Certified Fraud Examiners must obtain the 
evidence to show the actual how/whom/extent conclusions.  
 
Guilt and Innocence 
The rule that prohibits opinions regarding the guilt or innocence of any person or party is a 
rule of prudence. The AICPA had a rule that prohibited CPAs from attesting that a 
company’s financial forecast would be achieved. Most CPAs’ reaction to the rule was: “Why 
would anyone want to do something so dumb?” The general answer was that without the 
explicit rule, someone might give an achievability attestation, the actual events would fall 
short, and the CPA (and all other CPAs) would suffer criticism. The rule was a rule of 
prudence. Clearly, it is prudent for a Certified Fraud Examiner to refrain from usurping the 
role of jury. In a courtroom, no good attorney would ask a Certified Fraud Examiner for 
such a conclusion, and no alert judge would allow such testimony.  
 
In most situations, the fraud examiner’s job is to present the evidence in his report. Such 
evidence might constitute a convincing case pointing to the guilt or innocence of a person. 
But a clear line should be drawn between a report that essentially says, “Here is the evidence 
and the reasonable conclusions that can be drawn from it,” and one that steps over the line 
and says, “This person is guilty of the crime of fraud.” 
 
Whether or not a person is guilty (or innocent) of a crime is not a decision for the fraud 
examiner to make. The fraud examiner may draw reasonable conclusions based on the 
evidence. One of those conclusions may be that the suspected individual stole money, 
misrepresented a transaction, or concealed funds. There is no prohibition in the Code of 
Professional Ethics on expressing such a conclusion provided it has a reasonable basis in 
fact. The prohibition involves the next step, “The suspect took the money without 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1015 
permission and is therefore guilty of the crime of theft.” The individual may have taken the 
money without permission, but whether or not the individual is guilty of a crime is a 
determination for the judicial system, not the fraud examiner. 
 
 
Confidential Information 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall not reveal any confidential information obtained during 
a professional engagement without proper authorization. 
 
Confidential information rules in professional codes of ethics have the potential to create 
enormous conflicts — conflicts of principles and conflicts of values. Consider this possible 
exchange between a lawyer and client:  
 
 Client: 
Because you have taken my case on this fraud charge, I think you should know more about 
my background. 
 
 Lawyer: 
Go ahead. 
 
 Client: 
Three years ago, I participated  in an armed robbery and was never caught. My gun went off 
and killed the storekeeper. One of my buddies was accused and convicted. He’s had all his 
appeals and is scheduled to be executed tomorrow. What can you do? 
 
 Lawyer: 
Nothing. 
 
“Nothing” may be oversimplifying the situation, but the point is that lawyers have a keen 
awareness of the privileged information rights of their clients. Most lawyers will stoutly 
defend their duty not to endanger this client, even at the cost of a life. Most laymen are 
shocked at this particular. One commentator responded to a lawyer defending the position 
with a sharp retort: “Do you mean you will sa crifice an innocent man to a rule?” This 
incredulity is well aimed. It brings into sharp focus two conflicting values: the benefits of a 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1016   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
long-standing rule of legal practice and the sanctity of life itself. Not all situations are this 
dramatic, but Certified Fraud Examiners can nevertheless get into similar conflicts.  
 
Confidential information, for all practical purposes, is any and all information a Certified Fraud 
Examiner might obtain in the course of work, whether it be from the company or client for 
whom an investigation is performed or from any other source consulted during the work. 
The rules of confidential and privileged information are based on the belief that they 
facilitate a free flow of information between parties to the relationship. The nature of a fraud 
examination might make it necessary for Certified Fraud Examiners to have access to 
sensitive information. Clients and employers would be less likely to reveal such information 
or to provide access to sources if they could not trust a Certified Fraud Examiner to keep  
it confidential.  
 
Privileged information  is information that cannot be demanded, even by a court. Common law 
privilege exists for husband-wife and attorney-client relationships, and physician-patient and 
priest-penitent relationships have obtained the privilege through state statutes. The attorney-client 
privilege is statutory in some jurisdictions. Certified Fraud Examiners do not have any 
such privilege in common law or by statute. In all the recognized privilege relationships, the 
professional person is obligated to observe the privilege; it can be waived only by the client, 
patient, or penitent. (These people are said to be the holders of the privilege.) Likewise, a 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s client or employer is the holder of the confidence. (The Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  contains additional information on this subject.) 
 
The Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics does not assume a privileged 
status for the fraud examiner client/employer relationship. However, the examiner’s client or 
employer holds the key known as “proper authorization” in the rule. If the client or 
employer consents to disclosure of information otherwise considered confidential, then the 
Certified Fraud Examiner can transmit it to others. Sometimes consent is given when the 
consenter does not know exactly what information will be conveyed. Even with consent, 
therefore, a Certified Fraud Examiner should be careful to let the client/employer know 
what the consent covers. The best rule of prudence is to let the client/employer make the 
actual disclosure by transmitting the Certified Fraud Examiner’s report, working papers, or 
other documentation. Then the client not only knows what is being disclosed but is the one 
making the disclosure.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1017 
Confidential information relationships do not die with the severance of the Certified Fraud 
Examiner-client or Certified Fraud Examiner-employer relationship. The confidentiality rule 
does not permit disclosure after the assignment is finished, or there is no clause permitting 
disclosure after a Certified Fraud Examiner is fired, resigns, or retires from an employing 
organization. Examiners who write “kiss and te ll” memoirs about the inner secrets of an 
organization violate the confidentiality rule in the most blatant manner.  
 
Proper Authorization 
As just mentioned, one form of “proper author ization” is the consent given by a Certified 
Fraud Examiner’s client or employer. Additional forms of authorization are possible. Other 
professions have exceptions that void the confidentiality or privilege rules. Lawyers can 
reveal client confidences if doing so is necessary to prevent a future crime. CPAs are  
not bound by confidentiality when responding to a court subpoena or summons,  
when participating in quality control reviews, or when initiating complaints to their 
disciplinary bodies.  
 
Likewise, Certified Fraud Examiners are not bound by confidentiality when doing so would 
make them parties to a violation of the law. Care must be taken about remaining silent when 
silence could be construed as obstructing justice or engaging in a conspiracy. The advice of 
an attorney should be sought in such cases.  
 
Questions may arise over information received from someone being investigated. Suppose 
an employee being questioned tells the Certified Fraud Examiner something “in confidence” 
concerning his role in a theft. Fraud examiners must remember that the confidentiality 
relationship runs first to the client or employer, and that this promise of confidentiality is 
understood to exist without being spoken. In the case of the employee-informant, the fraud 
examiner does not have an understood or unspoken promise of confidentiality and is not 
bound by the rule with respect to the informant. If the fraud examiner promises the 
employee-informant “confidentiality,” the promise will probably turn out to be a lie, because 
the examiner has also promised the client/employer a report on all the relevant evidence. A 
Certified Fraud Examiner should not promise confidentiality or leniency to an informant for 
the purpose of extracting testimony. A Certified Fraud Examiner’s reputation and 
effectiveness depends upon the integrity of the Certified Fraud Examiner’s word.  
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1018   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Relation to Conflict of Interest 
Another aspect of the confidentiality rule concerns the possibility that a fraud examiner 
might use information that is part of a conflict of interest with the client/employer. The 
Institute of Internal Auditors’ Code of Ethics c ontains language that makes this relation very 
clear: “Members and Certified Internal Auditors shall be prudent in the use of information 
acquired in the course of their duties. They shall not use confidential information for any 
personal gain nor in any manner which would be contrary to law or detrimental to the 
welfare of their organization.” Clearly, using information for personal gain or using 
information to the detriment of the client/employer is a close kin to lying and stealing. The 
lie comes from the Certified Fraud Examiner’s breaking a pledge to maintain confidentiality, 
and the stealing comes from harming the client or employer.  
 
When a Certified Fraud Examiner faces the potential for personal gain from confidential 
client information, a conflict of interest exists—the Certified Fraud Examiner’s desire for 
wealth vs. the client/employer’s desire for and trust in confidential services. One of the 
worst kinds of ethical breaches would be to break the promise of confidentiality for personal 
gain. It is mere greed at work.  
 
Public Information 
It is tempting to consider confidential information to be “nonpublic information” instead of 
“all information” on the grounds that public information is available to everyone anyway. 
Such an interpretation is not appropriate. Public information might be hard to find and/or 
expensive to obtain and analyze. After all, the client or company paid the Certified Fraud 
Examiner a fee or salary to find and use public information, and a Certified Fraud 
Examiner’s disclosure of it would give others a “free ride.” When information is public, let 
others find it for themselves.  
 
Some might argue that no confidence is abused if a Certified Fraud Examiner points others 
to public information that is published and widely distributed, such as financial statements in 
annual reports or stories in national newspapers such as the Wall Street Journal. The next step 
is to consider public information that is not published, such as real estate deed restrictions, 
liens on property, and credit records. Defending a breach of confidence on the grounds “It 
was public anyway” is a weak excuse. Mere revelation of the source of information imparts 
signals of importance that are not public and that may guide others to information a client or 
employer believes is confidential.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1019 
Blowing the Whistle 
Difficult problems arise over Certified Fraud Examiners’ obligations to “blow the whistle” 
about clients’ or employers’ shady or illegal practices. The problem exists at two levels. The 
first is the managerial level, where the Certified Fraud Examiner might be employed or 
engaged by high-level managers who turn out to be involved in fraudulent practices. A 
Certified Fraud Examiner should always arrange to have a pipeline to levels of management 
above the operations under investigation. Thus, for example, evidence of managerial-level 
complicity can be reported to the board of directors and its audit committee without 
trampling on the confidentiality rule.  
 
The other level — involvement by the directors  or the highest level of management or 
ownership—presents the hard problems. In such cases, the only higher levels exist outside 
the organization, such as the police or similar agencies, the U.S. Department of Justice, 
Department of Defense contract officers, and the like. These and other agencies are 
concerned with law or contract violations. A board of directors may withhold evidence of 
criminal acts, price fixing, or contract overcharges from them.  
 
In general, examiners are not legally obligated to blow the whistle on clients or employers. 
However, circumstances might exist where they are morally and legally justified in making 
disclosures to appropriate outside parties. Such circumstances include those in which a client 
or employer has intentionally involved a Certified Fraud Examiner in its illegal or unethical 
conduct, or when a client or employer has distributed misleading reports based on the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s work. The confidentiality rule should not be viewed as a license 
or excuse for inaction where action may be appropriate to right a wrongful act committed or 
about to be committed by a client or employer. A Certified Fraud Examiner is under no 
obligation to go to jail with wrongdoers. When in doubt, consult legal counsel. 
 
 
Complete Reporting of Material Matters 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall reveal all ma terial matters discovered during the course 
of an examination which, if omitted, could cause a distortion of the facts. 
 
In its simplicity, this rule demands full and fair reporting of the findings made in 
investigations. The two words — material and distortion — are key concepts.  
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1020   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Evidence and conclusions are material if knowledge of them would affect clients’ decisions 
based on a Certified Fraud Examiner’s report. Materiality  is a user-oriented concept. If 
matters omitted from a report were known to the users, and their own perceptions and 
conclusions would be different in light of this knowledge, the omitted information is 
material. Certified Fraud Examiners are placed in the difficult position of determining not 
what they themselves consider important and material, but rather what they think users will 
consider important and material. They need to project a decision-making process onto the 
users instead of simply being introspective.  
 
Therefore, it is very important for Certified Fraud Examiners to learn directly from clients 
and employers the type of information they consider important. Nothing is gained by playing 
a guessing game. A Certified Fraud Examiner should obtain as good an understanding as 
possible of the users’ interests, the information desired, the level of detail needed, and other 
aspects of the users’ needs.  
 
The “distortion of facts” in the rule is cited in reference to omissions. Distortion is clearly 
related to the concept of materiality and users’ decisions. It could likewise refer to the 
matters included in a report. A subtle stretching of the facts to make them look as if they 
support a preconceived conclusion would be a distortion that could cause users to undertake 
inappropriate actions. Sometimes the evidence to support a definitive conclusion or 
recommendation is simply not obtainable—the evidence is missing or depends upon future 
events, for example. The Certified Fraud Examiner’s obligation is to avoid rushing to 
judgment. When matters are not clear, the Certified Fraud Examiner’s report should stress 
the tentative nature of the evidence and withhold judgment. To jump to conclusions could 
be considered a distortion of facts.  
 
 
Professional Improvement 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall continually strive to increase the competence and 
effectiveness of professional services pe rformed under his or her direction. 
 
This rule contains both good advice and a specific directive for behavior. It is an admonition 
to progress toward greater expertise and thus better serve clients and employers.  
The state of the “fraud arts” changes continually. Years ago, investigators needed to learn 
how to cope with computer fraud. Today, Certified Fraud Examiners are faced with a 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1021 
growing array of ways and means for perpetrating frauds. While many of these might not be 
new, or might be variations on old themes, it is still a challenge for Certified Fraud 
Examiners to know about all of them. A continuing learning process is necessary for 
Certified Fraud Examiners to increase their competence and effectiveness in conducting 
fraud examinations.  
 
People who become Certified Fraud Examiners agree to complete 20 hours of continuing 
professional education each year. Course content is not specified in detail, but the 
requirement is that at least ten hours will be spent on technical subjects that contribute 
directly to fraud examination expertise. Certified Fraud Examiners who also are CPAs, CIAs, 
or who hold other professional designations can double-count continuing education hours 
obtained in connection with the other certifications, as long as they meet the criteria for 
fraud examination continuing education. Further details about policies and procedures are 
available from the Association.  
 
Professional ethics for Certified Fraud Examiners is not simply a matter covered by a few 
rules in a formal Code of Professional Ethics. Concepts of proper professional conduct 
permeate all areas of practice. Ethics are the foundation of Certified Fraud Examiners’ self-regulatory 
efforts.  
 
 The principled approach to thoughtful decisions is important in fraud examination work in 
all settings, such as private practice, industrial, government and foreign employment, and 
other working arrangements. The ethics rules might appear to be restrictive, but they are  
for the benefit of the public as well as for the discipline, use, and protection of Certified 
Fraud Examiners. 
 
 
Professional Standards and Practices 
 
General Standards 
Independence and Objectivity 
Certified Fraud Examiners are responsible for maintaining independence in attitude and 
appearance, approaching and conducting fraud examinations in an objective and unbiased 
manner, and ensuring that examining organizations they direct are free from impairments  
to independence. 
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1022   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Qualifications 
Certified Fraud Examiners must possess the skills, knowledge, abilities, and appearance 
needed to perform examinations proficiently and effectively. Certified Fraud Examiners who 
are responsible for directing fraud examinations must ensure they are performed by 
personnel who collectively possess the skills and knowledge necessary to complete 
examinations in accordance with these Standards. Certified Fraud Examiners must maintain 
their qualifications by fulfilling continuing education requirements and adhering to the Code 
of Ethics of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. 
 
Fraud Examinations 
Certified Fraud Examiners must conduct fraud examinations using due professional care, 
with adequate planning and supervision to provide assurance that the objectives are achieved 
within the framework of these standards. Evidence is to be obtained in an efficient, 
thorough, and legal manner. Reports of the results of fraud examinations must be accurate, 
objective, and thorough. 
 
Confidentiality 
Certified Fraud Examiners are responsible for ensuring that they, and examining 
organizations they direct, exercise due care to prevent improper disclosure of confidential or 
privileged information. 
 
Specific Standards 
Independence and Objectivity 
ATTITUDE AND APPEARANCE 
Independence of attitude requires impartiality and fairness in conducting examinations and 
in reaching resulting conclusions and judgments. Certified Fraud Examiners must also be 
sensitive to the appearance of independence so that conclusions and judgments will be 
accepted as impartial by knowledgeable third parties. Certified Fraud Examiners who 
become aware of a situation or relationship that could be perceived to impair independence, 
whether or not actual impairments exist, should inform management immediately and take 
steps to eliminate the perceived impairment, including withdrawing from the examination  
if necessary. 
 
OBJECTIVITY 
To ensure objectivity in performing examinations, Certified Fraud Examiners must maintain 
an independent mental attitude, reach judgments on examination matters without undue 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1023 
influence from others, and avoid being placed in positions where they would be unable  
to work in an objective professional manner. All possible conflicts of interest should  
be disclosed. 
 
ORGANIZATIONAL RELATIONSHIP 
The Certified Fraud Examiner’s reporting relationship should be such that the attitude and 
appearance of independence and objectivity are not jeopardized. Organizational 
independence is achieved when the Certified Fraud Examiner’s function has a mandate to 
conduct independent examinations throughout the organization, or by a reporting 
relationship high enough in the organization to ensure independence of action. 
 
Qualifications
SKILLS, KNOWLEDGE, ABILITIES, AND EXPERIENCE 
Certified Fraud Examiners cannot be expected to have an expert level of skill and knowledge 
for every circumstance that might be encountered in a fraud examination. Nevertheless, 
Certified Fraud Examiners must have sufficient skill and knowledge to recognize when 
additional training or expert guidance is required. It is the responsibility of a Certified Fraud 
Examiner to ensure that necessary skills, knowledge, ability, and experience are acquired or 
available before going forward with a fraud examination.  
 
Certified Fraud Examiners must be skilled in obtaining information from records, 
documents, and people; in analyzing and evaluating information and drawing sound 
conclusions; in communicating the results of fraud examinations, both orally and in writing; 
and in serving as an expert witness when appropriate. 
 
Certified Fraud Examiners must be knowledgeable in investigative techniques, applicable 
laws and rules of evidence, fraud auditing, criminology, and ethics. 
 
CONTINUING EDUCATION 
Certified Fraud Examiners are required to fulfill continuing education requirements 
established by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. Additionally, Certified Fraud 
Examiners are responsible for securing other education necessary for specific fraud 
examination and related fields in which they are individually involved.  
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1024   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
CODE OF ETHICS 
Certified Fraud Examiners are to adhere to the Code of Professional Ethics of the 
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. 
 
Fraud Examination 
DUE PROFESSIONAL CARE 
Due professional care is defined as exercising the care and skill expected of a prudent 
professional in similar circumstances. Certified Fraud Examiners are responsible for ensuring 
that there is sufficient predication for beginning a fraud examination; that said examinations 
are conducted with diligence and thoroughness; that all applicable laws and regulations are 
observed; that appropriate methods and techniques are used; and that said examinations are 
conducted in accordance with these standards. 
 
PLANNING AND SUPERVISION 
Certified Fraud Examiners must plan and supervise fraud examinations in a manner to 
ensure that objectives are achieved within the framework of these standards. 
 
EVIDENCE 
Certified Fraud Examiners must collect evidence, whether exculpatory or incriminating, that 
supports fraud examination results and will be admissible in subsequent proceedings, by 
obtaining and documenting evidence in a manner to ensure that all necessary evidence is 
obtained, and the chain of custody is preserved. 
 
REPORTING 
Reports of the results of a fraud examination, whether written or verbal, must address all 
relevant aspects of the examination and be accurate, objective, and understandable. 
 
In rendering reports to management, clients, or others, Certified Fraud Examiners shall not 
express judgments on the guilt or innocence of any person or persons, regardless of the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s opinion of the preponderance of evidence. Certified Fraud 
Examiners must exercise due professional care when expressing other opinions related to an 
examination, such as the likelihood that a fraud has or has not occurred, and whether or not 
internal controls are adequate. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1025 
Confidentiality 
Certified Fraud Examiners, during fraud examinations, are often privy to highly sensitive and 
confidential information about organizations and individuals. Certified Fraud Examiners 
must exercise due care so as not to purposefully or inadvertently disclose such information 
except as necessary to conduct the examination as required by law. 
 
Predication Standards 
Knowing when to initiate an examination will largely be driven by the source of the 
information. Information can be derived from a number of sources — a complaint, an 
anonymous tip, by accident, or through some proactive effort, such as an audit or survey. 
The value of the information has to be weighed and the creditability evaluated.  
 
The purpose of a preliminary inquiry is to determine if there is some creditable information 
that a fraudulent act has or will occur (a red flag). If so, what is the examiner’s responsibility?  
 
Preliminary inquiries should be conducted expeditiously and not used as a means of holding 
in abeyance a decision of initiating a formal fraud examination. If a sufficient number of 
fraud indicators exist, a fraud examination should be initiated. 
 
Because business activities/transactions are susceptible to fraudulent acts, all examinations 
should be approached with professional skepticism. That is, assume neither dishonesty nor 
unquestioned honesty of management/personnel. 
 
Bribery 
Bribery  is the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting of something of value for the purpose of 
influencing the action of an individual in the discharge of his duties. It can also include the 
securing of advantage over competitors by secret and corrupt dealing with employees or 
agents of prospective purchasers. 
 
Any indication (through audit, tip, complaint, or accidental discovery) that such action 
(bribery) has occurred, may have occurred, or could occur should be investigated until the 
Certified Fraud Examiner has established that it has occurred, or, within reasonable 
certainty, that it did not occur. 
 
In the example given, the fact that there is a major control weakness is the only predication 
needed to investigate the situation further to determine whether there was fraud. 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1026   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Conflicts of Interest 
This generally refers to a clash between public or corporate interest and the private 
pecuniary interest of an individual or individuals. It arises when an officer’s or employee’s 
personal or financial interest conflicts or appears to conflict with his official duties. 
 
Any indication that there may be a conflict of interest or that there appears to be a conflict 
of interest should be reviewed/investigated. This is particularly important if the 
agency/company does not require employees to sign conflict of interest statements annually, 
and there is no active prevention program such as a computer cross check of employee 
phone numbers and addresses with those of contractors and vendors. 
 
Embezzlement 
Embezzlement  is generally the fraudulent appropriation of property by one lawfully entrusted 
with its possession. It is the willful taking or conversion to one’s own use, another’s money 
or property of which the wrongdoer acquired possession lawfully by reason of some office, 
employment, or position of trust. 
 
Any indication that embezzlement has occurred or could be occurring should be 
investigated. If financial statements, inventory, or other documents appear out of order, no 
matter how innocuous or nonmaterial, a preliminary review should be made to determine if 
it is accidental or if a full scale investigation should be conducted. Again, the Certified Fraud 
Examiner should follow the situation until he is reasonably assured that there is no active 
fraud taking place. 
 
False Financial Statements 
This includes any false statement with regard to a corporation’s financial condition. It means 
something more than merely untrue or erroneous information. It also implies that the 
statement is decidedly untrue and deceitful, and made with the intention to deceive a person 
to whom the false statement is made or exhibited. 
 
Any indication that financial statements are not accurate requires further review to determine 
the reasons for their inaccuracy. While there may be legitimate reasons for the apparent 
inaccuracies, it is incumbent on the Certified Fraud Examiner to review the situation enough 
to determine those reasons and document his inquiry. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1027 
False Statements 
False statements  include oral or written statements made knowingly false, or made recklessly 
without honest belief in their truth, and with the purpose to mislead or deceive. 
 
Any apparent inaccurate statements should be reviewed and the reasons for the inaccuracies 
documented, including the individuals responsible for the statements and the rationale 
behind them. If the inaccuracies seem more than minor discrepancies, or the reasons for the 
discrepancies appear unjustifiable, a full review may be necessary. 
 
Theft 
Theft  is the taking of personal property belonging to another from his possession, or from 
the possession of some person holding the same for him without his consent, with the intent 
to deprive the owner of the value of the same, and appropriating it to the use and benefit of 
the person taking it. 
 
Larceny 
Larceny  includes obtaining possession of property by fraud, trick, or device with a 
preconceived design or intent to appropriate, convert, or steal. 
 
For larceny and theft, if there is any indication or pattern that property is missing, it is 
important that the Certified Fraud Examiner review the situation to determine if a full- scale 
investigation is warranted.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  CFE Code of Professional Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1101

CFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS
 
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners 
 
CFE Code of Professional Standards 
 
(Adopted by the Board of Regents, February 22, 2001) 
 
[At the Board of Regents meeting in February 2001, the Board officially adopted the 
following CFE Code of Professional Standards. The standards expand on and provide 
further guidance for members on the ethical and professional duties listed in the CFE Code 
of Professional Ethics. 
 
The standards were drafted by the Professional Standards and Practices Committee. The 
Committee will, in the future, provide additional comments to supplement these standards 
and will also develop practical scenarios to assist members in the application of the 
standards.] 
 
I. Preamble 
 
The Association of Certified Fraud Examiners is an association of professionals committed 
to performing at the highest level of ethical conduct. Members of the Association pledge 
themselves to act with integrity and to perform their work in a professional manner. 
 
Members have a professional responsibility to their clients, to the public interest, and each 
other; a responsibility that requires subordinating self-interest to the interests of those 
served. 
 
These standards express basic principles of ethical behavior to guide members in the 
fulfilling of their duties and obligations. By following these standards, all Certified Fraud 
Examiners shall be expected, and all Associate members shall strive, to demonstrate their 
commitment to excellence in service and professional conduct. 
 
II. Applicability of Code 
 
The CFE Code of Professional Standards shall apply to all members and all Associate 
members of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. The use of the word “member” 
or “members” in this Code shall refer to Asso ciate members as well as regular members of 
the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. 
CFE Code of Professional Standards Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1102   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
III. Standards of Professional Conduct 
 
A. Integrity and Objectivity 
 
1. Members shall conduct themselves with integrity, knowing that public trust is 
founded on integrity. Members shall not sacrifice integrity to serve the client, their 
employer, or the public interest. 
 
2 Prior to accepting the fraud examination, members shall investigate for potential 
conflicts of interest. Members shall disclose any potential conflicts of interest to 
prospective clients who retain them or their employer. 
 
3. Members shall maintain objectivity in disc harging their professional responsibilities 
within the scope of the engagement. 
 
4. Members shall not commit discreditable acts, and shall always conduct themselves in 
the best interests of the reputation of the profession. 
 
5. Members shall not knowingly make a false statement when testifying in a court of 
law or other dispute resolution forum. Members shall comply with lawful orders of 
the courts or other dispute resolution bodies. Members shall not commit criminal 
acts or knowingly induce others to do so. 
 
B. Professional Competence 
 
1. Members shall be competent and shall not accept assignments where this 
competence is lacking. In some circumstances, it may be possible to meet the 
requirement for professional competence by use of consultation or referral. 
 
2. Members shall maintain the minimum program of continuing professional education 
required by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. A commitment to 
professionalism combining education and experience shall continue throughout the 
member’s professional career. Members shall continually strive to increase the 
competence and effectiveness of their professional services. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  CFE Code of Professional Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1103 
C. Due Professional Care 
 
1. Members shall exercise due professional care in the performance of their services. 
Due professional care requires diligence, critical analysis and professional skepticism 
in discharging professional responsibilities. 
 
2. Conclusions shall be supported with evidence that is relevant, competent,  
and sufficient. 
 
3. Members’ professional services shall be ad equately planned. Planning controls the 
performance of a fraud examination from inception through completion and 
involves developing strategies and objectives for performing the services. 
 
4. Work performed by assistants on a fraud examination shall be adequately supervised. 
The extent of supervision required varies depending on the complexities of the work 
and the qualifications of the assistants. 
 
D. Understanding with Client or Employer 
 
1. At the beginning of a fraud examination, members shall reach an understanding with 
those retaining them (client or employer) about the scope and limitations of the 
fraud examination and the responsibilities of all parties involved. 
 
2. Whenever the scope or limitations of a fraud examination or the responsibilities of 
the parties change significantly, a new understanding shall be reached with the client 
or employer. 
 
E. Communication with Client or Employer 
 
1. Members shall communicate to those who retained them (client or employer) 
significant findings made during the normal course of the fraud examination. 
 
F. Confidentiality 
 
1. Members shall not disclose confidential or privileged information obtained during 
the course of the fraud examination without the express permission of proper 
authority or order of a court. This requirement does not preclude professional 
CFE Code of Professional Standards Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1104   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
practice or investigative body reviews as long as the reviewing organization agrees to 
abide by the confidentiality restrictions. 
 
IV. Standards of Examination 
 
A.  Fraud Examinations  
  
1.    Fraud examinations shall be conducted in a legal, professional, and thorough 
manner. The fraud examiner’s objective shall be to obtain evidence and information 
that is complete, reliable, and relevant.  
  
2.  Members shall establish predication and sc ope priorities at the outset of a fraud 
examination and continuously reevaluate them as the examination proceeds. 
Members shall strive for efficiency in their examination.   
  
3.  Members shall be alert to the possibility of conjecture, unsubstantiated opinion, and 
bias of witnesses and others. Members shall consider both exculpatory and 
inculpatory evidence. 
 
B. Evidence  
 
1.  Members shall endeavor to establish effective control and management procedures 
for documents. Members shall be cognizant of the chain of custody including origin, 
possession, and disposition of relevant evidence and material. Members shall strive 
to preserve the integrity of relevant evidence and material. 
 
2.  Members’ work product may vary with the circumstances of each fraud examination. 
The extent of documentation shall be subject to the needs and objectives of the 
client or employer.  
 
V. Standards of Reporting 
 
A. General 
 
1.  Members’ reports may be oral or written, including fact witness and/or expert 
witness testimony, and may take many different forms. There is no single structure 
or format that is prescribed for a member’s report; however, the report should not 
be misleading. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  CFE Code of Professional Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1105 
B. Report Content 
 
1. Members’ reports shall contain only information based on data that are sufficient 
and relevant to support the facts, conclusions, opinions, and/or recommendations 
related to the fraud examination. The report shall be confined to subject matter, 
principles, and methodologies within the member’s area of knowledge, skill, 
experience, training, or education. 
 
2.  No opinion shall be expressed regarding the legal guilt or innocence of any person  
or party. 
 



:


fraud prevent and deterr
understand human behavior
much of our understand of human behavior ca n be attribut to bf skinner describ
by mani as on of the greatest social scientist of the twentieth centuri skinner promis
that he would revolution not just psycholog but all of human societi with hi theori of
behavior accord to skinner human behavior should be approach scientif
instead of worri over men soul or quibbl about what make up the self
behaviorist would deal with what peopl actual do by analyz peopl action the
behaviorist could then alter or direct ani behavior for the greater good of all crimin
behavior could be modifi into product action rear a famili would ceas to be a
continu game of trial and error the pitfal would be replac by basic behavior
principl
skinner accomplish mai have fallen short of thi lofti goal but while he not as
wide recogn as sigmund freud skinner influenc permeat mani area often
without be overtli attribut to the method skinner propos in walden two 1948 and
scienc and human behavior 1953 when lawyer argu the mitig or exoner
circumst of a client case thei often us behaviorist idea entir theori of
manag rest on the assumpt that incent and promot ar not just the best wai to
sell someth theyr the best wai to ensur that employe work properli
behavior analysi and the detect of fraud
when a detect search for a suspect motiv the detect is us behaviorist method
of analysi the suspect it is assum wa stimul by some arrang of factor mani
cours in criminolog ar built around the fundament premis that crime ar particular
sort of behavior and best understood as the product of oper condit fraud
examin often us the same method in approach a case when monei is miss the
examin trace the known flow of fund and then ask who had the opportun and the
motiv to get at thi monei even without be consciou of the fact the examin is
perform a behaviorist analysi on the crime
ultim the question of fraud and behavior come down to thiswhat can we do about it
we know that peopl commit these crime at an alarm rate incid rang from the
clerk who skim a few hundr dollar off a businesss daili deposit to multimilliondollar
scam artist who destroi entir organ there a world of differ between the
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4102 2011 fraud examin manual
skim clerk and the scam financi execut so can we even analyz the two
peopl within the same system of fraud
a fraud examin work with behaviorist principl know that the differ between
crime li in the differ behavior the man who plai milliondollar game with other
peopl monei is stimul and reinforc by a distinct set of factor and so too is the
clerk who build a famili nest egg from hi threefigur theft so when an examin is ask
to go beyond crimesolv and to consult on fraud prevent the job demand a thorough
analysi of behavior
it is import to think of employ as a system of behavior becaus so much fraud
occur in workplac environ and becaus such think highlight the connect
between econom and peopl action for both the crook and the dedic worker
monei exert a power influenc and thi is not like to chang the resourc
employ then should consid the best wai to establish a posit set of relat between
employe and the fund flow through the compani the more rigor we understand
how peopl behav the better equip we ar to chang the wai thei behav
behavior studi such as those conduct by skinner show that punish is the least
effect method of chang behavior punish bring a temporari suppress of the
behavior but onli with constant supervis and applic in repeat experi
skinner found that punish either appli a neg stimulu or take awai a
posit on effect extinguish a subject behavior but that the behavior return
when the punish wa discontinu and eventu all respons came out again
the subject would suppress the behavior as long as the punish wa appli directli and
continu but as soon as the punish wa withdrawn for a while the behavior wa
attempt again if there wa no punish follow the attempt the subject began to
behav as befor
behavior reinforc and punish ar distinguish by the wai that posit and
neg forc ar appli a posit reinforc present a posit stimulu in exchang for
the desir respons father sai to their son youv clean your room good here
the kei to the car the behavior clean is given in return for the car a neg
reinforc on the other hand withdraw a neg stimulu in exchang for the respons
so the father sai ill stop hassl you if you clean thi room the neg hassl is
withdrawn when the appropri behavior is perform
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4103
reinforc and punish
reinforc present posit stimuli withdraw neg stimuli
punish present neg stimuli withdraw posit stimuli
in an act of punish the polar so to speak ar revers face with an undesir
behavior the punish present a neg stimulu a father hear hi son tell a
particularli raunchi stori put a bar of soap into the boi mouth punish mai also be
administ by withdraw a posit stimulu your room is still filthi the father tell
hi languid child so you cant us the car the boi suffer from thwart desir
punish fight a lose battl in manipul behavior becaus it work by provid
neg consequencesadminist unpleasantri and take awai desir a car or
the thrill of a raci stori doesnt becom less attract for it us in punish it power to
stimul is simpli squelch reinforc on the other hand proce like the old song
to accentu the posit skinner conclud that behavior is most effect modifi by
manag and modifi desir through reinforc he want to replac destruct
behavior with product on instead of try to punish an alreadi exist impuls
behavior point toward a number of altern to punish chief among these is to
modifi the circumst surround the act if an employe is experienc financi problem
there mai be wai a compani can help allevi pressur through credit counsel pai
advanc or lowinterest loan therebi allevi financi difficulti without the employe
resort to fraud in other instanc employe engag in fraud becaus thei feel underpaid
or unappreci
emot accord to skinner ar a predisposit for peopl action anger is not itself
a behavior but a state of be that predispos peopl to do thing like yell or fight anger
is a part of a person respons to the extent that an angri man is more like to get in a
shout match with hi friend and sinc the emot associ of ani event ar
import factor in condit behavior the associ can be manipul in
condit the behavior that why advertis us cute babi to sell toilet paperth
imag associ the toilet paper with the emot evok by the babi a compani portrai
it founder as a father figur for a similar reason when manag ar face with disgruntl
employe thei can modifi these emot circumst not just with imag work but
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4104 2011 fraud examin manual
with adequ compens and recognit of worker accomplish incent
program and taskrel bonus follow thi principl assum that employe who feel
challeng and reward by their job will produc more work at a higher qualiti and ar
less like to violat the law
anoth nonpunit approach drive the undesir behavior into extinct by
prevent the expect respons thi is a special version of modifi the
circumst busi perform an extinct strategi by implement a system of
intern control in requir sever signatur for a transact for exampl a bank
prevent ani on employe from gain access to monei thi approach doesnt involv
reinforc or punit measur it simpli modifi the structur in which act take
place the percept of intern control provid a particularli strong deterr to fraud
becaus it obstruct the oper behavior that ha heretofor been link with posit
reinforc we prevent the act by block the expect respons crimin behavior is
discourag becaus crime doesnt pai
a relat strategi overcom improp behavior by encourag the behavior opposit
skinner sai we can condit incompat behavior that interfer with the person usual act
instead of punish a child emot tantrum for exampl the behaviorist reward the
child for control emot outburst we drive the tantrum into extinct by not
respond and reinforc the stoical behavior a destruct behavior is offset by an
incompat product on sinc fraud involv dishonesti secret and antagonist
behavior the astut manag find wai to reward the opposit behavior honesti
open and cooper
of cours it easier to list these strategi in a few paragraph than it is to implement them
even the most seemingli simpl act can becom tangl as peopl and circumst
interact a perfectli sound theoret reinforcementan employe incent program
perhapsmai be view with suspicion by disgruntl worker behavior modif is
never easi skinner sai reinforc must be sensit and complex becaus peopl
live ar complic and their behavior sensit for exampl peopl in group often
interact in alarm and unstabl wai skinner demonstr thi tendenc with the exampl
of a whippingboi game plai by eighteenthcenturi sailor the sailor ti up a group of
young boi in a straight line restrain each boi left hand and place a whip in the right
hand the first boi in line wa given a light blow on the back and told to do the same to the
person immedi in front of him each boi hit the next in line and each on wa hit in
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4105
turn as skinner report it wa clearli in the interest of the group that all blow be gentl
but the inevit result wa a furiou lash 1 each boi in the line hit a littl harder than
he had been hit himself so after a few cycl the last blow would in fact be furiou
especi sinc each swing wa preced by pain creat an emot disposit of anger
and anxieti whip session arent a like happen in most compani but peopl
often exhibit a similar inclin toward catalyz reaction whisper session gradual
evolv into fullblown discuss that echo into the hallwai minor financi indiscret
grow into largescal larceny2
ideal behavior manag could anticip thi catalyz and redirect the energi but
what if that is not an option though the do llar amount and the audac of some white
collar crime boggl the averag observ mind the crime remain an act of behavior and
thu should be approach by the same method us to analyz a 4500 credit card fraud
the perpetr mai be describ as obs ssive and megalomaniac but he is still
behav in a network of action with hi behavior subject to oper condit
the dollar amount ar in fact mislead onc the stake reach a certain level it not even
plausibl to look for explan involv a lack of respect or appreci wheelerdeal
and armchair analyst often aver that it not realli the monei and theyr right
highdollar crimin describ their machin as a kick or thrill thei feel like theyr
plai a game and it the game of their live behaviorist agre monei is a gener
reinforc link with mani posit factor directli and often take on a symbol power
of it own therebi yield a condit of strength skinner sai we ar automat
reinforc apart from ani particular depriv when we successfulli control the physic
world 3 so we need not be starv in order to act especi with the sens of control
symbol and liter gain by acquir monei gameplai exert someth similar on
it particip someon who manipul a chess board or a deck of card successfulli
gain a sens of strength over extern event we can plai the game for it own sake
becaus it yield the impress of strength imagin then the behavior stroke that
happen when the game power is combin with the power of monei as a gener
reinforc and both of these factor ar plai out with real peopl and set the
1 skinner bf scienc and human behavior macmillan publish new york 1953 p 309
2 compar the excus everybodi doe it it often tr ue that an impress number of other peopl in the
perpetr peer group were themselv break the law a condit catalyz by intens interact and
result in more seriou crime
3 skinner p 77
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4106 2011 fraud examin manual
dealmak is race through a thicket of reinforc and the greater the riskfinanci
legal or personalth greater the thrill the stimulu isnt the monei as a thing in itself ani
more than monei for it own sake prompt the miser in either case the condit of
strength we might even call it power feed the behav person monei just happen to
be the reinforc par excel of our cultur
deal with highstak crimin will remain difficult despit our understand of their
behavior not just becaus the amount of monei and the network of action ar so
complex but becaus the condit is so intens how for exampl can you replac the
kick of score a 35milliondollar take in a threedai scam can a career con be prompt
to give up the deceit practic that have mark hi experi find genuin and
specif answer mai be delai for some time but thei will like follow the same pattern
weve discuss with other crime
modifi the circumst of the behavior by for exampl make legitim
busi a more opportun place for dare and innov techniqu
extinguish the crimin behavior by prevent it success us regul control
and supervis
encourag behavior incompat with crimin activ through educ practic
and demonstr valu that call the crimin lifestyl howev flashi into question
the specif measur will be particular to the crime the action dictat the respons but
whether were deal with a work mother credit card fraud or berni madoff palati
scheme our method can be behavior fraud examin mai never erad crime
complet but by approach crimin act scientif we can becom more success
in anticip and prevent the act
conclus
to successfulli recogn detect and prevent fraud the examin ha to take into account
as mani variabl as possibl and ha to learn a great deal about how human beingsa
individu and in groupsbehav
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4107
all the effort of behavior engin notwithstand the question of behavior final
rest with the person who behav in walden two the founder of skinner utopian
commun admit that there is onli so much that can be done by cultur design
you cant forese all futur circumst and you cant specifi adequ futur conduct
you dont know what will be requir instea d you have to set up certain behavior
process which will lead the individu to design hi own good conduct when the time
come we call that sort of thing selfcontrol 4
no substitut exist for the consciou individu make a choic to act and no scienc can
predict or shape behavior with pure accuraci there ar just too mani factor at work in the
network of action howev selfcontrol is a behavior that is guid by condit in the
same wai ani other act would be
it doe littl good for exampl to tell an alcohol stop drink control yourself the
command alon ha littl forc even if the alcohol want to stop drink famili
member can suggest that the man simpli throw awai hi bottl but the princip
problem skinner interject is to get him to do it 5 the famili can howev help
condit the alcohol selfcontrol by regi tere disapprov of drink by reinforc
the man success resist to drink and by encourag the man to do thing
incompat with a drink life thei cant fo llow the man through everi step of hi life he
ha to resist the impuls to sneak a sip on hi own but the behavior of resist is
strengthen by hi famili member intervent selfcontrol as a behavior is shape by
variabl in the environ and the histori of the individu 6
understand why peopl do certain thing allow us to go beyond a simplist insist
that crimin control themselv we will in stead have to consid how thi control can
be condit prevent the behavior directli when possibl but ultim reli on
each individu have adequ absorb the principl of selfcontrol
4 id at p 96
5 id at p 240
6 ibid famili member in thi type of situat often ask the alcohol dont you see what your do the
answer mai sometim be no becaus selfknowledg is a discrimin behavioran act of cognit that
label and organ inform as a behavior selfknowledg is of cours influenc by condit we
recogn or know what weve been condit to know thu treatment program often encourag
patient to reflect on their behavior in certain wai condit a selfknowledg that will contribut to self
control
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4108 2011 fraud examin manual
why peopl obei the law
now that we have a gener understand of at least some of the reason why human
behav the wai thei do let us turn our discuss to why peopl obei and contrarili break
the law in hi book why peopl obei the law tom tyler studi the two princip type of
lawabid peopl
obvious some peopl choos to obei the la w while other choos to break it mani
otherwis lawabid member of societi evad tax occasion us a control
substanc commit fraud or even drive under the influenc of alcohol accord to studi
by tyler the instrument and the norm perspect attempt to explain why some
follow the law to the letter while other obei select
instrument perspect
accord to thi theori peopl obei the law becaus thei fear punish when
review the incarcer rate in thi countri it is not difficult to discern that thi is the
perspect most adher to by policymak
a person of thi belief might exce the speed limit think that the benefit of save time
outweigh the risk of the potenti speed ticket these type ar unlik to rob a bank
though consid that success is doubt and the penalti is steep thei weigh the pro
and con of complianc with the law and act accordingli
norm perspect
the focu of thi perspect is what on consid just and moral when peopl believ
complianc is their moral oblig commit to the law is voluntari regardless of fear
of punish
peopl of thi belief mai indulg in illeg drug but refrain from steal on be moral
accept in their view and the other not other mai obei all law out of the belief that the
author ar just in ani case complianc is unforc and voluntari
natur the author prefer voluntari complianc from their point of view the
norm is prefer to the instrument perspect sinc the former doe not requir
7 tyler tom r why peopl obei the law 1990 yale univers press new haven
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4109
enforc if the public alreadi believ in the govern moral right to govern the
author job is made much easier
moral howev can work against the govern as it did with the us public moral
indign over the vietnam conflict for instanc those who view the govern
author as legitim support the war regardless of their own view as to it necess
other consid the ongo struggl useless and wrong and oppos it
anoth signific differ between the instrument and the norm perspect is
whether on focus on procedur rather than result those adher to the norm
point of view will for exampl be more concern with be treat justli in court rather
than with win or lose their case thei will contentedli await judgment if dealt with
fairli peopl of thi opinion ar interest in neutral lack of bia honesti polit and
respect for on right the due process then is most effect in promot complianc
to those of thi view the instrumentalist on the other hand focus on the outcom of hi
case and is less concern with procedur in hi mind a procedur is fair if it is favor
legitimaci
by definit effect leadership must produc complianc with a leader decis
howev it is sometim the case that when new legisl or polici is introduc public
support and complianc do not occur suprem court decis notabl on school prayer do
not necessarili produc gener public accept of or adher to polici likewis if a
compani introduc a new polici that no employe mai take a gift no matter how small from
a potenti vendor mani employe will continu to take small gift anywai
alter citizen behavior by manipul access to valu resourc or threaten to
impos sanction is known as social control onc again the concept is that reward and
punish ar what caus peopl to obei the law peopl maxim their person gain and
compli base on deterr of cours life is more complic than reward and
punish otherwis the job of law enforc would be easi but social control
appeal to author the public understand deterr reward and punish in
contrast emphas the norm approach place power not in author but in the
peopl whose voluntari complianc is sought
in studi gener complianc with the law sociologist have found that deterr doe
not fulli explain why peopl obei the law citizen choos to obei the law when the chanc
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4110 2011 fraud examin manual
of be caught violat it ar virtual zero as when on might come upon a stop sign in a
desert street almost all american pai their incom tax in a voluntari system even
though the chanc of be caught shave tax ow ar small yet citizen break the law
when it is riski to do so as when thei bui illeg drug or embezzl thousand of dollar
from their compani
in a democraci the legal system cannot function if it can influenc peopl onli by
manipul reward and cost the resourc requir to enforc such a regim ar too
high deterr is expens to enforc and doe not guarante an adequ level of
obedi drunk drive is a good exampl studi show that an extrem high
invest of resourc is need to convinc peopl that the likelihood of be caught and
punish for drive drunk is high public campaign against drunk drive tend to
temporarili reduc the number of dui or dwi as long as citizen think the chanc of
be caught ar rise the incid of drunk drive remain lower howev as soon as
public percept of increas vigil against drunk drive lessen the number of arrest
goe up again likewis as is discuss later in the fraud prevent program chapter
increas the percept of detect is a power antifraud program if an employe
think that hi compani is not pai attent to occup fraud then some employe
ar more like to try to get awai with it
consid the us of marijuana an illeg yet still popular drug if the reason peopl abstain
from us thi drug is that thei believ in compli with the law then obvious in their
ey the author have legitimaci howev if thei forgo marijuana us becaus it violat
their moral valu then it is their convict that ar the decid factor if fear of legal
punish stop them then deterr carri greater weight with them and if thei refrain
out of fear of social ostrac then the social group influenc prevail
a person own norm valu have the final sai about appropri behavior unlik the
reward and punish approach on own valu ar what produc complianc or
noncompli with the law in the end psychologist refer to thi as intern
oblig for which citizen take person respons
voluntari complianc
voluntari complianc matter onli to the extent to which it produc obedi that goe
beyond selfinterest measur by most of us by reward and punish a norm
speeder for instanc will accept be a few minut late to hi appoint in order to
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4111
obei the speed limit thu make the road safer for everyon a norm employe will
accept a salari freez and not steal from the compani to make up for the rais he wa
promis in other word these peopl will act against their own best interest if thei feel
complianc with the rule is of greater moral import
of cours govern author recogn that without the good will of the public thei
could not function their aim must be to maxim complianc and minim hostil
toward law while gain legitimaci in the ey of the public ani leader who want to
effect govern must have legitimaci with hi subordin the same is true for
employ manag teacher and armi sergeant otherwis complianc will not occur
due to it signific social impact social scientist and politician have found legitimaci to
be an issu of major concern it is seen as a reservoir of loyalti from which leader can draw
opinion poll on the public attitud toward the law and the govern ar realli about
public confid in the govern legitimaci if the public doe not have confid in
the legal system obedi to law is unlik
studi show that both children and adult feel a strong oblig to obei the law whether
we can attribut thi to their norm valu or the legitimaci of the author is the real
question natur those who view the author as legitim ar more like to compli
thi lead to the conclus that norm support of the system result in compliant
behavior
measur legitimaci and complianc
a studi by tyler call the chicago studi focus on six law with which peopl deal on a
daili basi disturb the peac litter dr iv while intox speed shoplift and
park illeg particip were ask how often thei had broken these law in the past
year most admit to park illeg 51 pe rcent and speed 62 percent but veri few
admit to shoplift 3 percent twentyseven percent confess to disturb the peac
25 percent to litter and 19 percent admit to have driven while under the influenc
the second wave of interview in which particip were ask about a shorter time frame
produc similar result to measur fear of punish respond were ask how like
thei thought it wa that thei would be arrest or issu a citat if thei violat these six
law eightythre percent thought it wa like thei would be caught drive drunk 78
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4112 2011 fraud examin manual
percent thought the same for park violat and shoplift 72 percent for speed 35
percent for disturb the peac and 31 percent for litter
particip were then gaug for peer approv for shoplift 89 percent said that thei
thought that the five adult thei know best would disapprov eightysix percent said the
same for drunk drive as did 51 percent for litter 52 percent for speed 44 percent
for illeg park and 53 percent for disturb the peac
the next question wa design to measur respond moral thei were ask whether
each offens wa wrong almost everi on of the particip felt that ani violat of
the six law were wrong speed came out as the least immor and shoplift the most
with 99 percent of particip consid it moral objection
on see that citizen seem to view the break of law as a violat of their person
moral interestingli most believ the chanc of get caught ar high and sinc peer
disapprov level ar rel light on can gather that the social group is the sourc of the
least amount of pressur to obei law
more than four out of five particip felt a person should obei the law even if it goe
against what thei think is right almost as mani respond felt that disobei the law is
seldom justifi and that obedi and respect for author ar the most import virtu
children should learn
legitimaci and complianc
legitimaci is regard as the essenti ingredi in what give govern and leader
author the idea is that if the author have legitimaci the public will obei the law
tyler chicago studi howev wa design to put thi concept to the test
the studi did show that legitimaci is relat to complianc particip who attribut
greater legitimaci to author were more like to obei the law for instanc thi doe not
prove a causal relationship though the result of the studi were analyz to account for
demograph and sociolog factor thi regress analysi suggest that legitimaci ha
a signific effect on complianc regardless of the other factor
certainli legitimaci impact on a person is in fluenc by hi person experi with
polic and court a person who feel mistreat by the author is certainli less like to
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4113
have confid in their legitimaci and therefor is less like to obei law in such case
peer approv seem to take on greater import in those peopl think on more
interest result wa that those particip who consid themselv polit liber
were more like than those who regard themselv as moder to base compliant
behavior on feel of legitimaci
implic of the chicago studi
author do not take complianc with the law for grant thei often find that occasion
noncompli must be toler sometim noncompli is so widespread that it cast
doubt upon the effect and valid of the law itself prohibit for exampl wa
wide and often openli violat befor it repeal the result of the studi suggest that
norm valu ar more influenti upon complianc than the reward and punish
approach thi is consist with skinner behavior theori discuss previous
again the studi show that peopl have a high level of norm commit to abid by
the law most particip felt that break the law wa moral wrong and that law
should be obei even when on doe not agre with themth my countri right or
wrong approach author who can tap into and encourag those view will of cours
inspir complianc employe who have a strong sens of loyalti to their employ will
not violat compani polici becaus such act would be a betray to the compani
the psycholog variabl
the chicago studi wa design to gaug the gap between citizen concern for favor
outcom and procedur fair it also measur the extent to which fair influenc
reaction to experi the experi in question is of the everydai averagecitizen
varietyth type of encount most of us have with author over rel minor
matter particip report call the polic for a number of reason accid
disturb suspici activ and crime against properti or violent crime the
major of caller felt it wa import for the polic to solv their problem whether it wa
seriou or not
polic respons time wa satisfactori to most respond onli 15 percent felt that the
polic did not respond quickli enough nearli 70 percent knew what action the polic had
taken to solv the problem and almost twothird of those said that the polic settl the
situat the 43 percent who said that the polic fail to solv their problem admit that
thei did do everyth thei could all in all 71 percent said thei were satisfi with the
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4114 2011 fraud examin manual
outcom of their call most respond also felt that thei were treat quit well by the
polic eightysix percent express overal satisfact with their polit concern for
their right proprieti attent honesti and willing to consid their opinion
respond who were stop by the polic natur had less magnanim feel
toward them still 73 percent of those who receiv ticket for minor offens consid
the outcom fair acknowledg that the ticket wa deserv
satisfact level of particip who had to go to court were similarli high 80 percent
consid their treatment fair howev 36 percent state that thei believ the judg
could have reach a better outcom overal though particip were content with these
element of our justic system
legitimaci and experi
peopl will accept unfavor rule if thei believ thei were dealt with fairli thu fair
procedur can cushion the blow of an outcom that is to on disadvantag without
damag the author legitimaci of cours fair procedur can onli go so far if fair
procedur consist produc unfavor result the fair of the procedur
themselv will come into question
peopl place import on procedur for sever reason the first of which is simplic
often the result itself is difficult to classifi as fair or unfair peopl therefor focu on the
step that lead up to the outcom anoth reason such emphasi is place on procedur is
that with as much religi and ethnic divers that the unit state ha peopl do not
alwai concur on what is fair although most peopl mai not necessarili agre upon the
outcom thei ar usual of on mind as to the justic of the procedur
the procedur aspect of the law and how the public perceiv them must be of great
import to author of cours policymak must have a good idea of what the public
consid fair if the public perceiv a court legal action as just thei will support the
outcom although it might not be to their advantag plea bargain for exampl is often
justifi base on outcom but if the inconsist in plea agreement is seen as unfair
support for the legal system will weaken likewis nofault insur mai make sens in
econom term but mai dilut the basic principl underli our legal system those
individu ar respons for their own action
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4115
the same is true in the corpor environ employe will often accept unpopular
compani polici if the employe feel that the polici is appli fairli for instanc
employe mai be upset that the compani provid onli three paid sick dai but if the rule
is appli to all employe in an equal manner most employe will live with the polici
howev if some employe ar allow addit sick dai and other ar not employe
begin to resent the polici and the compani in other word these employe feel thei ar
be treat unfairli
the mean of procedur justic
an import issu left unaddress until now is how peopl decid which procedur ar
fair and which ar not previou effort to studi thi question have focus on control two
area of control with which peopl ar gener concern ar decis control control over
the actual decis made and process control control over the opportun to state
on case
to better illustr let us take the exampl of an attornei repres a client in court
while the client surrend control of the case to hi attornei he mai still seek to maintain
as much control as he can through control of the process accord to the instrument
perspect he will valu the opportun to testifi onli insofar as it help to achiev a
benefici outcom to hi case studi show howev that most of us appreci the chanc
to air our view regardless of whether it influenc the outcom or not from thi on can
conclud that process control ha an independ impact on how on perceiv fair and
whether on is satisfi with the outcom on satisfact with the outcom and on
opinion of fair procedur depend larg on on degre of control
again on must ask what criteria peopl us to decid whether a procedur is fair gs
leventh propos six standard for evalu the fair of a procedur
repres
consist
suppress of bia
accuraci
correct
ethic
repres relat to those parti whose concern ar affect throughout the
alloc process consist refer to the uniform and unbias treatment of all of the
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4116 2011 fraud examin manual
affect parti suppress of bia guarante that those involv with the outcom have no
person vest interest in the case thi also prohibit a particip relianc on previous
form opinion rather than just the evid at hand as when a juror convict becaus he
believ most defend ar guilti accuraci refer to object high qualiti correct
involv the check and balanc provid in the system which allow unfair decis to be
correct such as the appeal process ethic of cours involv the degre to which
procedur meet gener held ethic standard of fair and moral tortur for
instanc is a violat of ethic as it is a breach of basic moral code
studi measur the import of leventh six criteria show that peopl place the most
import on consist accuraci repres and suppress bia ar also
highli valu
base on tyler chicago studi the author hypothesi is that in encount with the polic
peopl ar more concern with fair than with the policeman adher to formal
issu of right ie ethic in the courtroom howev ethic standard and right
receiv greater emphasi
peopl view on procedur fair ar affect by two factor background characterist
and prior view race educ incom sex ag and polit view ar the most
import background characterist those who ar liber and better educ will place
the most emphasi on ethic when decid if a procedur is just minor ar more
like to focu on consist and suppress of bia though prior view form perhap
from past experi carri more weight than background characterist ani background
characterist is certain to be overridden by on prior view on a subject
influenc of control on the mean of procedur justic
the chicago studi assess process control by question respond about how much
opportun thei had to state their case or present their problem decis control wa
measur by ask how much influenc particip had over the determin made by
the third parti in control most particip fe lt thei had a high 43 percent to moder 20
percent level of process control in contrast a number of particip felt thei had littl
decis control about half said not much at all
the chicago studi thu lead on to conclud that process control judgment is the decid
factor when assess procedur justic in term of control process control judgment ar
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4117
also import in assess how experi affect peopl evalu of procedur justic
ergo respond ar more concern with their opportun to speak out rather than
their influenc over the outcom the belief of citizen that their view ar be weigh
and consid by the author and that the author ar deal fairli with them
reinforc their belief in their own process and decis control
in the employ context the studi tend to support the idea that employe should be
involv in the develop of polici and procedur instead of just distribut a fraud
polici or an ethic polici send out a questionnair ask employe for their idea on how
fraud and corrupt can be prevent in the compani if employe feel thei have some
control over the rule thei will be more like to obei and follow them
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4201
theori of crime causat
understand human behavior and why peopl obei the law help explain some of the
reason peopl commit fraud howev there have been a number of theorist who have
attempt to explain specif why peopl commit crime in more sophist scienc
such as chemistri and physic theori build on on anoth as new fact emerg from
studi prompt by the reign theori in criminolog as in virtual all the social
scienc theori compet with on anoth for accept with none of them adequ
satisfi either practition or scholar in the field
the reason for thi jumbl of interpret of crimin activ in larg part li in the fact
that human be unlik inanim object think for themselv you can push a rock in a
certain direct and it will all other thing be equal move in that direct but you
cannot predict as simpl a matter as the direct in which a human be might decid to
proce when confront with a choic perhap you can guess that he will go to the right
becaus you know that thi is the direct in which the store he want to go to li but ani
human be for reason that satisfi him can decid on ani given dai that he prefer to go
to the left perhap just to saunter around or to get extra exercis or for no particular reason
that seem evid to him or to other
imagin how much more difficult it is to try to predict veri complic human behavior
such as crimin act
the follow section summar some of the betterknown criminolog theori both
past and present
classic criminolog
classic criminolog base on the philosoph principl of utilitarian ha it root in
the belief that human be ar ration and calcul creatur and therefor do thing in
order to avoid pain and produc pleasur some of the compon of classic
criminolog theori ar
peopl have free will which thei can us to elect to engag in either crimin or
noncrimin behavior
crimin behavior will be more attract if the gain ar estim to be greater than
the loss
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4202 2011 fraud examin manual
the more certain sever and swift the reaction to crime the more like it is that the
penalti will control the behavior
two theorist name ar associ with classic criminolog the italian cesar beccaria
and the englishman jeremi bentham bentham marvel eccentr will that hi bodi
be preserv and place in the entrywai to the univers of london and brought to the
tabl when the faculti meet hi wish were carri out and the bodi can still be seen
todai by anyon visit the school
the polici implic of classic criminolog thought which ar promin todai in
theori group under the head of ration choic ar that penalti should be
establish that make the anticip result of crimin behavior less appeal than the
prospect of the loss such as the loss of freedom the theori also ha a benevol
compon in that it suggest that penalti that ar too sever serv no purpos sinc thei
ar needlessli excess for the deterr thei seek to achiev
utilitarian remain a muchfavor approach to crime with it assumpt that offend
will calcul potenti gain and loss befor thei decid to disobei the law the us
sentenc commiss propos ar base almost total on the idea of classic
criminolog mandat that monetari penalti be calcul at a level that will induc
compani to conclud that break the law is not fiscal appeal
there ar sever major difficulti inher in the theori though the first of cours is that
mani peopl do not stop and add up the gain and loss of lawbreak befor thei engag
in it second the impact of penalti can be veri differ for differ peopl the thought
of a week in prison mai be aw to on person but a piec of cake to anoth third it is
veri difficult to know whether the penalti will in fact result from the behavior most
offend optimist assum that thei will not be caught
routin activ theori
routin activ theori a variat of classic theori hold that both the motiv to
commit crime and the suppli of offend is constant there will alwai be a certain number
of peopl motiv by greed lust and other forc who inclin toward lawbreak the
determin factor particularli in predatori crime such as those involv violenc and
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4203
theft ar the activ of potenti victim there ar three import element that
influenc crime
the avail of suitabl target such as compani and individu
the absenc of capabl guardian such as auditor and secur personnel
the presenc of motiv offend such as unhappi or financi
challeng employe
biolog theori
biolog theori maintain that crimin behavior is not the result of choic the calcul of
benefit and potenti loss but rather is caus by the physic trait of those who commit
crime the foundat of biolog theori were laid by cesar lombroso an italian doctor
who insist that there were born crimin peopl who were atavist or a throwback to
more primit human type lombroso spent hi career measur the bodi of offend
and conclud that thei were mark by a high degre of asymmetri with such thing as
slope forehead and other anomali later critic would point out that lombroso us
no control groupthat is he did not measur peopl who were not crimin if he had
done so he would have found that thei share equal in those kind of trait that
lombroso presum were indic of crimin propens
biolog theori continu to flourish todai with theorist seek to locat genet
distinct between those who break the law and those who obei it in their book the bell
curv richard herrnstein and charl murrai argu that low intellig and crime ar
intim connect and that low intellig as measur by iq score is genet
transmit some scholar in the field savag the herrnsteinmurrai posit but it
receiv a good deal of media attent
biolog theorist now take a much less determinist posit than lombroso thei will
point to thi or that human characterist and sai that it given certain environment
circumst is apt to produc illeg act put anoth wai thei report that thei have
found a larg number of offend with a biolog trait but that there ar mani more that
have the trait who never get into ani troubl with the law
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4204 2011 fraud examin manual
psycholog theori
theori root in psycholog ar base on the view that crimin behavior is the product of
mental process the psychoanalyt idea of sigmund freud focu on earli childhood
develop and on unconsci motiv that is motiv of which the offend
himself is not awar freud identifi a threepart structur to human person the id the
drive for food sex and other lifesustain thing the superego the conscienc that
develop when learn valu becom incorpor into a person behavior and the ego
the i or the product of the interact between what a person want and what hi
conscienc will allow him to do to achiev what he want
cognit theori
cognit theori stress inadequ moral and intellectu develop as ly at the root of
crimin act there ar also person theori which illustr the belief that trait such as
extrovers ar respons for a signific amount of crime
integr theori
integr theori draw from choic theori biolog theori and psycholog theori on
such argument is put forward by jame q wilson and richard j herrnstein in their book
crime and human natur wilson and herrnstein maintain that while crimin activ is a
choic thi choic is heavili influenc by biolog and psycholog factor thei also
explor social factor the factor includ famili life school and gang membership
condit theori
h j eysenck work with what he call condit theori argu that the failur of a person
to incorpor satisfactorili the dictat of societi repres the major explan for
subsequ crimin behavior eysenck maintain that extrovert person both normal and
neurot ar more difficult to condit that is to trainthan introvert person and
that extrovert therefor get into more troubl than introvert
anoth psycholog theme is that frustrat is the precursor of aggress the theori
suggest that the express of aggress such as a fraud perpetr get back at hi
employ will allevi the frustrat and allow the organ to return to a more
satisfactori state
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4205
social structur theori
these theori concentr on the kind of societi that gener particular level of crime
why is crime so low in japan and so high in the unit state why do south american
countri typic have high rate of homicid while england homicid rate is rel
low there ar variou kind of sociolog theori all base on similar premis but with
differ emphas
as a group social structur theori suggest that forc oper in the lowerclass area of
the environ push mani of their resid into crimin behavior social structur
theorist challeng those who would suggest that crime is an express of psycholog
imbal biolog trait person choic etc thei argu that peopl live in equival
social environ seem to behav in a similar predict fashion
theori of anomi
strain theori ar a branch of the social structur theori strain theorist view crime as a direct
result of the frustrat and anger peopl experi over their inabl to achiev the social
and financi success thei desir the bestknown strain theori is robert merton theori of
anomi robert merton a columbia univers sociologist maintain that the discrep
between what peopl ar indoctrin into desir and the wai that ar avail to them
to achiev such end is the cornerston for explan of crimin behavior more
inform about merton is contain in the organiz crime chapter
merton theori of anomi that is normlessn ess wa deriv from the work of emil
durkheim a french sociologist who adopt the term in hi effort to explain suicid rate
among differ social group for merton anomi in the unit state wa character by
an almost overpow emphasi on the acquisit of thing and on the fact that social
statu and import is usual measur in term of monei
peopl can obtain monei and materi good merton note by conformingthat is by
work at job and engag in other legal enterpris that pai off thei can also withdraw
from the frai sai that thei will not be driven by a desir for good but will opt out of
the game that domin societi the most withdrawn often tend to be those who emploi
illeg drug to provid their satisfact then there ar the innov those who refus to
plai by the accept rule of the game but turn to outlaw method in order to accomplish
what societi ha told them that thei must achiev to be accept member
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4206 2011 fraud examin manual
social process theori
not all sociologist believ that a person social structur alon control the direct of hi
valu attitud and behavior after all most peopl who resid in even the most
deterior urban area ar lawabid citizen social process theori hold that crimin is a
function of individu social and the socialpsycholog interact peopl have
with the variou organ institut and process of societi
though thei differ in mani respect the variou social process theori all share on basic
concept all peopl regardless of their race cl ass or gender have the potenti to becom
delinqu or crimin
social learn theori
social learn theori hold that crimin behavior is a function of the wai peopl absorb
inform viewpoint and motiv from other most notabl from those with whom
thei ar close such as member of their peer group social learn theorist believ that all
peopl have the potenti to commit crime if thei ar expos to certain kind of
circumst all peopl rais in franc by french parent learn to speak that languag
pole learn to speak polish so too will a person rais with attitud that favor crimin act
respond by commit such act and the person rais and live in an environ where
crimin activ would be unthink will avoid crime inde crime might not even occur
to him as a solut to whatev problem is confront him
theori of differenti associ
the theori of differenti associ is undoubtedli the bestknown among all explan
offer in the unit state to account for crime though it too ha been wide critic on
the ground that it is just about imposs to test
the theori first appear as a systemat formul in 1939 in the third edit of edwin
h sutherland principl of criminolog later sutherland would make hi bestknown
contribut to criminolog by coin the phrase whitecollar crime and write a
monograph on the subject sutherland wa particularli interest in fraud commit by
the elit upperworld busi execut either against sharehold or the public
sutherland said gener motor doe not have an inferior complex unit state steel
doe not suffer from an unresolv oedipu problem and the dupont do not desir to
return to the womb the assumpt that an offend mai have such patholog
distort of the intellect or the emot seem to me absurd and if it is absurd regard
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4207
the crime of businessmen it is equal absurd regard the crime of person in the
econom lower class 1
the theori of differenti associ begin by assert that crimin behavior is learn
explic that idea sutherland specifi as a second point that crimin behavior is learn
in interact with other person in a process of commun if individu acquir
crimin habit or propens were expos to situat circumst and interact
total of a crimin natur it would be rel easi to comprehend how thi process of
commun oper in view of the enorm variat in standard and person to
which ani individu in our societi is expos it becom exceedingli difficult to discern
those critic element that induc crimin behavior without the intervent of some
addit principl
sutherland third point is that crimin beha vior is acquir through particip within
intim person group thi particular stress suggest that the root of crime must be
sought in the social experi of the individu unfortun the process of
social is far from be adequ understood sutherland fourth point indic
that the crimin learn process includ not onli techniqu of commit crime but also
the shape of motiv drive ration and attitud crime techniqu often
involv a high degre of skill pick pocket and not get caught demand consider
adroit and be a success prostitut demand know how to hustl custom
collect monei bui polic protect and deal with a drunken or violent john
fifth sutherland narrow hi focu by indic the kind of pressur that move the
learn process in the direct of accept of illeg pursuit care to keep within the
legal definit of behavior sutherland stipul that the specif direct of motiv and
drive is learn from definit of the legal code as favor or unfavor
and sixth he set out hi core point by establish the principl of differenti
associ accord to thi postul a person becom a crimin becaus of an excess
of definit favor to violat of the law over definit unfavor to violat of
the law then as a mean of demonstr with greater clariti the charact of associ
that have a subsequ effect on behavior sutherland state hi seventh point that
differenti associ mai vari in frequenc durat prioriti and intens but there is
1 quot in gei gilbert on whitecollar crime lexington lexington book 1982
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4208 2011 fraud examin manual
no suggest regard which of these element is apt to be more import than the
other frequent contact mai promot feel of boredom and indiffer on intens
experi mai overwhelm all prior learn or it mai not the axiom hardli help us much
in unravel the causal content of crime
sutherland eighth point concern the natur of learn and again is primarili a didact
statement of common behavior scienc understand rather than a contribut that
move the theori veri far forward learn crimin and delinqu behavior sutherland
assert involv all the mechan that ar involv in ani other learn the kei problem
is not that sutherland is wrong it is that he cast into the spotlight a theoret problem that
ha plagu student of human behavior sinc time immemori if crime is to be
understood as learn like anyth elsesai basketbal skill cook patriot and
flirtingthen ani theori that can unravel it in gredient will at the same time have to set
befor us an understand of all human action sutherland proposit can hardli
pretend to approach so stun an intellectu achiev and in thi respect can be
regard as extraordinarili overambiti or perhap simplist
as hi next to last proposit sutherland stress that learn differ from pure
imit hi last point is a worthwhil remind that while crimin behavior is an
express of gener need and valu it is not explain by these gener need and
valu becaus noncrimin behavior is an express of the same need and valu thi
injunct indic that the gener sometim emploi to account for crime
such as the view that peopl steal becaus thei crave esteem or ar greedi or kill becaus
thei ar unhappyhav littl scientif merit peopl both crimin and noncrimin ar
motiv by much the same need and valu thei becom or do not becom crimin
on the basi of their uniqu respons to common drive for prestig happi success
power wealth and numer other human aspir an individu mai feel a press
need for monei and take an extra weekend job pump ga or try to borrow from a
friend or shrug hi shoulder and figur that thi time hell do without anoth person
feel the same need mai hold up a fast food outlet
social control theori
travi hirschi in hi 1969 book caus of delinqu first articul the social control theori a
particularli import reason for the current domin of control theori as the
interpret scheme for understand crime and delinqu is that unlik theori such
as differenti associ it offer a consider number of testabl proposit such
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4209
proposit take the form of ifthen statement if someth exist or is done then it
foretel that someth will follow such formul allow for experiment test
and rebutt
control theori take it cue from a classic of sociolog emil durkheim suicid in which
the french theoretician wrote
the more weaken the group to which the individu belong the less he depend on
them the more he consequ depend on him self and recogn no other rule of conduct
than what ar found on hi privat interest durkheim 1951 p 209
essenti control theori argu that the institut of the social system train and press
those with whom thei ar in contact into pattern of conform school train for
adjust in societi peer press the etho of success and convent behavior and
parent strive to inculc lawabid habit in their youngsterseven hirschi stress
parent who themselv plai fast and loos with the rule the theori rest on the thesi that
to the extent that a person fail to becom attach to the varieti of control agenc of the
societi hi chanc of violat the law ar increas thi doctrin edg veri close to be
selfevid in it insist that close affili with lawabid peopl group and
organ is predict of lawabid behavior howev it is notabl rich with
subordin statement some of them far from obviou
four aspect of affili ar address by the theori
attach
commit
involv
belief
attach refer primarili to affectiontyp ti with peopl such as parent teacher and
peer commit refer to cost factor involv in crimin activ peopl ar commit to
convent behavior and probabl have invest someth fiscal and emotion in
their ultim success an invest that thei ar wari of risk by mean of a crimin
act commit might involv thing such as obtain a better job or see on children
succe involv concern matter such as time spent on the job that is particip in
activ relat to futur goal and object belief refer to a convict about the
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4210 2011 fraud examin manual
legitimaci of convent valu such as the law in gener and crimin justic
prescript in particular
hirschi insist that there is no import relationship between social class and delinqu
and crime thu a person in ani classlow middl or upperwho default on liaison
with the import form agenc in our societi will be more apt to find himself on a
path that end in crime among the import consider control theori stress
strongli is the bond of affect for convent person the stronger thi bond the
more like the person is to take it into account when and if he contempl a crimin act
hirschi 1969 p 83 what essenti happen the theori suggest is that peopl
confront with the possibl of behav in a lawviol manner ar like to ask of
themselv what will my wife or my mother and father think if thei find out to the
extent that individu believ that other peopl whose opinion ar import to them will
be disappoint or asham and to the extent that thei care deepli that these peopl will
feel thi wai thei will be constrain from engag in the sanction behavior
differenti reinforc theori
differenti rei nforcement theori is anoth attempt to explain crime as a type of learn behavior
it is a revis of sutherland work that in corpor element of psycholog learn
theori popular by b f skinner and the social learn theori discuss abov the
theori wa summar by ronald aker in hi 1977 work deviant behavior a social learn
approach
accord to these behavior theorist peopl learn social behavior by oper condit
behavior control by stimuli that follow the behavior behavior is reinforc when posit
reward ar gain or punish is avoid neg reinforc it is weaken by
neg stimuli punish and loss of reward neg punish whether deviant or
crimin behavior is begun or persist depend on the degre to which it ha been reward
or punish and the reward or punish attach to it altern thi is the theori of
differenti reinforc
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4301
punish and the crimin justic system
the crimin justic system involv peopl and agenc that apprehend and adjud
presum lawbreak and sanction those who either plead guilti or ar convict of
violat the law with whitecollar crime nolo plea nolo contender i do not choos to
disput the alleg ar also common almost invari such plea can reason be
regard as evid of crimin guilt thei ar gener resort to in an attempt by the
defend to avoid the stigma of a crimin label and to undercut the strength of a possibl
civil suit
the us of the word system in regard to crimin justic can be mislead sinc it impli that
there exist an integr network of cooper organ dedic to a common
overarch goal in actual fact thi is far from true the jurisdict morass that mark the
administr of crimin justic demonstr that it is far from be a coher system
the polic typic ar under local control in most citi thei come under the jurisdict
of the mayor or the citi manag though on rare occas such as in st loui law
enforc fall under state jurisdict the trial court gener ar oper by the
counti which also emploi prosecutor the countiesther ar slightli more than 3000
of them in the unit statesalso ar respons for the run of the jail which hous
peopl await trial that cannot rais or ar not allow bail and those who ar confin on
misdemeanor charg in addit counti personnel in the form of sheriff forc ar
larg respons for law enforc in nonurban area in some citi thei serv as the
local polic under contractu arrang the state run the appel court and the
prison where the more seriou offend ar hous in addit privat compani such
as the correct corpor of america have recent begun to take over the oper
of some hold facil both jail and prison as part of a profitmak program that
is legitim by claim of greater effici and lower cost
in 2008 over 73 million peopl were on probat in jail or prison or on parol at year
end crimin justic agenc in the unit state emploi 24 million peopl the system
cost taxpay more than 68 billion in 2006 and that expens ha been rise astronom
in the wake of law that mandat tougher penalti becaus of the fear of such penalti
there ar fewer plea bargain and more trial longer sentenc also have come with the
threestrik law that have overtax exist penal facil
punish and the crimin justic system fraud prevent and deterr
4302 2011 fraud examin manual
calcul on a per capita basi the oper of the crimin justic system in the unit
state cost each taxpay somewhat more than 200 a year an amount veri similar to what
is paid for transport and health care
besid local state and counti law enforc there exist a veri extens feder crimin
justic presenc the feder govern forc primarili deal with offens that cross state
line though when public opinion is arous the us congress ha been known to pretend
that a crime ha interst characterist in order to bring it under the jurisdict of agenc
such as the feder bureau of investig which ha consider greater resourc than
most local constabulari thu for instanc kidnap wa made a feder offens after the
notori lindbergh case on the fictiti basi that childsteal presumpt would carri
their victim across a state boundari
most major prosecut for whitecollar offens ar gener by feder agenc in part
becaus the major of law which proscrib whitecollar crime ar feder statut and rule
of feder regulatori agenc addition most state and local author ar more than
will to yield jurisdict to polic and prosecutor who have larger personnel pool that
special in complex whitecollar crime case
sentenc option
there ar a varieti of sanction avail to the judg and when thei ar charg with
impos sentenc the juri as well among other there is pretrial divers probat
and incapacit or incarcer if the sentenc is imprison it mai be made under
rule that dictat a determin sentenc such as five year or an indetermin sentenc
such as five to ten year there ar some offens where the sentenc is mandatori and
dictat by a set of guidelin that typic allow for a decreas or increas of the stipul
amount of time to be serv if certain other circumst ar present for instanc whether
the offend wa arm
sentenc of whitecollar offend is often complic by the fact that while their
behavior mai have been notabl harm thi most like will be their first crimin offens
thei also typic come to court with an unblemish record of social accomplish
church particip seemingli strong famili ti and an arrai of civil achiev these
kind of credenti work in offend favor when it come time to impos a sentenc upon
them studi of whitecollar crime also point out that judg and defend in such case
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4303
often share similar social and educ background creat a certain empathi in the
sentenc note for instanc the sentenc memorandum file on behalf of a client who
had commit an egregi incom tax violat
in short the court must pass sentenc upon a man with an unblemish record whose
charact is on of the highest and whose achiev have been truli outstand it is
submit that noth in thi record suggest that the defend need prison
rehabilit or that he is ever like again to break the law in consid onli thi man
as a human be it is submit that a prison sentenc is unwarr the record for
total good dure a life span of 44 year weig hs heavili against the isol transgress of
the evas of tax 1
pretrial divers
while not truli a sentenc sinc it is not the consequ of a trial or a plea divers is
often us at the local level for offend who seem suit to what it ha to offer under it
term select individu will be place into some form of treatment program after thei
have been arrest but befor further proceed if it is assum for instanc that their
troubl with the crimin law were fundament relat to alcohol thei mai be
order to attend alcohol anonym meet a certain number of time each week for
a specifi period other offend particularli juvenil might be divert to differ
kind of counsel program or place in a remedi educ group referr to
employ servic might also be mandat
in theori a person can be place in a pretrial divers program almost indefinit though
most judg will stipul a time period if the person successfulli complet the program a
crimin record can be avoid if the accus person fail in the divers program usual
by nonparticip he can be tri for the crime that had earlier been charg against him
in practic some judg demonstr seemingli endless patienc with such offend sinc
thei had origin determin that given the situat thei did not want to imprison the
alleg offend
probat
mani layperson confus probat with parol parol refer to the statu of an offend after he
ha been releas from prison or jail and is place under supervis in the commun
1ibid p 222
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4304 2011 fraud examin manual
probat typic is a sentenc impos prior to and instead of incarcer some judg
howev favor what is call shock probat thei insist that offend serv a brief
timeperhap onli a weekin a penal institut in order to get a tast of what can be in
store for them if thei do not adher to the law and to the probat condit that ar
impos upon them
probat law vari from state to state but the offend typic is place under the control
and guidanc of a probat offic who is to see to it that the condit that ar
establish ar met in practic probat offic tend to be serious overwork and
usual provid onli minim supervis of their charg most of their contact with the
probation mai be onli by wai of telephon call to the person and the person employ
besid probat offic ar expect both to counsel and to control their roster of
probationsrol that often ar incompat few probation for instanc will frankli
discuss person problem with a probat offic when thei ar awar that he can us what
he learn as a basi for send them to prison
most probat agenc ar part of the state bu reaucraci though in larger area thei mai be
oper by the counti about 30 state combin the administr of probat and parol
in a singl agenc
after a person is convict of a crime the probat offic is charg with investig hi
background in order to provid inform that will be help to the judg in determin
what punish to impos the judg almost invari will follow the recommend of
the probat offic though some judg valu their independ insist on report
without ani recommend disposit nonetheless probat offic soon learn what
matter influenc particular judg if thei observ for instanc that a judg will invari be
lenient with an offend who attend church regularli thei will highlight that element if it is
their own judgment that the defend deserv a break thei also can pinpoint item that
thei know will influenc a given judg to impos a harsher sentenc
probat impli a contract between the offend and the crimin justic system most
probat rule requir that the offend adher to some or all of the follow condit
maintain steadi employ
make restitut to the victim for loss or damag
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4305
cooper with the probat offic thi involv among other matter show up
for appoint notifi the offic of chang of address intent to marri a new
job or similar develop
meet famili respons
obei all law mani jurisdict will incar cerat a probation as a violat if thei
believ that he ha commit anoth offens thei revok hi probat statu and
therebi avoid the difficulti of a court proceed the probation can fight thi
disposit and request a hear but few ar like to do so successfulli
rule specif tailor to the particular offend also might be impos probation can
be order to report for urinalysi or other form of drug test on a regular basi or thei
can be forbidden to drive or to go to place where alcohol beverag ar serv until
rel recent most jurisdict forbad probation from associ with peopl who
had a crimin record but these ar often the onli friend a probation might have and the
rule ha come to be regard by mani crimin justic personnel as unreason and
unlik to be obei for probat offic the rule often afford a basi to revok the
freedom of an offend when thei believ that he is continu to violat the law but thei
ar unabl to prove thi
sentenc of probat ar for a fix period of time with the length gener determin
by statut and in term of the serious of the offens violent offend often ar not
allow by law to be put on probat
there have been a number of innov probat tactic includ hous arrest and
electron monitoring2 under electron monitor the probation wear equip that
allow the probat offic to establish hi whereabout at ani time hous arrest usual
involv confin to the place where the person live typic with an except made
for work outsid at a job
oppon of electron monitor see it as a big brother tactic that remind them of the
totalitarian regim depict by georg orwel in hi novel 1984 thei also find hous arrest
too similar to the kind of tactic typic us in some foreign countri to deal with
polit crimin
2see richard a ball c ronald huff and j robert lilli hous arrest and correct polici do time at
home newburi park ca sage 1988
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4306 2011 fraud examin manual
given overcrowd problem in prison the lower cost of keep such peopl on the street
offer an attract altern howev there is alwai the risk that the offend might
commit a seriou crime therebi elicit sever public critic of the judici and probat
author a desir to protect their reput is a major consider in decis to impos
a prison term on a person who arguabl could do quit well in a control commun set
whitecollar crime offend ar usual regard as prime candid for probat thei
ar highli unlik to reoffend usual have famili to support and gener express
remors and sai that thei will never again fall into errant habit of cours thei typic
make a fine appear in court well dress well spoken courteou and contrit
whitecollar offend tend to be older and if imprison might find the atmospher
intoler though there ar a number of feder prisonsscornfulli call countri club
by outsiderswher the popul is larg ma de up of tame whitecollar offend
whitecollar offend also will receiv lighter sentenc if thei cooper with the
author and bear wit against coconspir in on studi it wa found that more
than 42 percent of cooper defend were charg with a singl offens compar to
30 percent of uncoop defend whitecollar offend also ar more readili grant
bail just on person in eight spend ani time incarcer befor trial and for the gener
highstatu offend the figur is fewer than on in twenti in a comparison group of
common crimin at least onethird spent time in jail befor their trial 3
in earli 2010 the sec announc it initi to encourag individu and compani
cooper in investig by offer cooper agreement defer prosecut
agreement and nonprosecut agreement see the updat sec enforc manual
at httpwwwsecgovdivisionsenforceenforcementmanualpdf for further detail of the
tool avail to the sec for encourag cooper
shame
criminologist late have been pai a great deal of attent to the concept of reintegr
shame as a punish that might deter an offend from further wrongdo put forward
by an australian john braithwait who wa the first winner of the associ of certifi
3david weisburd stanton wheeler elin ware and nanci bode crime of the middl class whitecollar
offend in the feder court new haven yale univers press 1991
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4307
fraud examin cressei award shame invo lve two subtl and delic practic first
pressur is put on the offend by those closest to him those he respect and sometim
those he ha victim to acknowledg that what he did is wrong and to feel truli contrit
about hi deed second the offend is reassur that those import to him continu to
regard him with affect and welcom him as a reform person back into the fold
critic believ that braithwait idea mode led on chines and japanes custom might in
theori be extrem effect but that in cynic societi such as the unit state thei ar
not veri like to have much impact on harden lawbreak
in america shame ha tend to take a much harsher approach the tactic wa made
famou by nathaniel hawthorn in the scarlet letter in which an adulter is forc to wear
the letter a sewn into her cloak brand on the hand or forehead wa us in
seventeenth centuri england for thiev and other offend who were spare the more
common punish of death by hang
todai a form of brand character respons to certain crimin offens some state
requir that when an offend is releas from prison after serv time for sexual assault on
a child member of the commun where he will live must be notifi of hi presenc
among them jurisdict increasingli ar resort to such shame approach to isol
offend and warn those thei presum might harm in l996 as a condit of probat
a farmer in pittsfield illinoi wa requir to place a larg sign at the entranc of hi
drivewai read warn a violent felon li ve here travel at your own risk the
offend had hit anoth farmer in the face with a fuel pump
similarli individu convict of drunk drive sometim have to put special licens plate
on their car shoplift mai be requir to take out advertis in their local paper
show their pictur and announc their offens
oppon of such penalti point out that there is littl scientif evid of their valu
and that their legal justif is arguabl thei sai that the aim of justic is not vengeanc
and humili but to restor what wa destroi and to prevent an illeg act from
recur thei do not believ that the shame approach that is becom fashion in
the unit state achiev such end
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4308 2011 fraud examin manual
correct
correct is on of those euphemist word that increasingli ar enter the languag in
order to soften the realiti of a situat correct is the gener term for the process of
administ punish follow a plea or a convict in regard to a crimin offens it
most typic refer to imprison peopl serv time in prison most gener for
feloni while jail hous individu convict of misdemeanor or those await trial who
have been unabl or ar not permit to rais bail to purchas some free time gener
sentenc of a year or less ar serv in jail those that ar longer involv prison time
the term correct came into usag dure a period in which the rule philosophi wa that
confin could reform a lawbreak thu prison for young person were rechristen
as reformatori the programsat least in blueprint focus on educ group therapi
skill train and similar project gear toward allow a releas inmat to live in a selffulfil
manner after releas nonetheless the core of prison exist clearli wa
punit and most observ regard the rehabilit program as littl more than
windowdress
todai the prevail philosophi undergird imprison is label just desert that is
a person who ha hurt other and undermin the wellb of societi ha earn
through hi behavior the consequ of depriv of liberti and the concomit
characterist of imprison there is no need just desert advoc believ to coat
imprison with cozi descriptor it is treatment that an offend deserv becaus of hi
selfinterest illeg behavior
incapacit is the rule rational of the just desert approach by definit imprison
reduc crime by remov the opportun for the offend to violat the law there is of
cours a consider level of crimin activ within a correct institut that primarili
involv drugtak and assault includ sexual assault but at least those outsid the
prison ar protect from the depred of those insid it the kei issu is that virtual
all individu who ar incapacit in an institut set includ those sentenc
under the threestrik law will somedai be releas if thei ar push further into crime
by their prison experi it is possibl that thei might commit more seriou offens upon
their releas than thei would have if thei were given a lesser or lighter sentenc
it is sometim argu that whitecollar crimin need not be imprison sinc their
violat most often ar ti to the occup posit thei occupi and thu their
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4309
pattern of offend can usual be elimin by remov them from their busi or
profession posit doctor will no longer violat the law govern medic benefit
program if their licens to practic medicin is revok nor will insid trader have the
chanc to carri on their illeg activ if thei ar bar from trade either directli or by
proxi
the difficulti with thi reason is that incapacit involv question of equiti that is
whether all those who violat the law ar treat similarli with no favorit to the wealthi
and well place there also is the matter of gener as oppos to specif deterr specif
deterr refer to keep the individu who broke the law from do so again gener
deterr involv demonstr to other the consequ of lawbreak so that thei will
not succumb to the temptat of do so those with philosoph inclin might
seek to puzzl out the justic of punish on person in order to teach other peopl a
lesson but the crimin justic system not concern with such esoter matter seek to
serv the end of both specif and gener deterr in it respons to law violat
type of sentenc
sentenc that involv incapacit can take sever form
determin sentenc
a determin sentenc is on of a fix number of year usual set by the legislatur to be
serv upon convict of a certain offens in socal flat determin sentenc the
offend must serv the entir time in prison sai five year for a fraud violat more often
though decreasingli so in mani jurisdict the flat sentenc can be reduc usual by as
much as onethird for good behavior thi ca rrot is consid import by some prison
administr becaus it offer a reward for conform to institut rule beyond the
avoid of punish mete out within the wall such as solitari confin
a variat on the determin sentenc approach is for the legislatur to set a maximum
term for ani given offens and to allow the sentenc judg to exercis discret to impos
a time period up to that maximum often an accus person will enter a guilti plea dure a
bargain session with the prosecut which will stipul that the person will be
recommend for a sentenc less than the maximum an agreement which judg almost
invari endors or that the person will be allow to plead to a lesser offens than the
more seriou on in order to ensur that the sentenc will not exce a certain amount
of time
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4310 2011 fraud examin manual
indetermin sentenc
indetermin sentenc impos a rang of time that can be serv by the offend sai five to
twenti year thi gap allow the correct author to determin when to releas the
prison base upon hi perform within the institut and an assess of the
likelihood that he will continu to pose a danger to the commun onc the most popular
form of sentenc becaus it wa believ that prison offici possess the skill and
wisdom to make accur judgment about reoffend indetermin sentenc have come
into disreput dure the past decad the object larg have focus on the inequ
involvedtwo peopl commit the same offens often serv vastli differ prison
term in addit prison author were deem to us the indetermin sentenc unfairli
to take reveng on peopl thei did not like as a punit weapon rather than as a
predict device4
mandatori sentenc and threestrik law
legislatur began adopt mandatori sentenc for crime out of dissatisfact with what
thei regard as toosoft judg the move ha been led by the work of the us sentenc
commiss a typic mandatori sentenc will disallow parol in the case of certain violent
crime or repeat offens similarli judg will not be permit to place certain kind of
offend on probat or to suspend their sentenc most judg of cours regard thi
inroad against their discretionari power and autonomi unfavor
in on of it more controversi action the us sentenc commiss in novemb l991
establish rule for sentenc corpor for divers whitecollar offens the purpos
of the rule wa to provid just punish adequ deterr and incent for
organ to maintain intern mechan for prevent detect and report
crimin conduct the commiss rule reflect the follow principl first the court
must whenev practic order the organ to remedi ani harm caus by the
offens the resourc expend to remedi the harm should not be view as punish
but rather as a mean of make victim whole for the harm caus second if the
organ oper primarili for a crimin purpos or primarili by crimin mean the
fine should be set suffici high to divest the organ of all of it asset third the
fine rang for ani organ should be base upon the serious of the offens and the
culpabl of the organ the serious of the offens gener will be reflect by
4see further jame m byrn arthur j lurigio and joan petersilia ed smart sentenc the emerg of
indetermin sentenc newburi park ca sage 1992
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4311
the highest of a the monetari gain b the monetari loss or c the amount note in a
guidelin offens fine tabl culpabl will gener be determin by the step taken by the
organ prior to the offens to prevent and detect crimin conduct the level and extent
of involv in or toler of the offens by certain personnel and the organ
action sinc an offens ha been commit
the sentenc schedul permit a court to place condit on the wai a busi is run if the
court believ that these chang ar import to prevent further offend establish
more effect account procedur hire a wast control specialist or expand the
board of director beyond a group of intim can be some of the condit place upon a
corpor on the other hand if a compani ha establish an intern regimen that seek
to control illeg action it can receiv credit from the court for thi in regard to reduct of
a fine or other stipul penalti the sentenc guidelin provid howev that a
corpor gener is not elig for a fine mitig if the crime wa commit by a
more senior employe with manageri authority5
prison
william penn is wide credit with begin the practic of imprison in the unit
state in england in penn time capit puni shment wa the usual respons to most crime
with more than 250 design offens carri that penalti some mitig had been
introduc by the practic of transport wherebi select offend were dispatch to
the american coloni and after america gain it freedom from british rule to australia
of the more than 1800 prison in the unit state todai 372 ar classifi as maximum
secur 480 as medium secur and 969 as minimum secur sinc prison construct
ha not kept up with prison popul overcrowd is a seriou problem and a larg
number of state ar under feder court order to reduc overcrowd and otherwis
improv prison condit
more than fourfifth of prison inmat have a record of prior crimin offens more than
half ar incarcer for violent behavior and nearli on in five commit the offens to
obtain monei for drug almost nine out of ten jail inmat ar adult male prior to
incarcer the median incom of inmat wa lower than 10000 a year
5for a thorough review of the us sentenc commiss guidelin for organiz offens see
henri j amoroso organiz etho and corpor crimin liabil campbel law review 17
1995 4770
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4312 2011 fraud examin manual
todai the growth in prison popul ha been particularli pronounc in l985 there
were 313 incarcer peopl in the unit state per everi 100000 peopl that figur rose
to 509 inmat per 100000 person in 2008 the growth larg wa fuel by the
imprison of drug offend at the end of june 2008 there were 2310984 peopl in
feder and state prison and local jail thi repres a rise of 08 percent from the end of
2007 less than the averag annual growth of 24 percent from 20002007
the total number of peopl in jail and prison in the unit state ha tripl over the last
sever decad as politician have press for tougher sentenc law and have built more
prison to seek to assuag public fear about violent crime
critic of prison continu to argu that the right of prison ar too liber prison have
us the court to seek to obtain greater privileg in regard to religion and speech medic
care vocat and educ train due process and gener live condit
at the same time prison have becom increasingli violent particularli as ethnic and racial
group clash interethn and racial clash have led to suggest that prison ought to be
segreg along racial and ethnic line to reduc outbreak of violenc
feder prison which tend to be more richli fund ar regard as superior to virtual all
state institut and it is in them that most incarcer whitecollar offend will do
their time
there ar five differ secur level in order to confin offend in an appropri
manner thei ar minimum secur low secur medium secur high secur
and administr
rehabilit
intens debat in the area of correct ha center about the question of whether prison
and other program can rehabilit those expos to them a famou studi by robert
martinson review more than 200 carefulli design research studi of divers kind of
treatment program for offend and conclud that none of them show much if ani
abil to turn person awai from a life of crime6 more recent some scholar now
maintain that martinson research wa flaw and that hi conclus wa inaccur thei
6robert martinson what work question and answer about prison reform public interest 35
19742254
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4313
stress in particular that the error ha been to look for improv in all those who undergo
on or anoth kind of treatment regimen instead the effort should be to determin what
work for what kind of peopl and to concentr on these conclus when formul
treatment approaches7
certainli some whitecollar offend have us the incarcer experi to redesign
their live in a manner veri much for the better charl w colson a onetim special
assist to presid nixon wa describ by herbert klein nixon intim friend as
on of the meanest peopl i ever knew caught up in the waterg scandal colson
negoti a guilti plea to on count of obstruct of justic in regard to hi involv in
the burglari of the offic of daniel ellsberg in an effort to defam ellsberg who had
releas the pentagon paper which show the falsiti of govern claim about the
progress of the vietnam war colson receiv a onetothre year prison sentenc and wa
fine 5000
dure hi time as an inmat at the max well feder prison colson form the prison
fellowship which sought to chang the live of convict through a combin of
practic assist and relentless evangel 8 so success wa colson that two decad
after hi releas he wa award the templeton prize for progress in religion a prize that
carri a stipend of more than l million twenti year later i see how god ha us my
life colson note when receiv the award sometim the greatest advers turn out
to be the greatest bless
not all whitecollar offend demonstr so extraordinari a turnabout but cynic ar wont
to sai that if on of the problem involv in maintain control in america turbul
prison system ha it basi in the lifestyl of mani offend a better class of prison
that is more whitecollar offendersmi ght help solv part of that problem
jail
there almost invari is littl in the wai of treatment avail in jail thei simpli
warehous prison jail origin in franc in the l600 and through the centuri thei
7franci t cullen and paul gendreau the effect of correct treatment reconsid the
noth work debat in lynn goodstein and dori layton mackenzi ed the american prison
issu in research and polici new york plenum press 1989 pp 2430
8t carlson deliv us from evil prison fellowship save gra ce polici review 62 19927222 see
charl w colson born again old tappan nj chosen book 1976 colson life sentenc minneapoli
world wide 1979
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4314 2011 fraud examin manual
have been regard as hellhol of pestil and cruelti in mediev england a jail
sentenc wa regard as a sentenc to death sinc condit were so abomin todai
more than 8 million peopl ar place in jail each year some for sever stai the great
major ar poorli educ unemploi impoverish and drug ridden
communitybas correct
to eas overcrowd communitybas correct facil have becom commonplac
while some peopl might be sentenc directli to such program thei typic hous
individu who have complet time insid institut wall communitybas program
emphas the us of neighborhood residenti reentri center also known as halfwai
hous comprehens sanction center and home confin
parol
parol deriv from the french and mean word as in word of honor is the plan
releas and commun supervis of offend befor the expir of their sentenc
under most state law an offend is elig for parol after serv onethird of hi
sentenc parol decis usual ar made by a board or a commiss base on it
member conclus regard whether the off nder will remain at liberti without violat
the law there is pressur on parol board member to be notabl conserv in their
action becaus ani repetit of an offens by someon thei releas particularli if the
offens is heinou will trigger commun outrag against the board on the other hand
overcrowd prison condit dictat earli releas to make room for newcom
parol is consid an act of grace and onc on parol the inmat is suppos to be
close supervis by a parol offic though thi rare happen becaus of extraordinarili
heavi caseload
pardon
a person mai appli for a pardon that if grant releas him from further punish and
restor the civil right that ar forfeit upon convict for a crime includ the right to
vote to serv on a juri or to hold public offic
there ar two type of pardon l full and absolut and 2 condit full and absolut
pardon usual ar grant onli after convict and upon a presumpt show that the
offend wa actual innoc the full and absolut pardon that richard nixon receiv
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4315
from presid gerald ford befor possibl crimin proceed had begun wa a rare
except to thi rule
a condit pardon impli guilt and for thi reason mai be reject by the person to
whom it is offer the grant of a pardon or other clemenc is the prerog of the
execut branch the presid or state governor and mai not be compel by the
petition or by the judiciari
crime statist
uniform crime report
the feder bureau of investig fbi compil statist on the extent of crime in the
unit state in a document call the uniform crime report ucr the report is put
togeth on the basi of inform voluntarili submit by more than l5000 law
enforc depart thi includ virtual everi signific public polic agenc in
the countri
the ucr divid crime into part i and part ii offens part i offens ar murder and
nonneglig manslaught forcibl rape robberi aggrav assault burglari larceni
arson and auto theft while most peopl would agre that these categori appear to
incorpor most seriou crimin behavior the somewhat arbitrari natur of the categori
should not be overlook in regard to rape for instanc the categori also embrac
attempt rape and studi have shown that men mai be arrest for attempt rape for
behavior no more omin at least in comparison with forcibl rape than pat a femal
stranger on the behind in a rather menac wai the polic charg a seriou crime in order
to more readili persuad the offend to plead to a lesser offens
the inclus of arson on the list of major offens illustr that polit concern enter
into the compil it wa ad to the fbi part i tabl about a decad ago when
legisl decid that the offens need to be highlight and mandat that the fbi
upgrad it
part ii offens includ most other violat though thei omit traffic offens and pai no
heed to seriou whitecollar crime when thei do mention offens that might fall into the
whitecollar categori often what thei ar tabul as offens includ crime that might
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4316 2011 fraud examin manual
otherwis not be consid whitecollar for exampl for classif purpos forgeri
includ the pass of bad check by drug addict without bank account when you add in
theft of servic welfar fraud petti confid game and credit card fraud you can
account for virtual all of the crime charg under possibl whitecollar crime head
the ucr figur ar base on what is call offens known to the polic data is also
provid on arrest though not on whether the case is resolv by a determin of guilt
rate ar report per 100000 person a matter which skew the crime pictur in some
jurisdict in la vega for instanc the crime rate is higher per capita than it reason
ought to be becaus the figur pai no heed to the veri larg tourist influx
nation crime survei
the nation crime victim survei ncv is a statist studi carri out by the
bureau of the censu that annual conduct interview with 51000 individu about
experi of crime victim it show ucr serious underreport that is the
person interview report a much greater amount of crime than that which figur in the
ucr report about 55 percent of crime of violenc and onequart of theft ar found to
be report to the polic the nc make no attempt to measur ani behavior that would
fit into the categori of whitecollar crime
the ucr result show that crime victim and offend share the same demograph
characterist the averag victim is young male uneduc and poor a somewhat
counterintuit result is that as wealth increas the likelihood of be a victim of violenc
or burglari decreas howev wealth is correl posit with victim by person
theft and larceni
selfreport survei
selfreport survei typic involv a questionnair on which a respond indic which
offens he ha commit and how often he ha done so within a specifi period of time
thei invari ar administ to juvenil becaus youngster can more readili be locat
in classroom for instanc and will be more like to cooper with the research at least
if thei ar persuad by the guarante of anonym
the survei show that the most common juvenil offens ar truanci alcohol us and
recours to fals identif typic to gain entranc to a place outofbound for
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4317
underag person or to bui liquor veri few youngster do not commit ani offens at all
that if known and taken serious could not result in offici action against them
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4401
whitecollar crime
what is whitecollar crime
sinc the term wa first us there have been constant disput regard what is or should
be the definit of whitecollar crime the design wa coin by edwin h sutherland in
decemb l939 dure hi presidenti address in philadelphia to the american sociolog
societi ten year later sutherland publish a monograph white collar crime in which he
offer an arguabl vagu definit of the concept in a footnot whitecollar crime wa
said to be crime in the upper whitecollar class which is compos of respect or at
least respect busi and profession men these crime were confin to act
perform by whitecollar person in occup role therebi exclud most of their
case of murder adulteri and intox sinc these ar not customarili a part of their
occup procedur 1
a few page after thi definit forai sutherland illustr whitecollar crime through
exampl of theft by chain store employe and overcharg by garag mechan and watch
repair there wa littl consist between hi definit and hi illustr of what
might fall within it
nonetheless the term whitecollar crime ha been wide incorpor into popular and
scholarli languag throughout the world though the design econom crime is sometim
us as well the difficulti with econom crime is that so mani illeg act includ murder
ar often commit in order to achiev econom gain the unit nation for it part
adopt the phrase abus of power for those behavior that correspond to whitecollar crime
as defin by sutherland in addit other design such as upperworld crime crime by the
power avoc crime crime in the suit and organiz crime ar sometim emploi to
design more or less the same phenomena as whitecollar crime
a major difficulti with the concept as formul by sutherland is that he is design an
offens categori that ha no equival in the law certain statut offens can be identifi
as those that by and larg will be commit by person in the elit class offens such as
antitrust violat and insid trade but what is to be done definition with sai the
proofread who is paid littl more than minimum wage and learn from inform that
he is work on of a merger between the compani and on of it strong competitor he
1edwin h sutherland whitecollar crime new york dryden press 1949 p 9
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4402 2011 fraud examin manual
bui stock and reap a consider profit but is then caught and prosecut as an insid
trader is thi person to be regard as a whitecollar crimin numer further exampl
of situat that ar definition ambigu can be offer
the dictionari of crimin justic data terminolog publish by the feder bureau of justic
statist defin whitecollar crime as nonv iolent crime for financi gain commit by
mean of decept by person whose occup statu is entrepreneuri profession or
semiprofession and util their special occup skill and opportun also
nonviol crime for financi gain util decept and commit by anyon have
special technic and profession knowledg of busi and govern irrespect of the
person occup
thi definit certainli catch in it net a wide arrai of wrongdoer but critic fault it for
it explicit omiss of violent offens what about a doctor who knowingli perform
unnecessari surgeri in order to collect a larg fee and end up caus the patient to die or
a surgeon who kill a patient becaus of hi incompet or how about the numer
death and injuri from toxic wast pollut air and violat of health and safeti
regul ar such result not the product of whitecollar crime
though there is no consensu within the scholarli commun on definit todai of
whitecollar crime is that propos by albert j reiss jr and albert biderman
whitecollar crime violat ar those violat of law to which penalti ar attach that
involv the us of a violat posit of econom ic power influenc or trust in the legitim
econom or polit institut order for the purpos of illeg gain or to commit an
illeg act for person or organiz gain 2
opportun is an import ingredi of whitecollar crime an unemploi youth need
fund might turn to arm robberi or burglari he is in no posit to violat the antitrust
law though do so might well provid him with a great deal more fund and lesser
likelihood of be caught the bank presid or the compani chief execut for their
part can deal with a person cash shortag through a varieti of illeg tactic that ar ti to
their busi posit crimin will often commit offens in wai with which thei ar
most familiar wai that thei can most easili accomplish and those that have the lowest
albert j reiss jr and albert biderman data sourc on whitecollar lawbreak washington dc
nation institut of justic u s depart of justic 1980
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4403
likelihood of dire consequ an oftenunherald bonu of social statu is access to
opportun for less dirti more decent kind of crime
public percept of whitecollar crime
studi indic that whitecollar offens particularli those that inflict physic harm ar
seen by the public to be as seriou as more tradit kind of crime those offens that
as on earli criminologist note carri a brimston smell
a poll by the nation survei of crime sever gather the opinion of 60000
respond l8 year of ag or older about a list of crimin act each respond wa ask
to rate the crime list the result show among other thing that fraud by a grocer and
a l0 embezzl were perceiv to be as seriou as an obscen phone call accept of
a bribe by a citi politician and an arm robberi that net l000 were also rate at about
the same level the follow tabl present the result of the studi show the crime in
order of increas serious and indic the whitecollar offens in boldfac type
nation survei of crime sever rate select offens stimuli
rate offens stimuli
19 an employe embezzl 10 from hi employ
19 a store owner knowingli put larg egg into contain mark
extra larg
19 a person make an obscen phone call
31 a person break into a home and steal 100
32 an employ illeg threaten to fire employe if thei join a
labor union
36 a person knowingli pass a bad check
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4404 2011 fraud examin manual
37 a labor uni on offici illeg threaten to organ a strike if an
employ hire nonunio n worker
54 a real estat agent refus to sell a hous to a person beca us of that
person race
54 a person threaten to harm a victim unless the victim give him monei the
victim give him 10 and is not harm
57 a theater owner knowingli show pornograph movi to a minor
61 a person cheat on hi feder incom tax return and avoid pai
10000 in tax
61 a person run a prostitut racket
62 a person beat a victim with hi fist the victim requir treatment by a
doctor but not hospit
62 an employe embezzl 1000 from hi employ
64 an employ refus to hire a qualifi person becaus of that
person race
65 a person us heroin
69 a factori knowingli get rid of it wast in a wai that pollut the
water suppli of a citi as a result on person becom ill but doe not
requir medic treatment
69 a person beat a victim with hi fist the victim requir hospit
80 a person steal an unlock car and sell it
82 know that a shipment of cook oil is bad a store owner decid
to sell it anywai onli on bottl is sold and the purchas is treat by
a doctor but not hospit
86 a person perform an illeg abort
90 a citi offici take a bribe from a compani for hi help in get a
citi build contract for the compani
90 a person arm with a lead pipe rob a victim of 1000
92 sever larg compani illeg fix the retail price of their product
94 a person rob a victim of 10 at gunpoint no physic harm occur
94 a public offici take 1000 of public monei for hi own us
96 a polic offic knowingli make a fals arrest
96 a person break into a home and steal 1000
100 a govern offici intention hinder the investig of a
crimin offens
109 a person steal properti worth 10000 from outsid a build
112 a compani pai a bribe to a legisl to vote for a law favor
the compani
118 a man beat a stranger with hi fist the victim requir hospit
120 a polic offic take a bribe not to interfer with an illeg gambl
oper
120 a person give the floor plan of a bank to a bank robber
133 a person arm with a lead pipe rob a victim of 10 the victim is injur
and requir hospit
135 a doctor cheat on claim he make to a feder health insur plan
for patient servic he gain 10000
139 a legisl take a bribe from a compani to vote for a law favor the
compani
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4405
146 a person us forc rob a victim of 10 the victim is hurt and requir
hospit
155 a person break into a bank at night and steal 10000
157 a counti judg take a bribe to give a light sentenc in a crimin case
166 a person us forc rob a victim of 1000 the victim is hurt and requir
treatment by a doctor but not hospit
178 know that a shipment of cook oil is bad a store owner decid
to sell it anywai onli on bottl is sold and the purchas di
195 a person kill a victim by recklessli drive an automobil
197 a factori knowingli get rid of it wast in a wai that pollut the
water suppli of a citi as a result 20 peopl becom ill but none
requir medic treatment
199 a factori knowingli get rid of it wast in a wai that pollut the
water suppli of a citi as a result on person di
201 a man forcibl rape a woman her physic injuri requir treatment by a
doctor but not hospit
338 a person run a narcot ring
391 a factori knowingli get rid of it wast in a wai that pollut the
water suppli of a citi as a result 20 peopl die
439 a person plant a bomb in a public build the bomb explod and on
person is kill
721 a person plant a bomb in a public build the bomb explod and 20
peopl ar kill
sourc the nation survei of crime sever by marvin wolfgang robert figlio paul traci and
simon singer 1985 washington dc us govern print offic pp vix
crime of the middl class a look at whitecollar crime
survei carri out subsequ provid essenti the same resultthat the public as a
whole regard some whitecollar offens as seriou matter the difficulti with such
survei howev is that thei fail to convei in ani effect manner the complex of the
whitecollar offens and the statu of the offend it is on thing for a respond to sai
that he regard toxic wast offens that produc death as veri seriou violat but quit
anoth for that person to regard the corpor execut respons for such matter as an
evil person becaus of thi whitecollar off nder receiv much less sever penalti than
the street peopl who commit the offens that the public gener regard to be as seriou
as their
the debat over just what constitut a whitecollar crime and what drive the whitecollar
crimin ha been rage ever sinc sutherland semin work the author of crime of the
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4406 2011 fraud examin manual
middl classes3 offer a contribut that for the most part avoid theorybuild offer
instead a statist report of offend convict in feder court
us feder court record and an unpreced access to probat offic
presentenc investig report psi the author determin that most peopl
convict of whitecollar crime ar not upper class that social statu ha onli an indirect
signific and that onc a convict is attain higher statu often mean a stiffer
sentenc the most import factor is how person situat and organiz
opportun combin to make crime possibl and attract to averag american 4 white
collar crime doe have a uniqu place in criminolog but the split is not between an
underworld of the desper poor and an elit univers of highstak shyster whitecollar
crime ha some relat to both of these mytholog world but is larg the provinc of
the middl class where organiz posit is more import than pedigre and
person situat ar more forc than sociolog trend
profil of offend
the wide arrai of crime call whitecollarf rom antitrust and secur violat to
bank embezzl and credit fraudmak a ssembl a profil of the typic offend
difficult but not imposs most defend ar white male with a modera te social statu
thei ar slightli more like than the gener popul to have a high school diploma 78
percent versu 69 percent or a colleg degre 247 percent versu 19 percent for the
gener public the major then ar not highli educ and in at least on categori
own on hometh offend fall behind the averag citizen while 55 percent of
american own their home onli 453 percent of the offend do social statu is a factor
in whitecollar crimin but as the author point out the posit confer by statu
rather than statu itself empow the offend 5 so a corpor manag who wa
promot from insid the compani with onli a ninthgrad educ and who doesnt own
hi home is not as atyp an offend as might be suppos the kei is that by hi
posit in hi compani he ha the opportun and mean to commit a crime
3 weisburd david et al crime of the middl class whitecollar offend in the feder court new haven yale
up 1991
4 weisburd p xiv
5 weisburd p 61
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4407
cressei studi
donald r cressei found in a 1953 studi of embezzl that most of those he examin
had live beyond their mean for some time befor decid to embezzl 6 crime extend
thi statement more gener remark the most interest fact about the whitecollar
offend aggreg financi statu is not the valu of their asset but the extent of their
liabil offend often have the materi good associ with success peopl but
mai bare be hold their financi selv togeth 7 these peopl have assembl a
structur of respect but it is often built on the sand of debt the cressei studi is
discuss in more detail in the chapter on occup fraud
effect of statu
what is loos call class or social statu doe have an effect on crime for exampl
on defend us hi posit as chairman of a local bank board to set up loan for hi
ail wood chip compani the loan would never have been approv without the
chairman influenc and he never report them in hi proxi statement to the bank
sharehold ultim the bank lost close to 6 million in thi case the chairman class
stand made a differ hi ruse squar with the document knowledg that offic
and manag commit the busi crime with the widest impact in term of dollar
amount and victim while owner and worker gener commit narrow scheme
organiz opportun
of all factor organiz opportun remain the determin aspect of whitecollar
crime against sutherland emphasi on an elit group run highclass sting oper
crime show that organ and complex make a larger differ than the offend
social statu in a fascin case a church group us it daycar center to defraud the
feder govern of approxim 1 million their arrang with the depart of
agricultur requir the daycar administr to submit monthli voucher report the
number of meal thei had serv and the cost of food and labor when auditor descend
upon the scam thei found that for about 79000 in actual expens the administr had
submit almost 1 million in food cost and 400000 for labor teacher said thei
sometim brought food to the center themselv becaus the children werent be fed
properli there were also report that mor ning snack were never serv unless the
govern inspector were expect that the same children were run through serv line
6 weisburd p 65n
7 weisburd p 65
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4408 2011 fraud examin manual
twice when inspector were present and that some children were buse in from other
daycar center on inspect dai 8 the exampl show accord to the author that a
crimin posit in an organ and hi abil to organ the scam have far more
bear on the crime than social statu or class alon
the middl class
peopl of moder social stand ar in fact more like than member of the upper class
to commit highli organ crime from within a corpor structure9 some offend do fit
the stereotyp of respect and high social statu in whitecollar crime but most of
them ar solidli middl class thei appear to repres the veri broad middl of the
societi much abov the poverti line but for the most part far from elit social statu the
author sai offend ar mostli commonplac not unlik the averag american in most
respect though perhap more often with person live that ar in some state of disarrai
the singl qualiti that distinguish them from other american is that thei have been
convict of a feder crime 10
methodolog
all the conclus in the crime of the middl class ar qualifi the author and
research drew from the feder court record of seven districts11 and obtain access to
the presentenc report psi prepar by probat offic psi had never been
avail to research befor and the close read of these document form a central
part of the project admittedli the crime and specif case studi were select not
drawn from a random sampl eight crime were target as whitecollar secur
violat antitrust suit briberi and influencepeddl embezzl mail or wire fraud
tax fraud fals claim and statement in offici document and credit fraud certain
violationssuch as rico charg against organ crime and break import law
were exclud judg to lie outsid the paramet of what most peopl think of as white
collar activ
8 weisburd p 94
9 the author opin that the individu and in depend of profess like doctor or lawyer
discourag their involv in the organiz network that drive these crime though we ar warn that
the grow particip of profe sional in larg privat organ such as hmo mai chang both
the opportun for and attitud toward crimin activ 8991
10 weisburd p 73
11 the district and central citi were as follow central california lo angel northern georgia
atlanta northern illinoi chicago maryland balti more southern new york manhattan and the bronx
northern texa dalla and western washington seattl a detail discuss of the sampl process is
includ as appendix 1
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4409
even within their eight categori the author didnt examin everi singl case decid to
focu on no more than 30 case within each categori in order to facilit the close read
of psi thei warn that their find were taken from studi peopl actual convict
so the result dont take into account how often charg ar actual file and follow up by
prosecut by deal with the convict thei focus on the treatment of peopl alreadi
insid the feder system
final the longrang natur of the project meant that the studi sampl year
19761978 were consider past befor the find were publish the sentenc
guidelin hand down in 1984 and adopt in 1987 make some materi that judg
consid at their discret like the dollar amount of a crime a mandatori element of
sentenc at the same time the sentenc act systemat exclud judgment base on
a defend moral charact which had previous been a standard in assess
wheeler and compani write that these develop will have to be accommod in
futur studi but thei dont expect that such trend will serious affect the gener pictur
thei present for exampl we see no reason to believ that the role of organiz
opportun in whitecollar crime is ani differ in substanc in 1990 than it wa in the
late 1970 although the particular organ singl out for public inquiri and
prosecut mai well have chang 12
with these qualif in mind it remain us to consid the find of thi report
the follow chart summar the rank of offend by social statu and in respect to
certain demograph featur
offend rank by statu with select demograph inform
high
antitrust
secur
these offend commit the crime with the largest dollar impact and the
widest geograph scope thei ar overwhelmingli white 99plu and male
991 for antitrust 978 for secur the group ar equal like to
hold a colleg degre 409 in either case and their fraud were usual
occup in natur there ar reveal contrast when these two type of
offend ar compar
1 almost 97 of antitrust offend had been steadili emploi in the
12 weisburd pxv
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4410 2011 fraud examin manual
year preced their crime while onli about 60 of the secur
offend had continu held a job
2 the antitrust had a median ratio of asset to liabil of 200000
asset to 40000 liabil the secur offend medianli held
57500 in asset with 54000 in liabil
3 antitrust violat were more like to own their own home 735 vs
582 and to be marri 957 vs 807 than secur offend
middl
tax fraud
briberi
these offend ar mainli white male around 45 year old their crime ar
not usual occupationaljust 15 for tax fraud and less than 18 for
briberi roughli 57 of offend own their own home and about 28
held a colleg degre their median asset rang from 4500049500
median liabil were between 19000 and 23500 the author remark that
although tax fraud is a typic whitecollar crime twothird of the tax
offend work in the manufactur or nonprofession servic sector
low
credit fraud
mail fraud
fals claim
thi group wa not as like to be white715 for credit fraud 768 for
mail fraud 618 for fals claimsor male848 for credit fraud 821
for mail fraud 847 for fals claim thei were gener younger than the
other categori offend less than 40 year old less like to be marri
about 50 and less like to own their own home roughli 3445 across
the three crime type their net worth as per the ratio of asset to liabil
wa remark low 70007000 for credit fraud 20003500 for mail
fraud 40005000 for fals claim
outsid hierarchi
bank embezzl
these offend were place outsid the rank becaus thei were
dramat younger a mean ag of 31 and more like to be femal 448
female552 male than the other gr oup while nearli 25 of the low
statu group wa unemploi at the time of their crime onli 3 of
embezzl were without a job just slightli abov the 28 rate for high
statu offend thei ar the group least like to have a colleg degre
129 or to own their own home 284 their median net worth wa
2000 in asset with 3000 in liabil male embezzl were usual
manag of a local bank oper while femal were most often teller
or cleric worker
howev difficult it mai prove to be to sort out the demographi of crime the strength of
the analysi li in it trace of the path of crimin through the feder system follow
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4411
their core group from offens to convict the author report on gener trend in the
treatment and sentenc of whitecollar crimin the most surpris conclus state
that peopl of higher social statu onc convict ar more like than similar offend to
receiv prison time and to be fine
cooper defend
some standard assumpt still appli for exampl inform on on cohort doe help
over 42 percent of cooper defend were charg with a singl violat while onli
30 percent of uncoop defend were so lucki also whitecollar defend receiv
bail rather easili just on person in eight spend ani time incarcer befor trial and for
the gener highstatu antitrust defend the figur is fewer than on in 20 by
comparison in a control group of common crimin ie peopl convict of the
nonviol econom crime of postal theft or postal fraud at least 13 of the defend
spent time in jail befor go to trial
plea by whitecollar defend
whitecollar defend ar more like to insist on a trial than other offend in at least 90
percent of feder case defend will plead guilti avoid the expens and effort of a
trial but over 18 percent of defend in the crime sampl as oppos to the usual ten
percent pled not guilti in case like bank embezzl usual simpl case with
clear evid plea bargain ar easili negoti and prosecutor mai activ seek guilti
plea 14 the decis on how to plead vari with the offend as much as the offens for
exampl femal bank teller were especi prone to plead not guilti while mani of the
male embezzlersgener higherlevel offici involv in more complex crime
proceed to trial of all whitecollar defend secur offend ar the on most
like to insist on their dai in court evid both the govern and the defend in
these case feel more strongli about their chanc to win
judgment
judgment against whitecollar defend often involv an assess of person suffer
it is wide held that when convict of a crime these peopl suffer a greater blow
13 postal theft and postal forgeri were select as econom crime without a direct link to violenc other
common crime such as burglari or larceni ar state offens and thu ar not appropri to thi studi of
the feder system postal theft involv act like steal governmentissu check such as welfar payment
postal forgeri involv the act of cash these item clearli the choic of these crime and not other for
comparison is debat
14 weisburd p 114
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4412 2011 fraud examin manual
person and profession than street crimin mani observ think thi suffer
should be acknowledg in assess a sentenc on feder judg is quot as sai
the whitecollar crimin by virt ue of hi convict ha suffer a loss of posit usual
loss of employ sometim statu in hi profess other time the abil to ever find
employ in anyth requir a fidel bond or what have you wherea the common
street crimin hasnt had a career loss of a similar natur inde in some area the
convict of a crime is some sort of a badg of matur 15
person suffer
examin psi the author found that in about 65 percent of the case overal person
suffer wa said to have plai an overwhelm role in the defend case secur
offend and embezzl top the list with 70 and 87 percent of these peopl
respect report some hardship of cours the report involv statement by the
defend or their famili which could be selfserv
and in actual look at object materialsuch as the loss of employ marit
separ and divorc or mental health problemsth author found the result
ambigu credit fraud perpetr for exampl seldom report ani suffer but
thei had a 20 percent divorc rate dure the time of their prosecut the highest in the
studi and there were often larg gap between differ type of crime compar to the
secur offend with a 70 percent rate of suffer onli about 24 percent of antitrust
offend had similar complaint the discrep mai lie in how differ crime ar
view antitrust violat who steal for their compani and actual provid the
servic thei sai thei do arent seen as harshli as those who steal from their
compani 16 secur offend ar stigmat b ecaus their crime ar often against
their own client while bank embezzl with over 87 percent report suffer ar
judg with particular strict becaus thei steal from their employ 17
in summari the author believ that the extra legal suffer of whitecollar defend ha
some valid but it not alwai possibl to be sure that prosecut alon caus the
hardship the contradictori imag of these crimin as both exception privileg and
15 weisburd p 116
16 weisburd p 124
17 weisburd p 125
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4413
especi harass overst their real experi in the legal system neither factor is as
great as the standard rhetor might suggest
imprison
crime doe find that the highest statu groupan titrust violat were the least like to
receiv prison time about 1 in 5 and to draw the shortest sentenc 18 month secur
fraud led the group with over 67 percent do time follow by tax fraud 589 percent
and mail fraud 551 percent but in consid all offend in all group the author
discov that the higher an individu statu the more like the person wa to be
imprison all els be equal doctor will have about a 30 percent greater likelihood of
be imprison for a whitecollar crime than truck driver and almost a 13 percent
greater likelihood than manag 18 judg seem to find peopl of higher prestig more at
fault or in other word more blameworthi in the commiss of their crime
on remark variabl in determin the sever of punish wa where the case wa
tri the district of maryland northern illinoi and northern texa tend toward
harsher sentenc northern georgia and southern new york hand down the lightest
on
more often than prison the punish of choic for whitecollar crimin is the
imposit of fine wherea 6 percent of the common crimin in the survei receiv
fine all of the antitrust violat did embezz ler were the least like group to be fine but
even so their 15 percent rate far exceed the norm for fine as well as imprison
higher statu usual meant a higher penalti analysi show that white defend those
with more impecc record and those who have higher class posit ar more like to
be fine 19 but while the decis to fine seem base on statu the actual levi ar often
compar low for antitrust suit the mean fine wa 9808 for embezzl it wa
just 1397 even welloff offend got off light a man convict of fix the price of
candi bar in an eastern state with a net worth exceed 190000 wa fine 3500
anoth defend whose net worth approach 14 million wa fine 5000 for credit
fraud onli 4 percent of offend were ever given the statut maximum penalti
18 weisburd p 143
19 weisburd p 157
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4414 2011 fraud examin manual
obvious most whitecollar crime dont even approach the billiondollar level of the
stereotyp an accur pictur actual look rather mundan for everi truli complic
and rarifi offens accord to wheeler and hi colleagu there ar mani other that
ar simpl and could be carri out by almost anyon who can read write and give an
outward appear of stabil 20 more than anyth els more than statu or class
posit or heritag the whitecollar crimin need an opportun and some sort
of organ
contribut factor
the author posit sever factor which have contribut to the rise problem of
econom crime
america economi increasingli run on credit which often mean rise person debt
the offend in the sampl often show seriou discrep between their
resourc and their commit 21
new inform technolog mean that the opportun for wrongdo is grow
and mani of the techniqu ar not wide comprehend by busi or individu
govern program distribut larg amount of monei make an entic target
for defalc
the import of credenti in a profession societi mai influenc individu to
inflat the credenti or to make them up when thei do not exist thi tendenc
involv everyth from cheat on school entranc exam to falsifi
credit applic
most broadli the author observ an american cultur base on affluenc and ever
higher level of success the continu pressur of a valu system that reward
econom affluenc or it visibl byproduct ha it effect on the broad middl of
american societi 22 televis and advertis in gener promis that no on ha to
settl for second best prompt those who find themselv run behind to fudg
the differ cross ethic and sometim legal line
conclus
curb thi pernici trend will not be easi but there ar wai sinc organiz
opportun determin so much crimin activ the foremost deterr is to pai
heighten attent to where the monei is and how it flow within ani group obvious
20 weisburd p 171
21 weisburd p 183
22 weisburd p 184
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4415
most busi have some system of financi control but the author sai that
organiz intellig is often less than stellar offend ar not usual the highli
sophist swindler from the mass media just averag peopl in a financi jam who
see a wai out through fraud 23
furthermor like mani analyst these dai the crime team believ it is far too easi to
acquir monei and good on credit tighten the restrict on credit card and loan
would directli address the role that debt plai in mani scheme
final these author center the problem of whitecollar crime around valu as long as the
place where citizen learn their prioriti school famili neighborhood mass media
emphas highpressur risktak and materi affluenc over honesti and moral
integr mani peopl will go for the gold even if thei have to steal it it will never be easi
thei acknowledg to balanc a marketbas economi which requir competit with an
equal insist on forthright and fair plai
23 weisburd p 190
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4501
organiz crime
most criminologist have adopt the distinct first made by marshal b clinard a
recipi of the associ of certifi fraud examin cressei award and richard
quinnei between occup crime and organiz crime organiz crime is that which
is commit by busi particularli corpor and govern occup crime
involv offens against the law by individu in the cours of their occup an
antitrust offens would be an organiz crime accept or offer bribe is an
occup offens
organiz crime occur in the context of complex relationship and expect among
board of director execut and manag on the on hand and among parent
corpor corpor divis and subsidiari on the other whitecollar crime is
distinguish from lower socioeconom crime in term of the structur of the violat
and the fact that administr and civil penalti ar more like to be us as punish
than ar crimin penalti
while corpor cannot be jail thei mai be confin most corpor lawbreak ar
handl by govern regulatori agenc like the feder trade commiss the
environment protect agenc and the food and drug administr enforc
measur might includ warn letter consent agreement or decre not to repeat the
violat order of regulatori agenc to compel complianc seizur or recal of
good administr or civil monetari penalti and court injunct to refrain from
further violat
corpor crime is certainli not limit to the unit state clinard and yeager sai it
appear to be extens in europ japan australia and other area accord to delma
marti french multin violat the law in mani wai thei util both legal and illeg
mean in tax evas thei mai transfer profit from on subsidiari to anoth locat in a
countri that ha a more lenient tax system or present a tax haven like switzerland
accord to cosson french manufactur corpor also falsifi their bookkeep to
avoid payment of industri and commerci tax
in japan the diet legislatur ha pass a law for the punish of crime relat to
environment pollut that advers affect the health of person under thi law
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4502 2011 fraud examin manual
intent or neglig emiss by industri of a substanc that caus danger to human
life or health is to be punish with imprison or fine
the swiss bank system ha often been accus of offer a hide place for stolen or
loot monei provid a screen for stock manipul and shadi promot and help
tax evad to conceal both incom and asset deposit in swiss bank ar often launder
to obscur their illeg origin and then the monei is made legal through new commerci
transact and is therefor conceal from tax author
corpor organ and crimin behavior
corpor offens take place in a context of complex relationship and expect in an
organiz set it is often difficult to distinguish which corpor particip ought
to be held person respons for the wrongdo mani offens ar the result of myriad
decis that ar made by differ individu and pass through a chain of command
not uncommonli when corpor act ar contrari to the law upperlevel execut take
pain to avoid learn what is go on so as to avoid respons if a scheme is
uncov in some corpor there is on wellpaid execut who is onli half in jest
refer to as the vice presid in charg of go to jail
the law larg treat corpor as peopl thei make more invit prosecutori target
than individu most notabl becaus thei have deeper pocket and can be heavili fine to
repai loss that have been inflict on individu or on the societi in gener
govern regulatori agenc such as the feder trade commiss ftc the
environment protect agenc epa and the food and drug administr fda
overse corpor perform in area assign to them by congression mandat
typic the lawmak enact a statut that is deliber vagu allow the enforc
agenc to develop it own enforc guidelin within the boundari of the
congression author the agenc will sometim seek to expand the reach of the
law by select notabl egregi case for litig and appeal therebi anticip a
favor rule on what is fundament a somewhat novel interpret of their mandat
the imag of the corpor
larg corpor have contribut significantli to industri and commerci develop
throughout the world their size and resourc enabl them to organ and coordin
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4503
product and distribut the capit resourc of a larg corpor provid it with the
abil to develop adopt and alter technolog on a mammoth scale a consider portion
of the popul ha been accord a high standard of live becaus of corpor activ
at the same time larg corpor have the power to influenc the manner in which
law ar written and to commit act that can inflict seriou harm upon the popul thei
can hire lobbyist and lawyer who manipul definit of wrongdo in the
corpor interest
the veri larg and remot of the corpor from most of us is part of the reason
that american tradition have a loveh attitud toward such organ we admir
and desir corpor product but we ar uneasi about their power a power that tend
to be us singlemindedli in the pursuit of profit thoma hobb a seventeenth centuri
english polit philosoph stand out in the crowd that ha been scorn of
corpor hobb unsavori comparison wa between corpor and ascarid
worm that eat at the entrail of what hobb call natur man 1 centuri later robert
heilbron an economist would castig the corpor with it wealthseek it
dehuman calculu of plu and minu it care inculc of impuls and goal that
should at most be toler 2
corpor and their execut ar often the object of deprecatori humor as far back as
l635 a satirist had a businessman proclaim i love church i mean to rob my
countrymen and build on 3 in more recent time a us senat told the stori of a
corpor offic who when ask at a committe hear if he were not asham of
doubled peopl who trust him wa puzzl who els can you cheat he want
to know the putdown of the busi world ar part of a common folklor reflect in
the belief that the express legitim busi is an oxymoron
accord to william kristol public hostil toward big busi date back to the populist
movement of the late nineteenth centuri and suspicion of trust that led to the 1890
sherman antitrust act peopl ar suspici as to whether good produc by larg
corpor ar of the highest qualiti or ar avail at the lowest possibl price in 1978 a
1thoma hobb leviathan london andrew crook 1651
2robert heilbron in the name of profit new york doubledai 1973 p 223
3christoph hill societi and puritan in prerevolutionari england london secker warburg 1964 p 267
4john t noonan bribe new york macmillan 1984
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4504 2011 fraud examin manual
survei by seymour lipset and gordan schneider conclud that major industri and
corpor had drop in public esteem greatli dure the 1970
clinard and yeager
in a comprehens studi of corpor lawbreak marshal clinard a recipi of the
associ donald cressei award and peter yeager examin over a twoyear period the
record of 562 compani 477 of which were on the fortun 500 list and found that l553
whitecollar crime case had been file against them some 60 percent of the firm had at
least on case against them for those compani the averag number of violat wa 44
the oil pharmaceut and motor vehicl industri were the most like to be charg for
wrongdo a matter that mai be a function of enforc prioriti or a true reflect of
their activ
in a studi by irwin ross he analyz 1043 compani that at on time or anoth had
appear on the fortun list of larg industri compani includ in hi studi were five
kind of offens bribetak or bribegiv by highlevel execut crimin fraud illeg
campaign contribut tax evas and antitrust violat on hundr seventeen or 11
percent of the corpor were violat
the cost of corpor crime not onli includ financi loss but also injuri death and
health hazard such crime destroi public confid in busi and hurt the imag of
corpor clinard and yeager sai pricefix offens victim the consum and
feder state and municip govern while incom tax crime depriv the govern
and those depend on it for need revenu
clinard and yeager believ that corpor violat ar increasingli difficult to discov
investig or prosecut successfulli becaus of their grow complex and intricaci thi
is particularli true thei believ of antitrust case foreign payoff comput fraud and
illeg polit contribut in the last categori some corpor pai bonus to their
execut with the understand that part of that reward will be turn over to the coffer
of a candid that the corpor favor
crimin activ involv corpor ar often root in organiz subcultur
and valu and ar develop over time a particularli comprehens examin of how
5marshal b clinard and peter c yeager corpor crime new york free press 1980
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4505
matter of life and death becom embed in routin decisionmak and ultim can
lead to tragedi is provid in a book titl the challeng space shuttl disast by dian
vaughan anoth cressei award winner 6
legal respons have been slow and ineffectu when deal with econom organiz
chang the law ha emphas the role of the individu actor in crimin but ha not
examin the role of the organ in crime crimin activ ar often root in
organiz subcultur and attitud develop over time and cannot be trace to
individu or group within the organ while individu still carri out the crimin
enterpris their attitud and characterist ar of littl import as an organ will
replac those employe unwil to particip in a crimin activ
opportun for unlaw organiz behavior
organiz structur
complex compani provid a structur that can foster misbehavior thei provid mani
set where misconduct is possibl thei isol those set in depart and in
locat around a citi the countri or the world the isol in turn mean that
inform about what on part of a compani is do mai be unknown in anoth part
all thi reduc the risk that misbehavior will be detect and punish the larger a
compani grow the more special it subunit tend to becom an intern diversifi
compani mai have few employe who fulli understand the detail work
special depart in a larg firm compet for resourc not onli with other firm
but with depart in their own firm the need to outperform both other busi and
intern unit can gener suffici pressur to lead to misconduct vaughan note that
depart often have surviv concern that conflict with the larger interest of an
organ when given a chanc to make decis she write lowerlevel manag will
tend to act not in the interest of the firm but in the interest of their depart
special also hide illeg activ especi where a firm task ar kept separ and
unrel employe cannot garner knowledg about all the particular of how a firm
work thi protect a compani from the effect of personnel turnov and leak of
6dian vaughan the challeng launch decis riski technolog cultur and devianc at nasa
chicago univers of chicago press 1996
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4506 2011 fraud examin manual
inform becaus no on can offer much more than a piec of the jigsaw puzzl
that make up the compani pictur the same secreci howev rais the chanc
for misconduct
compani spell out rule in a common languag to decid how task will be perform and
to creat common bond that will facilit decis make but a compani abil to
coordin all it activ vari consider vaughan write that organiz growth
natur lead to a progress loss of control over depart execut cannot hope to
keep track of all the unit in a huge compani and must reli on subordin to carri out
polici vaughan state that when the distanc between top execut and subordin unit
grow to a suffici level author leakag result such leakag mean the compani ha
becom too unwieldi for an execut to enforc rule at all level the organ in
short vaughan write can diversifi beyond the capabl of those at the top to master it
such leakag allow subsidiari compani research account or other depart to
engag in misconduct without ani assur that intern control will check the behavior
in some case as with comput crime detect misconduct might be beyond the abil of
most employe convers author leakag and special can also lead an
organ to compli with societ rule even when the organiz pressur lean
toward misconduct
doe the exist of author impli a loss of compani control while a compani that
cannot steer it employe behavior might be view as irrat or incompet the abil
to control inform flow from top to bottom mai not be possibl research and theori
suggest to the contrari that inform is process select through a compani in wai
that tend to protect the interest of depart and to promot effici
sometim censorship of inform promot a compani interest in other case need
to know polici or ignor of rule that ar irrelev to a depart lead to
ineffici all these tendenc restrict inform flow and creat opportun for on
unit in a compani to act outsid the knowledg of other unit censorship polici mai
origin in ani part of a compani and hide matter throughout the organ
the tier structur of most organ obscur person respons and tend to
spread it throughout the compani thu determin where a decis to engag in
misconduct origin can be difficult author john e conklin put it thi wai the
deleg of respons and unwritten order keep those at the top of the corpor
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4507
structur remot from the consequ of their decis and order much as the head of
organ crime famili remain untouch by law
criminogen organiz structur
sociologist edward gross ha assert that all organ ar inher criminogen
that is prone to commit crime though not necessarili crimin gross make thi
assert becaus of the relianc on the bottom line without necessarili mean to
organ can invit fraud as a mean of obtain goal criminologist oliv
williamson note that becaus of a depart concern with reach it goal
manag might well tend to maxim their depart own interest to the detriment of
the organ
organ can also be criminogen becaus thei encourag loyalti accord to dian
vaughan the reason ar that
the organ tend to recruit and attract similar individu
reward ar given out to those who displai characterist of the compani man
longterm loyalti is encourag through compani retir and benefit
loyalti is encourag through social interact such as compani parti and
social function
frequent transfer and long work hour encourag isol from other group
special job skill can discourag personnel from seek employ elsewher
thi in turn caus compani personnel to sometim perceiv that the organ might
be worth commit crime to maintain and further it goal the us of formal and inform
reward and punish plu social activ and pressur to particip link an
employe need and goal to the success of the compani societi place valu on the
reput of the compani for which on work reinforc the link between an individu
7edward gross organiz structur and organiz crime in gilbert gei and ezra stotland
ed whitecollar crime theori and research beverli hill sage 1980 pp 5376
8dian vaughan transact system and unlaw organiz behavior social problem 29 373380
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4508 2011 fraud examin manual
and corpor goal when a compani achiev it goal it employe prosper in short the
interest of an organ and it employe coincid and that situat mai set the stage
for unlaw conduct by individu on the organ behalf
vaughan write that organiz process creat an intern moral and intellectu
world that caus individu to identifi with organiz goal compani surviv come
to mean individu surviv and when resourc becom scarc the incent to misbehav
increas of cours not all agent will act unlawfulli on a compani behalf and how
ani employe behav will be link to factor that might not be relat to the world of
the organ
when the structur pressur to commit fraud exist a firm often cannot unit it agent in
such activ at least three factor prevent such uniti first the pressur to commit fraud
might not affect depart in a compani equal a sale depart that must meet
certain goal to gener profit will feel differ competit pressur than a product
develop depart in the same compani that is run smoothli some part of
compani might never experi pressur to cheat and member of those depart
will have no motiv to engag in misconduct on a firm behalf
second even in highpressur depart some employe will not have knowledg of the
difficulti of obtain need resourc an employe will have no motiv to commit
fraud unless he ha full inform about an organ goal and how the depart
can achiev them in other word an employe usual need a high degre of respons
for a compani success as well as the abil to bring about those goal befor a chanc to
engag in misbehavior can occur
third outsid societ behavior can produc valu that conflict with those learn in an
organiz environ for exampl fratern or profession associ impart their
own valu to employe that mai not coincid with a specif corpor code of honor
when face with conflict norm vaughan write employe will make their choic
base on the reward and punish thei perceiv to accompani the altern where
misbehavior is seen as too costli it will not occur where an organ provid suffici
reward to overcom the fear of punish misbehavior mai occur despit compet
norm the amount of inform an employe ha will affect the decis on which wai to
go as will an individu financi and social depend on the firm
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4509
the mere fact that corpor and individu goal ar often join in organ doe
not necessarili creat a climat for illeg action as with ani major decis complex
often enter the pictur temptat vari not onli among depart but within them
the avail of inform and individu riskreward assess mai gener law
behavior that resist organiz pressur to violat the law as well as unlaw
behavior in the face of organiz pressur to compli put plainli the likelihood that
organiz process will gener misbehavior is highli variabl and cannot current
be measur with ani degre of precis
in explain how employe ar taught to make decis that ar correct from a
corpor standpoint drucker said a natur tendenc exist in everi largescal
organ to discourag initi and encourag conform madden and margoli sai
corpor lead new manag through an initi period design to weaken their ti
with extern group includ their own famili and encourag a feel of depend on
and attach to the corpor
gei found that individu ar train quit often in illeg behavior as part of their
occup role schrager and short sai crimin behavior stem more from the role an
employe is expect to fulfil than from individu patholog mani execut know their
behavior is illeg but tend to justifi their action as simpli common practic in the busi
world clinard and yeager believ that in ration their behavior corpor follow a
gener tendenc to obei law select ie obei accord to situat need and
determin by factor like social class and occup
sutherland demonstr that corpor execut ar insul from those who might
disagre with their belief becaus thei associ almost exclus with peopl who ar probusi
polit conserv and gener oppos to govern regul
silk and vogel found that certain belief about govern intervent in busi ar us
throughout the busi world to justifi illeg activ by corpor for exampl some
defend the corpor right to violat law by claim that all legal measur propos
constitut govern interfer with the free enterpris system
a problem common in mani larg corpor with intric hierarch structur tend to
be a split between what the upper level believ is go on below and the actual procedur
be carri out clinard and yeager sai that the chief execut offic of a corpor is
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4510 2011 fraud examin manual
often isol and thu messag transmit down the line tend to becom distort
clinard and yeager found that all level of the corpor might often agre to perpetu
the lack of full inform for the kei to ani success conspiraci to violat the law
probabl li in the fact that the higherup do not inquir about what is go on and the
lower level do not tell them
often in corpor no singl individu at the highest level mai make a decis alon to
market a faulti product or take shortcut on product test clinard and yeager sai
instead decis ar made in small step at each level possibl without ani awar of
the illeg and potenti danger result
mccaghi sai profit pressur is the singl most compel factor behind devianc by
industri whether it be price fix the destruct of competit or the misrepresent
of a product such as make a shoddi product that will wear out and need to be replac
clinard and yeager sai certain industri such as the drug and chemic busi have
such sever competit and strong profit drive due to demand for continu develop
of new product that thei mai feel pressur to falsifi test data market new product befor
their full effect ar known or engag in uneth sale techniqu that can have disastr
effect on human be and the environ
corpor execut and crimin liabil
mani of the ethic and legal problem of a corpor result from the corpor structur
that separ ownership from manag typic larg corpor ar administ by a
group of salari manag with the board of director exercis littl direct power other
than hire or fire the manag and thu corpor manag have great autonomi over
decis regard product invest price and market
luthan and hodgett said that after perform a studi with the american manag
societi 3000 execut question felt under pressur to compromis person standard
to meet compani goal but that thei felt that busi ethic should still be a concern
execut tend to believ that their job ar at risk if thei cannot show a profit to higher
manag or the board of director and often thei ar clinard and yeager hold that if
goal for manag ar set too high the employe then confront a hard choic of risk
be thought incompet or take uneth or even illeg shortcut
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4511
accord to clinard and yeager corpor often try to protect their execut from
liabil by agre to pai fine court cost and attornei fee with corpor fund
bonus rais or liabil insur might offer protect to offic or director
gener execut compens and tenur remain untouch there is much difficulti in
crimin prosecut of execut becaus corpor violat ar usual far more complex
than convent crime also the complex of the legal proof requir allow
businessmen to test the limit of the law
businessmen might have sought legal advic on loophol in the law befor commit the
offens clinard and yeager sai which mai be cite as evid that the execut thought
thei were in legal complianc businessmen can hire highli skill lawyer who present
argument as to the client lack of previou convict or unlikelihood of becom a
repeat offend as well as be abl to cite numer preced where businessmen were
charg but not imprison for similar violat
corpor offend ar usual not imprison with ordinari crimin but ar usual
incarcer in institut design for lowrisk inmat with short sentenc presum
for the corpor offend own physic safeti justif us in argu against a
prison sentenc for corpor offend includ
ag and poor health
person and famili reason
extent of punish alreadi suffer by virtu of be indict
offens wa not immor
defend ha no prior record is not a threat to societi and ha been a promin
citizen activ in commun affair
incarcer would accomplish noth no benefit to societi
defend is repent
victim of corpor execut sole becaus of their posit
some corpor offend ar given commun servic as punish such as give
speech about their offens to busi and civic group work in program
design to aid the poor or help former ordinari crimin offend secur job pledg
from busi
prior to 2001 corpor offend gener receiv littl if ani public attent coverag
of corpor scandal wa often limit to busi and trade public howev all of
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4512 2011 fraud examin manual
that chang with the enron scandal suddenli corpor offend were frontpag new
and prosecutor have increas their effort in purs corpor execut for wrongdo
in the corpor organ
manag behavior
brenner and moland found that superior ar the primari influenc in uneth decis
make therefor the us of sanction to accomplish complianc with the law is onli on
of the variou forc oper within a corpor encourag or oppos violat of
law stone found that the success of law enforc ultim depend upon it
consist with and reinforc of the organ rule for advanc and reward
it custom convent and moral he maintain that if the law is too much at odd with
the corpor cultur employe will tend to cover up their track rather than chang
their behavior
corpor also argu that regul is faulti becaus most govern regul ar
incomprehens and too complex conklin found that antitrust law ar seen as
inconsist hypocrit poorli defin and rare enforc therefor most regul
must be written in detail to cover as mani conting as possibl
silk and vogel found sever other action us by busi to ration conduct
govern regul ar unjustifi becaus the addit cost of regul and
bureaucrat procedur cut heavili into profit
regul is unnecessari becaus the matter be regul ar unimport
although some corpor violat involv million of dollar the damag is so
diffus among a larg number of consum that individu there is littl loss
violat ar caus by econom necess thei aim to protect the valu of stock to
ensur an adequ return for stockhold and to protect the job secur of employe
by ensur the financi stabil of the corpor
john braithwait is a research in whitecollar crime at australian nation univers in
canberra he is also the recipi of the 1990 cressei award by the associ of certifi
fraud examin for hi research in intern whitecollar crime issu braithwait view
9christoph stone where the law end the social control of corpor behavior new york
harper row 1975
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4513
whitecollar crime as a product of the corpor subcultur in braithwait view
corpor will turn to crime as a result of block opportun
becaus whitecollar crime can exist onli in secreci deviant subcultur develop conspiraci
among execut for exampl line of commun ar not allow to develop and
peopl oper within sphere of respons
control organiz crime
clinard and yeager believ corpor that do violat accept conduct and those that
do not ar distinguish by corpor cultur or ethic climat which ar the degre to
which a corpor ha made the choic to be uneth to disregard the interest of the
consum and the public and to disobei the law that regul it specif industri
effort to control corpor crime follow three approach voluntari chang in corpor
attitud and structur strong intervent of the polit state to forc chang in corpor
structur accompani by legal measur to deter or punish or consum action voluntari
chang would involv the develop of stronger busi ethic and certain corpor
organiz reform govern control might involv feder corpor charter
deconcentr and divestur larger and more effect enforc staff stiffer penalti
wider us of public as a sanction and possibl the nation of corpor and
consum group pressur mai be exert through lobbi select bui boycott and
the establish of larg consum cooper
clinard and yeager suggest that a wide comprehens industri code of ethic which mani
businessmen favor would be of great help when a businessman wish to refus an
uneth request would help defin more clearli the limit of accept or ethic conduct
would improv the ethic climat of the industri and would serv to reduc cutthroat
practic where competit is intens greater stockhold involv might enabl
greater corpor complianc with the law but in actual it is the manag staff that
run the compani and make the decis the stockhold ar primarili concern with
stock growth and dividend
in some case critic inform deal with possibl law violat simpli fail to reach
the board of director new board member ar usual nomin by the board and
routin approv by stockhold make board selfperpetu board member ar
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4514 2011 fraud examin manual
often drawn from manag mani corpor now emploi outsid director andor
repres of the public interest much like the practic abroad of name union
repres to board these public member repres the public and consum
concern ascertain whether the corpor is compli with the law assist and maintain
corpor public respons help monitor the intern manag system to discov
faulti workmanship and report it to the board serv as liaison with govern agenc
with respect to legisl or standard and serv as a hotlin to receiv inform
about devianc
clinard and yeager found that mass media public about law violat probabl repres
the most fear consequ of sanction impos on a corpor public can also
inform the public about the oper of regulatori control and can enabl peopl to
understand the purpos of the control inform public is ordinarili carri as new
item from the media while formal public is a requir that a corpor must as
part of an enforc action publish an advertis or some other statement
acknowledg a violat and that correct measur ar be taken
if illeg behavior consist result in decreas patronag or even consum boycott
consum pressur would be an effect tool in the control of illeg corpor behavior
howev sai clinard and yeager it appear to not be veri effect consum ar often
unawar when a corpor product ar unsaf or when it ha been violat antitrust
law or pollut the environ without organ behavior a consum withdraw of
individu patronag is gener ineffect
mani corpor settl charg without admit or deni guilt by consent to either
an administr or a courtord decre ban futur violat in a consent
agreement the corpor reach an understand with the govern agenc not to
violat the regul again in a decre the agreement is ratifi by the court
sporkin sai consent decre have enabl the appoint of special offic to investig
and pursu claim against er manag and other on behalf of the corpor and
it sharehold the placement of peopl independ of manag and not previous
associ with the compani or the board of director and the appoint of special
review or audit committe a problem with consent order howev is that frequent no
on follow up to find out whether the term impos ar be met
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4515
violat of a consent order can be follow by an injunct as can distribut of
adulter contamin or mislabel product corpor violat of secur and
exchang act provis can result in injunct as well as discriminatori labor practic
illeg econom action environment pollut and illeg polit contribut
crimin fine and civil and administr penalti against corpor ar form of
monetari penalti for complet crimin case averag about on year from indict
to convict civil action about two year and administr case about four month
crimin action against corpor is difficult to initi becaus gener govern
agenc ar depend upon the record of the corpor and it abil or willing to
furnish need inform
not all expert agre that monetari penalti ar appropri for exampl a 25 million fine
to a pauper would have no effect on novel approach to punish corpor wa
propos by coffe 1978 he advoc stock dilut or equiti fine under thi
approach the convict corpor would issu addit share of stock to the state equal
to the cash valu of a fine the state could collect the equiti share and sell them trade
them or keep them for their earn power with respect to monetari penalti some
argu that these sanction ar limit to a person own worth and therefor have limit
util in 1992 congress implement the corpor sentenc guidelin provid up to
290 million in fine for illeg corpor behavior
some of the criteria consid when decid to bring crimin action against a corpor
ar the degre of loss to the public the durat of the violat the level of complic by
high corpor manag the frequenc of the violat evid of intent to violat
evid of extort the degre of notorieti endang by the media preced in law a
histori of seriou violat by the corpor deterr potenti and the degre of
cooper demonstr by the corpor
rule govern industri often have been initi by part of the industri itself kolko sai
that a major achiev for corpor mai have been the establish of the feder
trade commiss which rule out unfair method of competit and serv to stabil
the competit game by make the biggest abus of competit illeg
stone sai that as thei ag almost all agenc show evid of protect the industri
thei ar suppos to regul rather than the public industri also gain influenc over
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4516 2011 fraud examin manual
agenc by creat a businessori atmospher between regul and regulate that
mai caus the regul to feel unwarr confid in the possibl of voluntari
complianc by corpor
the enforc effort prevent and reduc fraud
while the issu involv in the enforc effort provid a context in which to assess the
effort to control whitecollar crime actual techniqu of prevent need to be discuss
there ar mani theori about enforc sanction and punish that ar a part of
control whitecollar crime
complianc
enforc strategi includ two main theori complianc and deterr
complianc hope to achiev conform to the law without have to detect process or
penal violat complianc system provid econom incent for voluntari
complianc to the law and us administr effort to control violat befor thei occur
for exampl the sec ha a host of administr mechan to encourag voluntari
complianc with it rule the ir also us such measur in addit to crimin penalti
most environment crime also ar control by these mean in a complianc system an
offens is call a technic violat
complianc strategi have been critic by some criminologist these expert believ
that complianc ha littl effect as sanction ar impos after the infract occur sinc
econom penalti ar common punish for violat these penalti amount to littl
more than the proverbi slap on the wrist in the case of larg wealthi corpor
deterr
as a strategi to control crime deterr is design to detect law violat determin who is
respons and penal offend in order to deter futur violat deterr system
try to control the immedi behavior of individu not the longterm behavior target by
complianc system
deterr theori assum that human ar ration in their behavior pattern human seek
profit and pleasur while thei try to avoid pain deterr assum that an individu
propens toward lawbreak is in invers proport to the perceiv probabl of
neg consequ
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4517
increas enforc
formal level of current enforc in whitecollar crime ar by all measur extrem
low on view hold that increas enforc can onli come with a complet and total
revis of the crimin justic system current peopl have littl fear of detect becaus
thei know that the polic and court cannot keep up with the pace of crimin offens it is
not necessari or even desir to advoc longer prison sentenc for offend becaus
we do not have the court and jail to accommod them perhap a better plan would be to
sacrific the sever of punish for certainti until potenti offend have the
percept that thei will be caught and punish we cannot expect a revers of the
crime trend
fraud prevent program
although the govern can provid incent for organ to prevent fraud
ultim it is up to manag to institut prevent program the fraud prevent
program chapter describ method wherebi manag can institut polici and
procedur to help detect and prevent fraud
corpor sentenc guidelin
congress in the comprehens crime control act of 1984 mandat uniform sentenc
guidelin the act also establish the unit state sentenc commiss ussc
which began studi sentenc for individu soon after the passag of the act it wa
wide held in congress that there wa a great dispar of penalti for similar crime
commit by individu after three year of studi the ussc announc sentenc
guidelin for individu in novemb of 1987 these guidelin becam effect in the
94 feder court of the unit state
in 1988 the unit state sentenc commiss began a studi of sanction for corpor
wrongdo after three year of studi and hear on mai 1 1991 the ussc submit
it propos guidelin for sentenc organ to congress on novemb 1 1991 the
guidelin went into effect and in april 2010 the us sentenc commiss modifi
sentenc guidelin for organ especi as thei relat to complianc program
the chang will becom effect on novemb 1 2010 bar ani congression
modif or reject
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4518 2011 fraud examin manual
until januari 2005 feder judg were requir to us the guidelin to determin whether
a defend had an effect complianc program in place to prevent the violat for
which it wa be charg but in two kei unit state suprem court rule unit
state v booker and unit state v fanfan the suprem court rule that the
sixth amend right to a juri trial requir that feder sentenc guidelin be advisori
rather than mandatori feder judg must still consid the guidelin when sentenc but
ar not requir to sentenc within the rang set by the guidelin accord to the
guidelin judg ar still requir to examin the adequaci of a compani complianc and
ethic program furthermor judg mai now mitig punish beyond the mandat
level of mitig given under the guidelin
the term organ includ the follow entiti
corpor
partnership
associ
jointstock compani
union
trust
pension fund
unincorpor organ
govern and polit subdivis thereof
nonprofit organ
the introductori commentari to the guidelin clearli state that thei ar design to provid
incent for organ to maintain intern mechan for prevent detect and
report crimin conduct among other thing the guidelin suggest a substanti reduct
of fine for organ that have effect complianc program
if an organ is found liabl for an offens the guidelin provid for four type of
remedi from which a judg mai consid fine restitut remedi order and probat
fine
fine ar base on two factor the serious of the offens and the level of culpabl by
the organ the serious of the offens determin the base fine to be impos
thi figur can be quit high the organ culpabl is a measur of the action taken
by the organ which either mitig or aggrav the situat depend on the
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4519
culpabl of the organ the base fine can be increas by as much as 400 percent or
reduc by as much as 95 percent
calcul the fine
under the guidelin an organ base fine is the highest of three number
the monetari loss suffer by the victim
the pecuniari gain receiv by the defend
an amount rang from 5000 to 7250000 0 as set forth in the offens level scale
individu guidelin which is a tabl of preset penalti base on the serious of
possibl offens
fine multipl
after the base fine is establish the next step in sentenc is to calcul the culpabl
multipli of the organ the calcul of thi multipli is a complic process
everi organ begin with a preset score of five on a scale of zero to ten the
organ score is then increas or decreas base on the presenc of aggrav or
mitig factor aggrav factor increas the score and thu increas the fine for the
organ while mitig factor decreas the score the guidelin note four
aggrav factor that can caus an organ score to increas
1 involv in or toler of crimin activ point will be ad if highlevel employe of
the organ particip in condon or were willfulli ignor of the offens
point mai also be ad if there wa pervas toler of the offens by highlevel
employe depend on the size of the organ thi can add from 1 to 5 point to
an organ culpabl score
2 prior histori if that organ ha previous been found crimin guilti of similar
act or if the organ ha been found guilti of a civil offens for similar act on at
least two occas point mai be ad to the culpabl score depend on how
long it ha been sinc the previou offens up to two point can be ad to the
organ culpabl score
3 violat of a prior court order point ar ad to the organ culpabl score if in
commit the offens at hand the organ violat an injunct or other judici
order point ar also ad if the offens in question is similar to a prior offens for
which the organ is alreadi on probat and if the commiss of the current
offens violat the probat order thi factor can add up to two point to the
culpabl score
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4520 2011 fraud examin manual
4 obstruct of justic final point ar ad to the organ culpabl score if that
organ interf in ani wai with the investig prosecut or sentenc of
the offens in question thi doe not alwai requir an affirm act by the
organ for instanc if the organ knew of an attempt by some parti to
obstruct an investig prosecut or sentenc and did noth to prevent it then
the organ mai be found to have obstruct justic simpli state if the
organ turn a blind ey to ani form of obstruct it face the possibl of
have it fine substanti increas under the guidelin thi factor can add up to
three point
fine reduc
the guidelin provid for an organ fine to be increas if it act badli but also
provid for the reduct of fine if the compani is good the guidelin set forth two
mitig factor which will reduc an organ crimin fine
1 selfreport an organ culpabl score will be reduc if within a reason
amount of time after learn of the offens the organ report the offens to
author and then cooper in the investig and accept respons for it
wrongdo there ar three element to the selfreport mitig credit 1 report
within a reason time 2 cooper in the investig and 3 accept
respons for the wrongdo the organ earn the most point five if it
compli with all three element howev it can receiv a smaller credit two even if it
doe not report the offens in a time manner as long as it cooper in the investig
and admit it own wrongdo even if the organ fail to cooper it can
nevertheless receiv some credit on for accept respons thi usual mean
plead guilti to the offens prior to trial
2 an effect program to prevent and detect violat of the law the implement of an
effect complianc program is the onli wai an organ can mitig potenti fine
befor violat actual occur it can knock up to three point out of a possibl ten
off of an organ culpabl score the element of an effect complianc
program under the guidelin ar discuss below
everi organ begin with a culpabl score of 5 under the guidelin each aggrav
factor rais the culpabl score and each mitig factor diminish it after all the factor
have been consid a final score is determin each score correspond to a rang of
multipli that determin how much the fine should be increas or decreas
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4521
tabl of minimum and maximum multipli from the guidelin
the organ fine is multipli by the minimum and maximum multipli for it
culpabl score to determin the possibl rang of fine
culpabl
score
10 or more
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0 or less
multipli
minimum
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
05
maximum
multipli
400
360
320
280
240
200
160
120
80
40
20
assum an organ had been fine 1 00000 it culpabl score could have a
tremend impact if the organ culpabl score wa zero as a result of selfreport
and have an effect complianc program in place that organ fine rang
would be between 5000 and 20000 determin by multipli 100000 by 05 and 20
respect on the other hand if the presenc of aggrav factor had left the
organ with a culpabl score of ten it fine rang would be 200000 to 400000
thu in the case of a 100000 base fine there is a potenti swing of 395000 in the fine
the organ will have to pai
departur
court ar permit to impos fine outsid the rang prescrib by the guidelin if there
ar special aggrav or mitig circumst in the case that would make a fine within
the rang inappropri sentenc that fall outsid the guidelin rang ar known as
departur the guidelin describ certain factor that would justifi departur from the
ordinari fine rang although the list ar not exhaust
upward departur
when a court impos a fine that is greater than the maximum fine provid by the
guidelin thi is known as an upward departur the guidelin list the follow as
factor that could justifi an upward departur
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4522 2011 fraud examin manual
the offens involv a forese risk of death or bodili injuri
the offens constitut a threat to nation secur
the offens present a threat to the environ
the offens present a risk to the integr or continu exist of a market
the offens involv offici corrupt
the organ culpabl score wa reduc becaus it had an effect complianc
program but the program wa onli implement becaus of a court order or
administr order in case such as thi the court can impos an upward departur to
offset all or part of the reduct
the organ culpabl score is greater than ten
downward departur
the guidelin list the follow factor that could justifi a downward departur
substanti assist to the author in the investig or prosecut of anoth
organ or individu
the organ is a public entiti
member or beneficiari other than share holder of the organ ar direct victim
of the offens a downward departur in these case mai be warrant becaus a fine
might increas the burden on the victim
the organ ha agre to pai remedi cost that greatli exce the organ
gain from the offens
the organ ha an exception low culpabl score becaus there wa no
involv by anyon with substanti author in the organ there wa an
effect complianc program in place and the base fine wa determin by some mean
other than the organ gain from the offens
restitut
the guidelin requir that whenev possibl the organ must pai full restitut to
the victim of the crime restitut is not view as a form of punish in the
guidelin but rather as a mean of remedi the harm caus by the offens
remedi order
the guidelin also provid for the imposit of remedi order which requir an
offend organ to fix a harm it ha alreadi caus to the extent that the harm is not
fix by the payment of restitut and prevent ani futur harm from occur
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4523
probat
final court ar requir to impos probat on offend organ under the
follow circumst
to secur payment of restitut enforc of a remedi order or to ensur
complet of commun servic
to safeguard the organ abil to pai a monetari penalti that wa not fulli paid
at the time of sentenc
when an organ with at least 50 employe did not have an effect program to
detect and prevent violat of law
when the organ wa adjud within the past five year to have commit
misconduct similar to ani part of the misconduct of the offens in question
when a highlevel employe wa involv in the offens in question and wa crimin
convict of similar conduct within the past five year
when such an order is necessari to ensur chang ar made to reduc the likelihood of
futur crimin conduct
when the sentenc doe not includ a fine
when such an order is necessari in order to accomplish on or more purpos of
sentenc set forth in 18 usc 3553a2
when the offend organ ha commit a feloni probat must run for at least
on year in no case mai probat run for more than five year the guidelin also
recommend condit for probat in variou circumst these condit includ
public the natur of the offens the organ convict the punish
impos and the step taken to prevent the recurr of a similar offens
provid period report to the court of the organ financi condit
and expens
requir the organ to submit to examin of the organ busi
record and to interview of knowledg employe
requir the organ to notifi the court upon learn of a materi advers chang
to it financi condit or the commenc of ani major legal proceed
includ bankruptci or ani investig by author
requir period payment under the court specif with prioriti in the order
of restitut fine and ani other monetari sanction
develop a program to avoid violat of law and a schedul to implement it
notifi the organ employe and sharehold of it violat and it program
to avoid and detect violat of law
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4524 2011 fraud examin manual
report to the court on the organ implement of a program to avoid and
detect violat of law and disclos ani investig by author
if an offend organ violat it probat thi mai result in
resentenc
the term of probat be extend
the imposit of more restrict condit
prosecut organiz fraud
in respons to the highprofil corpor fraud of enron worldcom global cross and
other the depart of justic doj institut polici for impos crimin penalti
against busi organ in januari 2003 then deputi attornei gener larri
thompson issu a doj memorandum entitl principl of feder prosecut of
busi organ the thompson memorandum
the thompson memorandum explain the depart ment posit regard the factor it
consid in choos to prosecut corpor and under what condit an
organ mai reduc liabil for cooper with the govern on of the factor
prosecutor consid in reach their charg decis wa a compani willing to
cooper in the investig the thompson memorandum provid that in assess a
compani cooper prosecutor were to consid whether the compani waiv it
attorneycli privileg and attornei work product protect the thompson
memorandum also made clear that busi perceiv as not have fulli cooper
would more like face crimin indict prosecut and sanction
follow it issuanc mani critic the thompson memorandum becaus it seem to
impli that compani that refus to turn over privileg document to the govern
could be consid uncoop in an attempt to appeas critic then deputi attornei
gener paul mcnulti issu a revis memo the mcnulti memorandum for feder
investig and prosecut of busi organ the mcnulti memorandum revis
the doj prior guidanc outlin in the thompson memorandum that address the
practic of feder prosecutor seek waiver as an element of a compani cooper
the mcnulti memorandum provid specif criteria prosecutor were requir to consid
and procedur thei were requir to follow befor seek waiver of privileg or work
product protect
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4525
on august 28 2008 the depart of justic doj issu guidelin that revis the
mcnulti memorandum on how feder prosecutor investig charg and prosecut
corpor crime unlik the mcnulti and thompson memorandum these guidelin ar a
part of the us attornei manual which provid intern doj guidanc but doe not
creat ani enforc law
in an effort to stop congression action the guidelin bar prosecutor from judg
corpor cooper for lenienc on whether an entiti is will to waiv the attorneycli
privileg or work product protect the guidelin also state that prosecutor can no
longer seek disclosur of inform that is either privileg or protect work product in
addit the guidelin provid that when evalu a corpor cooper
prosecutor mai no longer consid whether a compani is advanc legal fee for it
employe whether a corpor ha sanction or retain culpabl employe or whether
a corpor ha enter into joint defens agreement
even though most observ agre that the guidelin ar a signific improv over the
mcnulti memorandum mani contend that comprehens legisl is still need to
make the doj reform perman and prevent a relaps in depart polici and to bar
similar waiver polici adopt by other feder agenc such as the secur exchang
commiss and the intern revenu servic
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4601
occup fraud
occup fraud is commit larg by individu or small group of individu in
connect with their occup it can includ violat of law by businessmen
politician labor union leader lawyer doctor pharmacist and employe who embezzl
monei from their employ or steal merchandis and tool
gari green in hone the whitecollar crime concept us the term occup crime which
he defin as ani act punish by law which is commit through opportun creat in
the cours of an occup which is legal green further delin occup crime into
four categori
crime for the benefit of an emploi organ organiz occup crime
crime by offici through exercis of their statebas author state author
occup crime
crime by profession in their capac as profession profession
occup crime
crime by individu as individu
some scholar debat whether individu should be held respons for crime commit
on behalf of their organ although some direct benefit accru to the perpetr far
more benefit accru to the organ regardless of whether the organ is held
liabl the fraud is a direct result of some human action or interact in the word of parisi
if an organ is like a gun then there must be someon compar to a triggerman
research in occup fraud and abus
edwin h sutherland
rel littl research ha been done on the subject of occup fraud and abus
much of the current literatur is base upon the earli work of edwin h sutherland as
previous discuss in the theori of crime causat chapter sutherland believ
that the learn of crimin behavior occur with other person in a process of
commun therefor he reason crimin cannot occur without the assist of
other peopl sutherland further theoriz that the learn of crimin activ usual
occur within intim person group thi explain in hi view how a dysfunct
parent is more like to produc dysfunct offspr sutherland believ that the
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4602 2011 fraud examin manual
learn process involv two specif area the techniqu to commit the crime and the
attitud drive ration and motiv of the crimin mind on can see how
sutherland differenti associ theori fit with occup offend organ
that have dishonest employe will eventu infect a portion of honest on it also goe
the other wai honest employe will eventu have an influenc on some of those who
ar dishonest
donald r cressei
dure the 1940 at indiana univers on of sutherland brightest student wa don ald
r cressei 19191987 while much of suther land research concentr on upperworld
crimin cressei took hi own studi in a differ direct work on hi phd in
criminolog he decid hi dissert would focu on embezzl to serv as a basi for
hi research cressei interview about 200 peopl who had been incarcer for
embezzl fund
cressei hypothesi
cressei wa intrigu by embezzl whom he call trust violat he wa especi
interest in the circumst that led them to be overcom by temptat for that reason
he exclud from hi research those employe who took their job for the purpos of
steal a rel minor number of offend at that time upon complet of hi
interview he develop what still remain the classic model for the occup offend
hi research wa publish in other peopl monei a studi in the social psycholog of
embezzl
cressei final hypothesi wa
trust person becom trust violat when thei conceiv of themselv as have a
financi problem which is nonshar ar awar thi problem can be secretli resolv by
violat of the posit of financi trust and ar abl to appli to their own conduct in
that situat verbal which enabl them to adjust their concept of themselv as
trust person with their concept of themselv as user of the entrust fund or
properti 1
1 donald r cressei other peopl monei montclair patterson smith 1973 p 30
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4603
over the year the hypothesi ha becom better known as the fraud triangl on leg of the
triangl repres a perceiv nonshar financi need the second leg repres perceiv
opportun and the final leg stand for ration the role of the nonshar problem is
import accord to cressei when the trust violat were ask to explain why thei
refrain from violat of other posit of trust thei might have held at previou time
or why thei had not violat the subject posit at an earlier time those who had an
opinion express the equival of on or more of the follow quotat a there wa
no need for it like there wa thi time b the idea never enter my head c i thought it
wa dishonest then but thi time it did not seem dishonest at first 2
in all case of trust violat encount the violat consid that a financi problem
which confront him could not be share with person who from a more object point
of view probabl could have aid in the solut of the problem 3
nonshar financi problem
that which is consid nonshar is whol ly in the ey of the potenti occup
offend cressei said thu a man could lose consider monei at the race track daili
but the loss even if it constru a problem for the individu might not constitut a non
shareabl problem for him anoth man might defin the problem as on which must be
2 cressei p 33
3 cressei p 34
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4604 2011 fraud examin manual
kept secret and privat that is as on which is nonshar similarli a fail bank or
busi might be consid by on person as present problem which must be share
with busi associ and member of the commun while anoth person might
conceiv these problem as nonshar 4
in addit to be nonshar the problem that drive the fraudster is describ as
financi becaus these ar problem that can gener be solv by the theft of cash or
other asset a person with larg gambl debt for instanc would need cash to pai those
debt cressei did note howev that there ar some nonfinanci problem that could be
solv by misappropri fund through a violat of trust for exampl a person who
embezzl in order to get reveng on hi employ for perceiv unfair treatment us
financi mean to solv what is essenti a nonfinanci problem
through hi research cressei also found that the nonshar problem encount by
the peopl he interview aros from situat that could be divid into six basic
categori violat of ascrib oblig problem result from person failur
busi revers physic isol statu gain and employeremploye relat all of
these situat dealt in some wai with statusseek or statusmaintain activ by the
subject in other word the nonshar problem threaten the statu of the subject
or threaten to prevent them from achiev a higher statu than the on thei occupi at
the time of their violat
the import of solv the problem in secret
sinc cressei studi wa done in the earli 1950 the workforc wa obvious differ
than todai workforc but the employe face with an immedi nonshar financi
need hasnt chang much over the year that employe still must find a wai to reliev the
financi pressur that bear down upon him simpli steal monei howev is not
enough cressei found it wa crucial that the employe be abl to resolv the financi
problem in secret
as we have seen the nonshar financi problem identifi by cressei all dealt in some
wai with question of statu the trust violat were afraid of lose the approv of those
around them and so were unabl to tell other about their financi problem if thei could
not share the fact that thei were under financi pressur it follow that thei would not be
4 cressei p 35
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4605
abl to share the fact that thei were resort to illeg mean to reliev that pressur to do
so would be to admit that the problem exist in the first place
the interest thing to note is that it is not the embezzl itself that creat the need for
secreci in the perpetr mind it is the circumst that led to the embezzl a
violat of ascrib oblig a busi revers etc cressei said
in all case in the studi there wa a distinct feel that becaus of activ prior to the
defalc the approv of group import to the trust person had been lost or a
distinct feel that present gr oup approv would be lost if certain activ were reveal
the nonshar financi problem with the result that the trust person wa effect
isol from person who could assist him in solv problem aris from that activ
although the clear concept of a financi problem as nonshar doe not invari
result in trust violat it do es establish in trust person a desir for a specif kind of
solut to their problem the result desir in the case encount were uniform the
solut or partial solut of the problem by the us of fund which can be obtain in an
independ rel secret safe and sure method in keep with the ration
avail to the person at the time 5 emphasi ad
perceiv opportun
accord to the fraud triangl model the presenc of a nonshar financi problem by
itself will not lead an employe to commit fraud the kei to understand cressei theori
is to rememb that all three element must be present for a trust violat to occur the
nonshar financi problem creat the motiv for the crime to be commit but the
employe must also perceiv that he ha an opportun to commit the crime without be
caught thi perceiv opportun constitut the second element
in cressei view there were two compon of the perceiv opportun to commit a
trust violat gener inform and technic skill gener inform is simpli the
knowledg that the employe posit of trust could be violat thi knowledg might
come from hear of other embezzl from see dishonest behavior by other
employe or just from gener be awar of the fact that the employe is in a posit
where he could take advantag of hi employ faith in him technic skill refer to the
5 cressei p 6667
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4606 2011 fraud examin manual
abil need to commit the violat these ar usual the same abil that the
employe need to have to obtain and keep hi posit in the first place cressei note that
most embezzl adher to their occup routin and their job skill in order to
perpetr their crimes6 in essenc the perpetr job will tend to defin the type of
fraud he will commit account us check which thei have been entrust to dispos
of sale clerk withhold receipt banker manipul seldomus account or withhold
deposit real estat men us deposit entrust to them and so on 7
obvious the gener inform and technic skill that cressei identifi ar not uniqu
to occup offend most if not all em ploye have these same characterist but
becaus trust person possess thi inform and skill when thei face a nonshar
financi problem thei see it as someth that thei have the power to correct thei appli
their understand of the possibl for trust violat to the specif crise thei ar face
with cressei observ it is the next step whic h is signific to violat the applic
of the gener inform to the specif situat and conjointli the percept of the fact
that in addit to have gener possibl for violat a specif posit of trust can be
us for the specif purpos of solv a nonshar problem 8
ration
the third and final factor in the fraud triangl is the ration cressei point out that
the ration is not an ex post facto mean of justifi a theft that ha alreadi occur
significantli the ration is a necessari compon of the crime befor it take place in
fact it is a part of the motiv for the crime becaus the embezzl doe not view
himself as a crimin he must justifi hi misde befor he ever commit them the
ration is necessari so that the perpetr can make hi illeg behavior intellig to
himself and maintain hi concept of himself as a trust person9
after the crimin act ha taken place the ration will often be abandon that is of
cours becaus of the natur of us all the first time we do someth contrari to our
moral it bother us as we repeat the act it becom easier on hallmark of occup
fraud and abus offend is that onc the line is cross the illeg act becom more or
less continu so an occup fraudster might begin steal with the thought that ill
6 cressei p 84
7 cressei p 84
8 cressei p 85
9 cressei pp 9495
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4607
pai the monei back but after the initi theft is success he will usual continu to steal
past the point at which there is ani realist possibl of repai the stolen fund
cressei found that the embezzl he studi gener ration their crime by view
them as 1 essenti noncrimin 2 justifi or 3 part of a gener irrespons for
which thei were not complet account he also found that the ration us
by trust violat tend to be link to their posit and to the manner in which thei
commit their violat he examin thi by divid the subject of hi studi into three
categori independ businessmen longterm violat and abscond he discov
that each group had it own type of ration
independ businessmen
the independ businessmen in cressei studi were peopl who were in busi for
themselv and who convert deposit that had been entrust to them 11 perpetr in
thi categori tend to us on of two common excus 1 thei were borrow the
monei thei convert or 2 the fund entrust to them were realli theirsyou cant steal
from yourself cressei found the borrow ration wa the on most frequent
us these perpetr also tend to espous the idea that everyon in busi
misdirect deposit in some wai which therefor made their own misconduct less wrong
than steal 12 also the independ businessmen almost univers felt their illeg
action were predic by an unusu situati on which cressei conclud wa in realiti a
nonshar financi problem
longterm violat
cressei defin longterm violat as individu who convert their employ fund or
fund belong to their employ client by take rel small amount over a period
of time13 similar to independ businessmen the longterm violat gener prefer
the borrow ration other ration of longterm violat were
describ too but thei almost alwai were us in connect with the borrow theme
1 thei were embezzl to keep their famili from shame disgrac or poverti 2 their
wa a case of necess their employ were cheat them financi and 3 their
employ were dishonest toward other and deserv to be fleec some even point out
10 cressei p 93
11 cressei p 101102
12 cressei p 102
13 cressei p 102
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4608 2011 fraud examin manual
that it wa more difficult to return the fund than to steal them in the first place and claim
that thei did not pai back their borrow becaus thei fear that would lead to
detect of their theft a few in the studi actual kept track of their theft but most onli
did so at first later as the embezzl escal it is assum that the offend would
rather not know the extent of hi borrow
all of the longterm violat in the studi express a feel that thei would like to
eventu clean the slate and repai their de bt thi feel usual aros even befor the
perpetr perceiv that thei might be caught cressei point out that at thi point
whatev fear the perpetr felt in relat to their crime wa relat to lose their social
statu by the exposur of their nonshar problem not the exposur of the theft itself or
the possibl of punish or imprison thi is becaus their ration still
prevent them from perceiv their misconduct as crimin the trust violat cannot
fear the treatment usual accord to crimin until he come to look upon himself as
a crimin 14
eventu most of the longterm violat final realiz thei were in too deep it is at
thi point that the embezzl face a crisi while maintain the borrow ration
or other ration for that matter the trust violat is abl to maintain hi selfimag
as a lawabid citizen but when the level of theft escal to a certain point the
perpetr is confront with the idea that he is behav in a crimin manner thi is
contrari to hi person valu and the valu of the social group to which he belong thi
conflict creat a great deal of anxieti for the perpetr a number of offend describ
themselv as extrem nervou and upset tens and unhappy15
without the ration that thei were borrow longterm offend in the studi
found it difficult to reconcil convert monei while at the same time see themselv as
honest and trustworthi in thi situat thei have two option 1 thei can readopt the
attitud of the lawabid social group with which thei identifi befor the theft began
or 2 thei can adopt the attitud of the new categori of person crimin with whom
thei now identify16 from hi studi cressei wa abl to cite exampl of each type of
behavior those who sought to readopt the attitud of their lawabid social group mai
report their behavior to the polic or to their employ quit take fund or resolv to quit
14 cressei pp 120121
15 cressei p 121
16 cressei p 122
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4609
take fund specul or gambl wildli in order to regain the amount taken or leav the
field by abscond or commit suicid 17 on the other hand those who adopt the
attitud of the group of crimin to which thei now belong mai becom reckless in their
defalc take larger amount than formerli with less attempt to avoid detect and
with no notion of repay 18
abscond
the third group of offend cressei discuss wa abscond peopl who take the monei
and run cressei found that the nonshar problem for abscond usual result
from physic isol he observ that these peopl usual ar unmarri or separ
from their spous live in hotel or room hous have few primari group associ of
ani sort and own littl properti onli on of the abscond interview had held a higher
statu posit of trust such as an account busi execut or bookkeep 19 he also
found that the abscond tend to have lower occup and socioeconom statu
than the member of the other two categori
becaus abscond tend to lack strong social ti cressei found that almost ani financi
problem could be defin as nonshar for these person and also that ration
were easili adopt becaus the person onli had to sever a minimum of social ti when
thei absconded20 the abscond ration their conduct by note that their attempt to
live honest live had been futil henc their low statu thei also adopt an attitud of not
care what happen to them and a belief that thei could not help themselv becaus thei
were predispos to crimin behavior the latter two ration which were adopt
by everi abscond in cressei studi allow them to remov almost all person
account from their conduct21
in the 1950 when thi data wa gather by cressei embezzl were consid person
of higher socioeconom statu who took fund over a limit period of time becaus of
some person problem such as drink or gambl while thiev were consid
person of lower statu who took whatev fund were at hand cressei note sinc most
abscond identifi with the lower statu group thei look upon themselv as belong to a
17 cressei p 121
18 cressei p 122
19 cressei p 128
20 cressei p 129
21 cressei pp 128129
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4610 2011 fraud examin manual
special class of thiev rather than trust violat just as longterm violat and
independ businessmen do not at first consid the possibl of abscond with the
fund abscond do not consid the possibl of take rel small amount of
monei over a period of time 22
conjunctur of event
perhap the most import conclus to be drawn from the cressei studi wa that it took
all three element perceiv nonshar fi nancial problem perceiv opportun and
the abil to ration for the trust violat to occur
the three event make up the condit under which trust violat occur and the term
caus mai be appli to their conjunctur sinc trust violat is depend on that
conjunctur whenev the conjunc ture of event occur trust violat result and if the
conjunctur doe not take place there is no trust violat 23
conclus
cressei classic fraud triangl help explain the natur of mani but not alloccup
offend for exampl although academician have test hi model it ha still not fulli
found it wai into practic in term of develop fraud prevent program our sens
tell us that on model even cressei will not fit all situat plu the studi is nearli
half a centuri old there ha been consider social chang in the interim and now mani
antifraud profession believ there is a new breed of occup offenderon who
simpli lack a conscienc suffici to overcom temptat
dr steve albrecht
the albrecht studi
anoth pioneer research in occup fraud and abus is dr steve albrecht of
brigham young univers albrecht and two of hi colleagu keith r how and marshal
b romnei conduct an analysi of 212 fraud in the earli 1980 under a grant from the
institut of intern auditor research foundat lead to their book entitl deter
fraud the intern auditor perspect the studi methodolog involv obtain
demograph and background inform on the fraud through the us of extens
22 cressei p 133
23 cressei p 139
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4611
questionnair the particip in the survei were intern auditor of compani that had
experienc fraud
albrecht research includ an examin of comprehens data sourc to assembl a
complet list of pressur opportun and integr variabl result in a set of 50 possibl
red flag or indic of occup fraud and abus these variabl fell into two
principl categori perpetr characterist and organiz environ the purpos
of the studi wa to determin which of the red flag were most import to the commiss
and therefor to the detect and prevent of fraud the red flag rang from
unusu high person debt to belief that on job is in jeopardi from no separ of
asset custodi procedur to not adequ check a potenti employe background 24
the research gave particip both set of 25 motiv factor and ask which factor
were present in the fraud thei had dealt with particip were ask to rank these factor
on a sevenpoint scale indic the degre to which each factor exist in their specif
fraud the ten most highli rank factor from the list of person characterist base on
thi studi were
1 live beyond their mean
2 an overwhelm desir for person gain
3 high person debt
4 a close associ with custom
5 feel pai wa not commensur with respons
6 a wheelerdeal attitud
7 strong challeng to beat the system
8 excess gambl habit
9 undu famili or peer pressur
10 no recognit for job performance25
these motiv ar veri similar to the nonshar financi problem cressei identifi
the ten most highli rank factor from the list deal with organiz
environ were
24 while such red flag mai be present in mani occup fraud case on must reemphas albrecht caution that
the perpetr ar hard to profil and fraud is difficult to predict to underscor thi point albrecht research doe not
address and no current research ha been done to determin if nonoffend have mani of the same characterist if
so then the list mai not be discrimin enough to be us in short while on should be mind of potenti red flag
thei should not receiv undu attent absent other compel circumst
25 albrecht p 32
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4612 2011 fraud examin manual
1 place too much trust in kei employe
2 lack of proper procedur for author of transact
3 inadequ disclosur of person invest and incom
4 no separ of author of transact from the custodi of relat asset
5 lack of independ check on perform
6 inadequ attent to detail
7 no separ of custodi of asset from the account for those asset
8 no separ of duti between account function
9 lack of clear line of author and respons
10 depart that is not frequent review by intern auditors26
all of the factor on thi list affect employe opportun to commit fraud without be
caught opportun as you will recal wa the second factor identifi in cressei fraud
triangl in mani wai the studi by albrecht et al support cressei model like
cressei studi the albrecht studi suggest there ar three factor involv in occup
fraud it appear that three element must be present for a fraud to be commit a
situat pressur nonshar financi pressur a perceiv opportun to commit
and conceal the dishonest act a wai to secretli resolv the dishonest act or the lack of
deterr by manag and some wai to ration verbal the act as either be
inconsist with on person level of integr or justifi 27
the fraud scale 28
to illustr the concept albrecht develop the fraud scale which includ the
compon of situat pressur perceiv opportun and person integr when
situat pressur and perceiv opportun ar high and person integr is low
occup fraud is much more like to occur than when the opposit is true29
26 albrecht p 39
27 albrecht p 5
28 albrecht etal p 5
29 albrecht etal p 6
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4613
albrecht describ situat pressur as t he immedi problem individu experi
within their environ the most overwhelm of which ar probabl high person
debt or financi loss 30 opportun to commit fraud albrecht sai mai be creat
by individu or by defici or miss intern control person integr refer to the
person code of ethic behavior each person adopt while thi factor appear to be a
straightforward determin of whether the person is honest or dishonest moral
develop research indic that the issu is more complex 31
in addit to it find on motiv factor of occup fraud the albrecht studi
also disclos sever interest relationship between the perpetr and the fraud thei
commit for exampl perpetr of larg fraud us the proce to purchas new
home and expens automobil recreat properti expens vacat support
extramarit relationship and make specul invest those commit small
fraud did not32 perpetr who were interest primarili in beat the system
commit larger fraud howev perpetr who believ their pai wa not adequ
commit primarili small fraud lack of segreg of respons place
undeserv trust in kei employe impos unrealist goal and oper on a crisi
basi were all pressur or weak associ with larg fraud colleg graduat were
less like to spend the proce of their loot to take extravag vacat purchas
recreat properti support extramarit relationship and bui expens automobil
final those with lower salari were more like to have a prior crimin record33
richard c holling
the hollingerclark studi
in 1983 richard c holling of purdu univers and john p clark of the univers of
minnesota publish feder fund research involv survei of nearli 10000 american
worker their book theft by employe reach a differ conclus than cressei thei
conclud that employe steal primarili as a result of workplac condit and that the
true cost of the problem ar vastli underst in sum when we take into consider
the incalcul social cost the grand total paid for theft in the workplac is no doubt
grossli underestim by the avail financi estim 34
30 albrecht p 5
31 albrecht p 6
32 albrecht p 42
33 albrecht p xiv
34 richard c holling and john p clark theft by employe lexington lexingt book 1983 p 6
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4614 2011 fraud examin manual
hypothes of employe theft
in review the literatur on employe theft holling and clark conclud that expert
had develop five separ but interrel set of hypothes of employe theft the first
is extern econom pressur such as the nonshar financi problem that cressei
describ the second hypothesi wa that contemporari employe specif young
on ar not as hardwork and honest as those in past gener the third theori
advoc primarili by those with year of experi in the secur and investig
industri is that everi employe can be tempt to steal from hi employ the theori
basic assum that peopl ar greedi and dishonest by natur the fourth theori wa
that job dissatisfact is the primari caus of employe theft and the fifth that theft
occur becaus of the broadli share formal and inform structur of organizationsthat
is over time the group norm whether good or bad becom the standard of conduct
the sum of their research gener conclud that the fourth hypothesi wa correct
employe devianc
employe theft is at on extrem of employe devianc which can be defin as conduct
detriment to the organ and to the employe at the other extrem is
counterproduct employe behavior such as goldbrick and abus of sick leav
holling and clark defin two basic categori of employe deviant behavior 1 act by
employe against properti and 2 violat of the norm regul accept level of
product the former includ misus and theft of compani properti such as cash or
inventori the latter involv act of employe devianc that affect product
holling and clark develop a written questionnair that wa sent to employe in three
differ sector retail hospit and manufactur the employe were present with
list of categori 1 and categori 2 offens and were ask which offens thei had been
involv in and with what frequenc the research eventu receiv 9175 valid
employe questionnair repres about 54 percent of those sampl below ar the
result of the questionnair the first tabl repres categori 1 offensesact against
property35 holling and clark found that approxim onethird of employe in each
sector admit to commit some form of properti devianc
35 holling and clark p 6
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4615
the follow is a summari of the holling and clark research with respect to product
devianc not surprisingli thei found that thi form of employe misconduct wa two to
three time more common than properti violations36
36 holling and clark p 42
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4616 2011 fraud examin manual
job satisfact and devianc
the research of holling and clark strongli suggest that employe who ar dissatisfi
with their jobsacross all ag group but especi younger workersar the most like to
seek redress through counterproduct or illeg behavior in order to right the perceiv
inequ other writer notabl anthropol ogist gerald mar and research david
altheid have comment on thi connect mar observ that among both hotel dine
room employe and dock worker it wa believ that pilferag wa not theft but wa seen
as a moral justifi addit to wage inde as an entitl due from exploit
employ 37 altheid also document that theft is often perceiv by employe as a
wai of get back at the boss or supervisor 38 jason ditton document a pattern in us
industri call wage in kind in which employe situat in structur disadvantag
part of the organ receiv larg segment of their wage invis 39
37 holling and clark p 77
38 holling and clark p 86
39 holling and clark p 86
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4617
employe percept of control
the research also examin the perceptionnot necessarili the realityof employe
believ thei would be caught if thei commit theft we find that perceiv certainti of
detect is invers relat to employe theft for respond in all three industri
sectorsthat is the stronger the percept that theft would be detect the less the
likelihood that the employe would engag in deviant behavior 40
thi find is signific and consist with other research it suggest that increas the
percept of detect mai be the best wai to deter employe theft while increas the
sanction that ar impos on occup fraudster will have a limit effect recal that
under cressei model embezzl ar motiva ted to commit illeg act becaus thei face
some financi problem that thei cannot share with other becaus it would threaten their
statu it follow that the greatest threat to the perpetr would be that he might be caught
in the act of steal becaus that would bring hi nonshar problem out into the open
the possibl of sanction is onli a secondari concern the perpetr engag in the
illeg conduct onli becaus he perceiv there is an opportun to fix hi financi problem
without get caught therefor if an organ can increas in it employe mind the
percept that illeg act will be detect it can significantli deter occup fraud put
simpli occup fraudster ar not deter by the threat of sanction becaus thei do
not plan on get caught
control in the workplac accord to holling and clark consist of both formal and
inform social control formal control can be describ as extern pressur that ar
appli through both posit and neg sanction inform control consist of the
intern by the employe of the group norm of the organ these research
along with a host of other have conclud thata a gener propositioninform social
control provid the best deterr these da ta clearli indic that the loss of respect
among on acquaint wa the singl most effect variabl in predict futur deviant
involv furthermor in gener the probabl of suffer inform sanction is
far more import than fear of formal sanction in deter deviant activ 41 again thi
support the notion that the greatest deterr to the fraudster is the idea that he will be
caught not the threat of punish by hi employ
40 holling and clark p 117
41 holling and clark p 121
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4618 2011 fraud examin manual
other conclus
holling and clark reach sever other conclus base on their work first thei found
that substanti increas the intern secur presenc doe not seem to be appropri
given the preval of the problem in fact do so mai make thing wors second thei
conclud that the same kind of employe who engag in other workplac devianc ar
also princip the on who engag in employe theft thei found persuas evid that
slow or sloppi workmanship sickleav abus long coffe break alcohol and drug us at
work and come in late andor leav earli were more like to be present in the
employeethief
third the research hypothes that if effort ar made to reduc employe theft
without reduc it underli caus eg employe dissatisfact lack of ethic the
result could creat a hydraul effect that is tighten control over properti devianc
mai creat more detriment act affect the product of the organ if we push
down employe theft that action mai push up goldbrick fourth thei assert that
increas manag sensit to it employe will reduc all form of workplac
devianc fifth thei conclud special attent should be afford young employe as
these ar the on statist the most like to steal it must be point out howev that
although the incid of theft is higher among younger employe the loss associ
with those theft ar typic lower than loss caus by more senior employe who have
greater financi author
holling and clark assert that manag must pai attent to four aspect of polici
develop 1 a clear understand regard theft behavior 2 continu
dissemin of posit inform reflect of the compani polici 3 enforc
of sanction and 4 public the sanction
the research sum up their observ by sai perhap the most import
overal polici implic that can be drawn is that theft and workplac devianc ar in
larg part a reflect of how manag at all level of the organ is perceiv by the
employe specif if the employe is permit to conclud that hi contribut to the
workplac is not appreci or that the organ doe not seem to care about the theft
of it properti we expect to find greater involv in conclus a lower preval
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4619
of employe theft mai be on valuabl consequ of a manag team that is
respons to the current percept and attitud of it workforc 42
20082009 integr survei
in januari 2009 k pmg releas it report on it 20082009 integr survei the result of
the survei were base on respons from 5065 us employe span all level of job
respons 16 job function 13 industri sector and 4 threshold of organiz size
accord to the result of the survei nearli three out of four employe 74 percent
report that thei have observ misconduct in the workplac in the prior 12month period
with almost half of employe 46 percent report that what thei have observ wa
seriou misconduct that could caus a signific loss of public trust if discov kpmg
conduct similar survei in 2000 and 2005 in all three survei the report level of
overal misconduct remain larg consist with 74 percent in 2005 and 76 percent in
2000 report that thei had observ misconduct in the prior year similarli the three
survei have reveal consist level of seriou misconduct with 50 percent in 2005 and
49 percent in 2000 character the misconduct thei observ as capabl of caus a
signific loss of public trust if discov although the level of observ misconduct
ha remain constant employe report that the condit that facilit manag
abil to prevent detect and respond to fraud and misconduct within compani is
improv employe who work in compani with comprehens ethic and
complianc program report more favor result across the board than did those who
work in compani without such program for instanc employe who work in compani
with such program report fewer observ of misconduct and higher level of
confid in manag commit to integr
2010 report to the nation on occup fraud and abus
occup fraud and abus is a widespr ad problem that affect practic everi
organ regardless of size locat or industri in 1996 the acf releas the first
report to the nation on o cc upat fraud and abus which wa intend to shed light on the
immens and larg undefin cost that occup fraud impos on organ the
state goal of the first report were to
summar the opinion of expert on the percentag and amount of organiz
revenu lost to all form of occup fraud and abus
examin the characterist of the employe who commit occup fraud and abus
42 holling and clark p 144
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4620 2011 fraud examin manual
determin what kind of organ ar victim of occup fraud and abus
categor the wai in which seriou fraud and abus occur
all of the enumer goal of the first report fell under on larger and more all
encompass mission to better educ the public and antifraud profession about the
threat of occup fraud sinc that time with each subsequ edit of the report to the
nation that ha remain our primari goal
we releas updat edit of the report in even year between 2002and 2008 like the
first studi each subsequ edit ha been base on detail case inform about
specif fraud provid by the cfe who investig those case each report ha been
structur along the same line focus on the method us by employe manag and
execut to defraud their organ the loss caus by those fraud and the
characterist of both the perpetr and the victim of these crime
the 2010 edit of our report is base on 1843 actual case of occup fraud for the
first time ever we have widen our studi to includ case from countri outsid the
unit state thu the studi is now titl report to the nation on occup fraud and abus
thi expans allow us to more fulli explor the truli global natur of occup fraud
and provid an enhanc view into the sever and impact of these crime
the follow is an excerpt contain some of the more signific find of our studi
copi of the entir report to the nation can be download or view at no charg on the
acf websit wwwacfecom
measur the cost of occup fraud
measur the cost of occup fraud is an import yet incred challeng
endeavor arguabl the true cost is incalcul the inher clandestin natur of fraud
mean that mani case will never be reveal and of those that ar the full amount of
loss might not be uncov quantifi or report consequ ani measur of
occup fraud cost will be at best an estim nonetheless determin such an
approxim is critic to illustr the pandem and destruct natur of whitecollar
crime
we ask each cfe who particip in our survei to provid hi best estim of the
percentag of annual revenu that the typic organ lose to fraud in a given year
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4621
the median respons wa that the averag organ annual lose 5 of it revenu to
fraud appli thi percentag to the 2009 estim gross world product of 5807
trillion would result in a project total global fraud loss of more than 29 trillion
note that thi estim is base sole on the opinion of 1843 antifraud expert rather
than ani specif data or factual observ accordingli it should not be interpret as a
liter represent of the worldwid cost of occup fraud howev becaus there is
no wai to precis calcul the size of global fraud loss the best estim of antifraud
profession with a frontlin view of the problem mai be as reliabl a measur as we ar
abl to make in ani event it is undeni that the overal cost of occup fraud is
immens certainli cost organ hundr of billion or trillion of dollar each year
distribut of dollar loss
of the 1843 case of occup fraud that compris our studi 1822 includ the total
dollar loss the median loss for all scheme in the studi wa 160000 as the follow
chart show almost onefourth of all case in the 2010 studi involv loss of at least 1
million the distribut of dollar loss among case in the 2010 studi wa similar to the
distribut in our 2008 report in both studi more than 60 of scheme caus the
victim organ to suffer a loss of at least 100000
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4622 2011 fraud examin manual
how occup fraud is commit
previou acf research ha identifi three primari categori of occup fraud us
by individu to defraud their employ asset misappropri ar those scheme in
which the perpetr steal or misus an organ resourc these fraud includ
scheme such as skim cash receipt falsifi expens report and forg compani
check
corrupt scheme involv the employe us of hi influenc in busi transact in a
wai that violat hi duti to the employ for the purpos of obtain a benefit for himself
or someon els exampl of corrupt scheme includ briberi extort and a conflict
of interest
financi statement fraud scheme ar those involv the intent misstat or
omiss of materi inform in the organ financi report common method
of fraudul financi statement manipul includ record fictiti revenu
conceal liabil or expens and artifici inflat report asset
as indic in the follow chart asset misappropri ar by far both the most
frequent and the least costli form of occup fraud on the other end of the spectrum
ar case involv financi statement fraud these scheme were present in less than 5 of
the case report to us but caus a median loss of more than 4 million corrupt
scheme fell in the middl categori in both respect occur in just under onethird of all
case involv in our studi and caus a median loss of 250000
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4623
occup fraud by categoryfrequ 43
occup fraud by categorymedian loss
43 the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus sever case involv multipl scheme from
more than on categori
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4624 2011 fraud examin manual
subcategori of asset misappropri
with nearli 90 of occup fraud involv some form of asset misappropri it is
instruct to further delin the method us by employe to embezzl organiz
asset we divid asset misappropri scheme into nine subcategori as illustr in
the tabl below the first eight subcategori repres scheme target cash these fraud
account for approxim 85 of all asset misappropri
two of the subschem skim and cash larceni involv pilfer incom cash
receipt such as sale revenu and account receiv collect the next five subcategori
bill expens reimburs check tamper payrol and fraudul
regist disburs scheme involv fraudul disburs of cash the eighth form
of cash misappropri target cash the organ ha on hand such as petti cash fund
or cash in a vault the final subcategori of asset misappropri cover the theft or
misus of noncash asset includ inventori suppli fix asset invest
intellectu properti and proprietari inform the tabl below provid the frequenc
and median loss associ with each asset misappropri subcategori
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4625
the sum of percentag in thi tabl exce 100 becaus sever case involv asset misappropri scheme from more than on categori
as previous mention our 2010 data includ fraud case from countri throughout the
world while our 2008 data contain onli usbas case in the follow chart we isol
the us case from our current studi to make a more direct comparison to our 2008 data
interestingli while financi statement fraud remain the least common and most costli
form of fraud among us case there wa a much lower percentag of financi statement
case in thi studi four percent as compar to 2008 ten percent addition the
median loss for all three categori of fraud were notabl smaller in 2010 than thei were in
2008
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4626 2011 fraud examin manual
occup fraud by categori us onlyfrequ 44
occup fraud by categori us onlymedian loss
durat of fraud scheme
in addit to examin the monetari cost of the fraud case report to us we analyz
the length of time these scheme last befor be detect the median durationth
time period from when the fraud first occur to when it wa discov for all case in
our studi wa 18 month not surprisingli case involv financi statement fraudth
most costli form of fraudlast the long est with a median durat of 27 month
fraudul regist disburs on the other hand were not onli the least costli form of
fraud in our studi but also tend to be detect the soonest
44the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becauses veral case involv scheme from more than
on categori
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4627
median durat of fraud base on scheme type
detect of fraud scheme
on of the princip goal of our research is to identifi how past fraud were detect so
that organ can appli that knowledg to their futur antifraud effort tip were by
far the most common detect method in our studi catch nearli three time as mani
fraud as ani other form of detect thi is consist with the find in our prior
report tip have been far and awai the most common mean of detect in everi studi
sinc 2002 when we began track the data
manag review and intern audit were the second and third most common form of
detect uncov 15 and 14 of fraud re spectiv it is also noteworthi that 11
of fraud were detect through channel that lie complet outsid of the tradit anti
fraud control structur accid polic notificat ion and confess in other word 11 of
the time the victim organ either had to stumbl onto the fraud or be notifi of it by
a third parti in order to detect it
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4628 2011 fraud examin manual
initi detect of occup fraud 45
sourc of tip
not surprisingli employe were the most common sourc of fraud tip howev
custom vendor competitor and acquaint ie noncompani sourc provid at
least 34 of fraud tip which suggest that fraud report polici and program should be
public not onli to employe but also to custom vendor and other extern
stakehold
while tip have consist been the most common wai to detect fraud the impact of tip
is if anyth underst by the fact that so mani organ fail to implement fraud
report system such system enabl employe to anonym report fraud or
misconduct by phone or through a webbas portal otherwis known as hotlin the
abil to report fraud anonym is kei becaus employe often fear make report due
to the threat of retali from superior or neg reaction from their peer also most
thirdparti hotlin system offer program to rais awar about how to report
misconduct consequ on would expect that the presenc of a fraud hotlin would
enhanc fraud detect effort and foster more tip
45 the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus in some case respond identifi more than
on detect method
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4629
percent of tip by sourc 46
geograph locat of organ
as mention previous for the first time in the histori of our research on occup
fraud we open up our studi to includ fraud case investig by cfe outsid the
unit state as a result the case discuss in thi report repres fraud perpetr in
106 countri around the world we receiv inform on the locat of 1797 of the
case that were report to us of these 43 occur outsid the unit state provid
us with a true insight into the global plagu of occup fraud
the chart below show the number and median loss of the case report to us broken
down by region for victim organ with locat in more than on countri we ask
survei particip to choos the locat where the primari perpetr wa locat for
exampl a fraud perpetr at a european arm of a japanes compani would be classifi
as occur in europ similarli a case involv fraud perpetr at the canadian offic
of a south american compani would be consid a fraud that occur in canada the
region breakdown on case data throughout thi report should consequ be read within
thi framework addition due to the larg number of us case report we separ
north america into the unit state and canada and group the remain countri by
contin
46 the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus in some case respond identifi more than
the sourc of the initi tip
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4630 2011 fraud examin manual
geograph locat of victim organ
victim of occup fraud
as part of our survei we ask each respond to provid demograph inform about
the organ that wa defraud we believ it is us to measur the differ wai in
which occup fraud impact differ type of organ our hope is that thi
analysi mai enabl organ to better identifi where to strengthen or focu their anti
fraud effort base on the experi of other similar organ
type of victim organ
more than 40 of victim organ in our studi were privat own busi and
nearli onethird were publicli trade compani mean that almost threequart of the
victim repres in our studi came from forprofit enterpris sixteen percent of the
fraud report to us occur at govern agenc notforprofit organ were
the least repres categori with less than 10 of fraud take place at these entiti
organ type of victimfrequ
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4631
in addit to experienc the most fraud privat and public compani were also victim
to the costliest scheme in our studi the me dian loss for the case at these busi wa
231000 and 200000 respect in cont rast the loss experienc by govern
agenc and notforprofit organ were about half as much govern agenc
had a median loss of 100000 while notforprofit lost a median of 90000
organ type of victim median loss
size of victim organ
continu the trend observ in our prior studi small organ those with fewer
than 100 employe suffer the greatest percentag of the fraud in our 2010 studi
account for more than 30 of the victim organ howev the variat between
size categori is rel small with 23 of victim have between 100 and 999
employe 26 have 1000 to 9999 employe and 21 have more than 10000
employe
thi rel small dispar contrast with our previou studi in which small
organ were involv in a much higher percent of fraud than ani other categori
addition our research ha histor shown that smaller organ suffer
disproportion larg loss due to occup fraud organ with fewer than 100
employe experienc the greatest median loss of all categori of victim organ in
our 2008 studi the same wa true in our 2006 studi
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4632 2011 fraud examin manual
size of victim organ frequenc
size of victim organ median loss
industri of victim organ
we look at the industri classif of the organ victim by the fraud case in
our studi it is import to view thi data as a represent of the compani that had
cfe investig intern fraud case within the last two year rather than as an indic of
which industri ar more or less like to be victim by fraud howev the follow
tabl do draw attent to some differ in the frequenc and cost associ with
occup fraud among differ sector for exampl the bank and financi servic
industri had the most case account for more than 16 of the fraud report to us the
period of time cover by our survei calendar year 2008 and 2009 wa fill with new
stori of fraud in the bank sector so thi find is not unexpect in contrast the
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4633
mine industri experienc the fewest fraud in our studi but those case caus a median
loss of 1 millionbi far the largest of ani of the industri we examined47
industri of victim organizationsort by frequenc
47 there wa a small sampl of onli 12 case in thi industri which mai imp act the reliabl of the
media n loss data
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4634 2011 fraud examin manual
industri of victim organ sort by median loss
victim antifraud control at time of fraud
we ask survei particip which of sever common antifraud control were in place at
the victim organ dure the perpetr of the fraud a distinct should be made
between the follow data and the prior discuss on fraud detect method the
follow analysi cover the mere presenc of each control not necessarili it role in
detect the fraud onc it start more than threequart of the victim organ in
our studi had their financi statement audit by extern auditor while twothird had
dedic intern audit or fraud examin depart and almost 60 had independ
audit of their intern control over financi report addition nearli 70 of the
organ had a formal code of conduct in place at the time of the fraud though onli
39 extend that to includ a formal antifraud polici
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4635
as mention in our discuss on fraud detect method tip ar the number on mean
by which fraud is detect howev less than half of the victim organ in our studi
had a hotlin in place at the time the fraud occur there is evid that the presenc of a
hotlin improv organ abil to detect fraud and limit fraud loss which should
caus more organ to implement fraud hotlin
frequenc of antifraud measur 48
antifraud control in small busi
we have long hypothes that mani small compani ar particularli suscept to fraud
at least partial due to the limit resourc thei devot to antifraud control to test thi
theori we compar the presenc of antifraud control at those compani with fewer than
100 employe to the control at compani with more than 100 employe our find
confirm what we suspect the small compani in our studi did inde have fewer
control in place than the larger organ a factor that mai contribut to the
disproportion impact of fraud on these compani while discrep in level of
certain control ar somewhat expect given the associ cost or resourc requir to
enact them the gap between control in small busi as oppos to larger organ
is strike for exampl it would be expect that small busi would have a lower rate
of extern audit and that fewer small compani would have a formal intern audit or
48the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus mani victim organ had more than on
antifraud control in place at the time of the fraud
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4636 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud examin function but even less expens control were often absent in small
busi while 64 of larg compani had so me sort of manag review of control
process account or transact less than half as mani small busi had the same
type of monitor in place likewis formal code of conduct and antifraud polici cost
veri littl to implement but serv as an effect wai to make a clear and explicit statement
against fraudul and uneth conduct within an organ yet onli 41 and 16 of
small busi had these polici respect in place when the fraud occur
number dwarf by the 83 and 50 rate of larger organ
perhap most concern is that onli 15 of small busi had a hotlin in place
compar to 64 of larger organ as previous discuss our research show that
hotlin ar consist the most effect fraud detect method further the median loss
for fraud at compani with hotlin wa 59 smaller than the median loss for fraud at
organ without such a mechan arguabl enact hotlin would go a long wai in
help smallbusi owner protect their asset from dishonest employe
frequenc of antifraud control by size of victim organ
effect of control
we compar the median loss experienc by those organ that had a particular anti
fraud control against the median loss for those organ without that control at the time
of the fraud hotlin were the control with the greatest associ reduct in median loss
reinforc their valu as an effect antifraud measur employe support program
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4637
surpris audit and fraud train for staff member at all level were also associ with
median loss reduct of more than 50 in terestingli financi statement auditsth
most commonli implement controlwa among the control with the smallest associ
reduct in median loss
median loss base on presenc of antifraud control
the perpetr
we ask respond to provid inform about the fraud perpetr in their case so
we could better understand how occup fraud level and loss ar relat to
demograph inform such as ag job type gender educ and posit of author
in case where there were multipl offend the respons relat to the princip
perpetratorth person identifi by the cfe as the primari culprit in the case the
follow is a summari of the data we receiv
perpetr posit
we ask survei respond whether the perpetr wa an employe a manag or an
ownerexecut below we see that the distribut of case base on the perpetr
posit wa fairli similar to what we found in our 2008 studi although the 2010
distribut wa slightli more skew toward employe and manag not surprisingli
there wa a strong correl between the perpetr posit of author and the loss
caus by fraud the median loss in ownerexecut fraud wa more than three time the
loss caus by manag and more than nine time higher than loss in employe fraud
case
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4638 2011 fraud examin manual
number of perpetr frequenc
perpetr gender
twothird of the fraud in our studi were commit by male which is a higher percentag
than we encount in 2008 but consist with the overal trend note in prior report
that most occup fraud ar commit by men
perpetr gender
the perpetr ag
the distribut of perpetr base on their ag wa similar to our 2008 studi but the
2010 perpetr tend to be slightli younger our past report have gener shown the
highest level of fraud to occur in the 365 0 ag rang but thi year we found more than
half of all case were commit by individu between the ag of 31 and 45 gener
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4639
speak median loss tend to rise with the ag of the perpetr which is consist
with our prior research the most notabl differ between 2008 and 2010 is the loss
caus by perpetr older than 60 in each studi howev we were deal with fewer
than 40 case in that categori given the small sampl size we believ thi is more like to
be an anomali than an indic of ani particular trend
ag of perpetr frequenc
ag of perpetr median loss
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4640 2011 fraud examin manual
perpetr crimin and employ histori
onli 7 of the fraud perpetr in our studi had been previous convict of a fraudrel
offens which wa virtual ident to our find in 2008 eightysix percent had
never been charg with or convict of a prior offens the low rate of prior convict
suggest that crimin background check mai have some effect in prevent fraud but the
effect is probabl limit
perpetr crimin histori frequenc
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4641
in addit to crimin histori past employ issu mai indic that an employe is
more like to engag in fraudul conduct in the futur of the respond in our survei
791 were abl to provid inform about the perpetr prior employ histori
among those case about 8 of perpetr had been previous punish and 10 had
been previous termin for fraudrel conduct
perpetr employ histori frequenc
behavior red flag displai by perpetr
while a fraud is ongo the perpetr often displai certain behavior or characterist
that might indic he ha a heighten risk of commit fraud on their own these
behavior red flag do not prove an individu is engag in a fraud but thei should rais
warn signal to the individu cowork and manag as well as the organ
antifraud staff when these red flag exist alongsid other indic of misconduct thi can
be a strong clue that someth is wrong as discuss earlier in thi report occup
fraud often last for month or year befor thei ar caught so the abil to detect fraud as
earli as possibl can have a big effect in limit loss
we present survei respond with a list of common behavior red flag and ask them
to identifi which of these warn sign had been displai by the perpetr prior to
detect of the fraud as shown in the follow chart the most common red flag
displai by perpetr were live beyond financi mean 43 of case experienc
financi difficulti 36 excess control i ssue with regard to their job 23 and an
unusu close associ with vendor or custom 22 thi distribut is veri similar
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4642 2011 fraud examin manual
to what we found in our 2008 studi as we continu to track thi data in futur studi we
hope to be abl to identifi consist relationship between behavior warn sign and the
occurr of occup fraud ideal thi data will help organ build better frauddetect
program that incorpor behavior data in addit to more standard antifraud
control
behavior red flag present dure fraud scheme sort by frequenc 49
we also broke down the distribut of red flag base on the type of fraud differ form
of occup fraud result from differ factor and circumst which we would
expect to show up in the fraudster behavior as the follow chart illustr individu
who engag in financi statement fraud were much more like than other perpetr to
exhibit control issu or to be under excess pressur to perform within their organ
meanwhil live beyond on mean and experi enc financi difficulti were not as
common among financi statement fraudster as other thi make sens becaus while
asset misappropri and corrupt scheme ar almost alwai commit to enrich the
fraudster in mani financi statement scheme other factorssuch as meet earn
49 the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus in mani case perpetr displai more than
on behavior red flag
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4643
forecast or hit budget target mai be as much of a motiv as person financi
gain an unusu close associ with a vendor or custom wa note as a red flag in
45 of corrupt case which is not surpris given that most corrupt fraud involv
briberi or some kind of illicit benefit a wheelerdeal attitud wa also more common in
corrupt case than in other form of fraud and 42 of all corrupt perpetr were
identifi as live beyond their mean among those who misappropri asset live
beyond on mean and financi difficult i were the two most common red flag
behavior red flag of perpetr base on scheme type 50
50 the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus in mani case perpetr displai more than
on behavior red flag
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4701
fraud prevent program
fraud prevent requir a system of rule which in their aggreg minim the
likelihood of fraud occur while maxim the possibl of detect ani fraudul
activ that mai transpir the potenti of be caught most often persuad like
perpetr not to commit the fraud becaus of thi principl the exist of a thorough
control system is essenti to fraud prevent
respons for fraud prevent
vicari or imput liabil
corpor and other organ can be held liabl for crimin act commit as a
matter of organiz polici fortun most organ do not expressli set out to
break the law howev corpor and other organ mai also be held liabl for the
crimin act of their employe if those act ar done in the cours and scope of their employ
and for the ostens purpos of benefit the corpor an employe act ar consid to be
in the cours and scope of employ if the employe ha actual author or appar author
to engag in those act appar author mean that a third parti would reason believ
the employe is author to perform the act on behalf of the compani therefor an
organ could be held liabl for someth an employe doe on behalf of the
organ even if the employe is not author to perform that act
an organ will not be vicari liabl for the act of an employe unless the
employe act for the ostens purpos of benefit the corpor thi doe not mean
the corpor ha to receiv an actual benefit from the illeg act of it employe all that
is requir is that the employe intend to benefit the corpor
a compani cannot seek to avoid vicari liabil for the act of it employe by simpli
claim that it did not know what wa go on legal speak an organ is
deem to have knowledg of all fact known by it offic and employe that is if the
govern can prove that an offic or employe knew of conduct that rais a question as
to the compani liabil and the govern ca n show that the compani willfulli fail to
act to correct the situat then the compani mai be held liabl even if senior manag
had no knowledg or suspicion of the wrongdo
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4702 2011 fraud examin manual
in addit the evolv legal principl of consciou avoid allow the govern to
prove the employ had knowledg of a particular fact which establish liabil by show
that the employ knew there wa a high probabl the fact exist and conscious avoid
confirm the fact employ cannot simpli turn a blind ey when there is reason to
believ that there mai be crimin conduct within the organ if step ar not taken to
deter the activ the compani itself mai be found liabl
the corpor can be held crimin respons even if those in manag had no knowledg or
particip in the underli crimin event and even if there were specif polici or
instruct prohibit the activ undertaken by the employe the act of ani employe
from the lowest clerk to the ceo can imput liabil upon a corpor in fact a
corpor can be crimin respons for the collect knowledg of sever of it employe
even if no singl employe intend to commit an offens thu the combin of vicari
or imput corpor crimin liabil and the sentenc guidelin for organ creat
an extraordinari risk for corpor todai
respons and liabil of a corpor director and offic
although mani compani do not realiz it the current legal environ impos a
respons on compani to ferret out employe misconduct and to deal with ani known
or suspect instanc of misconduct with effici and decis measur
first the doctrin of account suggest that offic and director awar of potenti
illeg conduct by senior employe mai be liabl for ani recurr of similar misconduct and
mai have an oblig to halt and cure ani continu effect of the initi misconduct
second the corpor sentenc guidelin which ar discuss in more detail below
provid stiff penalti for corpor that fail to take voluntari action to redress appar
misconduct by senior employe
third the privat secur litig reform act of 1995 now requir as a matter of
statut that independ auditor look for and assess manag respons to indic
of fraud or other potenti illeg where the corpor doe not have a histori of
respond to indic of wrongdo the auditor mai not be abl to reach a conclus
that the compani took appropri and prompt action in respons to indic of fraud
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4703
fourth the delawar court of chanceri in in re caremark internationa l inc deriv litig
698 a2d 959 del ch 1996 state that in it view a director duti of care includ a duti to
attempt in good faith to ensur corpor inform and report system exist these
system must be reason design to provid senior manag and the board of director
with time accur inform that would permit them to reach inform judgment
concern the corpor complianc with law and it busi perform
the court in caremark also state that the failur to creat an adequ complianc system
under some circumst could render a director liabl for loss caus by noncompli
with applic legal standard therefor director should make sure that their compani
have a corpor complianc plan in place to detect misconduct and deal with it effect
the director should then monitor the compani adher to the complianc program
do so will help the corpor avoid fine under the sentenc guidelin and help
prevent individu liabil on the part of the director and offic
the treadwai commiss
the nation commiss on fraudul financi report commonli known as the
treadwai commiss wa establish in 1987 with the purpos of defin the
respons of the auditor in prevent and detect fraud the commiss wa form
by the major profession audit organizationsth american institut of cpa the
institut of intern auditor and the nation associ of account the treadwai
commiss made sever major recommend that in combin with other
measur ar design to reduc the probabl of fraud in financi report
a mandatori independ audit committe made up of outsid director
a written charter that set forth the duti and respons of the audit committe
the audit committe should have adequ resourc and author to carri out it
respons
the audit committe should be inform vigil and effect
coso recommend
the committe of sponsor organ wa form to support the implement of
the treadwai commiss in 1992 the committe issu intern controlintegr
framework thi report wa a collabor effort of the american account associ
the american institut of cpa the financi execut institut the institut of intern
auditor and the institut of manag account the report is meant to appli to all
entiti public and privat regardless of size
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4704 2011 fraud examin manual
the coso report complement treadwai recommend to the sec that public
compani manag report includ an acknowledg for respons for intern
control and an assess of effect in meet those respons the report
provid the follow definit
intern control is a broadli defin process design to provid reason assur regard the
achiev of object in the follow categori
reliabl of financi report
effect and effici of oper
complianc with applic law and regul
coso also identifi five interrel compon of intern control the effect of
intern control can be determin from an assess of whether these five compon ar
in place and function effect the five compon ar control environ risk
assess control activ inform and commun and monitor
control environ
the control environ set the moral tone of an organ influenc the control
conscious of the organ and provid a foundat for all other control
compon thi compon take into account whether manag and employe within
the organ exhibit integr in their activ
coso envis that upper manag will be respons for the control environ of
organ employe look to manag for guidanc in most busi affair and
organiz ethic ar no differ it is import for upper manag to oper in an
ethic manner and it is equal import for employe to view manag in a posit
light manag must set an appropri moral to ne for the oper of an organ
in addit to mere set a good exampl howev coso suggest that upper
manag take direct control of an organ effort at intern control thi idea
should be regularli reinforc within the organ there ar sever action that
manag can take to establish the proper control environ for an organ
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4705
these includ
the establish of a code of ethic for the organ the code should be dissemin to all
employe and everi new employe should be requir to read and sign it the code
should also be dissemin to contractor who do work on behalf of the organ
under certain circumst compani mai face liabil due to the action of
independ contractor it is therefor veri import to explain the organ
standard to ani outsid parti with whom the organ conduct busi
care screen of job applic on of the easiest wai to establish a strong moral tone
for an organ is to hire moral sound employe too often the hire process is
conduct in a slipshod manner where permit by law organ should conduct
thorough background check on all new employe especi manag and those
employe handl sensit financi function in addit it is import to conduct
thorough interview with applic to ensur that thei have adequ skill to perform
the duti that will be requir of them
proper assign of author and respons in addit to hire qualifi ethic
employe it is import to put these peopl in situat where thei ar abl to thrive
without resort to uneth conduct organ should provid employe with
welldefin job descript and perform goal perform goal should be
routin review to ensur that thei do not set unrealist standard train should
be provid on a consist basi to ensur that employe maintain the skill to perform
effect regular train on ethic will also help employe identifi potenti troubl
spot and avoid get caught in compromis situat final manag should
quickli determin where defici in an employe conduct exist and work with the
employe to fix the problem
effect disciplinari measur no control environ will be effect unless there is
consist disciplin for ethic violat consist disciplin requir a welldefin
set of sanction for violat and strict adher to the prescrib disciplinari
measur if on employe is punish for an act and anoth employe is not punish
for a similar act the moral forc of the compani ethic polici will be diminish the
level of disciplin must be suffici to deter violat it mai also be advis to
reward ethic conduct thi will reinforc the import of organiz ethic in the
ey of employe
risk assess
risk assess involv an entiti identif and assess of the risk involv in
achiev organiz object thi compon involv tailor ethic polici or
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4706 2011 fraud examin manual
complianc program to the natur of the organ busi accord to coso risk
assess is a threestep process
set object for the organ manag should establish mission statement or similar
express of organiz object these statement must take into account the
natur of the organ busi the industri in which the organ oper
and the polit and econom environ in which it oper as well as the
organ resourc and goal in state it goal the organ should establish
measur criteria so that progress can be measur goal should not be so lofti that
thei cannot be reach consid the organ resourc and environ in
set object input from all level of manag should be sought onc an
appropri statement of object is establish it should be commun to
all employe
analyz potenti risk of violat coso divid risk into two categori extern risk
and intern risk extern risk includ thing like increas competit chang in
technolog shift econom condit and new legisl intern risk ar factor
such as personnel chang avail of fund for organiz project new
oper system and the develop of new product
develop a strategi to manag risk organ should identifi and be prepar to react to
ani extern or intern risk thi mean develop control that ar tailor to the
inher risk of the organ busi and establish set polici for deal
with violat
control activ
control activ ar the polici and procedur that enforc manag direct
manag should set forth polici and procedur guidelin in a manual that is issu to
employe a person or person should be design to keep statement of polici
updat and to make sure thei ar properli dissemin all control activ should be
close monitor by manag and chang should be made where control failur ar
identifi consist with the risk analysi compon when a control failur is identifi
the risk of addit failur should be consid in redesign control
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4707
inform and commun
the inform and commun compon relat to the exchang of inform in a wai
that allow employe to carri out their respons organ should work to
identifi pertin inform and see that it is deliv to those who need it most a
proper inform system will accomplish the follow
assimil import financi oper and complianc inform thi inform should
be drawn from both intern and extern sourc mean manag mai have to go
outsid the organiz structur to identifi pertin inform there should be a
mean of screen incom inform so that pertin inform is maintain
but unnecessari inform is not allow to clog channel of commun
exampl of pertin inform includ fact on organiz perform
market condit competitor program econom chang and legisl or
regulatori chang
pass on pertin informat ion to those who need it manag should provid time
inform to employe to help them carri out their duti more effect import
fact should be commun in readili usabl form it is also import to
commun the import of observ control manag should help employe
understand their own role in the intern control system and make it clear that intern
control have a high prioriti
provid for upstream commun commun in an organ should flow
in all direct employe should be provid with clear channel for report
suspect control violat provis should be made for employe to make
anonym report in order to avoid fear of retali which can have a chill effect
on upstream commun a similar report mechan for custom and other
extern parti should be in place seriou effort should be made to follow up on
these commun
monitor
monitor is the process that assess the qualiti of a control environ over time thi
compon should includ regular evalu of the entir control system it also requir
the ongo monitor of daytodai activ by manag and employe thi mai
involv review the accuraci of financi inform or verifi inventori suppli
equip and other organ asset final organ should conduct
independ evalu of their intern control system an effect monitor system
should provid for the free flow of upstream commun as discuss under the
inform and commun compon
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4708 2011 fraud examin manual
implement an effect complianc and ethic program under the corpor sentenc guidelin
to review the unit state sentenc commiss began a studi of sanction for
corpor wrongdo in 1988 after three year of studi and hear on mai 1 1991 the
ussc submit it propos guidelin for sentenc organ to congress the
introductori commentari to the guidelin clearli state that thei ar design to provid
incent for organ to maintain intern mechan for prevent detect and
report crimin conduct among other thing the guidelin suggest a substanti
reduct of fine for organ that have effect complianc program see the
chapter on organiz crime for more in format about how penalti ar calcul
under the guidelin
the unit state sentenc commiss promulg modif to the exist
provis of chapter 8 deal with effect complianc and ethic program for busi
organ that becam effect novemb 1 2004 these provis contain in
section 8b21 narrowli tailor the criteria for complianc and ethic program therebi
provid organ with guidanc in establish and maintain effect program for
detect and prevent intern illeg activ as well as mitig sentenc culpabl
under the guidelin if a convict organ ha an effect complianc program in
place at the time of the offens the sentenc judg will consid the organ act of
due dilig in try to prevent the illeg when decid whether to increas or mitig
the sentenc the guidelin defin effect complianc program as on that is reason
design implement and enforc so that it gener will be effect in prevent and
detect crimin conduct
in april 2010 howev the us sentenc commiss modifi the sentenc guidelin
for organ especi as thei relat to complianc program the most signific
chang under the modifi sentenc guidelin for organ concern the sentenc
reduct credit for have an effect complianc program befor the guidelin were
modifi organ were disqualifi from receiv a reduct in sentenc for
maintain an effect complianc program if a highlevel person wa involv with the
fraudul activ under the modifi guidelin howev involv of a highlevel
person is no longer an automat bar from effect complianc program credit but the
amend impos sever condit to receiv a reduct under these circumst
includ a direct report requir to the govern author board or audit
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4709
committe the chang will becom effect on novemb 1 2010 bar ani
congression modif or reject
as provid by the guidelin to have an effect complianc and ethic program the
organ shall
exercis due dilig to prevent and detect crimin conduct
otherwis promot an organiz cultur that encourag ethic conduct and a
commit to complianc with the law
the guidelin further requir that such a complianc and ethic program be reason
design implement and enforc so that it is gener effect in prevent and
detect crimin conduct howev thi section further provid that the failur to prevent
or detect the offens in question doe not necessarili mean that the program is ineffect
in design such a program certain factor must be consid by each organ
1 applic industri size and practic an organ failur to incorpor and
follow industri practic or the standard call for by ani applic govern
regul weigh against a find that the program is effect
2 size of the organizationlarg organ ar expect to devot more formal
oper and greater resourc to meet the requir than ar small
organ for exampl smaller organ mai us avail personnel rather
than emploi separ staff to carri out ethic and complianc
3 recurr of similar misconduct the recurr of a similar event creat doubt as to
whether the organ took reason step to meet the requir
to meet the two requir of due dilig and promot of an ethic cultur section
8b21 b set forth the seven factor that ar minim requir for such a program to be
consid effect
1 the organ must have establish standard and procedur to prevent and detect
crimin conduct
2 item 2 ha three specif subpart
a the organ govern author shall be knowledg about the content and
oper of the complianc and ethic program and shall exercis reason
oversight with respect to implement and effect of the complianc and
ethic program
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4710 2011 fraud examin manual
b highlevel personnel shall ensur that the organ ha an effect complianc
and ethic program and specif individu within the organ shall be
assign overal respons for the complianc and ethic program
c specif individu within the organ shall be deleg daytodai
oper respons for the complianc and ethic program these individu
shall report period to highlevel personnel and as appropri to the govern
author or a subgroup thereof on the effect of the program it is also
requir that these specif individu be given adequ resourc and author to
accomplish their respons and be given direct access to the govern
author
3 the organ shall us reason effort not to includ within the substanti
author personnel ani individu whom the organ knew or should have known
ha engag in illeg activ or other conduct inconsist with an effect
complianc and ethic program
4 item 4 ha two subpart
a the organ shall take reason step to commun period and in a
practic manner it standard and procedur and other aspect of the complianc
and ethic program to the individu refer to in subpart b below by conduct
effect train program and otherwis dissemin inform appropri to
such individu respect role and respons
b the individu refer to in subpart a abov ar the 1 member of the govern
author 2 highlevel personnel 3 substanti author personnel 4 the
organ employe and as appropri the 5 organ agent
5 the organ shall take reason step to accomplish the follow
a ensur that the organ complianc and ethic program is follow includ
monitor and audit to detect crimin conduct
b evalu period the effect of the organ complianc and ethic
program
c have and public a system which mai includ mechan that allow for
anonym or confidenti wherebi the organ employe and agent
mai report or seek guidanc regard potenti or actual crimin conduct without
fear of retali
6 the organ complianc and ethic program shall be promot and enforc
consist throughout the organ through a appropri incent to
perform in accord with the program and b appropri disciplinari measur for
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4711
engag in crimin conduct and for fail to take reason step to prevent or detect
crimin conduct
7 after crimin conduct ha been detect the organ shall take reason step to
respond appropri to the crimin conduct and to prevent further similar crimin
conduct includ make ani necessari modif to the organ complianc
and ethic program
the follow ar some tip and suggest for develop a complianc and ethic program
that compli with these seven requir
1 establish standard
the first step is to establish standard and procedur that ar reason capabl of
prevent and detect crimin conduct on should start by produc a clear statement
of manag philosophi thi statement will serv as the backbon of all complianc
procedur thi is similar to the coso requir that manag must set the ethic
tone for the organ
organ should draft clear concis complianc standard that ar consist with
manag ethic polici and ar relev to busi oper a sampl corpor
complianc program is includ later in thi section it should provid a framework from
which fraud examin can build complianc program tailor to their own organ
2 assign responsisbl
the guidelin requir that the compani gove rning author shall be knowledg about
the content and oper of the complianc and ethic program and shall exercis
reason oversight with respect to the implement and effect of the program
govern author is defin as the board of director or if the organ doe not have a
board of director the highestlevel govern bodi of the organ
it is also requir that highlevel personnel shall ensur that the compani ha an effect
program and that specif individu within thi group be assign the overal respons
for the program
highlevel personnel ar those who have subst antial control over the organ or who
have a substanti role in the make of polici within the organ specif exampl of
highlevel personnel includ
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4712 2011 fraud examin manual
director
execut offic
individu in charg of major busi or function unit of the organ
individu with substanti ownership interest in the organ
audit committe
if a board of director exist the board must be knowledg about the complianc
program and overse it implement accordingli it is prefer for the board of
director or on of the board committe to control the organ complianc
program for instanc mani compani place their complianc program under the control
of audit committe there ar three princip benefit to thi practic
the involv of the board of director lend an air of author to the complianc
program it clearli identifi the program as a matter of compani polici
the involv of a board committe provid oversight to the oper of the
program by personnel who ar not involv in the daytodai oper of the program
effort to implement an effect complianc program can be document in the
committe minut thi document can prove us if the compani ever ha to
defend it action and seek mitig of a crimin fine
a member of the board should also be a member of the audit committe thi will help
ensur that the board is knowledg about the content and oper of the program
although the board and the offic mai deleg the daytodai oper respons
for the program to other individu such as a complianc offic and hi staff these
individu must report period to the board or other highlevel personnel regard the
effect of the program thei must also have suffici author to ensur that
standard ar strictli adher to as well as adequ resourc to implement and monitor the
program
3 due dilig in hire
the guidelin requir that the organ us reason effort not to includ within
the substanti author personnel of the organ ani individu whom the organ
knew or should have known through the exercis of due dilig ha engag in illeg
activ or other conduct inconsist with an effect complianc and ethic program
substanti author personnel is defin as individu who exercis a substanti measur of
discret in act on behalf of an organ the term includ highlevel personnel of
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4713
the organ individu who exercis substanti supervisori author such as a plant
manag or a sale manag and ani other individu who although not a part of an
organ manag nevertheless exercis substanti discret when act within
the scope of their author such as an individu with author in an organ to
negoti or set price level or an individu author to negoti or approv signific
contract whether an individu fall within thi categori must be determin on a casebi
case basi
like coso the guidelin requir that organi zation hire ethic employe thi requir
care screen of applic thorough background check where permit by law and
effect monitor of the perform of current employe although the guidelin onli
requir such screen for substanti author personnel it is recommend that such
screen be adopt for all employe
4 commun the polici
the corpor complianc polici should be commun to everyon who can potenti
bind a corpor through their own misconduct thi includ the follow
board of director
execut offic and director
manag and supervisor
lowlevel employe
independ contractor
note in particular that organ can be held liabl for the act of independ contractor
if the contractor is act for the benefit of the organ it is therefor import to
distribut copi of the complianc program to contractor as well as employe
train employe
as requir by the sentenc guidelin organ must conduct effect train
program organ ar also requir to period and appropri commun the
program complianc requir and procedur to all employe affect by the program
includ upperlevel personnel these program should be design to inform employe
about the compani stanc on corpor complia nce thei should also inform employe
about what kind of act and omiss ar prohibit by the law and by the organ the
train should be design to help employe identifi and avoid situat that could lead to
crimin conduct common train techniqu includ
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4714 2011 fraud examin manual
lectur
train film
interact workshop
computerbas cours
employe should be train to understand the organ ethic polici thei
should also be train to identifi potenti compromis situat and learn how to
avoid them thi train should be tailor to the natur of the organ busi
take into account the extern and intern risk that ar inher in that busi train
should also includ a review of statut and regul that ar particularli applic to
the organ
train should not be a onetim event simpli hand out a copi of the compani
complianc polici at the begin of an employe tenur is insuffici organ
should stress complianc by regularli emphas their standard to all personnel for
exampl mani compani dissemin a copi of their ethic polici everi six month along
with employe paycheck
5 achiev complianc
an organ is requir to take reason measur to ensur program complianc
through monitor audit period evalu the program effect and have
a public report system wherebi employe and agent mai retain anonym or
confidenti when report or seek guidanc regard actual or potenti illeg
conduct without fear of retribut these includ such thing as proactiv fraud detect
and hotlin which ar discuss in more detail in the next section
6 disciplinari action
enforc a complianc program mean adher to a system of disciplinari action for rule
breaker employe must know that if thei violat the compani complianc polici thei will
be punish the opportun to commit fraud is psycholog more accept when
employe believ fraud normal goe undetect and unprosecut new employe should
be advis of the complianc program at the time of hire and should sign an annual statement
acknowledg their understand of it the rang of possibl punish for violat of
the polici should be spell out these mai includ
reprimand
probat
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4715
suspens
reduct in salari
demot
reimburs of loss of damag
dismiss
referr for crimin prosecut or civil action
a combin of the abov
in addit the guidelin recommend the disciplin of individu who ar respons for
fail to detect offens
if a complianc program is not enforc it is noth more than a paper tiger there ar two
purpos to ani complianc program the first is to prevent crimin conduct the second is
to mitig ani potenti fine for crimin conduct by show that the organ is
dedic to prevent illeg activ if an organ doe not enforc it complianc
program it chanc of mitig fine ar nil therefor organ should adher to
welldefin procedur when investig potenti violat and when disciplin
individu for offens the organ effort should be document so that it can
prove that it made everi effort to enforc complianc for everi alleg of an offens the
compani should maintain
an account of the alleg offens
a descript of the step taken to investig the alleg
a descript of the action taken by the organ in respons to the violat
note howev that the guidelin also requir that the organ promot the complianc
and ethic program through appropri incent that encourag employe to perform in
accord with the program such incent can includ reward for report ethic concern
or misconduct or reward for idea for new or innov detect and monitor method
7 appropri respons
after detect of an offens the organ must take all reason step to appropri
respond to thi offens and to prevent further similar offensesinclud modifi it
program and administ appropri disciplin for the individu respons for the offens
and those who fail to detect it when a control failur is identifi chang mai be necessari
both coso and the guidelin requir organ to identifi the weak in the control
system and make modif to prevent similar failur in the futur the guidelin requir
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4716 2011 fraud examin manual
that organ explain the modif thei have made and demonstr why thei will
be effect
the propos amend clarifi subsect 8b21b7 ad an applic note to
provid guidanc on what action qualifi as rea sonabl step for the purpos of thi
subsect first the propos note state that if the crimin conduct ha an identifi
victim the organ should take reason step to provid restitut and otherwis
remedi the harm result from the crimin conduct 1 it provid that other proper respons
includ selfreport and cooper with author second the propos note provid
that the organ should apprais and if need alter it complianc program to guarante
that the complianc program is more product final the propos note provid that if
an organ decid to alter it complianc program it mai take the ad step of retain
an autonom monitor to guarante suffici apprais and applic of the chang
period assess
the guidelin also requir that the organ period assess the risk that crimin
conduct will occur and modifi it action and it complianc and ethic program accordingli in
do so the organ should assess the follow
the natur and serious of crimin conduct that could occur
the likelihood that certain crimin conduct mai occur becaus of the natur of the
organ busi
the prior histori of the organ which mai indic the type of crimin conduct
that the compani should be try to prevent
moreov the propos amend add an applic note that clarifi the requir
that organ conduct period assess the note provid that an organ as
part of a period assess should monitor the natur and oper of the organ
with regard to particular ethic and complianc function 2
relat of coso and corpor sentenc guidelin
the guidelin and co o focu on the develop of a stronger control system the
guidelin contain explicit requir for an effect control program coso doe not
mandat specif action it onli provid illustr of what constitut a strong control
1 sentenc guidelin for unit state court 75 fed reg at 3535
2 sentenc guidelin for unit state court 75 fed reg at 3535
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4717
system the seven minimum requir of the guidelin ar cover within the coso
system the follow tabl summar the relat between the compon of the two
pronounc
compon coso guidelin
control environ
managemenst set the ethic tone
lead by action such as
reward ethic conduct while
punish uneth action
sanction for know toler
or condon improp conduct
reward for cooper and
contrit
due dilig requir
upper manag oversight of
complianc program
integr and ethic
valu
code of ethic
mechan to encourag
employe report
code of ethic
addit report mechan
human resourc hire those who demonstr
integr
consist disciplin
nondeleg of author to
those with crimin tendenc
consist disciplin
risk assess object relat to oper
financi report and
complianc
identif and analysi of
relev risk
a strategi to manag risk
incent to maintain intern
control
identif of industryspecif
risk
control activ polici and procedur to help
ensur that manag
direct ar follow
standard and procedur capabl
of reduc the prospect of
crimin conduct
determin of modif
need to prevent futur problem
inform and
commun
the identif captur and
commun of pertin
inform in an appropri
format and time frame
effect commun of
standard and procedur to all
employe and other agent
requir train and distribut
of public
establish of addit
report mechan such as
hotlin or helplin
monitorin g ongo assess of the
intern control system
util of monitor and
audit system design to
detect crimin conduct
period evalu of program
effect
fiorelli roonei coso and the feder sentenc guidelin intern auditor april 1997
sampl corpor complianc polici
a sampl corpor complianc polici is includ at the end of thi chapter
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4718 2011 fraud examin manual
procedur to prevent fraud
the follow ar exampl of procedur that can be implement into a complianc
program that ar specif design to detect and prevent fraud
proactiv fraud polici
proactiv fraud polici ar gener from the top of the oper a proactiv polici mean
that the organ will aggress seek out possibl fraudul conduct instead of
wait for instanc to come to their attent thi can be accomplish by sever mean
includ the us of analyt review fraud assess question enforc of
mandatori vacat job rotat and surpris audit where possibl
us of analyt review
much intern fraud is discov as a result of analyt review to uncov such fraud and
defalc thei must materi impact the financi statement auditor should be
especi mind of the follow trend
increas expens
increas cost of sale
increas receivablesdecreas cash
increas inventori
increas salesdecreas cash
increas return and allow
increas sale discount
fraud assess question
fraud assess question is a nonaccusatori interview techniqu us as a part of a normal
audit see the investig section of the fraud examin manual for further detail it
oper on the theori that employe attitud ar a good indic of potenti problem
and that on of the most effect wai to deal with fraud is to ask about it
below ar some suggest question that can be ask as a part of the normal audit note
that the question here begin with the gener and proce to the specif
part of my duti as an auditor is to find fraud wast and abus do you understand that
do you think fraud is a problem for busi in gener
do you think thi compani ha ani particular problem with fraud
ha anyon ever ask you to do anyth that you felt wa illeg or uneth
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4719
if you felt that there wa a problem in the compani with respect to fraud what would
you do
do you have ani indic that there is fraud occur in the compani now
enforc of mandatori vacat
mani intern fraud requir manual intervent and ar therefor discov when the
perpetr is awai on vacat the enforc of mandatori vacat will aid in the
prevent of some fraud
job rotat
some fraud ar detect dure sick or unexpect absenc of the perpetr becaus
thei requir continu manual intervent
exampl
a manag who embezzl 16 million from hi compani said if the compani had
coupl a twoweek vacat with four week of rotat to anoth job function my
embezzl would have been imposs to cover up hi fraud last three year
surpris audit where possibl
all too mani fraud perpetr know when auditor ar come and therefor have time to
alter destroi or misplac record and other evid a proactiv fraud polici involv
us the techniqu of surpris audit as much as possibl it might have a signific
deterr effect
manag oversight
it is most common for employe who steal to us the proce for lifestyl improv
some exampl includ more expens car extravag vacat expens cloth new
or remodel home expens recreat properti and outsid invest manag
should be educ to be observ of these sign
exampl
discoveri of a 97000 embezzlem ent that occur over a two year period result when
an observ manag ask the intern auditor to examin the respons of a seven
year veteran of the compani the manag no tice that thi femal employe had begun
wear design cloth and make a big deal about it and wa drive a new bmw
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4720 2011 fraud examin manual
the manag wa also awar of the fact that thi employe had no outsid incom that
might explain the upgrad in lifestyl
increas the percept of detect
most expert agre that it is much easier to prevent than detect fraud to prevent fraud we
should understand someth about the mind of the potenti perpetr increas the
percept of detect might be the most effect fraud prevent method control for
exampl do littl good in forestal theft and fraud if those at risk do not know of the
presenc of possibl detect in the audit profess thi mean let employe
manag and execut know that auditor ar activ seek out inform concern
intern theft thi can be accomplish in sever wai
employe educ
each entiti should have some polici for educ manag execut and employe
about fraud thi can be done as a part of employe orient or it can be accomplish
through memoranda train program and other intercompani commun method
the goal is to make other within the compani your ey and ear
ani educ effort should be posit and not accusatori illeg conduct in ani form
eventu cost everyon in the compani through lost profit advers public and
decreas moral and product these fact should be emphas in train
minim employe pressur
pressur such as financi hardship or famili problem can be especi difficult to
detect in employe compani can take step to assist an employe who might be have
difficult time
opendoor polici
if employe and other can speak freeli mani manag will understand the pressur and
might be abl to elimin them befor thei becom acut
exampl
the control of a small frui tpack compani in california stole 112000 from the
compani when ask why he said nobodi at the compani ever talk to me especi
the owner thei were unfair thei talk do wn to me and thei we re rude thei deserv
everyth thei got
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4721
employe support program
mani progress compani and agenc have realiz the benefit of employe support
program some kind of support program includ alcohol and drug assist and
counsel for gambl abort marit problem and financi difficulti
manag climat
if the style of manag is conduct by object measur rather than by subject
measur then employe will not manufactur or imagin the perform criteria
emploi by manag in addit it is obviou that manag that is perceiv to be
dishonest will beget dishonest employe
exampl
jim a loan offic for a mortgag bank receiv hi primari compens base on the total
volum of loan measur by dollar he wa abl to put on the book each year dollar
volum wa the onli criteria for the compens in addit the loan offic were all in
competit with each other for the high volum award of the year the pressur to earn more
than hi fellow offic becam more acut each year
when the mortgag compani wa close down most of jim loan were in default becaus
jim perceiv that hi job perform wa base sole on volum no attent wa paid to
the qualiti of the loan in fact it wa discov er that on sever occas jim coerc the
loan process depart to close loan even though all the requir had not been
complet
exampl
a larg fast food chain lost 200000 when on of it buyer got involv with a supplier
the compani decid to notifi all of it vendor of the compani polici prohibit the give
of anyth of valu to influenc a purchas decis two vendor call in with complaint
about competitor result in the discoveri of two other fraud total an addit
360000
monitor system
both the guidelin and sarbanesoxlei specif mention the import of have a
report system for employe and agent of the organ to report crimin conduct
confidenti hotlin ar on of the best wai for an organ to monitor complianc
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4722 2011 fraud examin manual
report program
each employe in the compani should know where to report suspici uneth or illeg
behavior a report program should emphas that
fraud wast and abus occur in nearli all compani
such conduct cost the compani job and profit
the compani activ encourag ani employe with inform to come forward
the employe can come forward and provid inform anonym and without
fear of recrimin for goodfaith report
there is an exact method for report ie a telephon number name or other
inform
the report need not be made to on immedi superior
hotlin
hotlin have prove to be a veri effect report mechan howev most hotlin
report do not result in fraud case at the feder level publish report indic that about
five percent of hotlin call result in seriou alleg with care screen of call and
proper handl spuriou complaint can be effect weed out there ar three gener
type of hotlin the advantag and disadvantag of each ar summar below
part time inhous
these hotlin ar assign to an employe with other duti an audit or secur depart
usual staff an inhous hotlin when the employe is out a record take call the main
advantag is cost the main disadvantag is that the hotlin is not staf fulltim which can
discourag call also some peopl might be reluct to report to the compani
full time inhous
a fulltim inhous hotlin mai be feasibl depend on the compani size the advantag
is that peopl can make report at ani time dai or night and talk to a person the
disadvantag is cost and like the parttim line some peopl might be reluct to report
directli to the compani
third parti
an outsid compani that special in servic of thi type most often staff a thirdparti
hotlin the advantag ar cost effici and anonym a few ar staf around the
clock and will provid the inform immedi to the client subscrib thei also
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4723
provid anonym to those who might be more comfort with it their disadvantag is
that the oper is beyond the compani control
reward
some compani have a polici of reward inform that lead to the recoveri of
merchandis properti or monei other offer reward upon the crimin convict of the
person involv if a reward polici exist strict criteria should establish reward payment
and such propos polici should be review and approv by counsel the amount of
reward paid by compani vari from fix fee to a percentag of the recoveri studi
indic that reward should not exce a few thousand dollar
fraud prevent standard under sarbanesoxlei
the sarbanesoxlei act sox set forth a number of prevent measur public compani
must take to help reduc the threat of fraud the act as a whole is discuss in detail in the
law section of the fraud examin manual here we will cover onli the portion of sox
that directli relat to fraud prevent
audit committe respons
on of the kei to effect fraud prevent is assign highlevel personnel respons
for fraud prevent effort thi signal to employe that fraud is a seriou matter and it
help ensur that fraud prevent issu will receiv consider at the highest level of
the compani sox mandat that audit committe for publicli trade compani be
directli respons for two kei compon of an effect fraud prevent program
outsid audit and intern report mechan it also establish requir for the
composit of audit committe to ensur that thei ar capabl of carri out
their duti
overse audit
section 301 of the act requir the audit committe for everi publicli trade compani to be
directli respons for hire pai and overse the work of the compani outsid
auditor auditor must report directli to the audit committe and the committe is
respons for resolv disput between auditor and the compani manag
section 204 of sox requir outsid auditor to report certain inform to the audit
committe includ ani altern account treatment within gaap that have been
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4724 2011 fraud examin manual
discuss with manag the effect of us those altern treatment and the
treatment prefer by the auditor thi is design to give the audit committe a warn
in the event that manag ha us question or overli aggress account in the
prepar of the compani financi statement
receiv complaint
section 301 also specifi that audit committe must establish procedur for receiv and
deal with complaint and anonym employe tip regard irregular in the
compani account method intern control or audit matter
composit of the audit committe
the act also set forth certain requir regard the composit of audit committe
under section 301 everi member of the audit committe must also be a member of the
compani board of director which ensur that the committe will have suffici
author within the compani to carri out it duti furthermor section 407 of the act
requir everi public compani to disclos in it sec report whether at least on member of
the audit committe is a financi expert and if not to explain the reason why financi
expert ar defin by sox as person who through educ and profession experi
possess the follow 1 an understand of gener accept account principl and
financi statement 2 experi in prepar ing or audit financi statement of
compar compani and in account for estim accrual and reserv in those
compani 3 experi with intern control and 4 an understand of audit
committe function
final section 301 expressli state that audit committe must be given suffici author
and fund to hire attornei and other advisor necessari to carri out their duti
manag respons
sarbanesoxlei also place a number of requir on manag ement relat to fraud
prevent it make manag directli respons for intern control requir
compani to establish code of ethic for their senior financi offic and requir ceo
and cfo to person certifi their compani financi report
manag respons for intern control
intern control ar among the most import aspect of ani fraud prevent program
section 404 of sox requir each annual report file with the sec to contain an intern
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4725
control report that 1 state manag re sponsibl for establish and maintain an
adequ intern control structur and 2 contain an assess of the effect of the
intern control structur and procedur of the compani for financi report
manag intern control assess must be attest to and report on by the
compani outsid auditor
code of ethic for senior financi offic
in order to have an effect antifraud program organ must set clear standard for
conduct it is also critic to establish an ethic tone at the top of an organ to serv as
a guid and exampl for employe sarbanesoxlei address both of these issu by
requir publicli trade compani to disclos in their period report whether thei have
adopt a code of ethic for their senior financi offic and if not to explain their
reason sox also requir compani to make an immedi disclosur ani time there is a
chang in the code of ethic or a waiver for a senior financi offic
certif oblig
as part of an effort to elimin financi statement fraud sarbanesoxlei requir ceo
and cfo of publicli trade compani to person certifi their compani annual and
quarterli sec file there ar two categori of offic certif requir by sox
crimin certif which ar contain in section 906 of the act and civil certif
which ar contain in section 302
crimin certif
under section 906 all period file with the sec must be accompani by a statement
which certifi that the report fulli compli with the sec report requir and that
the inform in the report fairli present in all materi respect the financi condit
and result of oper of the compani thi statement must be sign by both the ceo
and cfo these certif ar known as crimin certif becaus the act
impos crimin penalti for violat of thi section includ fine of up to 1 million
and imprison of up to ten year
civil certif
section 302 requir that the ceo and cfo certifi the follow six item in everi annual
and quarterli report
thei have person review the report
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4726 2011 fraud examin manual
base on their knowledg the report doe not contain ani materi misstat that
would render the financi mislead
base on their knowledg the financi inform in the report fairli present in
all materi respect the financi condit result of oper and cash flow of
the compani
thei ar respons for design maintain and evalu the compani
intern control thei have design the control to ensur that thei receiv materi
inform about the compani thei have evalu the control within 90 dai prior to
the report and thei have present their conclus about the effect of the
control in the report
thei have disclos to the auditor and the audit committe ani materi weak in
the control and ani fraud whether materi or not that involv manag or other
employe who have a signific role in the compani intern control
thei have indic in the report whether there have been signific chang in the
compani intern control includ ani correct action with regard to signific
defici and materi weak
impact of certif oblig
sarbanesoxlei requir ceo and cfo to take person respons for their
compani financi statement thei cannot deleg their respons to their
subordin and then claim ignor when fraud is discov if the financi includ
fraudul report then the senior financi offic mai be held individu civilli liabl
for the misstat
the fairli present standard of item 3 is broader than what is requir by gaap it
essenti requir the ceo and cfo to certi fy that the compani ha select appropri
account polici ha properli appli those account standard and ha disclos
financi inform that reflect the underli transact of the compani
item 4 requir senior financi offic to take an activ role in the design and mainten
of their compani intern control it not onli requir the ceo and cfo to certifi that
thei ar respons for control but also that thei have evalu their control within 90
dai prior to their quarterli or annual report thi effect requir compani to
continu reevalu their control structur item 5 requir the ceo and cfo to report
ani materi weak in their compani control along with ani fraud involv
manag whether it is materi or not
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4727
the overal effect of these certif requir is to forc ceo and cfo to take an
activ role in the antifraud effort of their compani make intern control and fraud
prevent a high prioriti
whistleblow protect
a kei to ani fraud prevent program is the establish of a mechan by which fraud
can be report as wa state abov section 301 of sarbanesoxlei requir audit
committe to establish mechan for receiv complaint about irregular in a
compani account audit or intern control system
in order to protect those who make such report sox establish broad protect for
corpor whistleblow section 806 of the act creat civil liabil for publicli trade
compani that retali against employe who provid inform or assist in the
investig of secur fraud penalti for violat thi section includ reinstat
back pai with interest and compens for special damag such as litig cost and
attornei fee
section 1107 make it a crime to retali against a person for provid truth inform
relat to the commiss or possibl commiss of ani feder offens thi section
offer much broader protect than the civil whistleblow protect afford under
section 806 the whistleblow protect under section 1107 cover all individu not just
employe of publicli trade compani thei also protect individu who provid
inform about ani feder offens not just secur fraud vi olat of section 1107 ar
punish by fine of up to 250000 and up to ten year in prison for individu
corpor can be fine up to 500000
fraud prevent requir for extern auditor
attest to intern control
as wa state abov section 404 of sarbanesoxlei requir a compani auditor to attest
to and report on manag assess of in ternal control in each annual report file
with the sec in addit each audit report must describ the scope of the auditor test
of the compani intern control structur the audit report must includ an evalu of
whether the compani intern control ar accept and a descript of materi
weak in the control structur or ani materi noncompli with control
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4728 2011 fraud examin manual
restrict on nonaudit activ
in order to address concern about potenti conflict of interest that can aris when public
account firm receiv consult fee and other compens for nonaudit servic
from their audit client sarbanesoxlei establish a list of activ that public account
firm ar now prohibit from perform on behalf of their audit client the list includ
most consult and expert servic although tax servic ar still permiss if thei ar
approv in advanc by the audit committe
fraud prevent polici
anoth import element of an overal fraud prevent program is a written fraud polici
that specif spell out who in an organ handl vari fraud matter under
differ circumst
fraud polici object
a fraud prevent program will entail object veri similar to those of intern control
accord to the institut of intern auditor standard for the profession practic of
intern audit the primari object for manag to achiev proper intern control
includ reason assur that
financi and oper inform is accur and reliabl
polici procedur plan law and regul ar compli with
asset ar safeguard against loss and theft
resourc ar us econom and effici
establish programoper goal and object ar met
a fraud prevent polici with the abovement goal is the first step toward effect
fraud deterr
sell fraud prevent to manag
manag might not support fraud prevent for on of sever reason
manag concern ar often on area other than audit or fraud thei dont typic
understand that fraud is hidden and that loss go undetect thei also might refus to
believ that their own worker ar capabl of steal even when studi suggest a third
of us might do such a thing
becaus of the hidden natur of fraud manag ar understand reluct to believ
in the presenc of fraud and if on employe is caught commit fraud manag
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4729
might too often claim that thi is an isol problem and not worth addit
consider manag must understand that when instanc of fraud ar detect
it is too late to do anyth about them
manag sometim unreason feel that bring up the issu will alien the
work forc thi problem can be address by remind manag that the rankandfil worker
appreci work for an honest compani it is also help to point
out to manag what the loss might be
mani auditor complain that manag doe not adequ support fraud prevent
effort that is larg for two reason either thei believ that fraud is not realli a problem
in the compani or thei believ that even address the subject ha a neg impact in
either scenario it is difficult for the auditor to break down manag builtin resist
to deal with fraud prevent some of the follow suggest might be help in
sell fraud prevent to manag
the impact on the bottom line
on of the best wai to sell manag on fraud prevent is by show the impact on
the bottom line fraud impact net sale dollar for dollar for exampl if a compani net 20
percent on sale thei must sell five item at regular price to recov loss from the theft of
on item fraud can be veri expens
the impact of public
mani corpor execut ar more sensit to advers public than almost ani other
issu certainli on wai to convinc manag of the logic of fraud prevent is to
point out that neg public even in small case can have a devast impact on the
bottom line thi neg impact can be elimin or reduc by a proactiv fraud
prevent program
on of the more signific exampl of advers public can be demonstr in the ef
hutton case as on might recal 20 or so execut of ef hutton particip in a kite
scheme in the late 1980 the fraud itself wa insignific to the bottom line but it
result impact wa devast to ef hutton which eventu sold out thi situat
pointedli illustr that insignific fraud can have a veri signific impact
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4730 2011 fraud examin manual
write the fraud polici
compani often have an ethic polici that set forth in detail what is expect in the ethic
climat of the compani still other compani have a fraud polici that specif spell out
who handl fraud matter under what circumst the compon of a fraud polici will
differ from compani to compani mani fraud polici have some of the follow element
polici statement
the polici statement set forth that manag is respons for fraud and each member
of the manag team should be familiar with the type of signal present within hi scope
of respons the polici statement also design who is in charg of investig
suspect irregular
scope of polici
thi area of the fraud polici statement cover what constitut an irregular and the fact
that the polici cover everyon from manag to worker
action constitut fraud
thi area set forth in detail what action constitut fraudul conduct thi is import as
it give manag the legal ground to investig and punish violat the action list
can includ
ani dishonest or fraudul act
forgeri or alter of document
misappl of fund or asset
improprieti with respect to report financi transact
profit on insid knowledg
disclos secur transact to other
accept gift from vendor
destruct or disappear of record or asset
ani similar or relat irregular
nonfraud irregular
thi section cover alleg of person improprieti or irregular and state that thei
should be resolv by manag and not an auditor
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4731
investig respons
thi part deal with who will investig suspect irregular as well as to whom these
irregular will be report manag law enforc or legal counsel
confidenti
under thi section the confidenti natur of the investig is set forth it state that the
investig will not be disclos to outsid except as requir
author for investig
thi delin that whoever is in charg of the investig ha the author to take
control of and examin record
report procedur
thi part state that anyon suspect fraud should report it and not attempt an
investig it also state that manag and other should not make statement
regard the alleg guilt of the perpetr
termin
thi section state that ani recommend to termin employe should be review by
counsel and manag
commun the fraud polici
it obvious doe littl good to have a fraud or ethic polici if it is not commun to the
employe thi commun can be accomplish in sever wai again the
commun of the polici should be present in a posit nonaccusatori manner
orientationannu train
dure initi employe orient the fraud polici should be discuss thi is the first
opportun the compani ha to make it point and it should be made thoroughli
remind employe via annual onlin or live train mai reinforc the polici and
manag expect that it be follow
memoranda
an interoffic memorandum from the chief execut offic detail the fraud polici is a
good idea onc again the polici should con centrat on the posit aspect of work for
an ethic compani
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4732 2011 fraud examin manual
poster
some compani might wish to us poster displai in common area howev thi
should be carefulli consid as some employe might object to such tactic
employe moral
if an employe is properli instruct commun of a fraud polici can have a posit
impact on moral honest worker want to work for an honest compani a fraud polici
help set the proper tone
quizzesgam
game mai be a fun and inform wai to reinforc and commun the fraud polici in an
organ quizz with prize mai also be us to reward those who demonstr
awar of the polici
legal consider
mani compani have learn that it is best to spell out specif unaccept conduct if the
type of conduct that is consid unaccept is not accur detail there might be
legal problem in discharg a dishonest employe check with your counsel regard ani
legal consider with respect to a fraud polici on of the most import legal
consider is to ensur everyon and everi alleg is handl in a uniform manner a
sampl fraud polici is contain at the end of the chapter
ethic program
a written ethic polici is an excel method by which manag can object
commun it philosophi and develop a success ethic program the polici should be
dissemin among both new and old employe addition some compani have
found it effect to share the ethic polici with their vendor
in most cultur the major of peopl share the same valu thei agre on what is good
and bad what is right and wrong and what is moral and immor although all will not hold
the same set of valu the social valu of the major will affect the belief and behavior
of all peopl
the collect of a person belief and moral make up a set of principl known as ethic
ethic ar the judgment about right and wrong or more specif a person moral
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4733
oblig to societi that determin a person action determin ethic right and
wrong is complic by the fact that moral standard and gener accept social
behavior chang with time in addit differ group in the same societi mai have
conflict idea of right and wrong these valu and ethic of an individu ar reflect in
their action as employe there ar four factor that gener affect the ethic decis
of employe
the law and other govern regul
industri and organiz ethic code
social pressur
tension between person standard and organiz need
employe ethic whatev thei mai be influ nce a wide rang of organiz decis
and action
a common fallaci in discuss about ethic is if it legal it ethic a common defens to
charg of uneth behavior is to invok the law thi legalist approach to ethic
mistakenli impli that action that ar not explicitli prohibit by the law ar ethic the
main error in thi approach is that legal standard do not establish ethic principl
although abid by the law is a part of ethic behavior law themselv do not describ
how an ethic person should behav on can be dishonest unprincipl untrustworthi
unfair and uncar without break the law ethic peopl measur their conduct by basic
principl rather than rule thu in make person or occup decis the law is
onli the minimum threshold in determin what is legal possibl and doe not address
how peopl should behav ethic
origin of ethic
there ar theori that state that by the time on becom an adult and enter the work
place a basic code of ethic is alreadi in place ethic charact is hardwir into the
person befor or dure adolesc by thi theori if a person did not learn to be
ethic in childhood there is a slim chanc that he will act ethic as an adult
an oppos theori hold that oper valu that guid behavior ar not form until
earli adulthood and even after that thei ar subject to chang until on ha to make
seriou bind decis it is not necessari to act accord to on belief by thi theori
as long as individu have the capac to reflect and make valu judgment thei can modifi
their person ethic and chang their behavior
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4734 2011 fraud examin manual
busi ethic program reli on the valid of the latter theori with the hope that adult
behavior can be affect or modifi ethic program ar design to steer employe in the
right direct
ethic current place in busi
the declin in public attitud about busi in recent year ha reinforc the import
of ethic in the workplac although there seem to be a further deterior of public
confid substanti endeavor have been made by organ with respect to busi
ethic these initi includ adopt of code of conduct introduct of ethic into
employe and manag train and the establish of ethic and complianc offic
corpor ethic initi have acceler over the last decad due in part to the impact of
the us feder sentenc guidelin for organ these guidelin can multipli or
mitig potenti devast penalti for errant corpor depend on their
attempt to prevent such misconduct with effect complianc program
ethic program develop
identifi kei organiz characterist and issu is a start to the develop of an
ethic program these item includ
understand of why good peopl can commit uneth act
defin currenta well as desiredorganiz valu
determin if organiz valu have been properli commun
produc written ethic polici procedur or structur
ascertain how board member stockhold manag employe and ani other
pertin member of the organ defin success
determin if ethic is a leadership issu in the organ
with a good understand of the abovement issu a more effect ethic program
can be built the follow 12 compon ar necessari to develop implement and
manag a comprehens ethic program
focu on ethic leadership
vision statement
valu statement
code of ethic
design ethic offici
ethic task forc or committe
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4735
ethic commun strategi
ethic train
ethic help and fraud report telephon line
ethic behavior reward and sanction
comprehens system to monitor and track ethic data
period evalu of ethic effort and data
a sampl of a typic code of busi ethic and an annual complianc questionnair ar
provid at the end of thi chapter
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4736 2011 fraud examin manual
sampl corpor complianc program 3
i scope and implement
thi corpor complianc program comp lianc program appli to corpor
headquart and to all group oper divis and unit of and to all employe
and agent of compani whose function or respons involv complianc with
law regul or standard of conduct applic to the oper or practic of the
corpor in the unit state or abroad
ii standard of conduct
a compani s standard of conduct for employe complianc with applic law and
regul ar set forth in the busi ethic polici and the employe handbook
for nonexempt employe employe handbook which mai be revis and
supplement from time to time
b with the prior approv of compani manag the complianc coordin shall
as mai appear necessari from time to time revis and supplement the standard of
conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and the employe handbook
c the complianc coordin shall from time to time distribut to relev group
of employe materi incorpor by refer into the busi ethic polici
such as the hima code of ethic with respect to deal with health care
provid profession and institut
iii role of the complianc coordin
a the complianc coordin shall have overal respons 1 to overse
complianc with the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and
the employe handbook and with the complianc procedur establish by or
under the complianc program and 2 to ensur the proper function of the
complianc program
b the complianc coordin shall confer gener with manag about matter
relat to the complianc program includ all matter that under the complianc
program the complianc coordin is requir to report to the regulatori affair
committe of the board of director under xib of the complianc program
c the complianc coordin shall monitor develop relat to complianc
with applic law regul and standard of conduct and shall from time to
3 sourc bnaacca complianc manual prevent of corpor liabil pp 1900411 publish by
the bureau of nation affair inc 8003721033 httpwwwbnacom
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4737
time distribut to particular employe or group of employe memoranda new
articl or other inform materi that explain complianc requir
report chang in requir or industri standard highlight the import of
complianc or ar otherwis relev to their complianc respons
d the complianc coordin andor the corpor complianc audit director shall
review on a continu basi the corpor intern procedur for prevent
violat of law and shall creat a compendium of such procedur includ
1 procedur for review of propos product label promot materi and
advertis materi
2 procedur for obtain opinion of counsel on propos transact or
activ that mai rais question under the antitrust law or other law
3 procedur for review by regulatori affair profession of product test
product modif introduct of new product and other matter that mai
rais regulatori issu
4 procedur for time prepar and submiss of disclosur and report
requir by law
5 intern and extern program
e the complianc coordin shall 1 report to and meet with manag as
necessari and appropri with respect to ani defici identifi or
improv need in the complianc program and 2 report to and meet with
the regulatori affair committe of the board of director as requir by xib of
thi complianc program
f the complianc coordin shall see to it that all report of suspect misconduct
or improprieti relat to compani oper or practic ar promptli thoroughli
and properli investig in accord with a standard oper procedur
approv by manag and that where appropri disciplinari sanction ar
impos in accord with ix of thi complianc program
g the complianc coordin shall discharg the respons assign to him by
or under thi complianc program
h the complianc coordin shall take such other action as ar necessari and
appropri to implement and improv the complianc program
i is design as the complianc coordin
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4738 2011 fraud examin manual
iv deleg of author
a it is the polici of compani that substanti discretionari author shall not be
deleg to individu who the corpor know or through the exercis of
dilig could know have a propens to engag in illeg activ in particular
substanti discretionari author shall be deleg onli to individu who the
corpor is confid will not engag in illeg activ
b the complianc coordin shall at least annual review the deleg of
discretionari author within the corpor the check balanc and control
applic to such deleg discretionari author and the perform and
background of the person exercis such author to determin whether ani
current deleg violat corpor polici in conduct such review the
complianc coordin mai reli on inform in personnel file on the result of
corpor audit on the opinion of manag and supervisor on consult with
the corpor independ outsid auditor on survei of person outsid the
corpor who deal with the corpor and on other avail inform at
least annual the complianc coordin shall report in write to the chief
execut offic the result of that review the complianc coordin shall
recommend to manag ani need action
c the complianc coordin and the personnel depart shall from time to time
jointli review the corpor procedur includ background and refer
check and criteria for fill whether by new hire or by promot from within
posit involv substanti discret so as to ensur that onli person of
integr ar select for such posit the complianc coordin and the
personnel depart shall recommend to manag ani need action
v commun of standard and procedur to employe
a the complianc coordin shall ensur and subject to b at least annual shall
certifi in write to the chief execut offic that
1 everi offic and everi kei employe as determin by the complianc
coordin of the corpor ha within the preced twelv month
acknowledg to the complianc coordin in write that he ha review
and understand the busi ethic polici
2 everi employe of the corpor whose function or respons involv
complianc with law regul or standard of conduct applic to the
oper or practic of the corpor other than offic and kei
employe ha within the preced twelv month acknowledg to the
complianc coordin in write that he ha review and understand the
provis of the employe handbook that relat to standard of conduct
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4739
3 everi employe whose function or respons involv complianc with law
regul or standard of conduct applic to the oper or practic of
the corpor who wa newli hire by compani within the preced twelv
month ha within thirti dai from the commenc of employ with
compani a receiv the busi ethic polici or employe handbook as
applic and b acknowledg to the complianc coordin in write that
he ha review and understand the provis of the busi ethic polici or
employe handbook that relat to standard of conduct as applic
b if the complianc coordin cannot truthfulli make the certif requir by
a he shall certifi to the extent the fact permit shall identifi the employe as to
whom the requir certif cannot be given and shall state the reason to the
extent known why the requir of a13 as applic have not been
satisfi with respect to those employe and what measur will be taken promptli
to satisfi those paragraph as applic with respect to those employe
c the complianc coordin shall maintain record support the certif
call for by a
d the complianc coordin shall caus to be post in promin place
access in the aggreg to all compani employe whose function and
respons involv complianc with law regul or standard of conduct
applic to the oper or practic of the corpor a notic that
1 state compani s commit to compli with all applic law and regul
and the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and the
employe handbook
2 design the complianc coordin or a designe of the complianc
coordin to receiv ani report of misconduct or improprieti relat to
compani s oper or practic of whic h ani employe mai have knowledg
whether commit by an employe of compani an employe of anoth
compani or organ an employe of a government agenc or ani
other person
3 state that no employe will suffer ani penalti or retribut for good faith
report of ani suspect misconduct or improprieti
4 state that report of misconduct or improprieti mai be anonym
5 state that report of misconduct or improprieti mai be made directli to a
govern agenc
6 state that compani will investig all such report and that ani compani
employe found to have engag in misconduct will receiv prompt and
appropri disciplin up to and includ dismiss
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4740 2011 fraud examin manual
7 state that the complianc coordin or designe with telephon number is
avail for consult on ani question a compani employe mai have
concern the applic to compani s oper or practic of ani law
regul or standard of conduct or ani other matter relat to compani s
complianc program
e the complianc coordin shall in consult and coordin with other unit
of the corpor arrang for complianc train session for all employe whose
function or respons involv complianc with law regul or standard
of conduct applic to the oper or practic of the corpor each such
session shall includ a present of some aspect or aspect of the law
regul and standard of conduct applic to the employe who attend the
session everi such employe shall attend at least on such session dure each
twelv month of employ with compani special session shall be held as
necessari and conveni for new employe the complianc coordin shall at
least annual certifi to the chief execut offic that 1 everi such employe ha
attend at least on such complianc train session within the preced twelv
month or 2 that all but certain identifi employe have attend at least on
such session the reason why the identifi employe have not attend on and
the measur that will be taken to ensur that those employe promptli attend such
a session
f each supervisor shall annual certifi to the complianc coordin in write that
he ha person
1 discuss with each employe under hi immedi supervis the standard of
conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici or the employe handbook as
applic
2 inform each employe that strict complianc with such standard of conduct is
a condit of employ
3 inform each such employe that compani will take disciplinari action
includ dismiss as appropri for violat of such standard of conduct
g the complianc coordin shall maintain a file of such certif and shall
report at least annual to manag with respect to complianc with thi
provis of the complianc program
h the complianc coordin and the personnel depart shall jointli develop
and implement test or other method to measur the effect of the
commun of standard and procedur to employe the complianc
coordin and the personnel depart shall report the result of such test or
measur to manag
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4741
vi monitor audit and report
a monitor
1 the complianc coordin shall by memorandum at least annual advis all
employe with supervisori respons of their duti to monitor all activ of
their subordin in the cours of their employ with compani to ensur
that those activ ar conduct in complianc with all applic law
regul and standard of conduct
2 each supervisor shall sign a copi of the memorandum refer to in 1 and
return it to the complianc coordin who shall maintain a file of such
memoranda the complianc coordin shall at least annual report to
manag with respect to complia nce with thi provis of the
complianc program
b audit
1 the corpor complianc audit director shall be respons for the conduct
of intern nonfinanci audit to promot complianc with applic law
regul and standard of conduct other than those relat to financi
matter
2 the chief financi offic of the compani shall be respons for the conduct
of intern financi audit to promot complianc with applic law
regul and standard of conduct relat to financi matter
3 manag shall arrang for the conduct of annual audit by independ
outsid auditor to promot complianc with applic law regul and
standard of conduct both financi and nonfinanci
4 copi of all intern and outsid audit report relat to complianc
with law regul or standard of conduct whether financi or non
financi shall be provid to the complianc coordin and to the audit
committe or the regulatori affair committe of the board whichev is the
appropri recipi
c report
1 the complianc coordin shall establish and overse a report system in
which
a ani employe mai report to the complianc coordin or a designe of
the complianc coordin ani suspect misconduct or improprieti
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4742 2011 fraud examin manual
relat to compani s oper or practic whether commit by an
employe of compani an employe of anoth compani or organ an
employe of a govern agenc or other person
b no employe will suffer ani penalti or retribut for good faith report of
ani suspect misconduct or improprieti
c ani report of misconduct or improprieti mai be anonym
2 the complianc coordin shall at least annual commun to all compani
employe the polici of the corpor that ani employe who learn of an
appar violat of law regul or uneth conduct relat to the
busi or activ of the corpor shall report such violat or conduct to
the complianc coordin or a designe of the complianc coordin and
mai do so anonym
3 at least annual the complianc coordin shall report to manag and
to the regulatori affair committe of the board on the function of the
report system
vii debar individu
a it is the polici of compani that the corpor shall not knowingli emploi or retain
as a consult with or without pai ani individu who is publicli list by a feder
agenc as debar suspend or otherwis inelig for feder program
b to carri out it polici the corpor shall make reason inquiri into the statu
of ani potenti employe or consult such reason inquiri shall includ review
of the gener servic administr list of parti exclud from feder
procur program and inform on debar impos by ani other relev
feder agenc
c the corpor polici doe not requir the corpor to termin the
employ or consult of individu who becom suspend or ar propos
for debar dure their employ or consult with the corpor the
corpor shall howev remov such employe or consult from
respons for or involv with government busi until the resolut of
such suspens or propos debar
d if such employe or consult is debar hi employ or consult with the
corpor shall be termin
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4743
viii busi deal with debar individu and entiti and employe and consult charg with or convict of crime
a debar individu and entiti
1 it is the polici of compani that it shall not knowingli form a contract with
purchas from or enter into ani busi relationship with ani individu or
busi entiti that is publicli list by a feder agenc as debar suspend
or propos for debar other than 1 sale by the corpor in the
ordinari cours of busi and 2 purchas by the corpor in the ordinari
cours of busi of good or servic that ar not specif to the corpor
medic devic oper regul by the us food and drug administr
unless there is a compel reason to do so
2 the corpor shall make reason inquiri as to the statu of ani potenti
busi partner whose relationship to the corpor would not be within the
scope of a1 or a2 such reason inquiri shall includ review of the
gener servic administr list of parti exclud from feder
procur program and review of inform on debar impos by
ani other relev feder agenc
3 in the case of ani decis to proce with a busi relationship not within the
scope of a1 or a2 and permiss under a sole due to a compel
reason the decis and the compel reason shall be document by the
complianc coordin
b individu charg with or convict of offens relat to
government busi
1 if ani employe or consult of the corpor is charg by indict or
inform with crimin offens the corpor shall remov that employe
or consult immedi from respons for or involv with matter
relat to the corpor busi
2 if the employe or consult is convict of an offens relat to the
compani busi hi employ or consult with the corpor shall
be termin
3 with respect to ani person convict of a feder offens relat to the
busi or oper of compani the corpor shall have and enforc the
follow polici
a all busi relat under the corpor control with such person shall
be termin and such person shall not be reemploi or further retain
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4744 2011 fraud examin manual
by the corpor in ani capac thi provis doe not appli to ani
relationship involv the hold of ani type of secur
b no such person nor ani other person affili with such person shall share
ani offic space or storag space or ani build or comput system with
the corpor
c no such person shall be permit to enter the premis of the corpor
except as requir by law
ix disciplin
a it is the polici of compani that the standard of conduct set forth in the busi
ethic polici and in the employe handbook shall be consist enforc through
appropri disciplinari mechan disciplinari action mai be up to and includ
dismiss and mai extend as appropri to individu respons for the failur to
prevent detect or report an offens
b the complianc coordin shall in consult with manag and
supervisor as appropri establish and administ a companywid disciplinari
system includ written disciplinari case the system shall provid for the make
of disciplinari decis by appropri compani offici in consult with the
complianc coordin
c the complianc coordin shall maintain record of all disciplinari action taken
for violat of the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and
in the employe handbook
d the complianc coordin shall at least annual report to manag in
write on the disciplinari system
x respons to violat
a it is a polici of compani that if a violat of ani applic law regul or
standard of conduct relat to the busi of the corpor is detect the
corpor shall take all reason step to respond appropri to the violat
and to prevent further similar violat includ ani modif to thi
complianc program it is the polici of compani that if compani learn that ani
statement previous made by compani to ani govern agenc is fals or
incorrect in ani materi respect compani shall voluntarili and promptli after
appropri preliminari investig report the matter to the govern agenc it
is also the polici of compani that if compani learn of a violat of ani applic
law or regul that is not known to the govern agenc but is like to be of
interest to that agenc compani shall voluntarili and promptli after appropri
investig report the matter to that agenc
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4745
b ani employe of the corpor who learn of a violat of the type refer to in
a shall report it to the complianc coor dinat or designe of the complianc
coordin although it is prefer that ani such report be made by an employe
who identifi himself so that the matter mai be investig promptli and
thoroughli an employe mai make such a report anonym failur to report
such a violat known to an employe mai itself be a basi for disciplinari action
c whenev the complianc coordin receiv inform regard a possibl
violat of ani applic law or regul the complianc coordin shall take
appropri step to examin inform and conduct the investig necessari to
determin whether an actual violat ha occur the complianc coordin
shall recommend to manag an appropri cours of action and manag
shall render a time decis with respect to such recommend the complianc
coordin shall prepar a memorandum reflect the inform develop the
recommend made and the manag decis render and thi
memorandum shall promptli be furnish to the audit committe of the board
xi role of the regulatori affair committe of the board of director
a the regulatori affair committe shall be respons for review and suggest
to manag ani necessari improv in
1 the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and the
employe handbook
2 the complianc program gener
b the regulatori affair committe shall at least annual
1 receiv a written report from and meet with the complianc coordin with
respect to the complianc program gener includ
a the complianc coordin review of deleg of author within
the corpor
b the certif requir by va of thi program and employe
familiar with the corpor standard of conduct gener
c the certif requir by vd of thi program the complianc
commun and train gener includ their effect
d the certif requir by ve of thi program the complianc by
supervisor with via2 of thi program and the particip of
supervisor in thi program gener
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4746 2011 fraud examin manual
e the result of intern and ani extern audit whether financi or non
financi relat to complianc with law regul or standard of
conduct
f the report system requir by vic of thi program
g the disciplinari system requir by ix of thi program
2 discuss with manag the complianc program and the report of the
complianc coordin
3 report to the board of director with respect to the report of the complianc
coordin and the committe meet with the complianc coordin
and manag and with respect to the complianc program gener
c at each meet of the regulatori affair committe the complianc coordin
shall report to the committe ani and all recommend made by the complianc
coordin to manag and decis by manag under xc of thi
program sinc the last meet of the committe
d the regulatori affair committe shall adopt a standard oper procedur for
the perform of it respons under thi complianc program
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4747
sampl fraud polici
background
the corpor fraud polici is establish to facilit the develop
of control that will aid in the detect and prevent of fraud
against abc corpor it is the intent of abc corpor to
promot consist organiz behavior by provid guidelin
and assign respons for the develop of control and the
conduct of investig
scope of polici
thi polici appli to ani irregular or suspect irregular
involv employe as well as sharehold consult vendor
contractor outsid agenc do busi with employe of such
agenc andor ani other parti with a busi relationship with
abc corpor also call the compani
ani investig activ requir will be conduct without regard
to the suspect wrongdoer length of servic positiontitl or
relationship to the compani
polici
manag is respons for the detect and prevent of fraud
misappropri and other irregular fraud is defin as the
intent fals represent or conceal of a materi fact for
the purpos of induc anoth to act upon it to hi injuri each
member of the manag team will be familiar with the type of
improprieti that might occur within hi area of respons and
be alert for ani indic of irregular
ani irregular that is detect or suspect must be report
immedi to the director of who coordin all
investig with the legal depart and other affect area
both intern and extern
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4748 2011 fraud examin manual
action constitut fraud
the term defalc misappropri and other fiscal irregular refer
to but ar not limit to
ani dishonest or fraudul act
misappropri of fund secur suppli or other asset
improprieti in the handl or report of monei or financi
transact
profit as a result of insid knowledg of compani activ
disclos confidenti and proprietari inform to outsid
parti
disclos to other person secur activ engag in or
contempl by the compani
accept or seek anyth of materi valu from contractor
vendor or person provid servicesmateri to the
compani except gift less than 50 in valu
destruct remov or inappropri us of record furnitur
fixtur and equip
ani similar or relat irregular
other irregular
irregular concern an employe moral ethic or behavior
conduct should be resolv by department manag and the
employe relat unit of human resourc rather than the
unit
if there is ani question as to whether an action constitut fraud con
tact the director of for guidanc
investig respons
the unit ha the primari respons for the
investig of all suspect fraudul act as defin in the polici
if the investig substanti that fraudul activ have oc
cur the unit will issu report to appropri
design personnel and if appropri to the board of director
through the audit committe
decis to prosecut or refer the examin result to the
appropri law enforc andor regulatori agenc for
independ investig will be made in conjunct with legal
counsel and senior manag as will final decis on disposit
of the case
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4749
confidenti
the unit treat all inform receiv
confidenti ani employe who suspect dishonest or fraudul
activ will notifi the unit immedi and should
not attempt to person conduct invest igat or interviewsinterrog
relat to ani suspect fraudul act see report
procedur section below
investig result will not be disclos or discuss with anyon other
than those who have a legitim need to know thi is import in
order to avoid damag the reput of person suspect but
subsequ found innoc of wrong conduct and to protect
the compani from potenti civil liabil
author for investig suspect fraud
member of the investig unit will have
free and unrestrict access to all compani record and
premis whether own or rent
the author to examin copi andor remov all or ani
portion of the content of file desk cabinet and other
storag facil on the premis without prior knowledg or
consent of ani individu who might us or have custodi of ani
such item or facil when it is within the scope of their
investig
report procedur
great care must be taken in the investig of suspect impropri
eti or irregular so as to avoid mistaken accus or alert
suspect individu that an investig is under wai
an employe who discov or suspect fraudul activ will
contact the unit immedi the employe or other
complain mai remain anonym all inquiri concern the
activ under investig from the suspect individu hi
attornei or repres or ani other inquir should be direct
to the investig unit or the legal depart no inform
concern the statu of an investig will be given out the
proper respons to ani inquiri is i am not at liberti to discuss
thi matter under no circumst should ani refer be made to
the alleg the crime t he fraud the forgeri the
misappropri or ani other specif refer
the report individu should be inform of the follow
do not contact the suspect individu in an effort to
determin fact or demand restitut
do not discuss the case fact suspicion or alleg with
anyon unless specif ask to do so by the legal
depart or unit
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4750 2011 fraud examin manual
act in good faith
anyon report ani irregular that is detect or suspect
must be act in good faith and have reason ground for
believ the inform provid alleg made malici
or with knowledg of their falsiti will not be toler peopl
make such alleg mai be subject to institut disciplinari
action andor legal action by the individu accus of fraudul
conduct
whistleblow
protect
employe of abc corpor mai not retali against a
whistleblow for report an activ which that person believ
to be fraudul or dishonest with the intent or effect of advers
affect the term or condit of employ includ but
not limit to threat of physic harm dismiss transfer to an
undesir job assign demot suspens or impact on
salari or wage a whistleblow is defin as an employe who
inform a manag supervisor or director of
about an activ which that person believ to be fraudul or
dishonest
whistleblow who believ that thei have been retali against
mai file a written complaint with the director of
ani complaint of retali will be promptli investig by the
and appropri remedi measur will be taken if
alleg of retali ar proven thi protect from
retali is not intend to prohibit manag or supervisor from
take action includ disciplinari action in the usual scope of
their duti and base on valid performancerel factor thi
protect against retali is not intend to prohibit manag
from take action includ disciplinari action in the usual scope
of their duti and on the basi of valid performancerel
factor
termin
if an investig result in a recommend to termin an
individu the recommend will be review for approv by the
design repres from human resourc and the legal
depart and if necessari by outsid counsel befor ani such
action is taken the unit doe not have the author
to termin an employe the decis to termin an employe is
made by the employe manag should the
unit believ the manag decis inappropri for the fact
present the fact will be present to execut level manag
for a decis
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4751
administr
the director of is respons for the administr
revis interpret and applic of thi polici the polici will
be review annual and revis as need
approv
ceosenior vice presidentexecut date
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4752 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud polici decis matrix
investig intern financeexecut line risk legal public employe
action requir unit audit account mgmt mgmt mgmt relat relat
1 control to prevent fraud
2 incid report
3 investig of fraud
4 referr to law enforc
5 recoveri of moni due to fraud
6 recommend to prevent fraud
7 intern control review
8 handl case of a sensit natur
9 publicitypress releas
10 civil litig
11 correct actionrecommend
to prevent recurr
12 monitor recoveri
13 proactiv fraud audit
14 fraud educationtrain
15 risk analysi of area of vulner
16 case analysi
17 hotlin
18 ethicslin
p primari respons s secondari respons sr share respons
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4753
sampl code of busi ethic and conduct
introduct
thi section reaffirm the import of high standard of busi conduct adher to
thi code of busi ethic and conduct by all employe is the onli sure wai we can
merit the confid and support of the public
mani of us came from a cultur that provid answer or direct for almost everi
situat possibl manag our busi wa not so complex the dilemma we face
were for the most part simpl make our choic rel easi we would probabl all
agre that manag in todai environ is not so simpl
thi code ha been prepar as a work guid and not as a technic legal document thu
emphasi is on breviti and readabl rather than provid an allinclus answer to
specif question for exampl the term employe is us in it broadest sens and refer to
everi offic and employe of the compani and it subsidiari the word law refer to
law regul order etc
in observ of thi code as in other busi conduct there is no substitut for common
sens each employe should appli thi code with common sens and the attitud of seek
full complianc with the letter and spirit of the rule present
it is incumb upon you as an employe of the compani to perform satisfactorili and to
follow our polici and compli with our rule as thei ar issu or modifi from time
to time
these polici and rule ar necessari to effect manag the busi and meet the ever
chang need of the marketplac good perform and complianc with busi rule
lead to success both ar crucial sinc our abil to provid you with career opportun
depend total upon our success in the marketplac nonetheless chang in our economi
our market and our technolog ar inevit inde career opportun will vari
between the individu compani for these reason we cannot contract or even impli that
your employ will continu for ani particular period of time while you might termin
your employ at ani time with or without caus we reserv that same right thi
relationship might not be modifi except in write sign by an appropri repres
of the compani
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4754 2011 fraud examin manual
thi code of busi ethic and conduct is a gener guid to accept and appropri
behavior at the compani and you ar expect to compli with it content howev it doe
not contain all of the detail inform you will need dure the cours of your
employ noth contain in thi code or in other commun creat or impli
an employ contract or term of employ we ar commit to review our
polici continu thu thi code might be modifi or revis from time to time
you should familiar yourself with thi code so that you might readili distinguish ani
propos or act that would constitut a violat each employe is respons for hi
action violat can result in disciplinari action includ dismiss and crimin
prosecut there will be no repris against an employe who in good faith report a
violat or suspect violat
the absenc of a specif guidelin practic or instruct cover a particular situat
doe not reliev an employe from exercis the highest ethic standard applic to
the circumst
if ani employe ha doubt regard a question situat that might aris that
employe should immedi consult hi supervisor or a higherlevel manag
competit and antitrust
fair competit
the compani support competit base on qualiti servic and price we will conduct our
affair honestli directli and fairli to compli with the antitrust law and our polici of fair
competit employe
must never discuss with competitor ani matter directli involv in competit
between us and the competitor eg sale price market strategi market share and
sale polici
must never agre with a competitor to restrict competit by fix price alloc
market or other mean
must not arbitrarili refus to deal with or purchas good and servic from other
simpli becaus thei ar competitor in other respect
must not requir other to bui from us befor we will bui from them
must not requir custom to take from us a servic thei dont want just so thei can get
on thei do want
must never engag in industri espionag or commerci briberi
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4755
must be accur and truth in all deal with custom and be care to accur
repres the qualiti featur and avail of compani product and servic
complianc with law and regulatori order
the applic law and regulatori order of everi jurisdict in which the compani
oper must be follow each employe is charg with the respons of acquir
suffici knowledg of the law and order relat to hi duti in order to recogn
potenti danger and to know when to seek legal advic
in particular when deal with public offici employe must adher to the highest ethic
standard of busi conduct when we seek the resolut of regulatori or polit issu
affect the compani interest we must do so sole on the basi of merit and pursuant to
proper procedur in deal with such offici employe mai not offer provid or
solicit directli or indirectli ani special treatment or favor in return for anyth of
econom valu or the promis or expect of futur valu or gain in addit there shall
be no entertain of employe of the us govern
foreign corrupt practic act
no employe will engag in activ that might involv the employe or the compani in a
violat of the foreign corrupt practic act of 1977 the foreign corrupt practic act
requir that the compani book and record accur and fairli reflect all transact
and that we maintain a system of intern control that transact conform to
manag author and that the account record ar accur no employe
will fals report transact or fail to report the exist of fals transact in the
account record employe certifi the correct of record includ voucher or
bill should have reason knowledg that the inform is correct and proper
under the act it is also a feder crime for ani us busi enterpris to offer a gift
payment or bribe or anyth els of valu whether directli or indirectli to ani foreign
offici foreign polit parti or parti offici or candid for foreign polit offic for the
purpos of influenc an offici act or decis or seek influenc with a foreign
govern in order to obtain retain or direct busi to the compani or to ani person
even if the payment is legal in the host countri it is forbidden by the act and violat
us law
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4756 2011 fraud examin manual
conflict of interest
there ar sever situat that could give rise to a conflict of interest the most common
ar accept gift from supplier employ by anoth compani ownership of a
signific part of anoth compani or busi close or famili relationship with outsid
supplier and commun with competitor a potenti conflict of interest exist for
employe who make decis in their job that would allow them to give prefer or
favor to a custom in exchang for anyth of person benefit to themselv or their
friend and famili
such situat could interfer with an employe abil to make judgment sole in the
compani best interest
gift and entertain
definit of gift
gift ar item and servic of valu that ar given to ani outsid parti but do not includ
item describ below
normal busi entertain item such as meal and beverag ar not to be
consid gift
item of minim valu given in connect with sale campaign and promot or
employe servic safeti or retir award ar not to be consid gift for purpos
of thi code
contribut or donat to recogn charit and nonprofit organ ar not
consid gift
item or servic with a total valu under 100 per year ar exclud
definit of supplier
supplier includ not onli vendor providin g servic and materi to the compani but
also consult financi institut advisor and ani person or institut that doe
busi with the compani
gift
no employe or member of hi immedi famili shall solicit or accept from an actual or
prospect custom or supplier ani compens advanc loan except from establish
financi institut on the same basi as other custom gift entertain or other
favor that ar of more than token valu or that the employe would not normal be in a
posit to reciproc under normal expens account procedur
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4757
under no circumst should a gift or entertain be accept that would influenc the
employe judgment in particular employe must avoid ani interest in or benefit from ani
supplier that could reason caus them to favor that supplier over other it is a violat
of the code for ani employe to solicit or encourag a supplier to give ani item or servic to
the employe regardless of it valu no matter how small our supplier will retain their
confid in the object and integr of our compani onli if each employe strictli
observ thi guidelin
report gift
an employe who receiv or whose famili member receiv an unsolicit gift
prohibit by these guidelin should report it to hi supervisor and either return it to
the person make the gift or in the case of a perish gift give it to a nonprofit
charit organ
discount
an employe might accept discount on a person purchas of the supplier or custom
product onli if such discount do not affect the compani purchas price and ar gener
offer to other have a similar busi relationship with the supplier or custom
busi meet
entertain and servic offer by a supplier or custom mai be accept by an
employe when thei ar associ with a busi meet and the supplier or custom
provid them to other as a normal part of it busi exampl of such entertain
and servic ar transport to and from the supplier or custom place of busi
hospit suit golf out lodg at the supplier or custom place of busi and
busi lunch and dinner for busi visitor to the supplier or custom locat
the servic should gener be of the type normal us by the compani employe and
allow under the applic compani expens account
outsid employ
employe must not be emploi outsid the compani
in ani busi that compet with or provid servic to the compani or it
subsidiari
in a manner that would affect their object in carri out their compani
respons
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4758 2011 fraud examin manual
where the outsid employ would conflict with schedul hour includ overtim
or the perform of the compani assign employe must not us compani
time materi inform or other asset in connect with outsid employ
relationship with supplier and custom
busi transact must be enter into sole for the best interest of the compani no
employe can directli or indirectli benefit from hi posit as an employe or from ani
sale purchas or other activ of the compani employe should avoid situat
involv a conflict or the appear of conflict between duti to the compani and
selfinterest
no employe who deal with individu or organ do or seek to do busi
with the compani or who make recommend with respect to such deal should
serv as an offic director employe or consult
own a substanti interest in ani competitor of the compani or ani organ do
or seek to do busi with the compani substanti interest mean an econom
interest that might influenc or reason be thought to influenc judgment or action
but shall not includ an invest repres less than 1 percent of a class of
outstand secur of a publicli held corpor everi employe must complet the
conflict of interest questionnair includ with thi book
in addit no employe who deal with individu or organ do or seek to
do busi with the compani or who make recommend with respect to such
deal might
have ani other direct or indirect person interest in ani busi transact with the
compani other than customari employe purchas of compani product and servic
as consum and transact where the interest aris sole by reason of the employe
relationship or that of a holder of secur
provid telecommun or inform servic or equip either directli
or as a resel in a manner that would place the object or integr of the compani
in question
our polici is that employe will not do busi ness on behalf of the compani with a close
person friend or rel howev recogn that these transact do occur thei must
be report on the conflict of interest questionnair
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4759
thi polici is applic equal to the member of the immedi famili of each employe
which normal includ your spous children and their spous and the father mother
sister and brother of yourself and your household
employ of rel
rel of employe will not be emploi on a perman or temporari basi by the
compani where the rel directli report to the employe or the employe exercis ani
direct influenc with respect to the rel hire placement promot evalu
or pai
confidenti inform and privaci of commun
confidenti inform
confidenti inform includ all inform whether technic busi financi or
otherwis concern the compani which the compani treat as confidenti or secret
andor which is not avail or is not made avail publicli it also includ ani privat
inform of or relat to custom record fellow employe other person or other
compani and nation secur inform obtain by virtu of the employe posit
compani polici and variou law protect the integr of the compani confidenti
inform which must not be divulg except in strict accord with establish
compani polici and procedur the oblig not to divulg confidenti compani
inform is in effect even though materi might not be specif identifi as
confidenti and the oblig exist dure and continu after employ with
the compani
a few exampl of prohibit conduct ar
sell or otherwis us divulg or transmit confidenti compani inform
us confidenti compani inform to knowingli convert a compani busi
opportun for person us
us confidenti compani inform to acquir real estat that the employe know
is of interest to the compani
us divulg or transmit confidenti compani inform in the cours of
outsid employ or other relationship or ani succeed employ or other
relationship at ani time
trade in the compani stock or the stock of ani compani base on inform that
ha not been disclos to the public or divulg such inform to other so that thei
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4760 2011 fraud examin manual
might trade in such stock insid trade is prohibit by compani polici and feder
and state law
employe shall not seek out accept or us ani confidenti compani inform of or
from a competitor of the compani in particular should we hire an employe who
previous work for a competitor we must neither accept nor solicit confidenti
inform concern that competitor from our employe
classifi nation secur inform
onli employe with proper govern clearanc and a need to know have access to
classifi nation secur inform govern regul outlin in compani
instruct for safeguard must be follow disclos such inform without
author even after leav employ is a violat of law and thi code
advers inform about employe have govern clearanc must be report to the
secur or law depart repres have respons for clearanc
compani asset
cash and bank account
all cash and bank account transact must be handl so as to avoid ani question or
suspicion of improprieti all cash transact must be record in the compani book
of account
all account of compani fund except author imprest fund shall be establish and
maintain in the name of the compani or on of it subsidiari and might be open or
close onli on the author of the compani board of director imprest fund must be
maintain in the name of the custodian and the custodian is wholli respons for these
fund all cash receiv shall be promptli record and deposit in a compani or
subsidiari bank account no fund shall be maintain in the form of cash except
author petti cash and no compani shall maintain an anonym number account at
ani bank payment into number bank account by the compani might leav that
compani open to suspicion of particip in a possibl improp transact therefor
no disburs of ani natur might be made into number bank account or other
account not clearli identifi to the compani as to their ownership
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4761
no payment can be made in cash currenc other than regular approv cash payrol and
normal disburs from petti cash support by sign receipt or other appropri
document further corpor check shall not be written to cash bearer or
similar design
compani asset and transact
complianc with prescrib account procedur is requir at all time employe
have control over compani asset and transact ar expect to handl them with the
strictest integr and ensur that all transact ar execut in accord with
manag author all transact shall be accur and fairli record in
reason detail in the compani account record
employe ar person account for compani fund over which thei have control
employe who spend compani fund should ensur that the compani receiv good valu
in return and must maintain accur record of such expenditur employe who approv
or certifi the correct of a bill or voucher should know that the purchas and amount ar
proper and correct obtain or creat fals invoic or other mislead
document or the invent or us of fictiti sale purchas servic loan entiti
or other financi arrang is prohibit
employe must pai for person telephon call and us except to the extent that
specif defin benefit program or allow otherwis provid
expens reimburs
expens actual incur by an employe in perform compani busi must be
document on expens report in accord with compani procedur in prepar
expens report employe should review these procedur for the document in order
to be reimburs for busi expens
compani credit card
compani credit card ar provid to employe for conveni in conduct compani
busi no person expens can be charg on compani credit card except as
specif author by compani procedur ani charg person expens must be paid
promptli by the employe compani credit card should not be us to avoid prepar
document for direct payment to vendor where allow by local law charg on
compani credit card for which a properli approv expens report ha not been receiv at
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4762 2011 fraud examin manual
the time of an employe termin of employ might be deduct from the
employe last paycheck the compani will pursu repay by the employe of ani
amount it ha to pai on the employe behalf
softwar and comput
computer inform and comput softwar appear intang but thei ar valuabl
asset of the compani and must be protect from misus theft fraud loss and
unauthor us or dispos just as ani other compani properti
us of mainfram comput must be custom servic or job relat employe cannot
access compani record of ani kind for their person us misappropri of comput
space time or softwar includ but is not limit to us a comput to creat or run
unauthor job oper a comput in an unauthor mode or intention caus
ani kind of oper failur
person comput can be us for companysanct educ program as well as
person us incident to compani busi us with the permiss of your supervisor
howev person us cannot be allow for person financi gain
it is also understood that person comput will occasion be us at home with the
permiss of your supervisor
polit contribut
feder law and mani state law prohibit contribut by corpor to polit parti or
candid the term polit contribut includ in addit to direct cash contribut
the donat of properti or servic and the purchas of ticket to fundrais event
employe can make direct contribut of their own monei but such contribut ar
not reimburs in addit employe can make contribut to a companysponsor
polit action committe
where corpor polit contribut ar legal in connect with state local or foreign
elect such contribut shall be made onli from fund alloc for that purpos and
with the written approv of the presid of the compani make the contribut the
amount of contribut made shall be subject to intercompani alloc
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4763
it is improp for an employe to us hi posit within the compani to solicit polit
contribut from anoth employe for the purpos of support a polit candid or
influenc legisl it is also improp for an employe to make a polit contribut in
the name of the compani
employe conduct
conduct on compani busi
dishonest or illeg activ on compani premis or while on compani busi will not
be condon and can result in disciplinari action includ dismiss and crimin
prosecut the follow illustr activ that ar against compani polici and
that will not be toler on compani premis in compani vehicl or while engag in
compani busi
consumpt and storag of alcohol beverag except where legal licens or
author by an offic of the compani
the us of control substanc such as drug or alcohol the unlaw manufactur
distribut dispens possess transfer sale purchas or us of a
control substanc
drive vehicl or oper compani equip while under the influenc of alcohol
or control substanc
illeg bet or gambl
carri weapon of ani sort on compani premis in compani vehicl or while on
compani busi even employe with permit or licens cannot carri weapon on
compani properti or while on compani busi
the compani reserv the right to inspect ani properti that might be us by employe for
the storag of their person effect thi includ desk locker and vehicl own by the
compani it is a violat of compani polici to store ani contraband illeg drug toxic
materi or weapon on compani properti
report violat
all employe ar respons for complianc with these rule standard and principl in
the area of ethic legal and proprieti each employe ha an oblig to the compani
that transcend normal report relationship employe should be alert to possibl
violat of the code anywher in the compani and ar encourag to report such
violat promptli report should be made to the employe supervisor the appropri
secur audit or legal depart personnel or elsewher as the circumst dictat
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4764 2011 fraud examin manual
employe will also be expect to cooper in an investig of violat in addit
ani employe who is convict of a feloni whether relat to these rule or not should also
report that fact
all case of question activ involv the code or other potenti improp action
will be review for appropri action disciplin or correct step whenev possibl
the compani will keep confidenti the ident of employe about or against whom
alleg of violat ar brought unless or until it ha been determin that a violat
ha occur similarli whenev possibl the compani will keep confidenti the ident of
anyon report a possibl violat repris against ani employe who ha in good faith
report a violat or suspect violat is strictli prohibit
all employe ar requir to notifi the compani within five 5 dai of ani convict of
ani crimin statut violat occur on the job in addit ani employe who is
convict of a feloni whether relat to these rule or not should report that fact
disciplin
violat of thi code can result in seriou consequ for the compani it imag
credibl and the confid of it custom and can includ substanti fine and
restrict on futur oper as well as the possibl of fine and prison sentenc for
individu employe therefor it is necessari that the compani ensur that there will be no
violat employe should recogn that it is in their best interest as well as the
compani to follow thi code carefulli
the amount of ani monei involv in a violat might be immateri in assess the
serious of a violat sinc in some case heavi penalti might be assess against the
compani for a violat involv a rel small amount of monei or no monei
disciplinari action should be coordin with the appropri human resourc
repres the overal serious of the matter will be consid in set the
disciplinari action to be taken against an individu employe such action which might be
review with the appropri human resourc organ might includ
reprimand
probat
suspens
reduct in salari
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4765
demot
combin of the abov
dismiss
in addit individu case might involv
reimburs of loss or damag
referr for crimin prosecut or civil action
combin of the abov
disciplinari action might also be taken against supervisor or execut who condon
permit or have knowledg of illeg or uneth conduct by those report to them and do
not take correct action disciplinari action might also be taken against employe who
make fals statement in connect with investig of violat of thi code
the compani in it sole discret will determin the disciplinari action appropri to a
given matter the list of possibl action is inform onli and doe not bind the
compani to follow ani particular disciplinari step process or procedur
the compani rule and regul regard proper employe conduct will not be waiv
in ani respect violat is caus for disciplinari action includ dismiss all employe
will be held to the standard of conduct describ in thi booklet
the compani never ha and never will author ani employe to commit an act that
violat thi code or to direct a subordin to do so with that understood it is not possibl
to justifi commiss of such an act by sai someon direct it in higher manag
complianc letter and conflict of interest questionnair
annual all offic of the compani will repres in write that there ar no violat of
thi code known to the offic after the exercis of reason dilig or if such violat
have been commit to disclos such violat in a format to be specifi
annual each employe will review the code of busi ethic and conduct sign the
code acknowledg form and complet and sign the conflict of interest
questionnair if the employe circumst chang at ani time a new conflict of
interest questionnair or letter of explan must be complet
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4766 2011 fraud examin manual
the code of busi ethic and conduct acknowledg form should be sign and
given to your supervisor for inclus in your personnel file
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4767
compani name inc
code of conduct complianc questionnair
manageri employe ar be ask to complet thi complianc questionnair
compani name inc and it subsidiari ar commit to provid a workplac where
employe can and do act respons and ethic the compani name inc code of
conduct set out specif standard of conduct that should govern our behavior toward our
fellow employe supplier and custom pleas answer each of the follow question
and if necessari provid an explan for ani ye respons pleas explain in the extra space
provid on the last page
conflict of interest
1 dure fiscal 20xx did you receiv or ar you awar of anyon who receiv from ani person
or compani do busi with your employ ani loan gift trip gratuiti or other payment
that did or could caus prejudic toward or oblig to the giver or could be perceiv by
other as creat an oblig to the giver note each item or the total of item from a singl vendor
with a valu of more than 50 must be report except that you do not need to report loan made by financi
institut on normal and customari term common stock dividend or insur polici payment
ye no
2 in fiscal 20xx did you particip in or influenc or ar you awar of anyon who particip
in or influenc ani transact between your employ and anoth entiti in which thei or ani
member of their famili had a direct or indirect financi interest
ye no
3 in fiscal 20xx did you have a materi financi interest in or hold a posit of influenc with
or ar you awar of anyon who had a materi financi interest in or held a posit of influenc
with ani busi which furnish good or servic to your employ note the term materi
financi interest mean someon who by virtu of their stock ownership or monetari interest in a compani is
abl to direct or to influenc busi decis or a commiss sale repres posit of influenc
mean someon hold an influenti posit such as a sole proprietor partner member of a board of director
an execut or a manag
ye no
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4768 2011 fraud examin manual
4 for fiscal 20xx did you us or ar you awar of anyon who us compani asset or other
resourc includ fund equip suppli or personnel for purpos other than compani
busi or companysponsor activ
ye no
5 dure fiscal 20xx did you receiv or ar you awar of anyon who receiv gift or
entertain from individu or organ have deal with the compani includ
but not necessarili limit to loan ani form of cash gratuiti privat or person discount not
sanction by the compani or remuner or servic relat to illeg activ
ye no
6 dure fiscal 20xx did you accept or ar you awar of anyon who accept ani consider
or special favor from supplier or potenti supplier that in fact or appear could be deem
a bribe kickback or reward given to influenc your busi judgment
ye no
7 were you involv in or ar you awar of ani employe who wa involv in a conflict of
interest situat dure fiscal year 20xx
ye no
8 i have read the attach conflict of interest polici statement which is set forth in the
compani name inc and subsidiari code of conduct and complianc program
accordingli i have list below all relationship and outsid activ that requir disclosur
under the polici i have also list name address and the natur of the relationship of all
person or entiti do busi with my employ from whom i or ani member of my
immedi famili ha receiv directli or indirectli cash or a gift of more than nomin valu
50 dure the fiscal year end mai 31 20xx if there ar no person or entiti to be list so
indic by write none in the first space provid below
name of person entiti natur of relationshipoutsid activ
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4769
polit
9 in fiscal 20xx did you receiv or ar you awar of anyon who receiv ani payment from
your employ for the purpos of make a contribut to ani polit parti candid or
elect committe
ye no
secur trade
10 did you bui or sell or ar you awar of anyon who mai have bought andor sold stock base
on confidenti inform or commun confidenti inform to influenc
compani name inc stock transact
ye no
financi integr
11 ar you awar of ani entri made in the book and record of your employ in fiscal 20xx
that you believ ar fals or intention mislead
ye no
12 ar you awar of ani asset liabil or transact that you believ were improperli omit
from the book of your compani in fiscal 20xx
ye no
13 in fiscal 20xx ar you awar of anyon seek to influenc ani govern offici includ
foreign offici or govern employe or individu do busi with your compani by
offer monei good or servic in return for some special consider
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4770 2011 fraud examin manual
other
14 ar you awar of ani incid involv your employ that you feel constitut noncompli
with law regul polici guidelin procedur or ethic principl other than those
matter refer to in other question or incid that have alreadi been report note if you
prefer to report an incid or violat anonym pleas answer thi question n o and contact a member of
the ethic committe or call the confidenti ethic hotlin
ye no
15 pleas provid ani explan for ye respons
16 in the space below pleas provid ani suggest you mai have for improv the code of
conduct and complianc program
print name
signatur
date
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4771
compani name inc and subsidiari
employe companysubsidiari locat
code of conduct and conflict of interest employe certif
i have read the compani name inc and subsidiari code of conduct and
complianc program
i understand that the standard and polici in that code of conduct repres the
polici of compani name inc and it subsidiari and that violat those
standard and polici or ani legal and regulatori requir applic to my job
mai result in penalti set forth in the code of conduct or other appropri sanction
i understand that there ar sever sourc within the compani includ the ethic
committe that i can consult if i have question concern the mean or applic
of the code of conduct or relev legal and regulatori requir
i understand that it is my respons to disclos to an ethic offic a member of the
compani name inc oper audit depart a member of the ethic
committe or the compani ethic hotlin ani situat that might reason appear
to be a violat of the code of conduct
i have read the attach conflict of interest polici statement which is set forth in the
compani name inc and subsidiari code of conduct and complianc program
accordingli i have list below all relationship and outsid activ that requir
disclosur under the polici i have also list name address and the natur of the
relationship of all person or entiti do busi with my employ from whom i or
ani member of my immedi famili ha receiv directli or indirectli cash or a gift of
more than nomin valu 50 dure the fiscal year end mai 31 20xx if there ar no
person or entiti to be list so indic by write none in the first space provid below
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4772 2011 fraud examin manual
name of personent address natur of businessrelationship
i am not awar of ani except to standard and polici in the code of conduct
except if none so indic by write none
signatur of employe date
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4801
fraud risk assess
there ar mani thing that organ can and should do to minim the risk that fraud
can occur and go undetect a fraud risk assess can be a power proactiv tool in the
fight against fraud for ani busi
regul profession standardsett and law enforc author continu to
emphas the crucial role that fraud risk assess plai in develop and maintain
effect fraud risk manag program and control
what is fraud risk
cressei fraud triangl teach us that there ar three interrel element that enabl
someon to commit fraud the motiv that drive a person to want to commit the fraud the
opportun that enabl him to commit the fraud and the abil to ration the fraudul
behavior the vulner that an organ ha to those capabl of overcom all three
element of the fraud triangl is fraud risk fraud risk can come from sourc both intern
and extern to the organ
why should an organ be concern about fraud risk
everi organ is vulner to fraud there is no organ that ha immun to that
risk the kei to reduc that vulner is to be conscious awar and realist about
what the organ weak ar onli then can manag ensur that it can
establish mechan that effect prevent or detect fraudul activ
organiz stakehold expect their steward to be thought and prudent about
protect the busi howev even when tale of fraudster ar get a lot of public
attent mani organ still have difficulti face the realiti of how suscept thei
realli ar to fraud
there ar mani factor that influenc how at risk an organ is to fraud some of the
bigger factor ar
the busi it is in
the environ in which it oper
the effect of the intern control within the busi process
the ethic and valu of the compani and the peopl within it
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4802 2011 fraud examin manual
the busi it is in
the type of risk an organ face ar directli connect to the natur of the busi
in which it is engag for exampl the inher fraud risk face by hospit and medic
practic ar vastli differ from those face by bank and financi institut
the environ in which it oper
the environ in which the organ oper ha a direct impact on it vulner
to fraud brickandmortar busi have a veri differ risk profil than internet
busi likewis busi in urban area ha ve differ risk profil than busi in
rural area the environ in which the busi oper can plai a big role in
influenc it vulner to fraud
the effect of intern control within the busi process
a good system of intern control with the right balanc of prevent and detect
control can greatli reduc an organ vulner to fraud prevent control ar those
manual or autom process that stop someth bad from happen befor it occur
detect control can also be manual or autom but ar design to identifi someth bad
that ha alreadi occur no system of intern control can fulli elimin the risk of fraud
but welldesign and effect intern control can deter the averag fraudster by reduc
the opportun to commit the fraud
the ethic and valu of the compani and the peopl within it
it is extrem difficult if not imposs to have a compani made up of individu whose
ethic and valu ar fulli align with those of the organ the gap in that align
can significantli increas an organ fraud risk
while mani organ have code of conduct those code ar not alwai veri clear in
draw the definit line between accept and unaccept behavior that lack of
clariti leav a lot of wiggl room for fraudster to ration their action for exampl in
most organ it is gener understood that manipul financi record is
unaccept behavior that will result in termin howev it is not alwai appar
whether take a pen or pencil home that belong to the compani is unaccept behavior
or what the consequ if ani would be
an organ that is clear and consist about it ethic valu and expect for it
peopl will reduc the potenti fraudster abil to ration hi action likewis an
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4803
organ that demonstr consist and predict in how it handl and hold
account unaccept behavior can significantli reduc the risk of fraud
what is a fraud risk assess
fraud risk assess is a process aim at proactiv identifi and address an
organ vulner to intern and extern fraud as everi organ is
differ the fraud risk assess process is often more an art than a scienc what get
evalu and how it get assess should be tailor to the organ there is no onesizefitsal
approach addition organiz fraud risk continu chang it is
therefor import to think about a fraud risk assess as an ongo continu
process rather than just an activ
a fraud risk assess start with an identif and priorit of fraud risk that
exist in the busi the process evolv as the result of that identif and
priorit begin to drive educ commun organiz align and action
around effect manag fraud risk and identifi new fraud risk as thei emerg
what is the object of a fraud risk assess
in the simplest term the object of a fraud risk assess is to help an organ
identifi what make it most vulner to fraud through a fraud risk assess the
organ is abl to identifi where fraud is most like to occur enabl proactiv
measur to be consid and implement to reduc the chanc that it could happen
why should organ conduct fraud risk assess
everi organ should conduct a fraud risk assess and build procedur to keep the
assess process current and relev not onli is thi practic good corpor
govern but it make good busi sens
improv commun and awar about fraud
conduct a fraud risk assess can be a great vehicl for an organ to open up
commun and rais awar about fraud when employe ar engag in an open
discuss about fraud the convers themselv can plai a role in reduc fraud
vulner employe ar remind that the organ doe care about prevent
fraud and ar empow to come forward if thei suspect fraud is occur in the
organ open commun and awar about fraud can also deter a potenti
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4804 2011 fraud examin manual
fraudster by reduc hi abil to ration bad behavior and increas hi percept
that someon might catch on to hi action and report him
identifi what activ ar the most vulner to fraud
manag must know where the compani is most vulner to fraud in order to prevent
it from happen for most compani the normal cours of busi gener involv
mani differ activ howev not all of the activ that the compani engag in ar
equal in term of increas the businesss exposur to fraud the fraud risk assess
help guid the organ to focu on the activ that realli put the compani at greatest
risk
know who put the organ at the greatest risk
the action of certain individu can significantli increas the compani vulner to
fraud the risk can be driven from the wai in which someon make decis behav or
treat other within and outsid the organ the fraud risk assess can help home
in on those peopl and their activ that mai increas the compani overal fraud risk
develop plan to mitig fraud risk
if manag know where the greatest fraud risk ar it can put plan in place to reduc
or mitig those risk the fraud risk assess provid a vehicl that can be us to gain
align among variou stakehold and drive action to decreas fraud risk
develop techniqu to determin if fraud ha occur in highrisk area
assess an area as have high fraud risk doe not conclus mean that fraud is
occur there howev the fraud risk assess is us in identifi area to
proactiv investig to determin whether fraud ha in fact occur in addit put
activ in highrisk area under increas scrutini can deter potenti fraudster by
increas their percept of detect
what make a good fraud risk assess
a good fraud risk assess is on that fit within the cultur of the organ is
sponsor and support by the right peopl encourag everyon to be open in their
particip and is gener embrac throughout the busi as an import and
valuabl process convers a fraud risk assess that is conduct without these
condit will have inferior result
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4805
the right sponsor
have the right sponsor for a fraud risk assess is extrem import in ensur it
success and effect the sponsor must be senior enough in the organ and
command the respect of the employe to elicit full cooper in the process the sponsor
ha to be someon who is commit to learn the truth about where the compani fraud
vulner realli ar he cant be someon who is prone to ration or denial he
must be a truth seeker in the ideal situat the sponsor would be an independ board
director or audit committe member howev a good ceo or other intern senior leader
can be equal as effect
an organ cultur plai a big part in influenc fraud vulner and risk if the
compani cultur is shape by a strong and domin leader it would be difficult to have
that leader sponsor the fraud risk assess and get candid honest particip from the
peopl in the busi think about how effect a fraud risk assess of tyco
intern would have been with denni kozlowski as it sponsor similarli a fraud risk
assess of enron would have been imposs with kenneth lai or jeffrei skill as
it sponsor
the right sponsor is someon who is open and will to hear the good the bad and the
ugli for exampl let sai that the fraud risk assess reveal that on of the greatest
fraud risk face the organ is briberycorrupt base on the cozi natur of on of
the kei busi leader with the compani busi ness partner for the assess to be fulli
effect the sponsor need to be independ and open in hi evalu of the situat
and most importantli appropri in hi respons to the situat
independenceobject of the peopl lead and conduct the work
a good fraud risk assess can be effect conduct either by peopl insid the
organ or with extern resourc howev the peopl lead and conduct the
fraud risk assess need to be independ and object throughout the assess
process addition thei must also be perceiv as independ and object by other
the peopl lead and conduct the work should be thought and mind about ani
person bias thei mai have regard the organ and the peopl within it take
step to reduc or elimin all bias that mai affect the fraud risk assess process for
exampl if an employe on the fraud risk assess team had a veri bad past experi
with someon in the account payabl depart he might allow that experi to affect
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4806 2011 fraud examin manual
hi evalu of the fraud risk relat to that area of the busi to compens for thi
bia someon els should perform the fraud risk assess work relat to the account
payabl depart activ
cultur neutral is an import aspect of independ and object when lead or
conduct a fraud risk assess some organ have veri strong corpor cultur
that can plai a big role in influenc the wai the peopl insid of the organ think
about fraud risk if peopl within the organ ar lead and conduct the fraud risk
assess thei must be abl to step outsid of the corpor cultur to assess and evalu
the presenc and signific of fraud risk in the busi
a good work knowledg of the busi
the individu lead and conduct the fraud risk assess need to have a good
work knowledg of the busi everi organ is uniqu even compani that
appear similar have characterist that make them and their fraud risksdiffer from
their competitor some of those differ can be obviou while other ar more subtl
to ensur a good work knowledg of the busi the fraud risk assessor must know at
a more than superfici level what the busi doe and how it oper he must also have
an understand about what make the organ both similar to and differ from
other compani in relat line of busi
obtain inform about broad industri fraud risk from extern sourc can be
extrem help such sourc includ industri new crimin civil and regulatori
complaint and settlement and profession organ such as the institut of intern
auditor the american institut of certifi public account and the associ of
certifi fraud examin
access to peopl at all level of the organ
it is often said that percept is realiti in other word how an individu perceiv a
situat is hi realiti of the situat in an organ it is import to ensur that the
percept of peopl at all level get a voic in the fraud risk assess process
leader of a busi or function often have veri differ perspect from their
subordin about how someth is perceiv or execut howev thi doe not alwai
mean that on perspect is right and the other is wrong what it doe mean is that
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4807
expect and percept within the organ ar not align which could increas
fraud risk
engend trust
if the organ and it employe do not trust the peopl lead and conduct the
fraud risk assess thei will not be open and honest about the realiti of the busi it
cultur and it vulner to fraud trust is not someth that can be grant by
author it must be earn by word and a ction as the peopl lead and conduct the
fraud risk assess engag with busi thei should deliber and carefulli plan the
initi contact with an effort to develop a rapport and gain trust
the abil to think the unthink
most honest peopl ar not natur inclin to think like a fraudster in fact mani largescal
fraud that have occur would have been deem unthink by peopl closest to
the event a good fraud risk assess ha to allow for the peopl lead and conduct
the assess to be expans in their consider and evalu of fraud risk thought
of it cant happen here should not be allow to moder the evalu of fraud risk
a plan to keep it aliv and relev
the fraud risk assess should not be treat as a onetim exercis that is execut
report on and then put on a shelf to collect dust the organ should strive to keep
the process aliv and relev through ongo dialogu activ manag of action plan
and develop of procedur to ensur the assess is maintain on a current basi
consider for develop an effect fraud risk assess
a fraud risk assess is onli effect if the organ embrac it and us the result
to monitor chang or influenc the factor that put the compani at risk for fraud
packag it right
peopl do not easili relat to or embrac thing that thei dont understand everi
organ ha it own vocabulari and prefer method of commun ie the
languag of the busi the notif and execut of the fraud risk assess
includ the report of the result will onli be effect if complet in the languag of
the busi for exampl
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4808 2011 fraud examin manual
in a creativ organ where decis ar made base on qualit assess and
instinct and where the major of commun is visual a quantit approach to
assess fraud risk driven by number and calcul would most like be reject
in an organ where the busi is built and run on quantit decisionmak
model a qualit approach with no quantit compon would most like
be reject
therefor the assessor must remain mind of the languag us throughout the fraud risk
assess specif he should stai awai from technic languag that will not reson
with peopl in the busi for exampl mani peopl in the busi might not easili relat
to or understand the term cash larceni if cash larceni is on of the organ greatest
fraud risk it might be more effect to explain the concept in layman term and describ
the risk as theft of cash instead
on size doe not fit all
do not try to fit a round peg into a squar hole what work in on organ most like
will not easili work in anoth recogn the nuanc and differ of each busi
and tailor the approach and execut to the specif organ can help make the
fraud risk assess success while a gener framework or toolset can be a valuabl
start point for the develop of the fraud risk assess it must be adapt to fit the
busi model cultur and languag of the organ
keep it simpl
the more complic the fraud risk assess is the harder it will be to execut it and
drive action whether the assessor us a gener assess framework or develop on
specif for the organ he should focu the effort and time on evalu the area
that ar most like to have fraud risk
prepar the compani for a fraud risk assess
prepar the compani for the fraud risk assess is a critic element to ensur it
success the cultur of the organ should plai a larg role in influenc the approach
taken to prepar the compani for the fraud risk assess the goal of the prepar
should be to
assembl the right team to lead and conduct the fraud risk assess
determin the best techniqu to us in conduct the fraud risk assess
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4809
obtain the sponsor agreement on the work to be perform
educ the organ and openli promot the process
assembl the right team to lead and conduct the fraud risk assess
befor conduct the fraud risk assess the organ should build a fraud
risk assess team consist of individu with divers knowledg skill and
perspect that will lead and conduct the fraud risk assess the size of the team will
depend on the size of the organ and the method us to conduct the assess
the team should have individu who ar credibl and who have experi in gather
and elicit inform
the team member might includ intern and extern resourc such as
account and financ personnel who ar familiar with the financi report
process and intern control
nonfinanci busi unit and oper personnel who have knowledg of daytodai
oper custom and vendor interact and issu within the industri
risk manag personnel who can ensur that the fraud risk assess process
integr with the organ enterpris risk manag program
the gener counsel or other member of the legal depart
member of ani ethic or complianc function within the organ
intern auditor
extern consult with fraud and risk expertis
ani busi leader with direct account for the effect of the organ
fraud risk manag effort
determin the best techniqu to us to conduct the fraud risk assess
there ar mani wai to go about conduct the fraud risk assess pick a method or
combin of method that is cultur right for the organ will help to ensur it
success the assess team should also consid the best wai to gather candid truth
inform from peopl throughout all level of the organ start by understand
what techniqu ar commonli and effect us throughout the organ
some exampl of method that can be us to conduct the fraud risk assess ar
interview
focu group
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4810 2011 fraud examin manual
survei
anonym feedback mechan
interview
interview can be an effect wai to conduct a candid oneonon convers the
us of interview as a techniqu will depend on how will peopl in the organ
ar to be open and honest in a direct dialogu with the interview the assessor must
consid whether interview ar commonli and effect us in the organ to gather
and elicit inform he should also speak with individu that have previous conduct
interview with employe to glean lesson learn for each potenti interviewe the
assessor should gaug how like and will he would be to be open and honestsom
peopl mai be good interview candid while other mai need to be engag through a
differ approach
focu group
focu group enabl the assessor to observ the interact of employe as thei discuss a
question or issu some topic mai lend themselv to be discuss in an open forum in
which peopl feel comfort among their colleagu addition when discuss tough
or thorni issu in a group an anonym realtim vote tool can be an effect wai of
open up a dialogu among the particip
the success of a focu group will be highli depend on the skill of the facilit if focu
group ar us as part of the fraud risk assess thei should be led by an experienc
facilit whom the group will relat to and trust get a group to open up and talk
honestli can be veri difficult an experienc facilit will be abl to read the group and
us techniqu such as group icebreak to make the session a success
survei
survei can be anonym or directli attribut to individu sometim peopl will
share more openli when thei feel protect behind a comput or paper questionnair in
an organ where the cultur is not on where peopl open up and freeli talk an
anonym survei can be a great wai to get feedback howev employe can be skeptic
about the true anonym of a survei especi in organ that us survei to solicit
feedback anonym but send followup email to individu delinqu respond if
the assessor determin that an anonym survei is an appropri techniqu to us in the
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4811
fraud risk assess he should clearli and explicitli explain to employe how anonym
will be maintain
anonym feedback mechan
in some organ anonym suggest box or similar mechan ar us to
encourag and solicit frequent employe feedback in these compani inform
pertain to the fraud risk assess can be request in the same wai addition us
of an anonym feedback mechan can also be effect in an environ where peopl
ar less like to be open and honest through other method and techniqu
on approach to effect us the anonym feedback techniqu involv establish a
question of the dai that is promin displai abov a collect box an exampl
question is if you thought fraud wa occur in the compani would you come forward
why or why not
anoth approach involv us a tabl lineup of five to ten opaqu box each with a
statement post abov it employe ar provid with poker chip in two differ color
and told that on color indic i agre and on indic i disagre employe ar
then encourag to respond to each statement by put a correspond chip in each box
to indic their respons
obtain the sponsor agreement on the work to be perform
befor the fraud risk assess procedur begin the sponsor and the fraud risk
assess team need to agre on
the scope of work that will be perform
the method that will be us to conduct the work eg survei interview focu
group anonym feedback mechan
the individu who will particip in the chosen method
the content of the chosen method
the form of output for the assess
educ the organ and openli promot the process
the fraud risk assess process should be visibl and commun throughout the
busi employe will be more inclin to particip in the process if thei understand
why it is be done and what the expect outcom will be
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4812 2011 fraud examin manual
sponsor should be strongli encourag to openli promot the process the more
person the commun from the sponsor the more effect it will be in
encourag employe to particip in the process whether it is a video a town hall
meet or a companywid email the commun should be aim at elimin ani
reluct employe have about particip in the fraud risk assess process
execut the fraud risk assess
the execut of the fraud risk assess can be approach in mani wai the approach
should be tailor to the organ but should be structur and ration to ensur it
success
choos a framework
when conduct a fraud risk assess it is help to us a framework for perform
evalu and report on the result of the work fraud risk can be analyz and report
both qualit and quantit us a consist framework
the follow sampl fraud risk assess framework illustr how the element of fraud
risk assess ar appli under differ approach
sampl fraud risk assess framework 1 1
us thi framework the fraud risk assess team incorpor the follow step into
the fraud risk assess strategi
1 identifi potenti inher fraud risk
2 assess the likelihood of occurr of the identifi fraud risk
3 assess the signific to the organ of the fraud risk
4 evalu which peopl and depart ar most like to commit fraud and identifi the
method thei ar like to us
5 identifi and map exist prevent and detect control to the relev fraud risk
6 evalu whether the identifi control ar oper effect and effici
7 identifi and evalu residu fraud risk result from ineffect or nonexist
control
1 thi framework is base on inform contain in manag the busi risk of fraud a practic guid
sponsor by the institut of intern auditor the american institut of certifi public account and
the associ of certifi fraud examin
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4813
the framework begin with a list of identifi fraud risk which ar assess for rel
likelihood and signific of occurr next the risk ar map to peopl and
depart impact and to relev control subsequ the relev control ar
evalu for design effect and ar test to valid their oper effect
lastli residu risk ar identifi and a fraud risk respons is develop to address them
the tabl below provid a visual represent of the step involv in thi framework
and can be fill in as the fraud risk assess is perform
fraud risk assess framework 2
identifi
fraud risk and scheme
likelihood signific peopl
andor
depart
exist
antifraud
control
control
effect
assess
residu
risk
fraud risk
respons
financi report
misappropri o f
asset
corrupt
other risk
identifi potenti inher fraud risk
the fraud risk assess team should brainstorm to identifi the fraud risk that could appli
to the organ brainstorm should includ discuss regard the follow area
2 manag the busi risk of fraud a practic guid sponsor by the institut of intern auditor the
american institut of certifi public account and the associ of certifi fraud examin pg 21
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4814 2011 fraud examin manual
incent pressur and opportun to commit fraud
when assess incent pressur and opportun to commit fraud the fraud risk
assess team should evalu
incent program and how thei mai affect employe behavior when conduct
busi or appli profession judgment
pressur on individu to achiev perform or other target and how such pressur
mai influenc employe behavior
opportun to commit fraud that aris from weak intern control such as a lack of
segreg of duti
risk of manag overrid of control
when consid the potenti for manag overrid of control the fraud risk
assess team should keep in mind that
manag personnel within the organ gener know the control and standard
oper procedur that ar in place to prevent fraud
individu who ar intent on commit fraud mai us their knowledg of the
organ control to do it in a manner that will conceal their action
popul of fraud risk
the fraud risk identif process requir an understand of the univers of fraud risk
and the subset of risk that appli to a particular organ it includ gather
inform about the busi itself includ it busi process industri and
oper environ as well as all associ potenti fraud risk such inform can
be obtain from extern sourcessuch as in dustri new outlet crimin civil and
regulatori complaint and settlement and profession organ and associationsand
from intern sourc by interview and brainstorm with personnel review
complaint on the whistleblow hotlin and perform analyt procedur
fraud risk can be classifi into three major area fraudul financi report asset
misappropri and corrupt potenti fraud risk to consid in each categori ar
discuss below
fraudul financi report
potenti fraudul financi report risk includ
inappropri report revenu expens or both
inappropri reflect balanc sheet amount includ reserv
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4815
inappropri improv or mask disclosur
conceal misappropri of asset
conceal unauthor receipt expenditur or both
conceal unauthor acquisit disposit or us of asset
asset misappropri
potenti asset misappropri risk includ misappropri of
tangibl asset
intang asset
proprietari busi opportun
corrupt
potenti corrupt risk includ
payment of bribe or gratuiti to compani privat individu or public offici
receipt of bribe kickback or gratuiti
aid and abet of fraud by outsid parti such as custom or vendor
certain other type of risk that can affect or be affect by each of the major area of fraud
risk includ regulatori and legal misconduct reput risk and risk to inform
technolog it
regulatori and legal misconduct
regulatori and legal misconduct includ a wide rang of risk such as conflict of interest
insid trade theft of competitor trade secret anticompetit practic environment
violat and trade and custom regul in area of import and export depend on
the particular organ and the natur of it busi some or all of these risk mai be
applic and should be consid in the fraud risk assess process
reput risk
the fraud risk assess team should ensur that consider of reput risk is part of
the organ risk assess process becaus fraudul act can damag an
organ reput with custom supplier capit market and other for
exampl fraud lead to a financi restat can damag an organ reput in
capit market which can increas the organ cost of borrow and depress it
market capit
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4816 2011 fraud examin manual
risk to inform technolog
inform technolog it is a critic compon of fraud risk assess organ
reli on it to conduct busi commun and process financi inform a poorli
design or inadequ control it environ can expos an organ to threat to
data integr threat from hacker to system secur and theft of financi and sensit
busi inform whether in the form of hack econom espionag web
defac sabotag of data virus or unauthor access to data it fraud risk can
result in signific financi and inform loss
assess the likelihood of occurr of the identifi fraud risk
assess the likelihood and signific of each potenti fraud risk is a subject process
that allow the organ to manag it fraud risk and appli prevent and detect
control ration the fraud risk assess team should first consid fraud risk to the
organ on an inher basi or without consider of known control by
approach the assess in thi manner the team will be better abl to consid all
relev fraud risk and then evalu and design control to address the risk
the likelihood of occurr of each fraud risk can be classifi as remot reason possibl
or probabl the fraud risk assess team should consid the follow factor in assess
the likelihood of occurr of each fraud risk
past instanc of the particular fraud occur at the organ
preval of the fraud risk in the organ industri
intern control environ of the organ
resourc avail to address fraud
support of fraud prevent effort by manag
ethic standard of the organ
number of individu transact involv
complex of the fraud risk
number of peopl involv in review or approv a relev process
unexplain loss
complaint by custom or vendor
inform from fraud survei such as acf report to the nation on occup fraud
and abus
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4817
assess the signific to the organ of the fraud risk
the fraud risk assess team should consid qualit and quantit factor when
assess the fraud risk to the organ for exampl a particular fraud risk that might
onli pose an immateri direct financi risk to the organ but that could greatli impact
it reput would be deem a more signific risk to the organ
the signific of each potenti fraud can be classifi as immateri signific or materi
in assess the signific of each fraud risk the fraud risk assess team should
consid the follow factor
financi statement and monetari signific
financi condit of the organ
valu of the threaten asset
critic of the threaten asset to the organ
revenu gener by the threaten asset
signific to the organ oper brand valu and reput
crimin civil and regulatori liabil
evalu which peopl and depart ar most like to commit fraud and identifi the method thei ar like to us
in identifi potenti fraud risk the risk assess team will have evalu the
incent and pressur on individu and depart to commit fraud the team should
us the inform gain in that process to identifi the individu and depart most
like to commit fraud and the method thei ar like to us thi knowledg will assist the
organ in tailor it fraud risk respons includ establish appropri
segreg of duti proper review and approv chain of author and proactiv fraud
audit procedur
identifi and map exist prevent and detect control to the relev fraud risk
after identifi and assess fraud risk for likelihood of occurr and for signific
the fraud risk assess team should identifi and map exist prevent and detect
control to the relev fraud risk
prevent control
prevent control which ar intend to prevent fraud befor it occur includ
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4818 2011 fraud examin manual
bring awar to personnel throughout the organ of the fraud risk
manag program in place
perform background check on employe where permit by law
hire compet personnel and provid them with antifraud train
conduct exit interview
implement polici and procedur
segreg duti
ensur proper align between an individu author and hi level
of respons
review thirdparti and relatedparti transact
detect control
detect control which ar intend to detect fraud if it doe occur includ
establish and market the presenc of a confidenti report system such as a
whistleblow hotlin
implement proactiv fraud detect process control such as reconcili
independ review physic inspectionscount analysi and audit
implement proactiv fraud detect procedur such as data analysi continu
audit techniqu and other technolog tool
perform surpris audit
evalu whether the identifi control ar oper effect and effici
the fraud risk assess team must ensur that there ar adequ control in place that
the control ar mitig fraud risk as intend and that the benefit of the control exce
the cost such an assess requir
review of the account polici and procedur in place
consider of the risk of manag overrid of control
interview with manag and employe
observ of control activ
sampl test of control complianc
review of previou audit report
review of previou report on fraud incid shrinkag and unexplain shortag
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4819
identifi and evalu residu fraud risk result from ineffect or nonexist control
consider of the intern control structur mai reveal certain residu fraud risk
includ manag overrid of establish control that ha not been adequ
mitig due to
lack of appropri prevent and detect control
noncompli with establish prevent and control measur
these residu fraud risk should be evalu by the fraud risk assess team in the
develop of the fraud risk respons for likelihood and signific of occurr
sampl fraud risk assess framework 2 fraud risk index
the follow is a suggest framework that ha two compon the fraud risk index
which look at indic of area that put the organ at risk for fraud and the
leadership risk profil which examin the wai busi leader oper to help determin
if thei behav or conduct busi in a wai that can increas the compani risk of fraud
fraud risk index
the fraud risk index is the overal assess of fraud risk for the organ base on
three compon
the environment risk index
the cultur quotient
the preventdetect index
the environment risk index
the environment risk index is an assess of macrolevel fraud risk indic that can
affect the organ vulner to fraud these includ factor such as pressur on
the busi the organ system of intern control the tone at the top and the
overal qualiti of the mechan that the compani ha in place to prevent and detect fraud
the cultur quotient
the cultur quotient is an assess of how the organ and it peopl behav or ar
perceiv to behav the cultur quotient includ
toler index an assess of the organi zation toler for bad behavior an
organ that ha a high toler for bad behavior can significantli increas the
compani vulner to fraud risk
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4820 2011 fraud examin manual
entitl index an assess that help determin whether peopl in the compani
displai or promot a sens of entitl an organ that sustain a strong sens
of entitl from it employe or leader can have a higher risk of fraud
notif index an assess of how like it is that employe will come forward
when thei suspect someth is wrong an organ where there is a low probabl
that employe will come forward is at significantli greater risk of fraud than an
organ where it is like that employe will come forward
both the environment risk index and cultur quotient ar element of the fraud risk
index that ar aim at identifi and evalu macrolevel indic of fraud risk that
the compani mai be expos to the content and approach for perform these part of
the assess should be tailor for the organ under review
the preventdetect index
the preventdetect index assess the qualiti of the specif mechan that the
organ ha in place to prevent or detect potenti fraud particularli those fraud
scheme for which the compani is at the greatest risk thi compon of the assess
can be us to identifi the compani greatest fraud risk by pinpoint area and method
that provid opportun for potenti fraudster to get somethingof either real or
perceiv valueout of the busi
to calcul the preventdetect index a standard comprehens popul of fraud
scheme such as the acf occup fraud classif system is us to evalu
each scheme that appli to the busi and determin which scheme ar the highrisk
scheme that the organ should focu on for those fraud scheme that appli to the
compani an evalu of each scheme should be perform to identifi
the likelihood that the scheme could be perpetr
the signific of the fraud risk to the compani
whether there ar prevent or detect intern control in place to moder the risk
to a suffici level
leadership risk profil
the leadership risk profil is develop to provid a macrolevel organiz view of
which busi leader if ani increas the organ vulner to fraud through their
leadership style
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4821
oper behavior
decisionmak practic
the fraud risk assess team should develop or obtain an organiz chart that show
the organiz structur of the busi and identifi it leader the team should then
develop a profil of each of the leader and evalu the fraud risk associ with their
leadership style oper behavior includ how thei interact with their team and
partner across the busi and decisionmak practic
as part of thi evalu the team should consid ani inform that indic uniqu
pressur on or incent for each leader that could increas the organ fraud risk
such pressur and incent can includ but ar not limit to
a signific amount of person net worth invest in the compani
a larg portion of compens ti to activ that the leader can manipul eg
sale volum or other busi perform measur
a pend divorc
recent organiz chang that have either greatli expand or reducedelimin
the leader span of control
live larger than life
depend on drug or alcohol
gambl problem
note that a comprehens approach to conduct a fraud risk assess us thi
framework would includ the assess of both the fraud risk index and the leadership
risk profil howev due to the sensit natur of the leadership risk profil the
sponsor mai decid to focu the assess on onli the fraud risk index
respond to residu fraud risk
regardless of the framework us to conduct the fraud risk assess manag will
need to address the identifi risk larri cook cfe who is the princip author of the
acf fraud risk assess tool suggest that manag can us on or a
combin of the follow approach to respond to the organ residu
fraud risk
avoid the risk
transfer the risk
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4822 2011 fraud examin manual
mitig the risk
assum the risk
avoid the risk
manag mai decid to avoid the risk by elimin an asset or exit an activ if the
control measur requir to protect the organ against an identifi threat ar too
expens thi approach requir the fraud risk assess team to complet a costbenefit
analysi of the valu of the asset or activ to the organ compar to the cost of
implement measur to protect the asset or activ
transfer the risk
manag mai transfer some or all of the risk by purchas fidel insur or a bond
the cost to the organ is the premium paid for the insur or bond the cover
risk of loss is then transfer to the insur compani less ani deduct payment
includ in the contract
mitig the risk
manag can help mitig the risk by implement appropri countermeasur such
as prevent and detect control the fraud risk assess team should evalu each
countermeasur to determin if it is cost effect and reason given the probabl of
occurr and impact of loss
assum the risk
manag mai choos to assum the risk if it determin that the probabl of
occurr and impact of loss ar low manag mai decid that it is more cost effect
to assum the risk than it is to elimin the asset or exit the activ bui insur to
transfer the risk or implement countermeasur to mitig the risk
combin approach
manag mai also elect a combin of the abov approach for exampl if the
probabl of occurr and impact of loss ar high manag mai decid to transfer
part of the risk through the purchas of insur as well as implement prevent and
detect control to mitig the risk
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4823
report the result of the fraud risk assess
the success of the fraud risk assess process hing on how effect the result ar
report and what the organ then doe with those result a poorli commun
report can undermin the entir process and bring all momentum establish to a screech
halt the report should be deliv in a style most suit to the languag of the busi if
manag prefer short punchi powerpoint present the fraud risk assess
team should not give them a 50page word document
consider when report the assess result
to maxim the effect of the process the team should consid the follow point
when develop the report of the result
report object not subject result
a lot of instinct and judgment goe into perform the fraud risk assess when
report the result of the assess the team must stick to the fact and keep all opinion
and bias out of the report a report that is pepper with the assess team subject
perspect will dilut and potenti undermin the result of the work
keep it simpl
the assess result should be report in a wai that is easi to understand and that
reson with manag the reader of the report should be abl to quickli look at and
comprehend the result a simpl onepag visual can sometim make the most impact
focu on what realli matter
less is often more when it come to report the result of the fraud risk assess the
team should take care not to turn the report into a laundri list of thing that manag
will have to sort through and priorit instead the report should be present in a wai that
focus on what realli matter clearli highlight those thing that ar most import and
that will make the most impact on the organ fraud risk manag effort
identifi action that ar clear and measur to drive result
the report should includ some kei recommend for action that ar clear measur
and will drive result the action should be present in a wai that make it appar what
exactli need to be done the report should not includ recommend that ar vagu or
that wouldnt reduc the risk of fraud addition the action reflect in the report should
have alreadi been vet with and agre to by the recommend action owner
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4824 2011 fraud examin manual
sampl report format
below ar two exampl of simpl format that can be us or adapt to report on the
result of a fraud risk assess base on the fraud risk index framework discuss earlier
in thi chapter
graphic report format
the first sampl report format shown below would work well in an organ that us
dashboard or tend to be visual orient the gaug can be substitut with ani type of
visual represent that the organ us in the normal cours of busi thi report
should be accompani by a on or twopag action plan
execut summari report format
the follow report format is a simpl onepag executivesummarytyp report it give
the reader a snapshot view of the result of the work along with insight into what is drive
the result and what action can be taken to reduc the fraud risk us a simpl format like
thi forc the assess team to focu on what realli matter and what will make the
most impact
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4825
report the leadership risk assess result
the result of the leadership risk profil should be treat with great sensit the fraud
risk assess team should discuss with the sponsor what the best method would be for
convei the result of that work if a formal report is request a colorcod
organ chart can be us as quick visual to convei the fraud risk associ with each
leadership area across the busi
make an impact with the fraud risk assess
to make the most of the fraud risk assess process manag should us the
result to
begin a dialogu across the compani
look for fraud in highrisk area
hold action owner account for progress
keep the assess process aliv and relev
begin a dialogu across the compani
the result of the initi fraud risk assess can be us to begin a dialogu across the
compani that promot awar educ and action plan aim at reduc the risk
of fraud engag in an activ dialogu can be an effect wai to further establish
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4826 2011 fraud examin manual
boundari of accept and unaccept behavior open commun about fraud risk
can also increas the chanc that employe will come forward if thei believ thei have
wit potenti fraud
look for fraud in highrisk area
an intern audit or investig team within the organ can us the result of the
fraud risk assess in identifi highrisk process or activ and unusu transact
that mai indic fraud thi practic can also provid some reassur if the subsequ
search for fraud reveal that despit the assess risk fraud doe not appear to be occur
at that point in time manag should rememb howev that just becaus there is no
evid that fraud is occur in the present the risk that it could occur is not elimin
hold action owner account for progress
it is often said that what get measur get done to effect reduc identifi fraud risk
manag must hold action owner account for make progress and drive impact
the organ should track and measur progress against agreedupon action plan
publicli celebr the success of action owner that make good progress can be as or
more effect in drive the right behavior as provid consequ for the action
owner that fail to deliv result
keep it aliv and relev
sinc there ar so mani factor that can affect an organ vulner to fraud risk
manag must ensur that the fraud risk assess stai current and relev someon
should be design within the organ to own the fraud risk assess process that
person or team should build process to ensur that all chang in the busi model
compani oper environ and personnel ar consid rel to their impact on
the compani risk of fraud
the fraud risk assess and the audit process
the fraud risk assess should plai a signific role in inform and influenc the
audit process in addit to be us in the annual audit plan process the fraud risk
assess should drive think and awar in the develop of audit program for
area that have been identifi as have a moder to high risk of fraud although auditor
should alwai be on guard for thing that might be indic of fraud risk the result of the
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4827
fraud risk assess can help them design audit procedur in a wai that enabl them to
look for fraud in known area of high risk
in the cours of their work auditor should valid that the organ is appropri
manag the moder to high fraud risk identifi in the fraud risk assess by
identifi and map the exist prevent and detect control that pertain to
the moder to high fraud risk identifi in the fraud risk assess
design and perform test to evalu whether the identifi control ar oper
effect and effici
identifi within the moder to high fraud risk area whether there is a moder to
high risk of manag overrid of intern control
develop and deliv report that incorpor the result of their valid and
test of the fraud risk control
the follow templat can be us by auditor to evalu how effect the moder to
high fraud risk ar be manag by the busi
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4828 2011 fraud examin manual
the fraud risk assess tool
introduct
the acf fraud risk assess tool can be us by fraud examin to identifi their
client or employ vulner to fraud
the fraud risk assess tool consist of 15 modul each contain a seri of
question design to help organ zoom in on area of risk the fraud profession
and the client or employ should begin the risk assess process by work togeth to
answer the question in each modul it is import that the client or employ select
peopl within the organ who have extens knowledg of compani oper such
as manag and intern auditor to work with the fraud profession upon complet of
all of the question the fraud profession should review the result of the assess with
the client or employ in order to
identifi the potenti inher fraud risk
assess the likelihood and signific of occurr of the identifi fraud risk
evalu which peopl and depart ar most like to commit fraud and identifi the
method thei ar like to us
identifi and map exist prevent and detect control to the relev fraud risk
evalu whether the identifi control ar oper effect and effici
identifi and evalu residu fraud risk result from ineffect or
nonexist control
respond to residu fraud risk
the fraud risk assess tool mai reveal certain residu fraud risk that have not been
adequ mitig due to lack of or noncompli with appropri prevent and
detect control the fraud profession should work with the client to develop mitig
strategi for ani residu risk with an unaccept high likelihood or signific of
occurr respons should be evalu in term of their cost versu benefit and in
light of the organ level of risk toler
be awar howev that thi assess onli provid a snapshot of a particular point in
time the dynam natur of organ requir routin monitor and updat of their
financi risk assess process in order for them to remain effect
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4829
modul 1 employe assess
the employe assess question ar design to assess the probabl of a fraudul
event occur within the organ base on
intern control
intern control environ
resourc avail to prevent detect and deter fraud
1 ar employe provid formal written job descript
in addit to clarifi what employe ar respons for job descript signifi what
employe ar not respons for employe who perform duti outsid of their job
descript repres a signific red flag
2 ar employe provid with an organiz chart that show line of respons
organiz chart provid employe with a snapshot of an organ divis of
work level of manag and report relationship
3 doe the compani have written account polici and procedur
account polici and procedur includ those relat to fraud should be document
implement and commun to employe
4 is there a formal polici cover approv author for financi transact such as purchas or travel
in order to safeguard asset and financi report compani should develop and
implement polici for determin how financi transact ar initi author
record and review
5 doe the compani have an ethic statement
the compani should implement a formal ethic statement that 1 defin conduct that is
uneth 2 state that uneth act will be punish and 3 provid inform on
report uneth conduct
6 doe senior manag exhibit and encourag ethic behavior
senior manag set the tone for ethic conduct throughout the organ the tone
should signal that fraud will not be toler
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4830 2011 fraud examin manual
7 doe the compani have written fraud polici and procedur
the compani should document and implement fraud polici and procedur that describ
1 fraudul conduct 2 punish for engag in fraudul conduct and 3 how to
report fraudul conduct
8 is a senior member of manag respons for complianc with fraud polici
the respons for complianc with fraud and ethic polici should be assign to a
senior member of manag
9 doe the organ educ employe about the import of ethic and antifraud program
all employe should receiv train on the ethic and antifraud polici of the compani
the employe should sign an acknowledg that thei have receiv the train and
understand the polici
10 doe the organ provid an anonym wai to report suspect violat of the ethic and anti
fraud program
organ should provid employe vendor and custom with a confidenti system
for report suspect violat of the ethic and antifraud polici
11 ar fraud incid promptli and thoroughli investig
promptli and thoroughli investig all report incid of fraud can minim loss
12 doe the compani maintain a record of fraud incid
a formal record of all report incid of fraud includ document of investig
activ and final disposit of each incid should be maintain
13 doe the compani conduct preemploy background check
befor offer employ to an applic a compani should conduct a preemploy
background check where permit by law
14 doe the compani have a loss prevent function
respons personnel should be train to perform loss prevent function
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4831
15 doe the compani have an intern audit function
intern audit that focu on highrisk area for fraud can identifi new vulner
measur the effect of intern control and signal that fraud prevent is a high
prioriti for the compani
16 ar the duti relat to author custodi of asset and record or report of transact
segreg
the compani should segreg the duti relat to author custodi of asset and
record or report of transact
17 is complianc with intern control audit period
period audit of complianc with intern control send the messag to employe that the
compani is proactiv in it antifraud effort
18 do employe feel thei ar tr eat and compens fairli
manag should establish appropri line of commun with employe such as
survei exit interview and opendoor polici to assess their attitud toward the
organ
19 do ani employe have larg person debt or credit problem
employe with larg person debt or credit problem ar a red flag of potenti fraud and
should be monitor by manag
20 do ani employe appear to be spend far more than thei ar earn
manag should be observ of sign of employe spend far more than thei ar
earn it is common for employe who steal to us the proce for lifestyl
improv includ expens car and extravag vacat
21 do ani employe gambl excess
employe who gambl excess pose a potenti fraud risk to the compani and should
be monitor by manag employe assist program can be made avail to help
employe with gambl addict
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4832 2011 fraud examin manual
22 do ani employe us alcohol or drug excess
employe who us alcohol or drug excess pose a potenti fraud risk to the compani
and should be monitor by manag employe assist program can be made
avail to help employe with alcohol or drug addict
23 do ani employe resent their superior
employe who resent their superior should be monitor by manag as thei pose a
potenti fraud risk to the compani
24 do ani employe have a close associ with vendor or competitor
employe with a close relationship to a vendor or competitor should be monitor for
potenti conflict of interest
25 do ani employe have outsid busi interest that might conflict with their duti at the compani
employe should be requir to provid annual financi disclosur that list outsid
busi interest outsid interest that conflict with the organ interest should
be prohibit
26 is the compani experienc high employe turnov
high employe turnov especi in area particularli vulner to fraud is a warn sign
of fraud that should be investig
27 ar employe requir to take annual vacat
requir employe to take annual vacat can aid an employ in detect an ongo
fraud scheme becaus the employ is more like to discov a perpetr run such a
scheme when the perpetr is remov from the scene
28 is the compani domin by a small group of individu
if control is center in the hand of a few kei employe those individu should be under
heighten secur for complianc with intern control and other polici and procedur
29 doe the compani have unrealist product measur and expect
unrealist product measur and expect can place undu pressur on
employe and result in employe commit fraudul act in order to meet them
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4833
30 doe manag fail to give employe positi ve feedback and recognit for job perform
provid posit feedback and recognit to employe help to reduc the likelihood of
intern fraud and theft through boost moral employe with posit feel about an
organ ar less like to commit fraud against the organ
31 ar employe afraid to deliv bad new to supervisor or manag
manag should promot a cultur in which employe arent afraid to deliv bad new
after all the sooner manag receiv the bad new the sooner it can respond
32 is there a lack of commun between employe and manag
manag can improv commun with em ploye by creat an atmospher that
encourag open commun employe should feel safe in share ani thought
comment complaint or suggest
33 is there a lack of clear organiz respons in the compani
a lack of clear organiz respons can lead to confus and frustrat for
employe organiz chart and job descript can be us to clarifi organiz
respons
34 doe manag not seem to care about or reward appropri employe behavior
manag that doe not seem to care a bout or reward appropri employe behavior
can contribut to low employe moral and increas risk of fraud against the compani
by employe
modul 2 managementkei employe assess
the managementkei employe assess question ar design to assess the probabl
of a fraudul event occur within the organ base on
intern control
intern control environ
resourc avail to prevent detect and deter fraud
1 is the board of director compos of mainli offic of the compani or relat individu
the board of director should includ independ board member that ar not associ
with or emploi by the compani in theori independ director ar not subject to the
same pressur as manag and therefor ar more like to act in the best interest of
sharehold
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4834 2011 fraud examin manual
2 is there an independ audit committe
independ audit committe member with financi and account expertis can be
instrument in prevent and detect financi fraud
3 ha there been high turnov of manag and member of the board of director
manag should investig the reason for high turnov and implement measur to
reduc it
4 have an unusu high number of kei employe left the compani recent
manag should investig the reason for their departur and implement measur to
reduc turnov
5 is the compani involv in ani litig
manag should determin the reason for the litig monitor the file and take
correct action where necessari
6 doe the compani have offshor activ or bank account
manag should determin the reason for the offshor activ and account ascertain
complianc with us law and monitor activ close
7 do ani of the senior manag have off shore bank account or busi interest
the organ should requir senior manag to file annual financi disclosur report
and explain the purpos of ani offshor bank account or busi interest
8 ar ani kei employe experienc financi pressur es such as debt gambl medic bill or divorc
kei employe who ar experienc financi pressur repres a potenti fraud risk to
the compani and should be monitor by manag employe assist program can
be made avail to help employe with alcohol drug and other problem
9 do ani kei employe appear to be live beyond their mean
manag should be observ of sign of employe spend far more than thei ar
earn it is common for employe who steal to us the proce for lifestyl
improv includ expens car extravag vacat or expens cloth
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4835
10 do ani kei employe have civil judgment or bankruptci on record
kei employe who have civil judgment or bankruptci on record repres a potenti
fraud risk to the compani and should be monitor by manag
11 do ani kei employe have a crimin convict
kei employe with known crimin convict should be subject to increas review by
manag for complianc with intern control and other polici and procedur
12 do on or two kei employe appear to domin the compani
if control is center in the hand of on or two kei employe then those individu
should be under heighten scrutini for complianc with intern control and other polici
and procedur
13 do ani kei employe have friend or rel report directli to them
organ should prohibit kei employe from have friend or rel report directli
to them
14 do ani of the kei employe appear to have a close associ with a vendor
kei employe who have a close associ with a vendor should be monitor for
potenti conflict of interest
15 do ani kei employe have outsid busi interest that might conflict with their duti at the compani
kei employe should be requir to provid annual financi disclosur that list outsid
busi interest interest that conflict with the organ interest should be
prohibit
16 do ani kei employe own a portion of ani compani that doe busi with thi compani
organ should requir kei employe to disclos ani potenti conflict of interest
and should close monitor ani such conflict of interest
17 ha ani kei employe fail to take vacat
requir kei employe to take annual vacat can aid an employ in detect an
ongo fraud scheme becaus the employ is more like to discov a perpetr run
such a scheme when the perpetr is remov from the scene
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4836 2011 fraud examin manual
18 do ani kei employe have a signific amount of their net worth invest in the compani
manag should subject kei employe with a signific amount of their net worth
invest in the compani to increas review for complianc with intern control especi
those control relat to financi report
19 doe the compani have unusu high debt
manag should determin the reason for debt level and monitor intern control for
financi report
20 is kei employe compens prim arili base on comp ani perform
organ should monitor employe whose compens is base primarili on
compani perform for complianc with intern control especi control relat to
financi report
21 is there an incent to us inappropri mean to minim earn for tax reason
compani should remov ani incent to us inappropri mean to manipul
financi inform
22 is there excess pressur to increas the compani stock price
excess pressur to increas the compani stock price can result in manag
manipul financi result in order to meet expect
23 ha the compani recent experienc larg oper or invest loss
larg oper or invest loss ca n place undu pressur on manag to
manipul result in order to cover up the loss
24 doe the organ have suffici work capit
insuffici work capit can place undu pressur on manag to manipul
financi result
25 doe the organ have suffici credit
a lack of suffici credit can place undu pressur on manag to manipul financi
result in order to obtain credit
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4837
26 is the organ under pressu re to report favor earn
excess pressur to report favor earn can result in manag commit
fraudul act in order to meet expect
27 doe the compani depend heavili on onli a limit number of product or custom
depend on onli a limit number of product or custom place a compani at greater
risk for fraudul act to occur
28 ha the compani experienc diff iculti in collect receiv
cash flow problem which ar a warn sign of possibl fraud can aris when a compani
experi difficulti in collect receiv
29 ha the compani recent expand rapidli into new busi or product line
rapid expans into new busi or product line can place tremend financi pressur
on a compani
30 ha the compani experienc a reduct in sale volum
a reduct in sale volum can place undu pressur on manag to manipul
financi result
31 doe the compani have strong competitor that ar outperform
strong competit can place a compani at greater risk for fraudul act to occur
32 is the compani under pressur to sell or merg with anoth compani
situat pressur that mai lead to fraudul act can aris when a compani is under
pressur to sell or merg with anoth compani
33 doe the compani chang auditor often
a frequent chang in auditor is a red flag of fraud
34 doe the compani delai or avoid suppli auditor with the inform necessari to complet
the audit
delai or avoid suppli auditor with the inform necessari to complet audit is
an indic of fraudul activ
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4838 2011 fraud examin manual
35 doe the compani have problem with regulatori agenc
the compani should determin the reason for the problem with regulatori agenc and
implement measur to encourag complianc with regul
36 doe the compani have poor account record
the compani should implement proper account record
37 doe the account depart appear to be inadequ staf
the account depart should be adequ staf to allow for proper segreg
of duti
38 doe the organ fail to disclos question or unusu account practic
question or unusu account practic should be disclos
39 doe the compani have a number of la rge yearend or unusu transact
larg yearend or unusu transact should be investig
40 doe the organ lack an adequ intern audit staff
the intern audit depart should be adequ staf
41 doe the organ lack an intern control syst em or doe it fail to enforc the exist intern
control
organ should establish and enforc an intern control system
modul 3 physic control to deter employe theft and fraud
the physic control assess question ar design to assess the probabl of a
fraudul event occur within the organ base on
physic control in place to control access to account record and inform
physic control in place to protect the asset of the organ
1 doe the organ conduct preemploy back ground check to identifi previou dishonest or
uneth behavior
befor offer employ to an applic a compani should conduct a preemploy
background check where permit by law
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4839
2 ar there polici and procedur that address dishonest or uneth behavior
the compani should document and implement polici and procedur that describ 1
uneth conduct 2 punish for engag in uneth conduct and 3 how to report
uneth conduct
3 doe manag support the ethic and antifraud polici
senior manag set the tone for ethic conduct throughout the organ the tone
should signal that fraud will not be toler
4 doe the organ educ employe about the import of ethic and antifraud program
all employe should receiv train on the ethic and antifraud polici of the compani
the employe should sign an acknowledg that thei have receiv the train and
understand the polici
5 doe the organ provid an anonym wai to re port suspect violat of the ethic and antifraud
polici
organ should provid a system for anonym report of suspect violat of
the ethic and antifraud polici
6 doe the organ restrict access to area contain sensit document such as invoic receipt
journal ledger and check and maintain a sy stem for provid an audit trail of access
access to area contain sensit document should be restrict to those individu
who need the inform to carri out their job also an audit trail of access should
be maintain
7 doe the organ restrict access to comput system with sensit document such as account
softwar inventori and payrol and creat a system to provid an audit trail of access
access to comput system should be restrict to those individu who need the
inform to carri out their job also an audit trail of access should be maintain
8 doe the organ restrict access to area with high valu asset such as ship receiv storeroom
and cash
organ should restrict access to area with high valu asset and should maintain a log
of person access such area
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4840 2011 fraud examin manual
9 doe the organ us cctv and record equip to monitor entri exit area with sensit
or high valu asset and sale area
entri exit area with sensit or high valu asset and sale area can be monitor
us cctv and record equip
10 doe the organ conduct random unannounc audit of inventori ca sh expens purchas
bill and other account by in ternal or extern auditor
random unannounc audit help prevent fraud perpetr from have time to alter
destroi and misplac record and other evid of their offens
11 doe the organ us profession loss prevent or secur personnel to monitor physic control
profession loss prevent or secur personnel can be us to monitor physic control
12 doe the organ promptli investig incid of suspect or report fraud
promptli investig incid of suspect or report fraud can minim loss
modul 4 skim scheme
skim scheme includ
collect cash but not record the sale
collect cash keep a portion of the cash and underreport the sale amount
collect a custom payment but not cred it the amount to the custom account
collect cash and hold it in a person interestbear account befor deposit it
into the compani account
1 is there period analyt review of sale a ccount us vertic horizont and ratio analysi
period analyt review of sale account us vertic horizont and ratio analysi can
highlight discrep that point to skim
2 is there period review of the inventori and receiv record us statist sampl
period review of the inventori and receiv record us statist sampl can highlight
discrep that point to skim
3 is there period review of the inventori and receiv record us trend analysi
period review of the inventori and receiv record us trend analysi can highlight
discrep that point to skim
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4841
4 is there period review of the inventori and receiv record us ph ysical inventori count
period review of the inventori and receiv record us physic inventori count can
highlight discrep that point to skim
5 is there period review of the inventori and re ceiv record us verifi cation of ship and
requisit document
period review of the inventori and receiv record us verif of ship and
requisit document can highlight discrep that point to skim
6 is there period review of inventori account for writeoff
inventori account should be review period for writeoff
7 is there period review of account receiv and allow for uncollect account to look for writeoff
of account receiv
account receiv and allow for uncollect account should be review
period for writeoff of account receiv
8 is there period review of cash account for irregular entri
cash account should be review period for irregular entri
9 is the compani mail open by someon other than bookkeep cashier or other account employe
who make journal entri
compani mail should be open by someon other than bookkeep cashier or other
account employe who make journal entri
10 do voucher for credit and sale receipt contain serial number
voucher for credit and sale receipt should contain serial number
11 is the account receiv bookkeep restrict from prepar the bank deposit
the account receiv bookkeep should be restrict from prepar the bank deposit
12 is the account receiv bookkeep rest rict from collect cash from custom
the account receiv bookkeep should be restrict from collect cash
from custom
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4842 2011 fraud examin manual
13 is the account receiv bookkeep re strict from access to the cash receipt
the account receiv bookkeep should be restrict from access to the cash receipt
14 is the cashier restrict from access account receiv record
the cashier should be restrict from access account receiv record
15 is the cashier restrict from access bank and custom statement
the cashier should be restrict from access bank and custom statement
16 is each of the follow respons assign to a separ employe gener ledger entri cash receipt
entri and account receiv bill
have differ employe perform these task help minim the potenti for the
conceal of theft
17 doe the employe who open incom check place restrict endors on all check receiv
the employe who open incom check should immedi stamp all incom check
with the compani restrict endors to protect against unintend parti cash
the check
18 doe the person who open the mail prepar a list of all check and cash receiv
a list of all check and cash receiv should be prepar and reconcil daili against the
bank deposit receipt and the cash receipt report
19 doe the person who open the mail deliv all check and cash to the person respons for the daili
bank deposit
the person who open the mail should deliv all check and cash to the person respons
for the daili bank deposit
20 doe an employe perform an independ verif of the bank deposit ticket to the remitt list
gener by the employe who open the mail
an employe should perform an independ verif of the bank deposit ticket to the
remitt list gener by the employe who open the mail
21 doe the compani us a lockbox servic for cash receipt
lockbox decreas the potenti for fraud and error by reduc employe handl of
each transact
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4843
22 doe the compani have a safe with restrict access
a safe can be us to physic secur excess cash on hand access to the safe should be
restrict and an access log should be maintain
23 is cash deposit daili
daili bank deposit should be made so that excess cash doe not remain on the premis
24 ar there prenumb cash receipt for cash sale
prenumb cash receipt should be us for cash sale
25 ar employe who handl cash bond
employe who handl cash should be bond in order to protect against theft
26 is there a written polici and procedur for turn over delinqu account for collect
the compani should document and implement polici and procedur for turn over
delinqu account for collect
27 is the person who handl custom er complaint independ of the ca shier or account receiv function
the person who handl custom complaint should be independ of the cashier or
account receiv function
28 is physic access to the account syst em restrict to onli author person
physic access to the account system should be restrict to those who requir it to
perform their job function
modul 5 cash larceni scheme
cash larceni scheme includ
steal cash at the point of sale or regist
steal cash receipt post to sale and receiv journal
steal cash from bank deposit
1 ar cash regist tape total reconc il to the amount in the cash drawer
cash regist tape total should be reconcil to the amount in the cash drawer ani
discrep should be investig
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4844 2011 fraud examin manual
2 is an employe other than the regist worker respons for prepar regist count sheet and agre
them to regist total
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and agre them to regist tape total
3 is access to regist or the cash box close monitor ar access code kept secur
access to regist or the cash box should be close monitor and access code should be
kept secur
4 ar custom complaint regard short chang or improp post handl by someon other than the
employe who receiv the cash
custom complaint regard short chang or improp post should be handl by
someon other than the employe who receiv the cash
5 ar regist worker properli supervis
regist worker should be properli supervis by onduti supervisor or cctv record
of regist activ
6 ar cctv camera and digit record us to monitor regist area
cctv camera and digit record can be us to monitor regist area
7 is each receiv transact review for legitimaci and support document
receiv transact should be review for legitimaci and support document
8 is an independ list of cash receipt prepar befor the receipt ar submit to the cashier or
account receiv bookkeep
an independ list of cash receipt should be prepar befor the receipt ar submit
to the cashier or account receiv bookkeep
9 doe a person independ of the cash receipt and account receiv function compar entri to the cash
receipt journal with the bank deposit slip and bank deposit statement
compani should assign a person independ of the cash receipt and account receiv
function to compar entri to the cash receipt journal with the bank deposit slip and
bank deposit statement
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4845
10 ar the cash receipt cash count bank deposit deposit receipt reconcili s bank reconcili
post of deposit and cash disburs duti segreg
the primari wai to prevent cash larceni is to segreg duti
11 doe an employe other than the cashier or account receiv bookkeep make the daili bank deposit
have an employe other than the cashier or account receiv bookkeep make
the daili bank deposit is an import segreg of duti that can help to prevent
cash larceni
12 is job or assign rotat mandatori for employe who handl cash receipt and account duti
mani intern fraud scheme ar continu in natur and requir ongo effort by the
employe to conceal defalc by establish mandatori job or assign rotat the
conceal element is interrupt
13 ar vacat mandatori for employe who handl cash receipt and account duti
mani intern fraud scheme ar continu in natur and requir ongo effort by the
employe to conceal defalc by establish mandatori vacat the conceal
element is interrupt
14 ar surpris cash count conduct
surpris cash count help prevent fraud perpetr from have time to alter destroi and
misplac record and other evid of their offens
15 ar journal entri made to the cash account review and analyz on a regular basi
journal entri made to the cash account should be review and analyz on a
regular basi
16 doe the compani us a point of sale po system
a po system will allow the organ to gather sale inform in a comprehens
and time format
17 doe the po system track perpetu inventori
the po system should be configur to track perpetu inventori
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4846 2011 fraud examin manual
18 doe the po system track except such as void refund no sale overag and shortag
the po system should be configur to track except such as void refund no sale
overag and shortag
19 ar regist except report review on a regular basi
regist except report should be review on a regular basi by manag
20 ar all employe except for manag prohibit from make chang to the po system
all employe except for manag should be prohibit from make chang to the
po system
21 is access to the account receiv subledg and the gener ledger restrict to author employe
doe access leav an audit trail
access to the account receiv subledg and gener ledger should be restrict to
author employe an audit trail of who access the ledger includ time and date of
access should be kept
modul 6 check tamper scheme
forg maker scheme involv forg an author signatur on a compani check
forg endors scheme consist of forg the signatur endors of an
intend recipi of a compani check
alter paye scheme involv chang the paye design on the check to the
perpetr or an accomplic
author maker scheme occur when employe with signatur author write
fraudul check for their own benefit
1 ar unus check store in a secur contain with limit access
blank check which can be us for forgeri should be store in a secur area such as a
safe or vault secur to thi area should be restrict to author personnel
2 ar unus check from account that have been close promptli destroi
compani should promptli destroi all unus check from account that have been close
3 ar electron payment us where possibl to limit the number of paper check issu
compani can minim the possibl of check tamper and theft by us electron
payment servic to handl larg vendor and financ payment
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4847
4 ar print and sign check mail immedi after sign
print and sign check should be mail immedi after sign
5 ar new check purchas from reput check vendor
all new check should be purchas from reput wellestablish check produc
6 do compani check contain secur featur to ensur their integr
compani can reduc their exposur to physic check tamper by us check
contain secur featur such as highresolut microprint secur ink and
ultraviolet ink
7 ha the compani notifi it bank to not accept check over a predetermin maximum amount
compani should work in a cooper effort with bank to prevent check fraud
establish maximum dollar amount abov which the compani bank will not accept
check drawn against the account
8 ha the compani establish posit pai control with it bank by suppli the bank with a daili list of
check issu and author for payment
on method for a compani to help prevent check fraud is to establish posit pai control
by suppli it bank with a daili list of check issu and author for payment
9 is the employe who prepar the check prohibit from sign the check
check prepar should not be perform by a signatori on the account
10 ar detail comparison made between the paye on the check and the paye list in the cash
disburs journal
compani should perform detail comparison of the paye on the check and the paye
list in the cash disburs journal
11 ar employe respons for handl and code check period rotat
period rotat of personnel respons for handl and code check can be an
effect check disburs control
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4848 2011 fraud examin manual
12 ar bank reconcili complet immedi at after bank statement ar receiv
compani should complet bank reconcili immedi after bank statement ar
receiv the uniform commerci code state that discrep must be present to the
bank within 30 dai of receipt of the bank statement in order to hold the bank liabl
13 ar bank statement and account reconcili independ audit to confirm accuraci
bank statement and account reconcili should be independ audit for accuraci
14 ar cancel check independ review for alter and forgeri
cancel check should be independ review for alter and forgeri
15 ar check for a materi amount match to the support document
check for materi amount should be match to the support document
16 ar void check examin for irregular and to ensur thei havent been process
the list of void check should be verifi against physic copi of the check bank
statement should be review to ensur that void check have not been process
17 ar miss check record and stop payment issu
miss check mai indic lax control over the physic safekeep of check stop
payment should be issu for all miss check
18 do question paye or paye ad dress trigger review of the correspond check and support
document
question paye or paye address should trigger a review of the correspond check
and support document
19 with the except of payrol ar check issu to employe review for irregular
check payabl to employe with the except of regular payrol check should be close
scrutin for scheme such as conflict of interest fictiti vendor or duplic expens
reimburs
20 ar two signatur requir for check issuanc
requir dual signatur on check can reduc the risk of check fraud
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4849
21 ar all compani payment made by check or other record payment devic
make payment by check or other record payment devic can reduc the risk of
disburs fraud
22 ar handwritten check prohibit
handwritten check ar especi vulner to check fraud and should be prohibit
modul 7 cash regist scheme
fals refund scheme occur when an employe 1 issu a refund for fictiti
merchandis and keep the monei or 2 overst the amount of merchandis return
and skim the excess monei
fals void scheme occur when a regist worker retain a custom receipt process a
fictiti void sale and keep the monei
1 ar refund void and discount evalu on a routin basi to identifi pattern of activ among
employe depart shi ft merchandis etc
compani should routin evalu refund void and discount to search for pattern of
activ that might signal fraud
2 is there a sign post at the regist ask the custom to request and examin a sale receipt
sign ask custom to request and examin sale receipt should be post at regist
3 ar cash disburs record on a prenumb form and reconcil daili
cash disburs should be record on prenumb form and reconcil daili
4 do the cash disburs form have an explan section or code
an explan section or code should be includ on cash disburs form
5 ar custom that ar involv in void sale and refund randomli contact to verifi the accuraci of
the transact
custom involv in void sale and refund should be randomli contact to verifi the
accuraci of the transact
6 is access to the necessari control kei for refund and void rest rict to supervisor
access to the necessari control kei for refund and void should be restrict
to supervisor
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4850 2011 fraud examin manual
7 do void or refund transact have to be approv by a supervisor and document
all void or refund transact should be approv by a supervisor and document
8 is document of void and ref und transact maintain on file
document of void and refund transact should be maintain on file
9 is miss or alter regist tape thoroughli investig
compani should thoroughli investig ani miss or alter regist tape
10 ar gap in the regist tape investig
compani should investig ani gap in the regist tape
11 ar multipl void or refund for amount just under ani review limit investig
multipl void or refund for amount just under review limit should be investig
12 is an employe other than the regist worker respons for prepar regist count sheet and compar
them to regist total
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and compar them to regist total
13 ar custom complaint regard pa yment error thoroughli investig
custom complaint regard payment error should be thoroughli investig
14 doe each cashier have a separ access code to the regist
each cashier should be assign a separ access code to the regist
15 doe each cashier have a separ cash drawer
each cashier should have a separ cash drawer
16 is an over and short log kept for each person andor regist
an over and short log should be kept for each person andor regist
17 ar over and short incid thoroughli investig and monitor
over and short incid should be thoroughli investig and monitor
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4851
18 ar all no sale receipt account for and attach to a daili cashier report
all no sale receipt should be account for and attach to a daili cashier report
19 is access to the regist area restrict to author employe and supervisor
compani should restrict access to regist area to author employe and supervisor
20 ar all cashier period integr shop
compani should period conduct integr shop on all cashier
modul 8 purchas and bill scheme
shell compani scheme occur when an employe submit invoic for payment from a
fictiti compani control by the employe
payandreturn scheme occur when an employe arrang for overpay of a vendor
invoic and pocket the overpay amount when it is return to the compani
person purchas scheme occur when an employe submit an invoic for person
purchas to the compani for payment or when an employe us a compani credit
card for person purchas
1 doe the organ have a purchas depart
the organ should have a purchas depart that is separ from the
payment function
2 is the purchas depart independ of the account receiv and ship depart
the purchas depart should be independ of the account receiv and
ship depart
3 do purchas requisit requir manag approv
manag should approv all purchas requisit
4 do purchas order specifi a descript of item quantiti price and date
purchas order should specifi a descript of item quantiti price and date
5 ar purchas order form prenumb and account for
purchas order form should be prenumb and account for
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4852 2011 fraud examin manual
6 doe the compani maintain a master vendor file
the compani should maintain a master vendor file
7 ar competit bid requir for all purchas
compani should requir competit bid for all purchas
8 doe the receiv depart prepar receiv report for all item receiv
the receiv depart should prepar receiv report for all item receiv
9 doe the receiv depart main tain a log of all item receiv
the receiv depart should maintain a log of all item receiv
10 ar copi of receiv report furnish to the account and purchas depart
copi of receiv report should be furnish to the account and
purchas depart
11 ar purchas and receiv function separ from invoic process account payabl and gener
ledger function
purchas and receiv function should be segreg from invoic process account
payabl and gener ledger function
12 ar vendor invoic receiv report and purchas order match befor the relat liabil is record
compani should match vendor invoic receiv report and purchas order befor
record the relat liabil
13 ar purchas order record in a purchas regist or voucher regist befor be process through
cash disburs
purchas order should be record in a purchas regist or voucher regist befor be
process through cash disburs
14 ar procedur adequ to ensur that merchandis purchas for direct deliveri to the custom is
promptli bill to the custom and record as both a receiv and a payabl
compani should implement procedur adequ to ensur that merchandis purchas
for direct deliveri to the custom is promptli bill to the custom and record as both a
receiv and a payabl
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4853
15 ar record of good return to ve ndor match to vendor credit memo
record of good return to vendor should be match to vendor credit memo
16 is the account payabl ledger or voucher regist re concil monthli to the gener ledger control account
the account payabl ledger or voucher regist should be reconcil monthli to the gener
ledger control account
17 do writeoff of account payabl debit bala nce requir approv of a design manag
writeoff of account payabl debit balanc should requir approv of a
design manag
18 is the master vendor file period review for unusu vendor and address
the master vendor file should be review period for unusu vendor and address
19 ar vendor purchas analyz for abnorm level
vendor purchas should be analyz for abnorm level
20 ar control method in place to check for duplic invoic and purchas order number
compani should implement control method to check for duplic invoic and purchas
order number
21 ar credit card statement re view monthli for irregular
credit card statement should be review monthli for irregular
22 ar vendor with post offic box address verifi
all vendor with post offic box address should be verifi
23 ar voucher payment review regularli for proper document
voucher payment should be review regularli for proper document
24 is access to the account payabl subledg and the gener ledger restrict doe access creat an
audit trail
access to the account payabl subledg and the gener ledger should be restrict and an
audit trail should be creat
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4854 2011 fraud examin manual
modul 9 payrol scheme
ghost employe scheme occur when a person not emploi by the compani is on
the payrol
overpay scheme occur when a compani pai an employe base on falsifi
hour or rate
commiss scheme occur when the amount of sale made or the rate of commiss is
fraudul inflat
1 is the employe payrol list review period for duplic or miss social secur number
organ should check the employe payrol list period for duplic or miss
social secur number that mai indic a ghost employe or overlap payment to
current employe
2 ar personnel record maintain independ entli of payrol and timekeep function
personnel record should be maintain independ of payrol and timekeep function
3 ar refer check on all new hire
organ should perform refer check on all new hire
4 ar sick leav vacat and holidai re view for complianc with compani polici
sick leav vacat and holidai should be review for complianc with compani polici
5 ar appropri form complet and sign by the employe to author payrol deduct and
withhold exempt
employe should complet and sign appropri form to author payrol deduct and
withhold exempt
6 is payrol period compar with personnel record for termin
payrol should period be compar with personnel record for termin to ensur
that termin employe have been remov from the payrol
7 ar payrol check prenumb and issu in sequenti order
payrol check should be prenumb and issu in sequenti order
8 is the payrol bank account reconcil by an employe who is not involv in prepar payrol check doe
not sign the check and doe not handl payrol distribut
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4855
the payrol bank account should be reconcil by an employe who is not involv in
prepar payrol check doe not sign the check and doe not handl payrol distribut
9 ar payrol regist reconcil to gener ledger control account
payrol regist should be reconcil to gener ledger control account
10 ar cancel payrol check examin for alter and endors
cancel payrol check should be examin for alter and endors
11 is access restrict to payrol check stock and signatur stamp
access to payrol check stock and signatur stamp should be restrict
12 ar payrol withhold for tax insur etc examin to determin if ani employe ar not have
these item deduct from their paycheck
payrol check that do not have withhold for tax insur etc should
be investig
13 is the employe payrol list review period for duplic or miss home address and
telephon number
the employe payrol list should be review for duplic or miss home address and
telephon number
14 is the account inform for automat depo site payrol check review period for
duplic entri
account inform for automat deposit payrol check should be review
period for duplic entri
15 is an employe separ from the payrol depart assign to distribut payrol check
an employe separ from the payrol depart should be assign to distribut
payrol check
16 ar new employe requir to furnish proof of immigr statu
compani must requir new employe to furnish proof of immigr statu
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4856 2011 fraud examin manual
17 doe ani chang to an employe salari requir more than on level of manag approv
chang to an employe salari should requir more than on level of
manag approv
18 doe overtim have to be author by a supervisor
overtim should be author by a supervisor
19 do supervisor verifi and sign timecard for each pai period
supervisor should verifi and sign time timecard for each pai period
20 ar commiss expens compar to sale figur to verifi amount
compar commiss expens to sale figur to verifi amount is an import control
procedur that can help to detect payrol fraud
21 doe someon separ from the sale depart calcul sale commiss
someon separ from the sale depart should calcul sale commiss
modul 10 expens scheme
mischaracter expens scheme occur when an employe request reimburs for
a person expens claim the expens to be busi relat
overst expens scheme occur when an employe overst the cost of actual
expens and seek reimburs
fictiti expens scheme occur when an employe invent a purchas and seek
reimburs for it
multipl reimburs scheme occur when an employe submit a singl expens for
reimburs multipl time
1 ar the expens account review and analyz period us histor comparison or comparison
with budget amount
compani should period review and analyz expens account us histor
comparison or comparison with budget amount
2 do employe expens reimburs claim receiv a detail review befor payment is made
employe expens reimburs claim should receiv a detail review befor payment
is made
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4857
3 ar employe requir to submit detail expens report
employe should be requir to submit detail expens report contain receipt
explan amount etc
4 is a limit place on expens such as hotel meal and entertain
compani should place a spend limit on expens such as hotel meal
and entertain
5 ar receipt requir for all expens to be reimburs
compani should requir receipt for all expens to be reimburs
6 ar supervisor requir to review and approv all expens reimburs request
all expens reimburs request should be review and approv by supervisor
7 is there a random authent of expens receipt and expens claim
a polici requir the period review of expens report coupl with examin the
appropri detail can help deter employe from submit person expens for
reimburs
modul 11 theft of inventori and equip
fake sale scheme occur when an accomplic of an employe bui merchandis but
the employe doe not ring up the sale and the accomplic take the merchandis
without make ani payment
purchas scheme occur when an employe with purchas author us that
author to purchas and misappropri merchandis
receiv scheme occur when an employe misappropri asset purchas by the
compani as thei ar receiv at the compani
fals shipment scheme occur when an employe creat fals sale document and fals
ship document to make it appear that miss inventori wa not actual stolen but
rather sold
misus of compani asset occur when an employe borrow compani asset for
person us without author
larceni scheme occur when an employe take inventori from the compani premis
without attempt to conceal the theft in the account record
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4858 2011 fraud examin manual
1 ha a recent inventori of compani equip list ing serial number and descript been complet
compani should inventori compani equip and maintain a list of the equip serial
number and descript
2 doe the compani assign an individu from outsid of the depart to conduct the
depart inventori
an employe who doesnt work in the depart should be assign to conduct the
depart inventori
3 ar unexplain entri to the inventori record examin for sourc document
unexplain entri to the inventori record should be examin for sourc document
4 is the compani experienc sizeabl invent ori increas without compar sale increas
sizeabl inventori increas without compar sale increas mai indic an inventori
overstat fraud scheme and should be investig
5 ar analyt review of begin inventori sale cost of good sold and end inventori conduct
period to look for unexplain differ
analyt review of begin inventori sale cost of good sold and end inventori
should be conduct period ani discrep should be investig
6 is there an unusu volum of inventori adjust writeoff or dispos
ani unusu volum of inventori adjust writeoff or dispos should
be investig
7 doe the organ have writt n inventori instruct and order
organ should document and impl ement inventori instruct and order
8 doe someon independ of the purchas receiv ing and wareh function physic count
the inventori
physic inventori count should be conduct by someon independ of the purchas
receiv and wareh function
9 ar prenumb inventori tag us
prenumb inventori tag should be us
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4859
10 ar the inventori tag control and account for
inventori tag should be control and account for
11 do the inventori procedur prevent doubl count
organ should implement inventori procedur that prevent doubl count
12 ar inventori count subject to independ recount
inventori count should be subject to independ recount
13 is the inventori reason identifi for prop er classif in the account system such as
descript condit or stage of complet
the inventori should be reason identifi for proper classif in the account
system such as descript condit or stage of complet
14 ar differ between physic count and invent ori record investig be fore inventori record
ar adjust
differ between physic count and inventori record should be investig befor
inventori record ar adjust
15 is scrap inventori and is scrap dispos account for
scrap should be inventori and scrap dispos should be account for
16 ar the follow duti segreg requisit of inventori receiv of in ventori disburs of
inventori write off of inventori as scrap and receipt of proce from the sale of scrap inventori
the follow duti should be segreg requisit of inventori receiv of inventori
disburs of inventori write off of inventori as scrap and receipt of proce from
the sale of scrap inventori
17 is a receiv report prepar for all purchas good
a receiv report should be prepar for all purchas good
18 ar copi of receiv report sent directli to the purchas and ac count depart
copi of receiv report should be sent directli to the purchas and
account depart
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4860 2011 fraud examin manual
19 is the receiv depart provid with a copi of the purchas order on all item to be receiv
the receiv depart should be provid with a copi of the purchas order on all item
to be receiv
20 ar partial shipment annot on purchas order or attach as separ sheet
partial shipment should be annot on purchas order or attach as separ sheet
21 ar overag shortag and damag report complet and sent to the purchas and
account depart
overag shortag and damag report should be complet and sent to the purchas and
account depart
22 ar quantiti of materi receiv count and compar to purchas order
quantiti of materi receiv should be count and compar to purchas order
23 is there a written polici allow manag to inspect all desk file cabinet and other contain on
compani properti
compani should document and implement a written polici allow manag to
inspect all desk file cabinet and other contain on compani properti
24 is there an equip remov au thoriz polici requir written manag approv to remov ani
compani equip from the compani premis
compani should document and implement an equip remov author polici
requir written manag approv to remov ani compani equip from the
compani premis
25 is there a polici requir the in spection of packag box and other contain befor thei leav the
compani premis
compani should document and implement a polici requir the inspect of packag
box and other contain befor thei leav the compani premis
26 is the remov of trash and trash receptacl period monitor
compani should period monitor the remov of trash and trash receptacl
27 ar the ship and receiv area adequ supervis to prevent theft
ship and receiv area should be adequ supervis to prevent theft
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4861
28 ar high valu item store in secur or continu monitor area
high valu item should be store in secur or continu monitor area
29 is the ship function separ from the purchas and inventori function
the ship function should be separ from the purchas and inventori function
30 ar ship document prenumb and account for
ship document should be prenumb and account for
31 ar ship order match with sale order and contract
ship order should be match with sale order and contract to prevent inventori and
vendor scheme
32 ar shipment of good requir to have author sale order and contract prior to ship
shipment of good should be requir to have author sale order and sale contract
prior to ship
33 ar ship document forward directli to the a ccount depart for record inventori reduct
and cost of sale
ship document should be forward directli to the account depart for
record inventori reduct and cost of sale
modul 12 theft of proprietari inform
theft of proprietari inform involv theft or disclosur of confidenti or trade
secret inform for financi gain
1 ar there polici and procedur address the identif classif and handl of
proprietari inform
the compani should implement polici and procedur address the identif
classif and handl of proprietari inform
2 ar employe who have access to proprietari inform requir to sign nondisclosur agreement
employe who have access to proprietari inform should be requir to sign
nondisclosur agreement
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4862 2011 fraud examin manual
3 ar employe who have access to proprietari inform requir to sign no ncompet agreement to
prevent them from work for competitor with in a state period of time and locat
employe who have access to proprietari inform should be requir to sign
noncompet agreement to prevent them from work for competitor within a state
period of time
4 ar employe provid with train to make them awar of proprietari inform their respons
to protect the inform and the compani polici and procedur relat to proprietari inform
employe should be provid with train to make them awar of proprietari inform
their respons to protect proprietari inform and compani polici and procedur
relat to proprietari inform
5 is there an establish procedur to identifi what inform should be classifi as sensit and for
how long
compani should implement a procedur to identifi what inform should be classifi
as sensit and for how long
6 ar sensit document properli cl assifi and mark as confidenti
sensit document should be properli classifi and mark as confidenti
7 is sensit inform properli secur when not be us
sensit inform should be properli secur when not be us
8 is access to sensit inform ph ysical control and account for
access to sensit inform should be physic control and account for
9 is sensit inform promptli destroi when it is no longer need
organ should promptli destroi sensit inform when it is no longer need
10 ar compromis to the secur of proprietari inform promptli investig to determin the sourc
compani should promptli investig ani compromis to the secur of proprietari
inform to determin the sourc
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4863
11 ar employe requir to us screensav and or server password to protect unattend
comput system
employe should be requir to us screensav andor server password to protect
unattend comput system
12 ar confidenti document shred when discard
confidenti document should be shred when discard
modul 13 corrupt
briberi scheme involv the offer give receiv or solicit of a thing of valu to
influenc a busi decis
kickback scheme occur when vendor make undisclos payment to employe of
purchas compani in order to enlist the employe in overbil scheme
bidrig scheme occur when an employe fraudul assist a vendor in win a
contract through the competit bid process
econom extort scheme occur when an employe demand payment from a vendor
for decis made in the vendor favor ref usal to pai the extort result in harm to
the vendor
illeg gratuiti scheme involv give or receiv someth of valu to reward a
busi decis
1 is there a compani polici that address the receipt of gift discount and servic offer by a supplier or
custom
organ should implement a polici that address the receipt of gift discount and
servic offer by a supplier or custom
2 is there an establish bid polici
organ should establish a bid polici
3 ar purchas review to detect out of line cost
organ should review purchas for cost that ar out of line
4 ar purchas review to identifi favor vendor
purchas should be review to identifi favor vendor
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4864 2011 fraud examin manual
5 ar purchas review to identifi excess amount
purchas should be review and ani excess amount should be investig
6 ar prebid solicit document review for ani restrict on competit
prebid solicit document should be review for ani restrict on competit
7 ar bid solicit packag number and control
bid solicit packag should be number and control
8 is commun between bidder and purchas employe restrict
compani should restrict and monitor commun between bidder and
purchas employe
9 ar the bid receiv kept confidenti
all bid receiv should be kept confidenti
10 ar bidder qualif verifi
compani should verifi bidder qualif
11 ar contract award base on predetermin criteria
compani should establish predetermin criteria upon which to award contract
12 ar purchas account assign rotat
period rotat of purchas account assign can be an effect corrupt control
13 ar vendor survei period regard compani purchas practic
organ should period survei vendor regard compani purchas practic
modul 14 conflict of interest
purchas scheme involv the overbil of a compani for good or servic by a
vendor in which an employe ha an undisclos ownership or financi interest
sale scheme involv the undersel of compani good by an employe to a compani
in which the employe maintain a hidden interest
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4865
1 ar there period comparison of vendor inform with employe inform such as address and
telephon number
organ should conduct period comparison of vendor inform with employe
inform such as address and telephon number
2 ar vendor who emploi former compani employe under in creas scrutini
vendor who emploi former compani employe should be under increas scrutini for
potenti conflict of interest
3 doe the organ have a report procedur for personnel to report their concern about vendor
receiv favor treatment
organ should provid personnel with a confidenti system for report concern
about vendor receiv favor treatment
4 ar employe requir to complet an annual disclo sure document that includ busi ownership
incom and invest inform
employe should be requir to provid annual disclosur that list busi ownership
incom and invest inform
5 doe the organ requir vendor to sign an agreement allow vendor audit
organ should requir vendor to sign an agreement allow vendor audit
6 ar vendor audit conduct by someon independ of the purchas sale bill and
receiv depart
vendor audit should be conduct by someon independ of the purchas sale bill
and receiv depart
modul 15 fraudul financi report
fictiti revenu scheme involv record fictiti revenu from the sale of good
or servic
improp time scheme involv record revenu or expens in improp
account period
underst liabil scheme involv conceal or underst liabil and
expens capit expens or expens capit expens
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4866 2011 fraud examin manual
improp disclosur scheme involv the improp disclosur of materi inform
such as conting liabil signific event manag fraud relatedparti
transact or account chang
improp asset valuat scheme involv the improp valuat of inventori account
receiv fix asset intang or other asset
1 ar the organ account record in proper form
organ should maintain account record in proper form
2 doe the organ emploi an adequ number of account employe
the account depart should be adequ staf to allow for proper segreg
of duti
3 doe the organ have an effect intern audit staff
an effect intern audit staff can focu on highrisk area for fraud and can identifi new
vulner measur the effect of intern control and signal that fraud
prevent is a high prioriti for the compani
4 ar proper intern control establish and maintain
organ should establish and enforc an intern control system
5 doe the organ embrac the concept of intern control
embrac the concept of intern control requir that senior manag and employe
understand why intern control ar import and what adopt such measur mean
to them
6 ar senior manag visibl in their support of intern control
senior manag should be visibl in their support of intern control
7 ar the organ financi goal and object realist
unrealist financi goal and object can result in manag and employe commit
fraudul act in order to meet them
8 doe the organ consist achiev it financi goal and object
ani failur to meet financi goal and object should be research
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4867
9 is the organ report financi perform stabl or increas
manag should investig ani unstabl or decreas financi perform
10 doe the compani have stabl relationship with it bank
the compani should strive to have stabl relationship with it bank
11 ar there unrealist chang or increas in financi statement account balanc
manag should determin the reason for ani unrealist chang or increas in
financi statement account balanc
12 ar the account balanc realist given the natur ag and size of the compani
manag should investig ani unrealist account balanc
13 do actual physic asset exist in the amount and valu indic on the financi statement
an inventori of physic asset should be conduct to verifi that the physic asset exist in
the amount and valu indic on the financi statement
14 have there been signific chang in the natur of the or ganiz revenu or expens
the organ should determin the reason for ani signific chang in the natur of
it revenu or expens
15 do on or a few larg transact account for a si gnific portion of ani a ccount balanc or amount
situat in which on or a few larg transact account for a signific portion of ani
account balanc or amount should be research
16 ar there signific transact that occur near the end of a period that posit impact result of
oper especi transact that ar unusu or highli complex
ani signific transact that occur near the end of a period and posit impact result
of oper should be scrutin for legitimaci especi if the transact ar unusu
or highli complex
17 ar financi result fairli consist across period
the compani should be abl to explain ani varianc in financi result across period
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4868 2011 fraud examin manual
18 is there an inabl to gener cash flow from oper while experienc earn growth
ani inabl to gener cash flow from oper while experienc earn growth
should be investig
19 is there signific pressur to obtain addit capit necessari to stai competit
insuffici work capit can place undu pressur on manag to manipul
financi result
20 ar report asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that involv unusu
subject judgment or uncertainti
signific estim especi those that involv unusu subject judgment or
uncertainti should be review for reason
21 ar report asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that ar subject to
potenti signific chang in the near term in a manner that mai have a financi disrupt effect on the
organ
signific estim that ar subject to potenti signific chang in the near term
in a manner that mai have a financi disrupt effect on the organ should
be scrutin
22 is the compani experienc unusu ly rapid growth or profit especi when compar with that
of other compani in the same industri
unusu rapid growth or profit especi when compar with that of other
compani in the same industri is a red flag of fraud and should be investig
23 is the organ highli vulner abl to chang in interest rate
the organ should increas review of it financi report dure period of
high vulner
24 ar there unrealist aggress sa le or profit incent program
unrealist aggress sale or profit incent program can place undu pressur
on employe and result in employe commit fraudul act in order to meet them
25 is there a threat of immin bankruptci foreclosur or hostil takeov
a threat of immin bankruptci foreclosur or hostil takeov place a compani at
increas risk for fraudul activ to occur
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4869
26 is there a high possibl of ad vers consequ on signific pend ing transact such as busi
combin or contract award if poor financi result ar report
a high possibl of advers consequ on signific pend transact such as
busi combin or contract award if poor financi result ar report can place
extrem pressur on manag to manipul result
27 is there a poor or deterior financi posit when manag ha person guarante signific
debt of the entiti
the exist of a poor or deterior financi posit when manag ha person
guarante signific debt of the entiti can result in manag commit fraudul
act in order to protect itself from financi harm
28 doe the firm continu oper on a crisi basi or without a care budget ing and plan process
a care budget and plan process can help a firm to monitor progress toward it
goal control spend and predict cash flow and profit
29 doe the organ have difficulti collect receiv or have other cash flow problem
manag should determin the reason for ani collect or cash flow problem
30 is the organ depend on on or two kei product or servic especi product or servic that
can becom quickli obsolet
depend on on or two kei product can place tremend pressur on a compani
expos it to increas risk of fraud
31 do the footnot contain inform about complex issu
ani complex issu should be explain in the footnot
32 ar there adequ disclosur in the financi and footnot
gener accept account principl concern disclosur requir that financi
statement 1 includ all relev and materi inform in the financi or footnot and
2 not be mislead
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4901
ethic for fraud examin
in thi section we have discuss a number of behavior and ethic principl applic to
both organ and individu as a fraud examin the decis you make will be
extrem import to your client or compani as well as to the individu you mai be
call upon to investig therefor certifi fraud examin ar held to a veri high
ethic standard the follow materi is design to accomplish more than a mere
recit of rule of profession ethic for fraud examin it also contain discuss and
explan of mani featur of ethic in gener the first portion deal with principl of
moral philosophi these repres the high road in the studi of ethic for fraud
examin the latter portion deal more specif with rule of behavior in situat that
character fraud examin work the applic of the certifi fraud examin code
of profession ethic ar discuss
what is ethic
in a critic introduct to ethic philip wheelwright defin ethic as
that branch of philosophi which is the systemat studi of reflect choic of the standard
of right and wrong by which it is to be guid and of the good toward which it mai
ultim be direct
thi definit contain three kei element
ethic involv question requir reflect choic decis problem
ethic involv guid of right and wrong moral principl
ethic is concern with valu good inher in ethic decis
why doe an individu or a group need a code of ethic conduct while it ha been said
that a person should be upright and not be kept upright a code of conduct serv a us
purpos as a refer and a benchmark a code make explicit some of the criteria for
conduct particular to a profess in thi wai code of profession ethic ar abl to
provid some direct solut that might not be avail from gener ethic theori
furthermor an individu is better abl to know what the profess expect when a code
of ethic conduct is in place from the viewpoint of an organ profess a code is a
public declar of principl conduct and a mean of facilit enforc of
ethic for fraud examin fraud prevent and deterr
4902 2011 fraud examin manual
standard of conduct practic enforc and professionwid intern disciplin would
be much more difficult if member were not first put on notic of the standard
an ethic decis maker role
while on of the main purpos of ethic is to guid the action of individu decis
maker the role of decis maker doe not fulli describ a profession person entir
oblig each person act not onli as an individu but also as a member of a profess
and as a member of societi henc fraud examin also ar spectat observ the
decis of colleagu advisor counsel with cowork instructor teach student or
new employe on the job judg serv on disciplinari committe and critic
comment on the ethic decis of other all of these role ar import in the
practic of profession ethic
in consid gener ethic your primari goal is to arriv at a set of accept method
for make ethic decis to fulfil all your role consequ an understand of some
of the gener principl of ethic can serv as background in understand the ethic
decis face by cfe as well as the ethic guidelin provid in the certifi fraud
examin code of profession ethic
ethic decis
on of the kei element in ethic is reflect choic ethic problem almost alwai involv
project yourself in a futur in which you have to live with your decis profession
ethic decis usual turn on these question what written and unwritten rule govern
my behavior and what ar the possibl consequ of my choic
we could dispens with ani discuss of ethic theori and rule if we were will to
accept a simpl proposit let conscienc be your guid such a rule is appeal
becaus it call upon an individu own judgment which might be base on wisdom
insight adher to custom or an authorit code howev it might also be base on
capric immatur ignor stubborn or misunderstand
in a similar manner relianc on the opinion of other or on the weight of opinion of a
particular social group is not alwai enough anoth person or a group of peopl might
perpetu a custom or habit that is wrong think about the signboard that proclaim
wrong is wrong even if everybodi is do it to adher blindli to custom or group
habit is to abdic individu respons titu and keeton summar thi point
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4903
succinctli each person capabl of make moral decis is respons for make hi
own decis the ultim locu of moral respons is in the individu thu the
function of ethic principl and rule is not to provid a simpl and sure answer to all your
problem but to provid some guid for individu decis and action
moral ethic and legal
is it all right to lie to catch a crook consid the follow stori about a fraud examinati on
abel a fraud examin wa hire by megacorp inc to discov the method stockroom
employe were us to steal electron part from the inventori abel wa given a cover
ident known onli to the presid of me gacorp hi applic wa process through
the personnel depart in the normal mann r and he wa hire as a stockroom clerk
on the job abel preserv hi fals ident infiltr the gr oup respons for the theft
and produc suffici evid to have three peopl arrest and indict
while thi stori involv onli on type of fraud embezzl and on investig
method undercov work it can serv as a simpl exampl of the moral ethic and legal
issu face fraud examin these issu involv principl of moral philosophi rule of
ethic legal consider valu and abov all the problem of distinguish right
from wrong on execut upon take offic to ld the board of director that hi would be
an ethic administr sai it is veri simpl all it take is know the differ
between right and wrong but know that differ is often the hardest part
the high road
most public and mani privat discuss of ethic quickli becom philosoph reach
toward lofti principl and broad gener about desir behavior peopl easili cite
wellknown guid and believ the idea in them should never be violat such discuss
often take place in a vacuum apart from realworld situat peopl gener exhort
themselv and other to observ the highest principl of moral behavior
such considerationsth high road ar necessari if we desir to lift the discuss abov
the nittygritti fact of everydai problem howev the idealist natur of thi level of
discuss is often not suffici to help peopl cope with a problem immedi at hand
ethic for fraud examin fraud prevent and deterr
4904 2011 fraud examin manual
the high road is the realm of moral philosophi where philosoph principl guid the
process of think about problem and distinguish right from wrong such principl ar
necessari in the process of everydai life even though an individu might not know them in
all the twist and turn familiar to philosoph their fundament precept ar well
understood in our concept of common sens
philosophi ethic and law
moral philosophi exist at a global level permeat all facet of the problem of
distinguish right from wrong the field deal with human judgment base on standard
that identifi good and evil these word mean more than just right and wrong but thei convei
essenti the same idea there ar two aspect of moral philosophi that ar import for
fraud examin to consid the first is the human judgment process which deal with wai
of perform analys of ie think about problem the second is the standard or
valu such as honesti faith and uns lfishnessthat peopl can us to make moral
principl us
ethic can be distinguish from moral philosophi by it root in societi peopl ar usual
more comfort talk about ethic than moral philosophi becaus ethic seem practic
while moral philosophi seem intellectu and impract ethic gener refer to a
specif set a societi cultur nation profess or small group in thi context ethic
refer to behavior that conform to some societ norm or to a written code of ethic such
as the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic
when face with an ethicsrel problem it is appropri to begin the analysi of a
possibl action by ask is it legal such anali is is at the most practic level ethic is
somewhat less global and is connect to the set the law deal veri specif with
action that ar permit and action that ar prohibit with all due respect to the law it
is the lowest refer level for moral decis it happen though not frequent that a
law might permit an action that is prohibit by a profess code of ethic go on
step further a profess code of ethic might permit action that a moral philosoph
would abhor likewis law and code of eth ic might prohibit action that present no
problem in moral philosophi
for exampl the american institut of certifi public account had rule of ethic that
prohibit advertis with the except of broadbas institut advertis the
profess believ that profession digniti and object were enhanc by keep
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4905
practition out of thi aspect of the commerci world the us feder trade
commiss and the us depart of justic howev reach a differ conclus
thei decid that the prohibit against advertis were against the law bar restraint
of trade the govern forc the profess to elimin the rule against advertis
thi exampl illustr the triumph of on set of valu the govern belief that
competit through advertis would benefit consum over anoth set the profess
belief that profession digniti should be preserv
all three areasmor ethic and legalityar import for everydai decis it might
not be enough to know that a contempl action is legal or that it is permit or
prohibit by a group written code of ethic and while help it might also not be
enough to know that reason base on moral philosophi seem to identifi that action as
right or wrong the import thing to know ar the distinct between moral ethic
and legal ie between the philosophi the rule and the law onli with thi knowledg
can a fraud examin know where he stand when decid upon and justifi a cours
of action
thi materi observ on import limit it confin it consider of ethic for
fraud examin to matter of moral philosophi rule of ethic and gener valu it doe
not deal with detail matter of the law or with question about the legal or illeg of
action a fraud examin might take thi is not to sai that the law is unimport it is just
beyond the scope of thi part of the materi
mean and end
everyon know some sai like the end j ustifi the mean or fight fire with fire
fraud examin can be particularli influenc by thi idea becaus thei need to deal with
peopl who do not exercis moral reason follow ethic rule or keep within the law
these sai have the purpos of justifi action that could otherwis be consid
immor uneth or illeg after all the american colonist openli defi british law
foment a rebellion and fought a war we now regard them as hero
is it all right to lie no except
when a moral rule appear to be inflex peopl can alwai think of situat in which
thei want to justifi break the rule for exampl some peopl would easili conclud that
it is all right to lie to catch a crook after all if the moral rule were follow by everyon
ethic for fraud examin fraud prevent and deterr
4906 2011 fraud examin manual
then there would be no crook thu the fraudster dishonesti made it necessari for the
fraud examin to lie in return the end catch crook and uphold justic justifi the
mean ly
the problem with meansend analys is that thei ar often superfici end with the
need justif but fail to consid other aspect and consequ of the action
the justif of the undercov role of the fraud examin must be carefulli consid
in the previou exampl the presid of mega corp must think about the moral ethic and
legal climat of the compani onc it becom known that an undercov agent wa
emploi how mani more ar around what happen to trust
some conclud remark
thi brief discuss of ethic provid some guid to the wai mani peopl approach
difficult decis problem the greatest task is to take gener principl of moral
philosophi and appli them to a real decis their applic through code of
profession ethic is where the challeng li
code of profession ethic and statutori law have two thing in common thei ar both
base more or less on pervas moral principl and valu and thei both repres the
aspect of behavior that a committe or legislatur ha chosen to put in write in both
profession ethic and law not everi relev guid for behavior ha been written
therefor profession peopl includ fraud examin might find themselv on their
own when thei have to decid a proper cours of conduct in a particular fact situat
two type of ethic oper in the profession environ gener ethic the spirit
and profession ethic the rule in their book the philosophi of audit robert k mautz
and hussein a sharaf contribut the follow thought to the associ of gener
ethic and profession ethic
the theori of ethic ha been a subject of interest to philosoph sinc the begin of
record thought becaus philosoph ar concern with the good of all mankind their
discuss have been concern with that we might call gener ethic rather than the ethic
of small group such as the member of a given profess we cannot look therefor to
their philosoph theori for direct solut to our special problem nevertheless their
work with gener ethic is of primari impo rtanc to the developm ent of an appropri
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4907
concept in ani special field ethic behavior in audit or in ani other activ is no more
than a special applic of the gener notion of ethic conduct devis by philosoph for
peopl gener ethic conduct in audit draw it justif and basic natur from
the gener theori of ethic thu we ar well advis to give some attent to the idea
and reason of some of the great philosoph on thi subject
we have attend to the idea and reason of philosoph and now we turn to the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic and it particular rule
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41001
acf code of profession ethic
i a certifi fraud examin shall at all time demonstr a commit to
profession and dilig in the perform of hi or her duti
ii a certifi fraud examin shall not engag in ani illeg or uneth
conduct or ani activ which would constitut a conflict of interest
iii a certifi fraud examin shall at all time exhibit the highest level of
integr in the perform of all profession assign and will accept
onli assign for which there is reason expect that the
assign will be complet with profession compet
iv a certifi fraud examin will compli with law order of the court and
will testifi to matter truthfulli and without bia or prejudic
v a certifi fraud examin in conduct examin will obtain evid
or other document to establish a reason basi for ani opinion
render no opinion shall be express regard the guilt or innoc of
ani person or parti
vi a certifi fraud examin sha ll not reveal ani confidenti inform
obtain dure a profession engag without proper author
vii a certifi fraud examin shall reveal all materi matter discov dure
the cours of an examin which if omit could caus a distort of the
fact
viii a certifi fraud examin shall continu strive to increas the
compet and effect of profession servic perform under hi or
her direct
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41002 2011 fraud examin manual
the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic wa creat by the board of
regent of the associ of certifi fraud examin and adopt januari 1 1989
commit to profession and dilig
a certifi fraud examin shall at all time demonstr commit to
profession and dilig in the perform of hi or her duti
profession
profession is a qualiti desir by most peopl but it is obtain at a price
profession exist on two basic level 1 for the profession group as a whole and 2
for the individu certifi fraud examin consid first the profession group as
a whole
peopl frequent refer to profess profession men and women and profession
activ without defin the mean of the concept profession some fraud
examin sai i might not know how to defin it but i know it when i see it the us
suprem court onc said the same thing about pornographi the five princip
characterist that help differenti profession field of endeavor from other
vocat ar
a bodi of special knowledg acquir by formal educ
admiss to the profess govern by standard of profession qualif
recognit and accept by societi of profession statu and concurr recognit
and accept of social respons by the profession
standard of conduct govern relationship of the profession with client colleagu
and the public
a nation organ devot to the advanc of the oblig of the
profession group
special knowledg and formal educ
a fraud examin work involv special knowledg deriv from sever other field
such as account audit criminolog investig and law a profess might not
have a bodi of knowledg truli uniqu unto itself but it should have on that ha a
mystiqu requir studi comprehens and practic and be over and abov the
everydai abil other peopl might possess
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41003
continu profession educ is becom a hallmark of profession in recent
year ongo effort to increas compet and effect have becom requir by
some profess the american institut of certifi public account ha led the wai
with the requir for 120 hour of extra train everi three year to maintain and
increas profession compet a major of the state board of account now
requir continu educ as a prerequisit for renew cpa licens the associ
of certifi fraud examin requir 20 hour of continu profession educ everi
12month period half of which must be directli relat to fraud detect or deterr
profession admiss standard
the most highli esteem profess and some occup that ar mere regul
govern admiss to their rank by qualif contain in state law if legal recognit
is consid a requisit of a profess then the number of profess is quit larg
rang from doctor of medicin to barber some profess such as certifi intern
auditor or certifi fraud examin ar not regul by state or feder statut mani
group have the statu of profess without the benefit of licens law and the fraud
examin profess is on of these
certif examin ar offer in mani profess such as law medicin real
estat insur financ account manag public account and intern audit
the uniform cfe examin and certif is part of profession recognit for
fraud examin
experi is requir for mani but not all profession licens and certif
experi of on or two year is requir in most state for the cpa certif experi
is requir to obtain the certifi intern auditor design design as a certifi
fraud examin requir at least two year of experi in combin with other
qualif
social recognit a reciproc relationship
no group of practition can becom a profess mere by declar itself to be on
societi must acknowledg the group as a profession bodi at present fraud examin ar
at the stage of becom a selfdeclar profess histor other profess had the
same start point modern medicin overcam it root in magic account rose from
the level of bookkeep intern auditor advanc social goal by present a respons
front to congress and other public bodi the list goe on
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41004 2011 fraud examin manual
social recognit howev is not necessarili perman societi will not continu to
honor as profession ani group that fail to serv a broadbas social and public interest
thu the other side to the coin of recognit is certifi fraud examin must
reciproc and accept the social respons inher in a profession statu that serv
the public interest
standard of conduct
on wai to achiev the social recognit that goe with profession is to adher to the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic other profess have such code
thei ar the written version of moral philosophi and valu especi relev to the
group fraud examin and other profession must observ their code with an awar
of the societi around them care must be taken that rule ar not creat and follow in a
selfserv manner inim to behavior expect by the public
possess and follow a set of behavior rule is on thing possess and follow a set
that meet public expect is anoth other profess law architectur and
account to name three have found themselv under attack from the us feder trade
commiss and the us depart of justic when their rule were perceiv to have
introduc unwarr restraint of trade while the certifi fraud examin code of
profession ethic might not seem to contain such rule thei might come under attack in
some futur differ set certifi fraud examin must be prepar to experi
chang when appropri chang is necessari
individu fraud examin
when the focu of profession is turn to the individu certifi fraud examin it
featur for the group as a whole should not be forgotten the individu member is
presum to possess a bodi of knowledg on hi admiss to the group and attain of
the certifi fraud examin certif the individu is expect to adher to the code of
ethic and maintain membership in the nation organ along with these featur the
individu certifi fraud examin exhibit profession by continu strive to
honor the recognit grant by the public in daytodai life thi is accomplish by
exercis dilig in perform certifi fraud examin work
dilig
the dilig in perform hi or her duti phrase in the rule refer to sever activ
that collect defin highqual fraud examin work thei includ plan
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41005
assign and supervis assist and colleagu avoid conflict of interest
perform with compet obtain suffici evid to establish a basi for opinion
maintain confidenti relat and avoid distort of fact these activ ar the
subject of other rule in the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic and
thei will be discuss in more detail later
legal and ethic conduct and conflict of interest
a certifi fraud examin shall not engag in ani illeg or uneth conduct or ani
activ which would constitut a conflict of interest
thi rule is a composit of three prohibit illeg conduct uneth conduct and conflict
of interest
illeg conduct
the prohibit of illeg conduct seem straightforward some activ might be obvious
illeg but the legal statu of other might not be so clear a fraud examin is alwai well
advis to consult an attornei when question situat aris at the same time
howev it might be difficult to know ahead of time whether such a consult is
necessari consid the follow legalrel problem but rememb that thi chapter on
ethic is not intend to be your primari guid to legal matter
libel and slander
libel and slander can caus person injuri and subject a fraud examin to a lawsuit for
damag libel is a written defam of so meon els charact slander is a spoken
defam the content of a libel or slander messag must
contain word that injur anoth person charact or reput or hold him up
to ridicul
be commun oral or in write to other peopl
caus an actual damag to the person who is the subject of the commun
the risk involv in libel and slander ar reason for have the rule in the certifi fraud
examin code that prohibit express of opinion on the guilt or innoc of peopl
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41006 2011 fraud examin manual
fals imprison
fals imprison can mean more than put a person behind bar court have found
mani mean of detain to be fals imprison includ lock an employe in a
store remov a distributor from a car and detain a wit by forc even though
drastic action might be essenti a fraud examin must accomplish hi task legal
compound a feloni
the crimin act of compound a feloni can result from particip in a trade for
restitut for agre to forgo prosecut while plea bargain might be accept under
the supervis of a court certifi fraud examin should be veri care and should
obtain legal advic when negoti privat deal
some rule for profession insert the word knowingli in relat to illeg activ
sai on should not knowingli be a parti to an illeg activ the certifi fraud
examin code doe not includ thi wai out certifi fraud examin ar gener not
entitl to claim ignor of the law thei ar expect to know a consider amount
of law in connect with investig and thei ar expect to know when to consult
a lawyer
uneth conduct
the prohibit of uneth conduct is complic these materi have present an
arrai of issu in moral philosophi and ethic think intertwin consider of
principl and valu thi latter part is set forth in the certifi fraud examin code of
profession ethic legitim question ar e what manner of uneth conduct is
meant by thi rule doe it refer to gener matter of moral philosophi and ethic or is it
applic limit onli to the rule in thi code
a narrow focu on fraud examin profession would center attent onli on the
rule in the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic a broader socialrespons
focu would go beyond the code to the interact of the fraud examin
with other peopl affect by hi choic the broader focu is more consist with the
concept of profession becaus the code itself is a limit set of rule a fraud
examin must take person respons for decis and be awar that other
profession ar often critic for adher too rigidli to their code lawyer face harsh
critic when thei seem to hide knowledg of crimin act in their privileg
commun doctor ar often critic for the thing thei tell their patient about
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41007
termin ill profess ar critic for have special rule that seem to permit
their member to act contrari to social expect
conflict of interest and independ consider
the term conflict of interest in the rule beg for definit try to enumer the parti
whose interest might conflict the certifi fraud examin the certifi fraud
examin client for exampl client a mai conflict with client b or with client c the
certifi fraud examin employ the public innoc bystand and law
enforc agenc ar the first to come to mind these parti ar involv in almost
everi investig the line that connect these with each other and with the fraud
examin could look like a spaghetti bowl of multipl relationship decid
whether a conflict or a commun of interest exist depend on the fact of each
particular situat
nevertheless some conflict to avoid ar clear enough a certifi fraud examin
emploi fulltim by a compani should not engag in other job that creat a hardship or
loss to the employ a fraud examin should not be a doubl agent emploi by on
compani but retain by anoth compani or person to infiltr the employ and
transmit insid inform unless of cours the emploi compani agre to the
arrang in order to apprehend other parti emploi by the compani a certifi
fraud examin should not accept engag from both side to a controversyjust
like lawyer ar prohibit from repres both parti in a transact lawsuit or trial
conflict of interest and independ ar relat the american institut of certifi
public account aicpa includ independ and avoid of conflict of interest
in it code of profession conduct some particular from the aicpa mai be relev in
part for the certifi fraud examin consid the follow from the aicpa code of
profession conduct
independ will be consid to be im pair for audit engag if an aicpa
member had ani of the follow transa ction interest or relationship
ani direct or materi indirect financ ial interest in the enterpris under audit
ani joint close held busi invest with the enterpris under audit or with ani
offic director or princip stockhold thereof that wa materi in relat to the
member net worth to the net worth of the member firm
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41008 2011 fraud examin manual
ani loan to or from the enterpris under audit or ani offic director or princip
stockhold of the enterpris except immateri loan home mortgag and loan
secur by properti
ani managerialtyp connect with the enterpris under audit such as a promot
underwrit or vote truste director or offic or in ani capac equival to that of
a member of manag or of an employe
these rule for auditor exist specif to convei to the public a percept of
independ independ and conflict avoid ar enhanc by refrain from have
financi and manageri interest in client or in joint cooper with client manag
and director after all thei might be a suspect in an investig when a certifi fraud
examin work as an employe of a compani the prohibit about employ ar not
relev becaus the employeremploye relationship is known to the employ who is the
client and recipi of ani report in such case independ and conflict should be
consid in relat to all the other parti involv certainli a mental condit of
object and honesti then govern the relat between the certifi fraud examin and
hi employ if the cfe doe have a perceiv conflict it can usual be avoid through
adequ disclosur
integr and compet
a certifi fraud examin shall at all time exhibit the highest level of integr in the
performa nce of all profession assign and will accept onli assign for which there
is reason expect that the assign will be complet with profession
compet
thi rule contain two part the first deal with integr and the second with compet
compet here is relat to dilig as discuss previous in relat to the first rule in
the certifi fraud examin code
integr
if you were ask to name a desir person characterist integr is on that would
rank high on the scale along with honesti truth trustworthi and loyalti
outsid observ of certifi fraud examin activ will look for sign of integr as a
signal that trust is warrant howev integr hardli exist apart from other
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41009
characterist wellknown in moral philosophi and recogn in the certifi fraud
examin code of profession ethic
integr requir honesti truth trustworthi and confidenti it requir
subordin of desir for person gain to the interest of client employ and the
public it requir independ of mental attitud and avoid of conflict of interest
integr is all these thing wrap up into on word
in addit integr mean that a certifi fraud examin ought to have a well
develop sens of moral philosophyan abil to analyz situat where no rule of
the certifi fraud examin code ar specif applic and to be abl to distinguish
right from wrong it doe not mean howev that a certifi fraud examin must be
perfect in all technic matter nor doe it mean that certifi fraud examin and
other cannot have honest differ of opinion in the cours of a fraud examin
inadvert error mistak of judgment and other problem might caus conflict in such
case a certifi fraud examin can preserv integr either by admit error or by
convincingli justifi a differ of percept or opinion
profession compet
profession compet refer to how well certifi fraud examin do their job
determin of compet alwai depend on the specif fact and circumst of the
assign compet is best understood in the context of the prudent practition the idea
of a prudent profession practition is present in other social scienc theori for exampl
the econom man of econom theori and the reason man of law thi concept can
be summar for fraud examin as follow
a prudent practition is assum to have a knowledg of the philosophi and practic of
fraud examin to have the degre of tr ain experi and skill common to the
averag fraud examin to have the abil to recogn indic of fraud and to keep
abreast of develop in the perpetr and detect of fraud compet requir the
cfe to be acquaint with the compani activ function or program under
investig to review the method of control in oper to obtain suffici evid
pertin to the suspect fraud or illeg acti viti to be respons to unusu event and
unfamiliar circumst to persist until ani reason doubt about the evid have
been elimin and to exercis caution in instruct assist and review their work
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41010 2011 fraud examin manual
profession compet also demand attent to three kind of interfer that can
damag the independ and qualiti of a certifi fraud examin work fraud
examin who permit these condit to interfer with the assign demonstr less
than the desir level of profession compet the three type of interfer ar
program investig and report
program
fraud examin must remain free from interfer by manag who try to restrict specifi
or modifi the procedur thei need to perform includ ani attempt to assign personnel
or otherwis to control the examin work occasion client or employ manag try
to limit access to inform or to other personnel or to limit the amount of time avail
for the assign
investig
when appropri certifi fraud examin must have free access to book record
correspond and other evid thei must have the cooper of manag or other
employe without ani attempt to interpret or screen evid
report
client or employ manag should not be allow to overrul the certifi fraud
examin judgment on the appropri content of a report integr is destroi and
judgment is subordin when the certifi fraud examin is compel to alter a report
or to omit import inform or to misstat fact certifi fraud examin must not
let ani feel of misguid loyalti to the client employ or other sourc of conflict of
interest interfer with their oblig to report fulli and fairli
profession skeptic
fraud examin must alwai perform their work with an attitud of skeptic and begin
with the belief that someth is wrong or someon is commit a fraud depend of
cours on the natur of the assign and the preliminari inform avail thi
attitud mai make fraud examin extens and expens relax of thi initi
attitud of skeptic occur onli when the evid show no sign of fraudul activ
at no time is a certifi fraud examin entitl to assum a fraud problem doe not
exist profession skeptic can be dispel onli by evid as a result opinion or
attest about a fraudfre environ ar absolut prohibit for certifi
fraud examin
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41011
court order and testimoni
a certifi fraud examin will compli with law order of the court and will testifi
to matter truthfulli and wi thout bia or prejudic
the essenc of thi rule is truthtel the part about compli with law order of the
court is a direct not to flee from a summon or subpoena issu by a court even
though the rule specifi court it is reason to extend it to other agenc that have
the legal power to issu such order such as congression committe grand juri
special prosecutor and quasijudici administr agenc sometim legal counsel
might devis stratagem to avoid immedi servic of or attent to a summon fraud
examin can listen to such legal advic but thei also must weigh it against their own
knowledg of proper and legal behavior in some case a second legal opinion might be
advis the fraud examin could be on shaki ground with a defens of my lawyer
told me to hide when accus of obstruct of justic the lawyer might be in the cell
next door
truth testimoni often present strateg problem a fraud examin even on who is an
attornei should alwai be repres by counsel in a courtroom deposit or other
testimoni set the lawyer own sai is an attornei who repres himself ha a
fool for a client counsel is invalu for protect a fraud examin wit from
improp question
when testimoni is sought in examin or crossexamin a certifi fraud examin
should alwai respond to the question that ar askedno more and no less the attornei
conduct the examin ha the respons to ask the right question and the fraud
examin counsel ha the respons to object to mislead improp or irrelev
question the fraud examin counsel also ha the oblig to correct ani problem with
the crossexamin a help fraud exam iner who tri to embellish the answer with
addit materi might offend the court or do unintent harm to the case be made
for on parti or the other of cours a fraud examin mai invok hi own constitut
right upon the advic of counsel
answer should alwai be deliv without bia or prejudic it is the lawyer job to be
bias and prejudicedin the context of the ad versari judici systemestablish the case
for hi own client or for the govern the greatest danger for deliv bias or
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41012 2011 fraud examin manual
prejudici testimoni exist when the broad question is tell the court about your find
in your fraud examin thi is an open end invit to spill the bean if counsel
doe not object the certifi fraud examin is in the spotlight howev respond to
such an invit amount to deliv a report and the next rule in the certifi fraud
examin code of profession ethic can be us as a guid
reason evidenti basi for opinion
a fraud examin in conduct examin will obtain evid or other
document to establish a reason basi for ani opinion render ed no opinion shall
be express regard the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti
evidenti basi for opinion
the account profess ha similar rule some of which ar in it code of ethic some
in it technic practic standard here is a sampl of it provis
suffici compet evidenti matter is to be obtain through in spection observ
inquiri and confirm to afford a reason basi for an opinion regard the
financi statement under examin aicpa gener accept audit
standard
intern auditor should collect analyz int rpret and document inform to support
audit result the institut of intern auditor inc standard for the
practic of intern audit
a member shall obtain suffici relev data to afford a re ason basi for conclus
or recommend in relat to ani profession servic perform aicpa code of
profession conduct
a practition should obtain suffici relev data to afford a reason basi for
conclus or recommend aicpa manag advisori servic
standard
suffici evid shall be obta in to provid a reason ba si for the conclus that is
express in the report aicpa attest standard
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41013
suffici compet evid should be obta in to provid a reason basi for the
examin report aicpa standard for examin of prospect
financi inform
clearli the account profess consid suffici relev data evid a
compel standard of practic if not a matter of profession ethic evid can be
defin as all the inform that influenc a decis maker in reach decis that can
take the form of a report a set of recommend or similar product
evid might be quantit or qualit it mai be object or it mai have subject
qualiti it mai be absolut compel to a decis or it mai be onli mildli persuas
the certifi fraud examin task is to collect and evalu a suffici amount of
relev evid to afford a reason and logic basi for decis
auditor sometim sai thei gather evid to show that financi statement ar
present properli or that control procedur ar oper effect thei ar follow
a timetest method of investig that consist of three part
recogn the problem or issu subject to investig
gather suffici relev evid about it
analyz the evid and reach a conclus about the problem or issu
most auditor proposit ar express posit such as the cash balanc is
accur state howev an auditor will actu alli seek evid to show that the cash
balanc is not properli state imagin a cash balanc that is the sum of 110 separ bank
account an audit team will probabl sampl these account instead of look at all of
them the auditor look for evid that some of these cash balanc ar misstat if
thei fail to find ani misstat in a suffici larg sampl thei have not prove that
the total is proper but thei have no reason to believ that it is materi misstat
a liter report on thi kind of work would be call neg assur in which an auditor
would sai noth came to my attent to make me believ the cash balanc is materi
misstat thi statement of neg assur is an accur report of the audit process as
long as the attent consist of suffici re levant evid the report is us auditor
might not know without ani doubt that the balanc is proper but thei ar entitl to act as
though it is becaus thei have analyz suffici relev evid
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41014 2011 fraud examin manual
some fraud examin can take on thi same charact certifi fraud examin will be
assign to seek the truth about some busi record or to try to determin whether some
control procedur have fail the certifi fraud examin will seek evid of
misstat or failur and if none is found will report the posit result
in other case a client or employ might alreadi know that fraud theft shortag control
failur or other such event have occur the certifi fraud examin assign is
to then determin how the improp activ is be carri out by whom and to what
extent thi kind of fraud investig demand suffici evid exampl and suitabl
document to prove the howwhomext find in these case the neg
assur type of conclus is not appropria te certifi fraud examin must obtain the
evid to show the actual howwhomext conclus
guilt and innoc
the rule that prohibit opinion regard the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti is a
rule of prudenc the aicpa had a rule that prohibit cpa from attest that a
compani financi forecast would be achiev most cpa reaction to the rule wa why
would anyon want to do someth so dumb the gener answer wa that without the
explicit rule someon might give an achiev attest the actual event would fall
short and the cpa and all other cpa would suffer critic the rule wa a rule of
prudenc clearli it is prudent for a certifi fraud examin to refrain from usurp the
role of juri in a courtroom no good attornei would ask a certifi fraud examin for
such a conclus and no alert judg would allow such testimoni
in most situat the fraud examin job is to present the evid in hi report such
evid might constitut a convinc case point to the guilt or innoc of a person
but a clear line should be drawn between a report that essenti sai here is the evid
and the reason conclus that can be drawn from it and on that step over the line
and sai thi person is guilti of the crime of fraud
whether or not a person is guilti or innoc of a crime is not a decis for the fraud
examin to make the fraud examin mai draw reason conclus base on the
evid on of those conclus mai be that the suspect individu stole monei
misrepres a transact or conceal fund there is no prohibit in the code of
profession ethic on express such a conclus provid it ha a reason basi in
fact the prohibit involv the next step the suspect took the monei without
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41015
permiss and is therefor guilti of the crime of theft the individu mai have taken the
monei without permiss but whether or not the individu is guilti of a crime is a
determin for the judici system not the fraud examin
confidenti inform
a certifi fraud examin shall not reveal ani confidenti inform obtain dure
a profession engag without proper author
confidenti inform rule in profession code of ethic have the potenti to creat
enorm conflict conflict of principl and conflict of valu consid thi possibl
exchang between a lawyer and client
client
becaus you have taken my case on thi fraud charg i think you should know more about
my background
lawyer
go ahead
client
three year ago i particip in an arm robberi and wa never caught my gun went off
and kill the storekeep on of my buddi wa accus and convict he had all hi
appeal and is schedul to be execut tomorrow what can you do
lawyer
noth
noth mai be oversimplifi the situat but the point is that lawyer have a keen
awar of the privileg inform right of their client most lawyer will stoutli
defend their duti not to endang thi client even at the cost of a life most laymen ar
shock at thi particular on comment respond to a lawyer defend the posit
with a sharp retort do you mean you will sa crific an innoc man to a rule thi
incredul is well aim it bring into sharp focu two conflict valu the benefit of a
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41016 2011 fraud examin manual
longstand rule of legal practic and the sanctiti of life itself not all situat ar thi
dramat but certifi fraud examin can nevertheless get into similar conflict
confidenti inform for all practic purpos is ani and all inform a certifi fraud
examin might obtain in the cours of work whether it be from the compani or client for
whom an investig is perform or from ani other sourc consult dure the work
the rule of confidenti and privileg inform ar base on the belief that thei
facilit a free flow of inform between parti to the relationship the natur of a fraud
examin might make it necessari for certifi fraud examin to have access to
sensit inform client and employ would be less like to reveal such inform
or to provid access to sourc if thei could not trust a certifi fraud examin to keep
it confidenti
privileg inform is inform that cannot be demand even by a court common law
privileg exist for husbandwif and attorneycli relationship and physicianpati and
priestpenit relationship have obtain the privileg through state statut the attorneycli
privileg is statutori in some jurisdict certifi fraud examin do not have ani
such privileg in common law or by statut in all the recogn privileg relationship the
profession person is oblig to observ the privileg it can be waiv onli by the client
patient or penit these peopl ar said to be the holder of the privileg likewis a
certifi fraud examin client or employ is the holder of the confid the law
section of the fraud examin manual contain addit inform on thi subject
the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic doe not assum a privileg
statu for the fraud examin clientemploy relationship howev the examin client or
employ hold the kei known as proper author in the rule if the client or
employ consent to disclosur of inform otherwis consid confidenti then the
certifi fraud examin can transmit it to other sometim consent is given when the
consent doe not know exactli what inform will be convei even with consent
therefor a certifi fraud examin should be care to let the clientemploy know
what the consent cover the best rule of prudenc is to let the clientemploy make the
actual disclosur by transmit the certifi fraud examin report work paper or
other document then the client not onli know what is be disclos but is the on
make the disclosur
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41017
confidenti inform relationship do not die with the sever of the certifi fraud
examinercli or certifi fraud examineremploy relationship the confidenti rule
doe not permit disclosur after the assign is finish or there is no claus permit
disclosur after a certifi fraud examin is fire resign or retir from an emploi
organ examin who write kiss and te ll memoir about the inner secret of an
organ violat the confidenti rule in the most blatant manner
proper author
as just mention on form of proper author izat is the consent given by a certifi
fraud examin client or employ addit form of author ar possibl other
profess have except that void the confidenti or privileg rule lawyer can
reveal client confid if do so is necessari to prevent a futur crime cpa ar
not bound by confidenti when respond to a court subpoena or summon
when particip in qualiti control review or when initi complaint to their
disciplinari bodi
likewis certifi fraud examin ar not bound by confidenti when do so would
make them parti to a violat of the law care must be taken about remain silent when
silenc could be constru as obstruct justic or engag in a conspiraci the advic of
an attornei should be sought in such case
question mai aris over inform receiv from someon be investig suppos
an employe be question tell the certifi fraud examin someth in confid
concern hi role in a theft fraud examin must rememb that the confidenti
relationship run first to the client or employ and that thi promis of confidenti is
understood to exist without be spoken in the case of the employeeinform the fraud
examin doe not have an understood or unspoken promis of confidenti and is not
bound by the rule with respect to the inform if the fraud examin promis the
employeeinform confidenti the promis will probabl turn out to be a lie becaus
the examin ha also promis the clientemploy a report on all the relev evid a
certifi fraud examin should not promis confidenti or lenienc to an inform for
the purpos of extract testimoni a certifi fraud examin reput and
effect depend upon the integr of the certifi fraud examin word
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41018 2011 fraud examin manual
relat to conflict of interest
anoth aspect of the confidenti rule concern the possibl that a fraud examin
might us inform that is part of a conflict of interest with the clientemploy the
institut of intern auditor code of ethic c ontain languag that make thi relat veri
clear member and certifi intern auditor shall be prudent in the us of inform
acquir in the cours of their duti thei shall not us confidenti inform for ani
person gain nor in ani manner which would be contrari to law or detriment to the
welfar of their organ clearli us inform for person gain or us
inform to the detriment of the clientemploy is a close kin to ly and steal the
lie come from the certifi fraud examin break a pledg to maintain confidenti
and the steal come from harm the client or employ
when a certifi fraud examin face the potenti for person gain from confidenti
client inform a conflict of interest existsth certifi fraud examin desir for
wealth vs the clientemploy desir for and trust in confidenti servic on of the
worst kind of ethic breach would be to break the promis of confidenti for person
gain it is mere greed at work
public inform
it is tempt to consid confidenti inform to be nonpubl inform instead of
all inform on the ground that public inform is avail to everyon anywai
such an interpret is not appropri public inform might be hard to find andor
expens to obtain and analyz after all the client or compani paid the certifi fraud
examin a fee or salari to find and us public inform and a certifi fraud
examin disclosur of it would give other a free ride when inform is public let
other find it for themselv
some might argu that no confid is abus if a certifi fraud examin point other
to public inform that is publish and wide distribut such as financi statement in
annual report or stori in nation newspap such as the wall street journal the next step
is to consid public inform that is not publish such as real estat deed restrict
lien on properti and credit record defend a breach of confid on the ground it
wa public anywai is a weak excus mere revel of the sourc of inform impart
signal of import that ar not public and that mai guid other to inform a client or
employ believ is confidenti
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41019
blow the whistl
difficult problem aris over certifi fraud examin oblig to blow the whistl
about client or employ shadi or illeg practic the problem exist at two level the
first is the manageri level where the certifi fraud examin might be emploi or
engag by highlevel manag who turn out to be involv in fraudul practic a
certifi fraud examin should alwai arrang to have a pipelin to level of manag
abov the oper under investig thu for exampl evid of manageriallevel
complic can be report to the board of director and it audit committe without
trampl on the confidenti rule
the other level involv by the director or the highest level of manag or
ownershippres the hard problem in such case the onli higher level exist outsid
the organ such as the polic or similar agenc the us depart of justic
depart of defens contract offic and the like these and other agenc ar
concern with law or contract violat a board of director mai withhold evid of
crimin act price fix or contract overcharg from them
in gener examin ar not legal oblig to blow the whistl on client or employ
howev circumst might exist where thei ar moral and legal justifi in make
disclosur to appropri outsid parti such circumst includ those in which a client
or employ ha intention involv a certifi fraud examin in it illeg or uneth
conduct or when a client or employ ha distribut mislead report base on the
certifi fraud examin work the confidenti rule should not be view as a licens
or excus for inact where action mai be appropri to right a wrong act commit or
about to be commit by a client or employ a certifi fraud examin is under no
oblig to go to jail with wrongdoer when in doubt consult legal counsel
complet report of materi matter
a certifi fraud examin shall reveal all ma terial matter discov dure the cours
of an examin which if omit could caus a distort of the fact
in it simplic thi rule demand full and fair report of the find made in
investig the two word materi and distort ar kei concept
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41020 2011 fraud examin manual
evid and conclus ar materi if knowledg of them would affect client decis
base on a certifi fraud examin report materi is a userori concept if
matter omit from a report were known to the user and their own percept and
conclus would be differ in light of thi knowledg the omit inform is
materi certifi fraud examin ar place in the difficult posit of determin not
what thei themselv consid import and materi but rather what thei think user will
consid import and materi thei need to project a decisionmak process onto the
user instead of simpli be introspect
therefor it is veri import for certifi fraud examin to learn directli from client
and employ the type of inform thei consid import noth is gain by plai
a guess game a certifi fraud examin should obtain as good an understand as
possibl of the user interest the inform desir the level of detail need and other
aspect of the user need
the distort of fact in the rule is cite in refer to omiss distort is clearli
relat to the concept of materi and user decis it could likewis refer to the
matter includ in a report a subtl stretch of the fact to make them look as if thei
support a preconceiv conclus would be a distort that could caus user to undertak
inappropri action sometim the evid to support a definit conclus or
recommend is simpli not obtainableth evid is miss or depend upon futur
event for exampl the certifi fraud examin oblig is to avoid rush to
judgment when matter ar not clear the certifi fraud examin report should stress
the tent natur of the evid and withhold judgment to jump to conclus could
be consid a distort of fact
profession improv
a certifi fraud examin shall continu strive to increas the compet and
effect of profession servic pe rform under hi or her direct
thi rule contain both good advic and a specif direct for behavior it is an admonit
to progress toward greater expertis and thu better serv client and employ
the state of the fraud art chang continu year ago investig need to learn
how to cope with comput fraud todai certifi fraud examin ar face with a
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41021
grow arrai of wai and mean for perpetr fraud while mani of these might not be
new or might be variat on old theme it is still a challeng for certifi fraud
examin to know about all of them a continu learn process is necessari for
certifi fraud examin to increas their compet and effect in conduct
fraud examin
peopl who becom certifi fraud examin agre to complet 20 hour of continu
profession educ each year cours content is not specifi in detail but the
requir is that at least ten hour will be spent on technic subject that contribut
directli to fraud examin expertis certifi fraud examin who also ar cpa cia
or who hold other profession design can doublecount continu educ hour
obtain in connect with the other certif as long as thei meet the criteria for
fraud examin continu educ further detail about polici and procedur ar
avail from the associ
profession ethic for certifi fraud examin is not simpli a matter cover by a few
rule in a formal code of profession ethic concept of proper profession conduct
permeat all area of practic ethic ar the foundat of certifi fraud examin selfregulatori
effort
the principl approach to thought decis is import in fraud examin work in
all set such as privat practic industri govern and foreign employ and
other work arrang the ethic rule might appear to be restrict but thei ar
for the benefit of the public as well as for the disciplin us and protect of certifi
fraud examin
profession standard and practic
gener standard
independ and object
certifi fraud examin ar respons for maintain independ in attitud and
appear approach and conduct fraud examin in an object and unbias
manner and ensur that examin organ thei direct ar free from impair
to independ
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41022 2011 fraud examin manual
qualif
certifi fraud examin must possess the skill knowledg abil and appear
need to perform examin profici and effect certifi fraud examin who
ar respons for direct fraud examin must ensur thei ar perform by
personnel who collect possess the skill and knowledg necessari to complet
examin in accord with these standard certifi fraud examin must maintain
their qualif by fulfil continu educ requir and adher to the code
of ethic of the associ of certifi fraud examin
fraud examin
certifi fraud examin must conduct fraud examin us due profession care
with adequ plan and supervis to provid assur that the object ar achiev
within the framework of these standard evid is to be obtain in an effici
thorough and legal manner report of the result of fraud examin must be accur
object and thorough
confidenti
certifi fraud examin ar respons for ensur that thei and examin
organ thei direct exercis due care to prevent improp disclosur of confidenti or
privileg inform
specif standard
independ and object
attitud and appear
independ of attitud requir imparti and fair in conduct examin and
in reach result conclus and judgment certifi fraud examin must also be
sensit to the appear of independ so that conclus and judgment will be
accept as imparti by knowledg third parti certifi fraud examin who
becom awar of a situat or relationship that could be perceiv to impair independ
whether or not actual impair exist should inform manag immedi and take
step to elimin the perceiv impair includ withdraw from the examin
if necessari
object
to ensur object in perform examin certifi fraud examin must maintain
an independ mental attitud reach judgment on examin matter without undu
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41023
influenc from other and avoid be place in posit where thei would be unabl
to work in an object profession manner all possibl conflict of interest should
be disclos
organiz relationship
the certifi fraud examin report relationship should be such that the attitud and
appear of independ and object ar not jeopard organiz
independ is achiev when the certifi fraud examin function ha a mandat to
conduct independ examin throughout the organ or by a report
relationship high enough in the organ to ensur independ of action
qualif
skill knowledg abil and experi
certifi fraud examin cannot be expect to have an expert level of skill and knowledg
for everi circumst that might be encount in a fraud examin nevertheless
certifi fraud examin must have suffici skill and knowledg to recogn when
addit train or expert guidanc is requir it is the respons of a certifi fraud
examin to ensur that necessari skill knowledg abil and experi ar acquir or
avail befor go forward with a fraud examin
certifi fraud examin must be skill in obtain inform from record
document and peopl in analyz and evalu inform and draw sound
conclus in commun the result of fraud examin both oral and in write
and in serv as an expert wit when appropri
certifi fraud examin must be knowledg in investig techniqu applic
law and rule of evid fraud audit criminolog and ethic
continu educ
certifi fraud examin ar requir to fulfil continu educ requir
establish by the associ of certifi fraud examin addition certifi fraud
examin ar respons for secur other educ necessari for specif fraud
examin and relat field in which thei ar individu involv
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41024 2011 fraud examin manual
code of ethic
certifi fraud examin ar to adher to the code of profession ethic of the
associ of certifi fraud examin
fraud examin
due profession care
due profession care is defin as exercis the care and skill expect of a prudent
profession in similar circumst certifi fraud examin ar respons for ensur
that there is suffici predic for begin a fraud examin that said examin
ar conduct with dilig and thorough that all applic law and regul ar
observ that appropri method and techniqu ar us and that said examin ar
conduct in accord with these standard
plan and supervis
certifi fraud examin must plan and supervis fraud examin in a manner to
ensur that object ar achiev within the framework of these standard
evid
certifi fraud examin must collect evid whether exculpatori or incrimin that
support fraud examin result and will be admiss in subsequ proceed by
obtain and document evid in a manner to ensur that all necessari evid is
obtain and the chain of custodi is preserv
report
report of the result of a fraud examin whether written or verbal must address all
relev aspect of the examin and be accur object and understand
in render report to manag client or other certifi fraud examin shall not
express judgment on the guilt or innoc of ani person or person regardless of the
certifi fraud examin opinion of the preponder of evid certifi fraud
examin must exercis due profession care when express other opinion relat to an
examin such as the likelihood that a fraud ha or ha not occur and whether or not
intern control ar adequ
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41025
confidenti
certifi fraud examin dure fraud examin ar often privi to highli sensit and
confidenti inform about organ and individu certifi fraud examin
must exercis due care so as not to purposefulli or inadvert disclos such inform
except as necessari to conduct the examin as requir by law
predic standard
know when to initi an examin will larg be driven by the sourc of the
inform inform can be deriv from a number of sourc a complaint an
anonym tip by accid or through some proactiv effort such as an audit or survei
the valu of the inform ha to be weigh and the credit evalu
the purpos of a preliminari inquiri is to determin if there is some credit inform
that a fraudul act ha or will occur a red flag if so what is the examin respons
preliminari inquiri should be conduct expediti and not us as a mean of hold
in abey a decis of initi a formal fraud examin if a suffici number of
fraud indic exist a fraud examin should be initi
becaus busi activitiestransact ar suscept to fraudul act all examin
should be approach with profession skeptic that is assum neither dishonesti nor
unquest honesti of managementpersonnel
briberi
briberi is the offer give receiv or solicit of someth of valu for the purpos of
influenc the action of an individu in the discharg of hi duti it can also includ the
secur of advantag over competitor by secret and corrupt deal with employe or
agent of prospect purchas
ani indic through audit tip complaint or accident discoveri that such action
briberi ha occur mai have occur or could occur should be investig until the
certifi fraud examin ha establish that it ha occur or within reason
certainti that it did not occur
in the exampl given the fact that there is a major control weak is the onli predic
need to investig the situat further to determin whether there wa fraud
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41026 2011 fraud examin manual
conflict of interest
thi gener refer to a clash between public or corpor interest and the privat
pecuniari interest of an individu or individu it aris when an offic or employe
person or financi interest conflict or appear to conflict with hi offici duti
ani indic that there mai be a conflict of interest or that there appear to be a conflict
of interest should be reviewedinvestig thi is particularli import if the
agencycompani doe not requir employe to sign conflict of interest statement annual
and there is no activ prevent program such as a comput cross check of employe
phone number and address with those of contractor and vendor
embezzl
embezzl is gener the fraudul appropri of properti by on lawfulli entrust
with it possess it is the will take or convers to on own us anoth monei
or properti of which the wrongdoer acquir possess lawfulli by reason of some offic
employ or posit of trust
ani indic that embezzl ha occur or could be occur should be
investig if financi statement inventori or other document appear out of order no
matter how innocu or nonmateri a preliminari review should be made to determin if
it is accident or if a full scale investig should be conduct again the certifi fraud
examin should follow the situat until he is reason assur that there is no activ
fraud take place
fals financi statement
thi includ ani fals statement with regard to a corpor financi condit it mean
someth more than mere untru or erron inform it also impli that the
statement is decidedli untru and deceit and made with the intent to deceiv a person
to whom the fals statement is made or exhibit
ani indic that financi statement ar not accur requir further review to determin
the reason for their inaccuraci while there mai be legitim reason for the appar
inaccuraci it is incumb on the certifi fraud examin to review the situat enough
to determin those reason and document hi inquiri
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41027
fals statement
fals statement includ oral or written statement made knowingli fals or made recklessli
without honest belief in their truth and with the purpos to mislead or deceiv
ani appar inaccur statement should be review and the reason for the inaccuraci
document includ the individu respons for the statement and the rational
behind them if the inaccuraci seem more than minor discrep or the reason for the
discrep appear unjustifi a full review mai be necessari
theft
theft is the take of person properti belong to anoth from hi possess or from
the possess of some person hold the same for him without hi consent with the intent
to depriv the owner of the valu of the same and appropri it to the us and benefit of
the person take it
larceni
larceni includ obtain possess of properti by fraud trick or devic with a
preconceiv design or intent to appropri convert or steal
for larceni and theft if there is ani indic or pattern that properti is miss it is
import that the certifi fraud examin review the situat to determin if a full scale
investig is warrant
fraud prevent and deterr cfe code of profession standard
2011 fraud examin manual 41101
cfe code of profession standard
associ of certifi fraud examin
cfe code of profession standard
adopt by the board of regent februari 22 2001
at the board of regent meet in februari 2001 the board offici adopt the
follow cfe code of profession standard the standard expand on and provid
further guidanc for member on the ethic and profession duti list in the cfe code
of profession ethic
the standard were draft by the profession standard and practic committe the
committe will in the futur provid addit comment to supplement these standard
and will also develop practic scenario to assist member in the applic of the
standard
i preambl
the associ of certifi fraud examin is an associ of profession commit
to perform at the highest level of ethic conduct member of the associ pledg
themselv to act with integr and to perform their work in a profession manner
member have a profession respons to their client to the public interest and each
other a respons that requir subordin selfinterest to the interest of those
serv
these standard express basic principl of ethic behavior to guid member in the
fulfil of their duti and oblig by follow these standard all certifi fraud
examin shall be expect and all associ member shall strive to demonstr their
commit to excel in servic and profession conduct
ii applic of code
the cfe code of profession standard shall appli to all member and all associ
member of the associ of certifi fraud examin the us of the word member
or member in thi code shall refer to asso ciat member as well as regular member of
the associ of certifi fraud examin
cfe code of profession standard fraud prevent and deterr
41102 2011 fraud examin manual
iii standard of profession conduct
a integr and object
1 member shall conduct themselv with integr know that public trust is
found on integr member shall not sacrific integr to serv the client their
employ or the public interest
2 prior to accept the fraud examin member shall investig for potenti
conflict of interest member shall disclos ani potenti conflict of interest to
prospect client who retain them or their employ
3 member shall maintain object in disc harg their profession respons
within the scope of the engag
4 member shall not commit discredit act and shall alwai conduct themselv in
the best interest of the reput of the profess
5 member shall not knowingli make a fals statement when testifi in a court of
law or other disput resolut forum member shall compli with law order of
the court or other disput resolut bodi member shall not commit crimin
act or knowingli induc other to do so
b profession compet
1 member shall be compet and shall not accept assign where thi
compet is lack in some circumst it mai be possibl to meet the
requir for profession compet by us of consult or referr
2 member shall maintain the minimum program of continu profession educ
requir by the associ of certifi fraud examin a commit to
profession combin educ and experi shall continu throughout the
member profession career member shall continu strive to increas the
compet and effect of their profession servic
fraud prevent and deterr cfe code of profession standard
2011 fraud examin manual 41103
c due profession care
1 member shall exercis due profession care in the perform of their servic
due profession care requir dilig critic analysi and profession skeptic
in discharg profession respons
2 conclus shall be support with evid that is relev compet
and suffici
3 member profession servic shall be ad equat plan plan control the
perform of a fraud examin from incept through complet and
involv develop strategi and object for perform the servic
4 work perform by assist on a fraud examin shall be adequ supervis
the extent of supervis requir vari depend on the complex of the work
and the qualif of the assist
d understand with client or employ
1 at the begin of a fraud examin member shall reach an understand with
those retain them client or employ about the scope and limit of the
fraud examin and the respons of all parti involv
2 whenev the scope or limit of a fraud examin or the respons of
the parti chang significantli a new understand shall be reach with the client
or employ
e commun with client or employ
1 member shall commun to those who retain them client or employ
signific find made dure the normal cours of the fraud examin
f confidenti
1 member shall not disclos confidenti or privileg inform obtain dure
the cours of the fraud examin without the express permiss of proper
author or order of a court thi requir doe not preclud profession
cfe code of profession standard fraud prevent and deterr
41104 2011 fraud examin manual
practic or investig bodi review as long as the review organ agre to
abid by the confidenti restrict
iv standard of examin
a fraud examin
1 fraud examin shall be conduct in a legal profession and thorough
manner the fraud examin object shall be to obtain evid and inform
that is complet reliabl and relev
2 member shall establish predic and sc op prioriti at the outset of a fraud
examin and continu reevalu them as the examin proce
member shall strive for effici in their examin
3 member shall be alert to the possibl of conjectur unsubstanti opinion and
bia of wit and other member shall consid both exculpatori and
inculpatori evid
b evid
1 member shall endeavor to establish effect control and manag procedur
for document member shall be cogniz of the chain of custodi includ origin
possess and disposit of relev evid and materi member shall strive
to preserv the integr of relev evid and materi
2 member work product mai vari with the circumst of each fraud examin
the extent of document shall be subject to the need and object of the
client or employ
v standard of report
a gener
1 member report mai be oral or written includ fact wit andor expert
wit testimoni and mai take mani differ form there is no singl structur
or format that is prescrib for a member report howev the report should not
be mislead
fraud prevent and deterr cfe code of profession standard
2011 fraud examin manual 41105
b report content
1 member report shall contain onli inform base on data that ar suffici
and relev to support the fact conclus opinion andor recommend
relat to the fraud examin the report shall be confin to subject matter
principl and methodolog within the member area of knowledg skill
experi train or educ
2 no opinion shall be express regard the legal guilt or innoc of ani person
or parti
