2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Responsibility for Fraud Prevention/COSO Recommendations


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


COSO Recommendations 
The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations was formed to support the implementation of 
the Treadway Commission. In 1992, the Committee issued Internal Control—Integrated 
Framework. This report was a collaborative effort of  the American Accounting Association, 
the American Institute of CPAs, the Financial Executives Institute, the Institute of Internal 
Auditors, and the Institute of Management Accountants. The report is meant to apply to all 
entities, public and private, regardless of size.  
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.704   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The COSO report complements Treadway’s recommendation to the SEC that public 
companies’ management reports include an acknowledgment for responsibility  for internal 
controls and an assessment of effectiveness in meeting those responsibilities. The report 
provided the following definition: 
 
Internal Control is a broadly defined process … designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
achievement of objectives in the following categories:  
? Reliability of financial reporting 
? Effectiveness and efficiency of operations  
? Compliance with applicable laws and regulations 
 
COSO also identified five interrelated components of internal control. The effectiveness of 
internal controls can be determined from an assessment of whether these five components are 
in place and functioning effectively. The five components are control environment, risk 
assessment, control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. 
 



:


coso recommend
the committe of sponsor organ wa form to support the implement of
the treadwai commiss in 1992 the committe issu intern controlintegr
framework thi report wa a collabor effort of the american account associ
the american institut of cpa the financi execut institut the institut of intern
auditor and the institut of manag account the report is meant to appli to all
entiti public and privat regardless of size
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4704 2011 fraud examin manual
the coso report complement treadwai recommend to the sec that public
compani manag report includ an acknowledg for respons for intern
control and an assess of effect in meet those respons the report
provid the follow definit
intern control is a broadli defin process design to provid reason assur regard the
achiev of object in the follow categori
reliabl of financi report
effect and effici of oper
complianc with applic law and regul
coso also identifi five interrel compon of intern control the effect of
intern control can be determin from an assess of whether these five compon ar
in place and function effect the five compon ar control environ risk
assess control activ inform and commun and monitor
