2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Responsibility for Fraud Prevention/Information and Communication


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Information and Communication 
The information and communication  component relates to the exchange of information in a way 
that allows employees to carry out their responsibilities. Organizations should work to 
identify pertinent information and see that it is delivered to those who need it most. A 
proper information system will accomplish the following: 
• Assimilate important financial, operational, and compliance information. This information should 
be drawn from both internal and external sources, meaning management may have to go 
outside the organizational structure to identify pertinent information. There should be a 
means of screening incoming information so that pertinent information is maintained 
but unnecessary information is not allowed to clog channels of communication. 
Examples of pertinent information include facts on organizational performance,  
market conditions, competitor programs, economic changes, and legislative or  
regulatory changes. 
• Pass on pertinent informat ion to those who need it. Management should provide timely 
information to employees to help them carry out their duties more effectively. Important 
facts should be communicated in readily usable form. It is also important to 
communicate the importance of observing controls. Management should help employees 
understand their own roles in the internal control system and make it clear that internal 
controls have a high priority.  
• Provide for upstream communication. Communication in an organization should flow  
in all directions. Employees should be provided with clear channels for reporting 
suspected control violations. Provisions should be made for employees to make 
anonymous reports in order to avoid fears of retaliation, which can have a chilling effect 
on upstream communication. A similar reporting mechanism for customers and other 
external parties should be in place. Serious efforts should be made to follow up on  
these communications.  
 



:


inform and commun
the inform and commun compon relat to the exchang of inform in a wai
that allow employe to carri out their respons organ should work to
identifi pertin inform and see that it is deliv to those who need it most a
proper inform system will accomplish the follow
assimil import financi oper and complianc inform thi inform should
be drawn from both intern and extern sourc mean manag mai have to go
outsid the organiz structur to identifi pertin inform there should be a
mean of screen incom inform so that pertin inform is maintain
but unnecessari inform is not allow to clog channel of commun
exampl of pertin inform includ fact on organiz perform
market condit competitor program econom chang and legisl or
regulatori chang
pass on pertin informat ion to those who need it manag should provid time
inform to employe to help them carri out their duti more effect import
fact should be commun in readili usabl form it is also import to
commun the import of observ control manag should help employe
understand their own role in the intern control system and make it clear that intern
control have a high prioriti
provid for upstream commun commun in an organ should flow
in all direct employe should be provid with clear channel for report
suspect control violat provis should be made for employe to make
anonym report in order to avoid fear of retali which can have a chill effect
on upstream commun a similar report mechan for custom and other
extern parti should be in place seriou effort should be made to follow up on
these commun
