2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Fraud Prevention Standards Under Sarbanes-Oxley/Whistleblower Protection


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Whistleblower Protection 
A key to any fraud prevention program is the establishment of a mechanism by which fraud 
can be reported. As was stated above, Section 301 of Sarbanes-Oxley requires audit 
committees to establish mechanisms for receiving complaints about irregularities in a 
company’s accounting, auditing, or internal control systems.  
 
In order to protect those who make such reports, SOX established broad protections for 
corporate whistleblowers. Section 806 of the Act creates civil liability for publicly traded 
companies that retaliate against employees who provide information or assist in the 
investigation of securities fraud. Penalties for violating this Section include reinstatement, 
back pay with interest, and compensation for special damages such as litigation costs and 
attorney’s fees. 
 
Section 1107 makes it a crime to retaliate against a person for providing truthful information 
relating to the commission or possible commission of any federal offense. This Section 
offers much broader protection than the civil whistleblower protection afforded under 
Section 806. The whistleblower protections under Section 1107 cover all individuals, not just 
employees of publicly traded companies. They also protect individuals who provide 
information about any federal offense, not just securities fraud. Vi olations of Section 1107 are 
punishable by fines of up to $250,000 and up to ten years in prison for individuals. 
Corporations can be fined up to $500,000.  
 



:


whistleblow protect
a kei to ani fraud prevent program is the establish of a mechan by which fraud
can be report as wa state abov section 301 of sarbanesoxlei requir audit
committe to establish mechan for receiv complaint about irregular in a
compani account audit or intern control system
in order to protect those who make such report sox establish broad protect for
corpor whistleblow section 806 of the act creat civil liabil for publicli trade
compani that retali against employe who provid inform or assist in the
investig of secur fraud penalti for violat thi section includ reinstat
back pai with interest and compens for special damag such as litig cost and
attornei fee
section 1107 make it a crime to retali against a person for provid truth inform
relat to the commiss or possibl commiss of ani feder offens thi section
offer much broader protect than the civil whistleblow protect afford under
section 806 the whistleblow protect under section 1107 cover all individu not just
employe of publicli trade compani thei also protect individu who provid
inform about ani feder offens not just secur fraud vi olat of section 1107 ar
punish by fine of up to 250000 and up to ten year in prison for individu
corpor can be fine up to 500000
