2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Sample Corporate Compliance Program/VI. MONITORING, AUDITING, AND REPORTING


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


VI. MONITORING, AUDITING, AND REPORTING 
 
A. Monitoring 
 
1. The Compliance Coordinator shall, by memorandum, at least annually advise all 
employees with supervisory responsibility of their duty to monitor all activities of 
their subordinates in the course of their employment with ( company)  to ensure 
that those activities are conducted in compliance with all applicable laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct. 
    
2. Each supervisor shall sign a copy of the memorandum referred to in ¶ 1 and 
return it to the Compliance Coordinator, who shall maintain a file of such 
memoranda. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, report to 
Management with respect to complia nce with this provision of the  
compliance program.  
 
B. Auditing 
 
1. The Corporate Compliance Audit Director shall be responsible for the conduct 
of internal non-financial audits to promote compliance with applicable laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct (other than those relating to financial 
matters). 
 
2. The Chief Financial Officer of the Company shall be responsible for the conduct 
of internal financial audits to promote compliance with applicable laws, 
regulations, and standards of conduct relating to financial matters. 
 
3. Management shall arrange for the conduct of annual audits by independent 
outside auditors to promote compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and 
standards of conduct, both financial and non-financial. 
 
4. Copies of all internal and outside audit reports relating to compliance  
with laws, regulations, or standards of conduct (whether financial or non-
 financial) shall be provided to the Compliance Coordinator and to the Audit 
Committee or the Regulatory Affairs [Committee] of the Board, whichever is the 
appropriate recipient. 
 
C. Reporting 
 
1. The Compliance Coordinator shall establish and oversee a reporting system in 
which: 
 
a. Any employee may report to the Compliance Coordinator (or a designee of 
the Compliance Coordinator) any suspected misconduct or impropriety 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.742   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
relating to (company) ’s operations or practices, whether committed by an 
employee of (company), an employee of another company or organization, an 
employee of a government agency, or other person. 
 
b. No employee will suffer any penalty or retribution for good faith reporting of 
any suspected misconduct or impropriety. 
 
c. Any report of misconduct or impropriety may be anonymous. 
 
2. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, communicate to all (company)  
employees the policy of the Corporation that any employee who learns of an 
apparent violation of law, regulations, or unethical conduct relating to the 
business or activities of the Corporation shall report such violation or conduct to 
the Compliance Coordinator (or a designee of the Compliance Coordinator), and 
may do so anonymously. 
 
3. At least annually, the Compliance Coordinator shall report to Management and 
to the Regulatory Affairs Committee of the Board on the functioning of the 
reporting system. 
 



:


vi monitor audit and report
a monitor
1 the complianc coordin shall by memorandum at least annual advis all
employe with supervisori respons of their duti to monitor all activ of
their subordin in the cours of their employ with compani to ensur
that those activ ar conduct in complianc with all applic law
regul and standard of conduct
2 each supervisor shall sign a copi of the memorandum refer to in 1 and
return it to the complianc coordin who shall maintain a file of such
memoranda the complianc coordin shall at least annual report to
manag with respect to complia nce with thi provis of the
complianc program
b audit
1 the corpor complianc audit director shall be respons for the conduct
of intern nonfinanci audit to promot complianc with applic law
regul and standard of conduct other than those relat to financi
matter
2 the chief financi offic of the compani shall be respons for the conduct
of intern financi audit to promot complianc with applic law
regul and standard of conduct relat to financi matter
3 manag shall arrang for the conduct of annual audit by independ
outsid auditor to promot complianc with applic law regul and
standard of conduct both financi and nonfinanci
4 copi of all intern and outsid audit report relat to complianc
with law regul or standard of conduct whether financi or non
financi shall be provid to the complianc coordin and to the audit
committe or the regulatori affair committe of the board whichev is the
appropri recipi
c report
1 the complianc coordin shall establish and overse a report system in
which
a ani employe mai report to the complianc coordin or a designe of
the complianc coordin ani suspect misconduct or improprieti
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4742 2011 fraud examin manual
relat to compani s oper or practic whether commit by an
employe of compani an employe of anoth compani or organ an
employe of a govern agenc or other person
b no employe will suffer ani penalti or retribut for good faith report of
ani suspect misconduct or improprieti
c ani report of misconduct or improprieti mai be anonym
2 the complianc coordin shall at least annual commun to all compani
employe the polici of the corpor that ani employe who learn of an
appar violat of law regul or uneth conduct relat to the
busi or activ of the corpor shall report such violat or conduct to
the complianc coordin or a designe of the complianc coordin and
mai do so anonym
3 at least annual the complianc coordin shall report to manag and
to the regulatori affair committe of the board on the function of the
report system
