2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Sample Corporate Compliance Program/XI. ROLE OF THE REGULATORY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


XI. ROLE OF THE REGULATORY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
A. The Regulatory Affairs Committee shall be responsible for reviewing and suggesting 
to Management any necessary improvements in: 
 
1. The standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and the 
Employee Handbook 
 
2. The compliance program generally 
 
B. The Regulatory Affairs Committee shall, at least annually: 
 
1. Receive a written report from, and meet with, the Compliance Coordinator with 
respect to the compliance program generally, including: 
 
a. The Compliance Coordinator뭩 review of  delegations of authority within  
the Corporation 
 
b. The certifications required by  V.A of this program, and employee 
familiarity with the corporate standards of conduct generally 
 
c. The certifications required by  V.D of this program, the compliance 
communications and training generally, including their effectiveness 
 
d. The certifications required by  V.E of this program, the compliance by 
supervisors with  VI.A.2 of this program, and the participation of 
supervisors in this program generally 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.746   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
e. The results of internal and any external audits (whether financial or non-
 financial) relating to compliance with laws, regulations, or standards of 
conduct 
 
f. The reporting system required by  VI.C of this program 
 
g. The disciplinary system required by  IX of this program 
 
2. Discuss with Management the compliance program and the report of the 
Compliance Coordinator. 
 
3. Report to the Board of Directors with respect to the report of the Compliance 
Coordinator and the Committee뭩 meetings with the Compliance Coordinator 
and Management, and with respect to the compliance program generally. 
 
C. At each meeting of the Regulatory Affairs Committee, the Compliance Coordinator 
shall report to the Committee any and all recommendations made by the Compliance 
Coordinator to Management, and decisions by Management, under  X.C of this 
program since the last meeting of the Committee. 
 
D. The Regulatory Affairs Committee shall adopt a standard operating procedure for 
the performance of its responsibilities under this compliance program. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.747  



:


xi role of the regulatori affair committe of the board of director
a the regulatori affair committe shall be respons for review and suggest
to manag ani necessari improv in
1 the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and the
employe handbook
2 the complianc program gener
b the regulatori affair committe shall at least annual
1 receiv a written report from and meet with the complianc coordin with
respect to the complianc program gener includ
a the complianc coordin review of deleg of author within
the corpor
b the certif requir by va of thi program and employe
familiar with the corpor standard of conduct gener
c the certif requir by vd of thi program the complianc
commun and train gener includ their effect
d the certif requir by ve of thi program the complianc by
supervisor with via2 of thi program and the particip of
supervisor in thi program gener
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4746 2011 fraud examin manual
e the result of intern and ani extern audit whether financi or non
financi relat to complianc with law regul or standard of
conduct
f the report system requir by vic of thi program
g the disciplinari system requir by ix of thi program
2 discuss with manag the complianc program and the report of the
complianc coordin
3 report to the board of director with respect to the report of the complianc
coordin and the committe meet with the complianc coordin
and manag and with respect to the complianc program gener
c at each meet of the regulatori affair committe the complianc coordin
shall report to the committe ani and all recommend made by the complianc
coordin to manag and decis by manag under xc of thi
program sinc the last meet of the committe
d the regulatori affair committe shall adopt a standard oper procedur for
the perform of it respons under thi complianc program
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4747
