2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


ZZ_Miscellaneous


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes

The material in the Financial Transactions section is divided into three principal topic areas. 
First, general accounting concepts are illustrated, including the basics of debits and credits, 
as well as the contents of financial statements. Second, employee defalcation schemes are 
detailed. This section includes discussion on management’s, auditors’, and fraud examiners’ 
responsibilities regarding financial transaction fraud, fraudulent financial statement schemes, 
asset misappropriation schemes, and bribery and corruption. Finally, other fraud schemes, 
primarily external frauds, ranging from securities violations to health care frauds, are covered 
and explained. 
 
 
ACCOUNTING CONCEPTS 
 
Fraudulent acts are usually of a financial nature. The fraud examiner must therefore 
understand the essential nature of financial transactions and how they affect records. 
Additionally, the fraud examiner should have a grasp of both financial terminology and 
accounting theory.  
 
 
Accounting Basics 
Accounting can be defined as the identification, accumulation, measurement, and 
communication of economic data about an enterprise for decision makers and other 
interested parties. The measurement and recording of this data are accomplished through 
keeping a balance of the accounting equation. The accounting model or accounting equation, 
as shown below, is the basis for all double-entry accounting:  
 
Assets = Liabilities + Owners’ Equity 
 
By definition, assets consist of the net resources owned by an entity. Examples of assets 
include cash, receivables, inventory, property, and equipment, as well as intangible items of 
value such as patents, licenses, and trademarks. To qualify as an asset, an item must (1) be 
owned by the entity and (2) provide future benefit.  
 
Liabilities are the obligations of an entity or outsiders’ claims against a company’s assets. 
Liabilities usually arise from the acquisition of assets or the incurrence of operational 
expenses. 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.102                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Owners’ equity  represents the investment of a company’s owners plus accumulated profits 
(revenues less expenses). Owners’ equity is equal to assets minus liabilities.  
 
This equation has been the cornerstone of accounting since 1494, when Luca Pacioli 
invented it. The balance of the equation is the key. If a company borrows from a bank, cash 
(an asset) and notes payable (a liability) increase to show the receipt of cash and an 
obligation owed by the company. Since both assets and liabilities increase by the same 
amount, the equation stays in balance.  
 
Accounts and the Accounting Cycle 
The major components of the accounting equation are made up of numerous detail 
accounts. An account is nothing more than a specific accounting record that provides an 
efficient way to categorize similar transactions. All transactions are recorded in accounts that 
are categorized as asset accounts, liability accounts, owners’ equity accounts, revenue 
accounts, and expense accounts. Account format occurs in a number of ways. The simplest, 
most fundamental format is the use of a large letter T, often referred to as a T account.  
 
Entries to the left side of an account are debits (dr) and entries to the right side of an account 
are credits (cr). Debits increase asset and expense accounts, while credits decrease them. 
Conversely, credits increase liability, owners’ equity, and revenue accounts; debits decrease 
them. Every transaction recorded in the accounting records will have both a debit and a 
credit, thus the term double-entry accounting. The accounting equation, in the form of T 
accounts, looks like the following:   
 
 
 
Fraud investigation often requires an understanding of the debit-and-credit process. For 
example, a fraud examiner who is searching for a mysterious $5,000 disappearance of cash 
finds a debit in the legal expense account and a corresponding credit in the cash account for 
$5,000, but cannot find genuine documentation for the charge. The examiner can then 
reasonably suspect that a perpetrator may have attempted to conceal the theft by labeling the 
misappropriated $5,000 as a legal expense.  
 
 Assets  =  Liabilities + Owner's Equities

Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.103 
Discovering concealment efforts through a review of accounting records is one of the easier 
methods of detecting internal fraud; usually, one needs only to look for weaknesses in the 
various steps of the accounting cycle. Legitimate transactions leave an audit trail. They start 
with a source document such as an invoice, a check, a receipt, or a receiving report. These 
source documents become the basis for journal entries, which are chronological listings of 
transactions with their debit and credit amounts. Entries are made in various accounting 
journals. Then, entries are posted to the appropriate general ledger accounts. The 
summarized account amounts become the basis for financial statements for a particular 
period. 
 
Illustrated below is this flow of transactional information through the accounting records, 
followed by examples of typical accounting transactions, to help in understanding how 
transactions affect the balance sheet: 
 
 
Journal Entries  
As transactions occur, they are recorded in a company’s books via journal entries. Each journal 
entry serves as a record of a particular transaction and forms an audit trail that can be 
retraced later for an understanding of a company’s operations. Journal entries that are not 
triggered by a transaction, called adjusting journal entries, are also made periodically for items 
such as depreciation expense and accounts receivable write-offs.  
 
 
Transaction Occurs 
Purchase Orders, Receipts, and Other 
Documents Are Created 
Transaction Is Recorded in Journals 
Journals Are Posted to Individual Accounts
Financial Statements Are Generated with 
Account Balances 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.104                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE  
XYZ Company completed the following transactions during its first year of operations, 
20XX. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accounting Methods 

There are two primary methods of accounting: cash-basis and accrual-basis. Cash-basis 
accounting involves recording revenues and expenses based on when a company pays or 
receives cash. For example, sales are recorded when a company receives payment for goods, 
regardless of when the goods are delivered. If a customer purchases goods on credit, the 
company does not book the sale until the cash is received for the sale. Likewise, if a 
customer prepays for a sale, the company records the sales revenue immediately, rather than 
when the goods are passed off to the customer. The same holds true with expenses: they are 
recorded when paid without consideration to when they are incurred.  
 
Accrual-basis accounting, on the other hand, requires revenues to be recorded when they are 
earned (generally, when goods are delivered or services are rendered to a customer), without 
Transaction Analysis Account Debit Credit Assets Liabilities  Equity
 Enterprise established, Cash increased Cash 192,000 192,000    
Owner invests $192,000 Liabilities no effect   Common Stock 192,000  192,000   
Equity increased
 Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 1 9 2,000 192,000 192,000    -    192,000   
Company borrowed $80,000 Cash increased Cash 80,000  80,000    
on a note payable Liabilities increased   Notes Payable 80,000  80,000    
Equity no effect
 Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 2 7 2,000 272,000 272,000    80,000    1 9 2,000   
Purchase business Cash decreased Equipment 70,000   70,000    
equipment for $70,000 Assets increased   Cash 70,000  (70,000)  
Liab & Equity no effect
 Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 3 4 2,000 342,000 272,000    80,000    1 9 2,000   
Services rendered to client Cash increased Cash 15,000  15,000    
$40,000, $15,000 collected A /R increased   Accounts Receivable 25,000  25,000    
in advance Equity increased   Sales Revenue 40,000   40,000   
Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 3 8 2,000 382,000 312,000    80,000    2 3 2,000   
Operating expenses incurred Cash decreased Operating Expenses 25,000  (25,000)   
$25,000, Liabilities increased Cash 14,000  (14,000)  
14,000 paid in cash Equity decreased   Accounts Payable 11,000  11,000    
Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 4 0 7,000 407,000 298,000    91,000    2 0 7,000   
Paid $5,000 on Note Cash decreased Notes Payable 5,000  (5,000)    
Payable  Liabilities decreased   Cash 5,000  (5,000)    
Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 4 1 2,000 412,000 293,000    86,000    2 0 7,000   
Depreciated equipment for Asset decreased Depreciation expense 7,000  (7,000)   
1 yr, estimated life 10yr  Equity decreased   Accum. Depreciation 7,000  (7,000)    
($70,000 /1 0) = $7,000
 Cumulative Balance……………. ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… 4 1 9,000 419,000 286,000    86,000    2 0 0,000   
Balance Sheet Effect  
Journal Entry Assets = Liabilities + Owners Equity
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.105 
regard to when cash exchanges hands. Expenses are recorded in the same period as the 
revenues to which they relate. For example, employee wages are expensed in the period 
during which the employees provided services, which may not necessarily be the same 
period in which they were paid. 
 
Under cash accounting, a company may decide to postpone paying some expenses so they 
are not recorded in the current period, resulting in an artificially inflated bottom line. 
Conversely, accrual accounting requires expenses to be matched to revenues; therefore, it 
provides a truer picture of a company’s financial situation. As such, generally accepted 
accounting principles mandate the use of accrual-basis accounting.  
 
 
Financial Statements 
The results of the accounting process are reports, or financial statements, that exemplify the 
financial position and operating results of an entity. Financial statements are often the 
vehicles through which fraud occurs. 
 
According to AU section 623, Special Reports, promulgated by the AICPA’s Auditing 
Standards Board, financial statements include presentations of financial data and 
accompanying notes prepared in conformity with either generally accepted accounting 
principles or some other comprehensive basis of accounting. The following is a list of such 
financial statements: 
• Balance sheet 
• Statement of income or statement of operations 
• Statement of retained earnings 
• Statement of cash flows 
• Statement of changes in owners’ equity 
• Statement of assets and liabilities that does not include owners’ equity accounts 
• Statement of revenue and expenses 
• Summary of operations 
• Statement of operations by product lines 
• Statement of cash receipts and disbursements 
 
Although not specifically noted in AU section 623, financial statements may also include 
other financial data presentations, such as: 
• Prospective financial information (forecasts) 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.106                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Proxy statements 
• Interim financial information (for example, quarterly financial statements) 
• Current value financial presentations 
• Personal financial statements (current or present value) 
• Bankruptcy financial statements 
• Registration statement disclosures (Securities Act of 1933) 
 
Other comprehensive bases of accounting, according to AU section 623, include: 
• Government or regulatory agency accounting 
• Tax-basis accounting 
• Cash receipts and disbursements, or modified cash receipts and disbursements 
• Any other basis with a definite set of criteria applied to all material items, such as the 
price-level basis of accounting 
 
Consequently, the term financial statements  includes almost any financial data presentation 
prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles or another 
comprehensive basis of accounting. Throughout this section, the term financial statements 
will include the above forms of reporting financial data, including the accompanying 
footnotes and management’s discussion. For most companies, however, a full set of financial 
statements comprises a balance sheet, a statement of income, a statement of owners’ equity 
or a statement of retained earnings, and a statement of cash flows. Therefore, fraud 
examiners should be familiar with the purpose and components of each of these financial 
statements.  
 
Balance Sheet 
The balance sheet shows a “snapshot” of a company’s financial situation at a specific point in 
time, generally the last day of the accounting period. The balance sheet is an expansion of 
the accounting equation, assets = liabilities + owners’ equity. That is, it lists a company’s assets 
on one side and its liabilities and owners’ equity on the other side. The nature of the 
accounting equation means that the two sides of the statement should balance, hence the 
name “balance sheet.”  
 
The following balance sheet, derived from the journal entries in the above example, shows 
the financial position of XYZ Company on the last day of its first year of operations.  
 
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.107 
XYZ Company 
Balance Sheet  
December 31, 20XX 
      
      
Assets     Liabilities    
Current Assets    Current Liabilities   
Cash  $  198,000    Accounts Payable  $    11,000   
Accounts Receivable 25,000   Total Current Liabilities   $    11,000 
Total Current Assets   $  223,000     
    Long-term Liabilities   
Fixed Assets    Notes Payable 75,000   
Equipment 70,000   
Total Long-term 
Liabilities  75,000 
Less: Accum. Depreciation (7,000)   Total Liabilities  86,000 
Total Fixed Assets  63,000     
    Owners’ Equity    
    Common Stock 192,000   
    Retained Earnings 8,000   
    Total Owners’ Equity  200,000 
       
Total Assets   $  286,000  
Total Liabilities and 
Equity   $  286,000 
 
As mentioned, assets are the resources owned by a company. Generally, assets are presented 
on the balance sheet in order of liquidity, or how soon they are expected to be converted to 
cash. The first section on the assets side, current assets, includes all those assets that are 
expected to be converted to cash, sold, or used up within one year. This category usually 
includes cash, accounts receivable (the amount owed to a company by customers for sales 
on credit), inventory, and prepaid items. Following the current assets are the long-term assets, 
or those assets that will likely not be converted to cash in the near future, such as fixed assets 
(e.g., land, buildings, equipment) and intangible assets (e.g., patents, trademarks, goodwill). A 
company’s fixed assets are presented net of accumulated depreciation, an amount that 
represents the cumulative expense taken for wear-and-tear on a company’s property. 
Likewise, intangible assets are presented net of accumulated amortization, an amount that 
represents the collective expense taken for declines in value of the intangible property. 
 
Liabilities are presented in order of maturity. Like current assets, current liabilities  are those 
obligations that are expected to be paid within one year, such as accounts payable (the 
amount owed to vendors by a company for purchases on credit), accrued expenses (e.g., 
taxes payable or salaries payable), and the portion of long-term debts that will come due 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.108                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
within the next year. Those liabilities that are not due for more than a year are listed under 
the heading long-term liabilities. The most common liabilities in this group are bonds, notes, 
and mortgages payable. The total balance of the note payable is listed under long-term 
liabilities on XYZ Company’s balance sheet, indicating that it does not have to make any 
payments on the note during the next year. However, if a $5,000 payment was required 
during the next year, the company would have to reclassify $5,000 of the note balance to the 
current liabilities section and show the remaining $70,000 as a long-term liability. This 
adjustment would not change the total amount of the outstanding liability that was shown — all 
$75,000 would still appear on the balance sheet - but it would allow financial statement 
users to know that the company had an obligation to pay $5,000 during the next year rather 
than at some unspecified time in the future.  
 
The owners’ equity in a firm generally represents amounts from two sources — owner 
contributions (usually referred to as common or capital stock, and paid-in capital) and 
undistributed earnings (usually referred to as retained earnings). The balance in the capital stock 
account increases when the owners of a company invest in it through the purchase of 
company stock. The retained earnings balance increases when a company has earnings and 
decreases when a company has losses. The retained earnings account is also decreased when 
earnings are distributed to a company’s owners in the form of dividends, or when a company 
has losses. XYZ Company’s balance sheet shows that the company’s owners have 
contributed $192,000 to the company and that the company has retained $8,000 of earnings 
as of December 31, 20XX.  
 
Income Statement 
Whereas the balance sheet shows a company’s financial position at a specific point in time, 
the income statement details how much profit (or loss) a company earned during a period of 
time, such as a quarter or a year. The accounts reflected on the income statement are 
temporary; at the end of each fiscal year, they are reduced to a zero balance (closed), with the 
resulting net income (or loss) added to (or subtracted from) retained earnings on the balance 
sheet.  
 
Below is the income statement for XYZ Company for its first year of operations based on 
the sample transactions above. 
 
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.109 
XYZ Company 
Statement of Income 
For the Year Ended December 31, 20 X X  
   
Revenue   
Net Sales  $             40,000  
Less: Cost of Goods Sold  25,000  
Gross Profit   $             15,000 
   
Operating Expenses    
Depreciation 7,000  
Total Operating Expenses  7,000 
   
Net Income   $               8,000 
 
Two basic types of accounts are reported on the income statement - revenues  and expenses. 
Revenues represent amounts received from the sale of goods or services during the 
accounting period. Most companies present net sales  or net service revenues  as the first line item 
on the income statement. The term “net” means that the amount shown is the company’s 
total sales minus any sales refunds, returns, discounts, or allowances.  
 
From net sales, an expense titled cost of goods sold  or cost of sales  is deducted. Regardless of 
industry, this expense denotes the amount a company spent (in past, present, and/or future 
accounting periods) to produce the goods or services that were sold during the current 
period. For a company that manufactures goods, cost of goods sold signifies the amount the 
company spent on materials, labor, and overhead expenses to produce the goods that were 
sold during the accounting period. For a merchandise reseller, this expense is the amount the 
company has paid to purchase the goods that were resold during the period. For a service 
company, the cost of sales is typically the amount of salaries paid to the employees who 
performed the services that were sold. The difference between net sales and cost of goods 
sold is called gross profit  or gross margin, which represents the amount left over from sales to 
pay the company’s operating expenses.  
 
Operating expenses are those costs that a company incurs to support and sustain its business 
operations. Generally, these expenses include items such as advertising, management’s 
salaries, office supplies, repairs and maintenance, rent, utilities, depreciation, interest, and 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.110                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
taxes. Accrual accounting requires that these items be included on the income statement in 
the period in which they are incurred, regardless of when they are paid.  
 
After subtracting operating expenses from gross profit, a company’s net income or net earnings 
for the period is determined. If a company’s total expenses were greater than its total 
revenues and the bottom line is negative, then it had a net loss  for the period. Commonly, a 
profitable company will distribute some of its net income to its owners in the form of 
dividends. Whatever income is not distributed is transferred to the retained earnings account 
on the balance sheet. In the case of XYZ Company, net income for the year was $8,000. The 
company did not distribute any of these earnings, so the total amount — $8,000 — is shown 
on the balance sheet as retained earnings. If the company is also profitable during its next 
year of operations, any net income that is not distributed as dividends will be added to the 
$8,000 balance in retained earnings. If expenses outpace revenues and XYZ Company shows 
a loss for its second year, that loss will be deducted from the $8,000 retained earnings 
balance at the end of the second year.  
 
To summarize, the income statement ties to the balance sheet through the retained earnings 
account as follows: 
 
 
 
Statement of Owners’ Equity 
The statement of owners’ equity details the changes in the total owners’ equity amount listed 
on the balance sheet. Because it shows how the amounts on the income statement flow 
through to the balance sheet, it acts as the connecting link between the two statements. The 
balance of the owners’ equity at the beginning of the year is the starting point for the 
statement. The transactions that affect owners’ equity are listed next and added together. 
The result is added to (or subtracted from, if negative) the beginning-of-the-year balance, 
which provides the end-of-the-year balance for total owners’ equity.  
Assets Liabilities + Owners’ Equity =  
Common Stock Retained Earnings
 Dividends Net  Income
 Revenue Expenses 
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.111 
The statement of owners’ equity for XYZ Company would appear as follows:  
 
XYZ Company 
Statement of Owners’ Equity 
For the Year Ended December 31, 20XX  
  
Owners’ equity, January 1, 20XX  $              -  
Investment by owners during the year  $      192,000  
Net income for the year 8,000  
Increase in owners’ equity 200,000  
Owners’ equity, December 31, 20XX  $      200,000  
 
XYZ Company completed two types of transactions that affected the owners’ equity during 
20XX: the $192,000 invested by the company’s shareholders, and the revenue and expenses 
that resulted in the net income of $8,000. Had the company distributed any money to the 
shareholders in the form of dividends, that amount would be listed on the statement of 
owners’ equity as well. Notice that the $8,000 ties directly to the bottom line of the income 
statement, and the $200,000 owners’ equity ties to the “total owners’ equity” amount on the 
balance sheet.  
 
Some companies present a statement of retained earnings rather than a statement of owners’ 
equity. Similar to the statement of owners’ equity,  the statement of retained earnings starts 
with the retained earnings balance at the beginning of the year. All transactions affecting the 
retained earnings account are then listed and added to the beginning balance to arrive at the 
ending balance in the retained earnings account. Below is an example of the statement of 
retained earnings for XYZ Company:  
 
XYZ Company 
Statement of Retained Earnings 
For the Year Ended December 31, 20XX  
   
Retained earnings, January 1, 20XX  $              -   
Net income for the year  $         8,000  
Increase in owners’ equity 8,000  
Retained earnings, December 31, 20XX  $         8,000  
 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.112                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Statement of Cash Flows 
The statement of cash flows reports a company’s sources and uses of cash during the 
accounting period. This statement is often used by potential investors and other interested 
parties in tandem with the income statement to determine the true financial performance of 
a company during the period being reported. The nature of accrual accounting allows (and 
often requires) the income statement to contain many non-cash items and subjective 
estimates that make it difficult to fully and clearly interpret a company’s operating results. 
However, it is much harder to distort the amount of cold, hard cash that was received and 
paid during the year, so the statement of cash flows adds to the transparency of the financial 
statements.  
 
The following is the statement of cash flows for XYZ Company:  
 
XYZ Company 
Statement of Cash Flows — Direct Method 
For the Year Ended December 31, 20 X X  
   
Cash flows from operating activities   
Cash received from customers  $       15,000  
Cash paid for merchandise (14,000)  
Net cash flows from operating activities  $         1,000  
  
Cash flows from investing activities  
Cash paid for purchase of equipment (70,000)  
Net cash flows from investing activities (70,000) 
  
Cash flows from financing activities  
Cash received as owners’ investment 192,000  
Cash received from issuing note payable 80,000  
Cash paid on note payable (5,000)  
Net cash flows from financing activities 267,000  
  
Increase in cash 198,000  
Cash balance at the beginning of the year           0  
Cash balance at the end of the year  $      198,000  
 
The statement of cash flows is broken down into three sections: cash flows from operating 
activities, cash flows from investing activities, and cash flows from financing activities.  
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.113 
Cash Flows from Operations 
The cash flows from operations section summarizes a company’s cash receipts and payments 
arising from its normal business operations. Cash inflows included in this category 
commonly consist of payments received from customers for sales, and cash outflows include 
payments to vendors for merchandise and operating expenses and to employees for wages.  
 
This category can also be summarized as those cash transactions that ultimately affect a 
company’s operating income; therefore, it is often considered the most important of the 
three categories of cash flows. If a company continually shows large profits per its income 
statement, but cannot generate positive cash flows from operations, then questionable 
accounting practices might be to blame. On the other hand, net income that is supported by 
positive and increasing net cash flows from operations is generally considered an indicator of 
a strong company. 
 
There are two methods of reporting cash flows from operations. In the above example, 
XYZ Company’s statement of cash flows is presented using the direct method. This method 
lists the sources of operating cash flows and the uses of operating cash flows, with the 
difference between them being the net cash flow from operating activities.  
 
In contrast, the indirect method  reconciles net income per the income statement with net cash 
flows from operating activities; that is, accrual-basis net income is adjusted for non-cash 
revenues and expenses to arrive at net cash flows from operations. Below is an example of 
XYZ Company’s cash flows from operations using the indirect method:  
 
XYZ Company 
Statement of Cash Flows — Indirect Method 
For the Year Ended December 31, 20 X X  
Cash flows from operating activities   
Net income, per income statement   $         8,000  
Add:  Depreciation  $         7,000  
  Increase in accounts payable 11,000 18,000  
  26,000  
Subtract:  Increase in accounts receivable (25,000) (25,000) 
Net cash flows from operating activities  1,000  
 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.114                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Note that the net cash flows from operating activities is the same amount - in this case, 
$1,000 — regardless of the method that is used.  The indirect method is usually easier to 
compute and provides a comparison of a company’s operating results under the accrual and 
cash methods of accounting. As a result, most companies choose to use the indirect method, 
but either method is acceptable.  
 
Cash Flows from Investing Activities 
Cash inflows from investing activities usually arise from the sale of fixed assets (e.g., 
property and equipment), investments (e.g., the stocks and bonds of other companies), or 
intangible assets (e.g., patents and trademarks). Similarly, cash outflows from investing 
activities include any cash paid for the purchase of fixed assets, investments, or intangible 
assets.  
 
Cash Flows from Financing Activities 
Cash flows from financing activities involve the cash received or paid in connection with 
issuing debt and equity securities. Cash inflows in this category occur when a company sells 
its own stock, issues bonds, or takes out a loan. A company’s cash outflows from financing 
activities include paying cash dividends to shareholders, acquiring shares of its own stock 
(called treasury stock), and repaying debt.  
  
The total cash flows from all three categories are combined to arrive at the net increase or 
decrease in cash for the year. This total is then added to or subtracted from the cash balance 
at the beginning of the year to arrive at the cash balance at the end of the year, which ties 
back to the amount of cash reported on the balance sheet.  
 
Users of Financial Statements 
Financial statement fraud schemes are most often perpetrated by management against 
potential users of the statements. These users of financial statements include company 
ownership and management, lending organizations, investors, regulating bodies, vendors, 
and customers. The production of truthful financial statements plays an important role in 
the continued success of an organization. However, fraudulent statements can be used for a 
number of reasons. The most common use is to increase the apparent prosperity of an 
organization in the eyes of potential and current investors. (For more information, see the 
chapter on “Financial Statement Fraud.”)  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.115 
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) 
In preparing financial statements, management, accountants, and auditors are charged with 
following measurement and reporting practices known as generally accepted accounting principles  
(GAAP). The accounting practices that compose GAAP have developed through the 
accumulation of authoritative accounting pronouncements issued by several authoritative 
bodies. Historically, these pronouncements included Accounting Research Bulletins, 
Accounting Principles Board (APB) Opinions, Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB) Statements and Interpretations, Emerging Issues Task Force Abstracts, and SEC 
Staff Accounting Bulletins.  
 
In 2009, FASB launched the FASB Accounting Standards Codification(FASB ASC)  as the 
sole source of authoritative U.S. GAAP for non-governmental organizations. The 
Codification compiles and organizes all previous sources of GAAP by topic, providing an 
efficient and easy-to-use structure for researching and referencing accounting standards. The 
FASB ASC effectively supersedes the pre-Codification GAAP hierarchy established in SAS 
No. 69 and FASB Statement No. 162.  
 
While the U.S. has its own set of accounting standards that form GAAP, the various 
accounting rules from different countries are converging. The International Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB) is developing a single set of standards, called International Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS). For each accounting function, the IASB is looking for the most 
appropriate principle for how transactions should be accounted for, or the most suitable 
method of reporting the results. The IASB has sought the best, sometimes adopting a 
standard from one country or another, other times creating a new standard entirely. 
Currently, more than 120 countries require or permit the use of IFRS, with several more 
planning to adopt IFRS in the next few years. A list of the countries that have adopted the 
IFRS is available at www.iasplus.com/country/useias.htm.  
 
Basic Underlying Accounting Principles 
Basic accounting principles, referred to as generally accepted accounting principles, are the 
rules by which a company’s financial transactions are recorded into their appropriate account 
classifications. These principles have evolved over time and are expected to continue 
changing in response to shifts in social and economic conditions, advancements in 
technology, and demand by users for more useful or productive standards. The following is 
a list of the basic underlying principles on which accountants should base their practices.  
 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.116                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Historical Cost 
Although some exceptions exist, historical cost is, generally, the proper basis for the 
recording of assets, expenses, equities, etc. For example, a piece of operational machinery 
should be shown on the balance sheet at initial acquisition cost and not at current market 
value or an estimated replacement value. 
 
Revenue Recognition 
In general, revenue is recognized or recorded when it becomes realized or realizable, and 
earned. These criteria are usually met when:  
• Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists,  
• Delivery has occurred or services have been rendered,  
• The seller’s price to the buyer is fixed or determinable, and 
• Collectibility is reasonably assured.  
 
Therefore, revenue should not be recognized for work that is to be performed in subsequent 
accounting periods, even though the work may currently be under contract; the revenue 
should be recognized in the period in which the work is performed.  
 
Matching 
The matching principle requires that expenses be recorded in the same accounting period as 
the revenues they help generate. Estimates, accruals, and allocations are often needed to 
meet this requirement. When a sale is recorded, the appropriate charges for cost of goods 
sold, or other expenses directly corresponding to the sale, should be recorded in the same 
accounting period.  
 
Consistency 
Entities should employ consistent accounting procedures from period to period. Variations 
or changes in accounting policies and procedures must be justifiable. Standards used to value 
inventory, depreciate assets, or accrue expenses should be consistent from one accounting 
period to the next. 
 
Full Disclosure 
The financial statements of an entity should include all information necessary for the 
formation of valid decisions by the users. The statements should not include too much 
information, but are required to include enough information so that the user is not misled. 
Supplemental notes to the financial statements are usually required to meet these criteria. 
Financial Transactions  Accounting Concepts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.117 
Objectivity 
Accounting records should be designed and kept on objective, rather than subjective, 
evidence. Underlying verifiability must exist for the information contained in the statements. 
For example, assets are carried at historical cost and not at an estimated current value. 
Historical cost should be verifiable through legitimate proof of purchase.  
 
Separate Entity Assumption 
Economic activity of an entity should be kept separate from other personal or business 
entities. For example, personal business transactions of an entity’s owners or operators 
should not be included in the financial reports of the entity.  
 
Going Concern — Continuity Assumption 
There is an assumption that an entity will continue as a going concern; that is, the life of the 
entity will be long enough to fulfill its financial and legal obligations. Any evidence to the 
contrary must be reported in the financial statements of the entity. 
 
Unit of Measure 
All financial reports are based on the monetary unit, e.g., the dollar for U.S. entities. This 
assumption recognizes that the monetary unit is an effective means of communicating 
financial information. Adjustments for inflationary trends are not shown in the financial 
statements of the entity. 
 
Periodicity—Time Period Assumption 
The life of an entity is divided into economic time periods on which reporting statements are 
fashioned. These reporting periods vary, but a year is the most common. Some companies 
follow the calendar year, while others use a business year that ends near the lowest point of 
business activity in a 12-month cycle, regardless of where that point falls in the calendar year.  
 
Departures from GAAP — Modifying Conventions 
As with rules for most things, departures from GAAP are sometimes required. The 
following modifying conventions give guidance and should be considered when deviating 
from what is generally acceptable. 
 
Conservatism 
When considering an accounting matter in which there are two alternatives that equally 
satisfy conceptual and implementation principles for a transaction, an accountant should 
Accounting Concepts  Financial Transactions   
1.118                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
take a conservative approach, and follow the alternative that will have the least favorable 
impact on the net income of the entity. 
 
Industry Practices and Peculiarities 
The peculiarities and practices of an industry (such as banking, investment, and insurance) 
may warrant selective exceptions to accounting principles. Some differences in accounting 
also occur in response to legal requirements, such as those entities subject to regulatory 
controls.  
 
Substance over Form 
The economic substance of a transaction determines the accounting treatment, which may 
differ from the legal treatment. For example, although a lease contract may not transfer 
property rights, if the true substance of the transaction is a sale, then the lessee should 
record the transaction as an acquisition and capitalize the property.  
 
Application of Judgment 
An accountant may depart from GAAP if the results of departure appear reasonable under 
the circumstances, especially when strict adherence to GAAP will produce unreasonable 
results and the departure is properly disclosed.  
 
Materiality 
The amount of an item is material if its omission would affect the judgment of a reasonable 
person who is relying on the financial statements. The materiality threshold does not mean 
that immaterial items do not have to be recorded; rather, strict adherence to GAAP is 
necessary only when the item has a significant impact on the financial statements of an 
entity. In addition, the aggregate effect of immaterial items must also be considered. 
 
Cost-Benefit 
A departure from GAAP is permitted if the expected costs of reporting a transaction in 
compliance with GAAP exceed the expected benefits of compliance. 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.201 
MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
Management, auditors, and fraud examiners all have a responsibility with respect to the 
prevention and detection of fraud. This section of the Fraud Examiners’ Manual describes 
the regulations and best practices guidance for management, internal and external auditors, 
and fraud examiners in carrying out their respective anti-fraud responsibilities. 
 
 
Legislation and Best Practices 
An organization’s board of directors and senior management generally set the code of 
conduct for the company. This code of conduct is often referred to as the company’s “ethic” 
and is the standard by which all employees are expected to conduct themselves. If the 
company’s ethic is one of high integrity, it is anticipated that the employees will tend to be 
more honest. If, on the other hand, the ethic is one of corruption, the employees will view it 
as a license to be corrupt. “Ethical leadership has to come from inside, and from the top. 
Ethical considerations have got to be on senior management’s agenda. And they have to set 
the tone by example, not by sending memos,” says J. Gregory Dees, a professor at Harvard 
Business School. 
 
An unimpeachable company ethic does not, in and of itself, ensure that financial statement 
fraud will not occur. Other measures are required for management to discharge its 
responsibilities to prevent and detect fraudulent financial reporting. 
 
The Treadway Commission 
The National Commission on Fraudulent Financial Reporting, more commonly referred to 
as the Treadway Commission, was formed in the United States in 1985 to better define the 
responsibilities of the auditor in detecting and preventing fraud. The professional auditing 
organizations — the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, The Institute of 
Internal Auditors, and the American Accounting Association, among others — established 
the Treadway Commission to underwrite a study and make recommendations. In an effort 
to curb fraudulent financial reporting, the Treadway Commission offered four 
recommendations that, when combined with other measures, might help reduce the 
probability of fraudulent financial reporting. These recommendations are addressed to the 
board of directors’ audit committee. 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.202                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Mandatory Independent Audit Committee 
The board of directors oversees the conduct of management. The Treadway Commission 
recommended that each board of directors have an audit committee composed of outside 
directors. 
 
Written Charter 
The Treadway Commission also suggested that companies develop a written charter setting 
forth the duties and responsibilities of the audit committee. The board of directors should 
periodically review, modify, and approve this written charter. 
 
Resources and Authority 
According to the Treadway Commission, the existence of an audit committee and a written 
charter is not enough. The committee also must have adequate resources and authority to 
carry out its responsibilities. 
 
Informed, Vigilant, and Effective Audit Committees 
The audit committee should be composed of members who are informed, vigilant, and 
effective. 
 
The COSO Report 
In addition, in 1987, the Treadway Commission recommended that management of publicly 
held companies include with its management reports an acknowledgement of responsibility 
for internal controls and an assessment of its effectiveness in meeting those controls. The 
Treadway Commission formed the Committee on Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) to 
actualize its recommendations. In 1992, COSO issued Internal Control—Integrated Framework  
(followed by an addendum), which provided the following definition: 
 
Internal Control is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
achievement of objectives in the following categories:  
a)  reliability of financial reporting,  
b)  effectiveness and efficiency  of operations, and  
c) compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
 
COSO also identified, for management, five interrelated components of internal control: 
  
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.203 
• The control environment  sets the tone of an organization, influencing the control 
consciousness of the organization and providing a foundation for all other control 
components. 
• Risk assessment  is an entity’s identification and assessment of risks relevant to achieving 
control objectives. 
• Control activities  are an entity’s control policies and procedures. 
• Information and communication  is the exchange of information in a way that allows 
employees to carry out their responsibilities. 
• Monitoring  is the process that assesses the control environment over time.  
 
These components combined form an integrated system of controls. 
 
COSO Guidance for Smaller Public Companies 
In 2006, COSO issued a report titled Internal Control over Financial Reporting— Guidance for 
Smaller Public Companies, which provides guidance for small companies on implementing cost-
 effective internal controls over financial reporting as required under Sarbanes-Oxley Section 
404. While acknowledging that smaller public companies often face unique and 
disproportionate challenges in applying sound internal control practices, COSO noted that 
the benefits of good internal control outweigh the costs and add significant value to an 
organization. The guidance is split between three volumes and contains 20 principles related 
to the Internal Control—Integrated Framework, as well as 75 attributes related to these principles.  
 
The report outlines several methods small companies can utilize to establish and enhance 
cost-effective internal controls, such as widening and directing control from the top, 
emphasizing effective oversight on the part of the board of directors, compensating for 
limited segregation of duties, leveraging the abilities of commercially available information 
technology, and using management’s monitoring activities to offset shortcomings in other 
control areas. The report also discusses ways to achieve further efficiencies in designing, 
implementing, and assessing controls, including focusing on risk, adjusting documentation 
policies to fit the needs of the organization, and viewing internal control as an integrated 
process.  
 
More information on the COSO reports can be found at www.coso.org.  
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.204                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
On July 30, 2002, President Bush signed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. This law significantly 
changed the laws of corporate governance and the rules and regulations under which 
accounting firms and corporations must operate. Additionally, certain provisions 
considerably increased the responsibilities of management and the accounting profession 
with regard to fraud. Since the enactment of Sarbanes-Oxley, the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) has issued numerous SEC Releases that support and expand the Act’s 
requirements. Below is a summary of some of the most important provisions of Sarbanes-
 Oxley and the corresponding SEC rules that re late to fraud detection and prevention. More 
information about Sarbanes-Oxley can be found in the chapter entitled “The Law Related to 
Fraud” in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual. 
 
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, signed in July 2010, 
allows small public companies (those with less than $75 million in market cap) a permanent 
exemption from section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
 
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
Title I of Sarbanes-Oxley establishes the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
(PCAOB), whose purpose is: 
 
“to oversee the audit of public companies that are subject to the securities laws, and 
related matters, in order to protect the inte rests of investors and further the public 
interest in the preparation of informative,  accurate, and independent audit reports for 
companies the securities of which are sold to, and held by and for, public investors.”  
[Section 101] 
 
In short, the Board is charged with overseeing public company audits, setting audit 
standards, and investigating acts of noncompliance by auditors or audit firms. The Board is 
appointed and overseen by the Securities and Exchange Commission. It is made up of five 
persons, two who are or have been Certified Public Accountants (CPAs) and three who have 
never been CPAs. The Act lists the Board’s duties, which include: 
• Registering public accounting firms that audit publicly traded companies. 
• Establishing or adopting auditing, quality control, ethics, independence, and other 
standards relating to audits of publicly traded companies. 
• Inspecting registered public accounting firms. 
• Investigating registered public accounting firms and their employees, conducting 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.205 
disciplinary hearings, and imposing sanctions where justified. 
• Performing such other duties as are necessary to promote high professional standards 
among registered accounting firms, to improve the quality of audit services offered by 
those firms, and to protect investors. 
• Enforcing compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the rules of the Board, professional 
standards, and securities laws relating to public company audits. 
 
Registration with the Board 
Public accounting firms must register with the PCAOB in order to legally prepare or issue an 
audit report on a publicly traded company. In order to become registered, accounting firms 
must disclose, among other things, the names of all public companies they audited in the 
preceding year, the names of all public companies they expect to audit in the current year, 
and the annual fees they received from each of their public audit clients for audit, 
accounting, and non-audit services.  
 
Auditing, Quality Control, and Independence Standards and Rules 
Section 103 of the Act requires the Board to establish standards for auditing, quality control, 
ethics, independence, and other issues relating to audits of publicly traded companies. 
Although the Act places the responsibility on the Board to establish audit standards, it also 
sets forth certain rules that the Board is required to include in those auditing standards. 
These rules include the following:  
• Audit work papers must be maintained for at least seven years. 
• Auditing firms must include a concurring or second partner review and approval of audit 
reports, and concurring approval in the issuance of the audit report by a qualified person 
other than the person in charge of the audit. 
• All audit reports must describe the scope of testing of the company’s internal control 
structure and must present the auditor’s findings from the testing, including an 
evaluation of whether the internal control structure is acceptable, a description of 
material weaknesses in internal controls, and any material noncompliance with controls.  
 
Inspections of Registered Public Accounting Firms 
The Act also authorizes the Board to conduct regular inspections of public accounting firms 
to assess their degree of compliance with laws, rules, and professional standards regarding 
audits. Inspections are to be conducted once a year for firms that regularly audit more than 
100 public companies and at least once every three years for firms that regularly audit 
between 1 and 100 public companies.  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.206                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Investigations and Disciplinary Proceedings 
The Board has the authority to investigate registered public accounting firms (or their 
employees) for potential violations of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, professional standards, any 
rules established by the Board, or any securities laws relating to the preparation and issuance 
of audit reports. During an investigation, the Board has the power to compel testimony and 
document production.  
 
The Board also has the power to issue sanctions for violations or for non-cooperation with 
an investigation. Sanctions can include temporary or permanent suspension of a firm’s 
registration with the Board (which would mean the firm could no longer legally audit 
publicly traded companies), temporary or permanent suspension of a person’s right to be 
associated with a registered public accounting firm, prohibition from auditing public 
companies, and civil monetary penalties of up to $750,000 for an individual and up to 
$15,000,000 for a firm.  
 
Officers and Directors 
The Act includes several responsibilities for the officers and directors of public companies. 
 
Certification Obligations
The Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer of public companies must 
personally certify annual and quarterly SEC filings.  
 
Section 302 of the Act requires that the CEO and CFO personally certify the following: 
• They have personally reviewed the report.  
• Based on their knowledge, the report does not contain any material misstatement that 
would render the report misleading. 
• Based on their knowledge, the financial statements and information in the report fairly 
present, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the 
company.  
• They are responsible for establishing and maintaining internal controls and have 
designed such controls to ensure that material information relating to the company and 
its consolidated subsidiaries is made known to them; they have evaluated the 
effectiveness of internal controls within 90 days prior to the report; and they have 
presented their conclusions about the effectiveness of those controls in the report. 
• They have disclosed to their auditors and the audit committee any significant deficiencies 
in the controls that could adversely affect the company’s ability to record, process, 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.207 
summarize, and report financial data, and they have identified for their auditors any 
material weaknesses in internal controls. Further, they have disclosed to their auditors 
any fraud, whether material or not, that involves management or other employees who 
have a significant role in the company’s internal controls. 
• They have indicated in their report whether there have been significant changes in the 
company’s internal controls since the filing of  the last report, including any corrective 
actions with respect to previously identified significant deficiencies and material 
weaknesses. 
 
Internal Controls 
Under Section 404 of the Act, and SEC Release Nos. 33-8238 and 34-47986, management’s 
responsibility pertaining to the company’s internal control over financial reporting has been 
increased substantially.  
 
DEFINING INTERNAL CONTROL 
Internal control over financial reporting (ICOFR) is defined as: 
 
“ A process designed … to provide reasonable assurance re garding the reliability of financial reporting and the 
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles….” 
 
Additionally, ICOFR is deemed to include all policies and procedures that: 
• “Pertain to the maintenance of records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly 
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the [company]; 
• Provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit 
preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the [company] are being made only in 
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the [company]; and 
• Provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized 
acquisition, use or disposition of the [company ’s] assets that could have a material effect 
on the financial statements.” 
 
Examples of internal controls covered by Section 404 and the related Releases and Standards 
include, but are not limited to: 
  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.208                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Controls over initiating, authorizing, recording, processing, reconciling, and reporting 
significant account balances, transactions, and disclosures included in the financial 
statements. 
• Controls related to the prevention, identification, and detection of fraud. 
• Controls related to initiating and processing of non-routing and non-systematic 
transactions. 
• Controls related to the selection and application of appropriate accounting policies.  
 
MANAGEMENT’S REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL 
The provisions of Section 404 require management to acknowledge its responsibility for the 
ICOFR of the company and to assess the operating effectiveness of those controls. As a 
result, public companies must issue an additional internal control report within their annual 
report containing: 
• A statement of management’s responsibility for establishing and maintaining adequate 
ICOFR; 
• A statement identifying the framework that management used in conducting the 
assessment of the effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR; 
• Management’s assessment of the effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR as of the end of 
the company’s most recent fiscal year, including disclosure of any material weaknesses 
identified in the company’s ICOFR and an explicit statement as to whether the ICOFR 
is effective; and 
• A statement that the company’s independent auditor has issued an attestation report 
covering management’s assessment of the company’s ICOFR. The auditor’s attestation 
report must also be filed with the annual report.  
 
MANAGEMENT’S ASSESSMENT OF INTERNAL CONTROL 
In performing the ICOFR assessment, management must choose a suitable internal control 
framework against which to evaluate the design and effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR. 
The most commonly used model in the United States is the Internal Control—Integrated 
Framework established by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) of the 
Treadway Commission, which provides five components of effective internal controls: 
• Control Environment 
• Control Activities 
• Risk Assessment 
• Information and Communication 
• Monitoring 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.209 
The COSO framework is discussed in more detail in the “Fraud Prevention Programs” 
chapter in the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
Further detail on the Internal Control—Integrated Framework is also available at the COSO 
website (http://www.coso.org). 
  
Additionally, management must: 
• Determine which internal controls to test in performing the assessment, considering the 
significance of each control, both individually and in the aggregate; 
• Evaluate whether the failure of a control could result in a misstatement to the financial 
statements, the likelihood and magnitude of any resulting misstatement, and whether 
other controls are in place to mitigate this occurrence; 
• Determine which locations or business units to include in the assessment, if applicable; 
• Evaluate the design and operating effectiveness of the internal controls using the internal 
control framework chosen as a guide; 
• Evaluate the probability of occurrence and the size of potential misstatements resulting 
from the internal control deficiencies identified and determine whether they, either 
individually or in the aggregate, constitute material weaknesses (any deficiency where the 
likelihood of potential misstatement is more than remote) or significant deficiencies (any 
deficiency where the likelihood of potential misstatement is more than remote and the 
magnitude is more than inconsequential); 
• Provide sufficient documentation to support the assessment of ICOFR, including 
documenting the design of the internal controls and the results of management’s testing 
and evaluation; and 
• Communicate the assessment findings to the independent auditor and any other 
applicable parties. 
 
Recognizing that each company differs with regard to internal control structure, the rules 
state that the nature of the testing performed by management will depend on the specific 
circumstances of the company and the significance of the control being tested. However, the 
rules also assert that inquiries alone are generally not a sufficient basis for management’s 
assessment.  
 
In July 2007, the SEC issued guidance specifically  addressed to management about fulfilling 
their responsibilities pertaining to reporting on internal control over financial reporting. The 
guidance emphasizes a top-down, risk-based approach to management’s evaluation of 
ICOFR, and explicitly states that an evaluation performed in compliance with the guidance is 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.210                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
one way that management can satisfy the internal control requirements established by 
Sarbanes-Oxley. In providing direction to assist companies’ management in evaluation and 
assessment of the ICOFR, the Guidance addresses the following topics: 
• Identifying Financial Reporting Risks and Controls 
• Evaluating Evidence of the Operating Effectiveness of ICOFR 
• Reporting Considerations 
 
The full text of the SEC interpretive guidance can be found at 
http://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/2007/33-8810.pdf.  
 
Code of Ethics 
As required by Section 406 of the Act and SEC Release No. 33-8177, public companies must 
disclose in their annual report whether they have adopted a code of ethics for senior 
financial officers, and if they have not, they must explain their reasoning.  
 
DEFINING “CODE OF ETHICS” 
The rules define a “code of ethics” as a set of written standards that are designed to deter 
wrongdoing and to promote: 
• Honest and ethical conduct, including the ethical treatment of actual or apparent 
conflicts of interest between personal and professional interests; 
• Full, fair, accurate, timely, and understandable disclosure in all documents filed with the 
SEC and all other public communications; 
• Compliance with all applicable governmental laws, rules, and regulations; 
• The prompt reporting to the appropriate person or persons within the company of 
violations of the code; and 
• Accountability for adherence to the code. 
 
The SEC believes that the establishment of provisions beyond this definitional outline is 
best left to the discretion of the company. Therefore, the rules do not specify any detailed 
requirements, particular language, compliance procedures, or sanctions for violations that 
must be included in the code of ethics. The SEC does, however, explicitly encourage the 
adoption of codes that are broader and more comprehensive than necessary to meet the 
disclosure requirements. 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.211 
SENIOR FINANCIAL OFFICERS 
The senior financial officers that must be covered by the company’s code of ethics include 
the principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or 
controller, and persons performing similar functions. While the rules state that a company 
must have a specialized code of ethics that applies to senior financial officers, the company 
does not need to adopt a separate code of ethics for these officers. However, if it does not, 
the company’s general code of ethics should ex pressly state that it applies to all senior 
financial officers.  
 
DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 
In addition to the disclosure of the existence of the code of ethics in the annual report, the 
rules require that companies make publicly available the portions of their code of ethics that 
address the ethical considerations contained within the definition of “code of ethics” and 
that apply to the senior financial officers. To do so, the SEC permits companies to employ 
one of three alternative methods: 
• Filing the code of ethics that applies to the senior financial officers as an exhibit in the 
company’s annual report; 
• Posting the code of ethics that is relevant to the senior financial officers on its website, 
and disclosing the Internet address and the fact that the code is posted in this manner 
within the annual report; or 
• Providing a copy of the code of ethics to any person upon request, and without charge, 
provided the annual report contains an undertaking to do so and an explanation of how 
a person can make such a request.  
 
Public companies must also make known, either on a Form 8-K or on their website, any 
changes in and any waivers of the code of ethics relating to the senior financial officers. The 
nature of the change or waiver must be disclosed within five business days of its occurrence 
and, if disclosed on a website, must remain posted for 12 months.  
 
EXAMPLES OF CODES OF ETHICS 
The following are some examples of organizations that have adopted codes of ethics that 
meet the SEC’s guidelines. Additionally, the ACFE’s sample code of ethics is contained in 
the “Fraud Prevention Programs” chapter in the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section 
of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
• FEI (http://investor.fei.com/documentdisplay.cfm?DocumentID=2453)) 
• ExxonMobil 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.212                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
(http://www.exxonmobil.com/corporate/about_operations_sbc_ethics.aspx)) 
•  (http://media.corporate-ir.net/media_files/nys/nmg.a/reports/nmg_coefp.pdf) 
• McDonald’s ( http://www.mcdonalds.com/corp/invest/gov/officer_ethics.html) 
 
Audit Committee 
The audit committee of a company is a committee established by the board of directors for 
the purpose of overseeing the accounting, financial reporting, and auditing processes. 
Sections 301 and 407 of the Act and SEC Release Nos. 33-8177, 33-8220, 34-47235, and 34-
 47654 set out specific requirements for audit committees of public companies.  
 
Composition of the Audit Committee 
INDEPENDENCE 
Each member of the audit committee must be a member of the board of directors and must 
be “independent,” as evaluated by two criteria: 
• Fees—Audit committee members may only be compensated for their services on the 
board and any board committee. They cannot be paid by the company, or any of its 
subsidiaries, for any other consulting or advisory work, including indirect payments 
made by the company to a party related to the committee member. Audit committee 
members may receive any fixed retirement benefits they are entitled to for prior service 
with the company without violating this provision, as long as the benefits are not 
contingent upon the member’s continued service. 
• Affiliation—Audit committee members cannot be “affiliated persons” of the company 
or any other company related to it. This precludes executive officers, 
director/employees, general partners, and managing members of the company, or its 
parent, subsidiary, or sister company, from serving on the audit committee. There is a 
safe harbor provision that excludes members from being considered an affiliated person 
as long as they are not an executive officer of the company or any of its subsidiaries, and 
they are not a shareholder of 10 percent or more of any class of voting stock of the 
company or any of its subsidiaries. 
 
The SEC permits three exemptions from the independence standards. The first provides a 
one-year phase-in period for public non-investment companies, whereby there must be at 
least one fully independent member when the company goes public, a majority of 
independent members within 90 days, and a fully independent committee within one year. 
The second exemption allows a committee member to simultaneously sit on the board of 
directors of the company and of an affiliated company (i.e., a parent, subsidiary, or sister 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.213 
company) without being considered an affiliated person, provided the member otherwise 
meets the independence criteria. The final exemption exists to provide a number of 
accommodations for “foreign private issuers,” or listed companies that are incorporated 
outside of the United States. The SEC has stated that beyond these three exemptions, no 
additional exemptions will be granted, nor will it consider exemptions or waivers for 
particular relationships on a case-by-case basis. 
 
FINANCIAL EXPERT 
The board of directors must include a disclosure in the company’s annual report stating 
whether or not there is at least one member of its audit committee that qualifies as an “audit 
committee financial expert.” If there is, the company must also include the name of the 
expert, and whether the expert is independent from management. If there is not, an 
explanation must be given as to why the committee does not have such an expert. 
Additionally, the board is permitted, but not required, to disclose that it has more than one 
audit committee financial expert on its audit committee. 
 
To qualify as an “audit committee financial expert,” an individual must possess: 
• An understanding of generally accepted accounting principles and of financial 
statements; 
• The ability to evaluate the application of accounting principles used in the accounting for 
estimates, accruals, and reserves; 
• Experience in preparing, auditing, analyzing, or evaluating financial statements 
containing accounting issues that are “gene rally comparable” to those expected to be 
raised in the company’s financial statements, or experience supervising someone engaged 
in such activities; 
• An understanding of internal controls and financial reporting procedures; and 
• An understanding of the functions of an audit committee. 
 
The rules state that the audit committee financial expert must have acquired these attributes 
through education and experience from serving as or actively supervising a principal 
financial officer, principal accounting officer, controller, public accountant or auditor, or 
other similar position, or through the oversight or assessment of companies or public 
accountants regarding the preparation, audit, or evaluation of financial statements. The SEC 
also recognizes that individuals that do not meet any of these requirements but have “other 
relevant experience” may qualify as an audit committee financial expert. However, any board 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.214                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of directors that qualifies an expert under this category is required to provide a brief listing 
of that person’s experience with the disclosure in the annual report.  
 
In determining whether an individual qualifies as an audit committee financial expert, the 
board of directors should consider all relevant facts and circumstances including, but not 
limited to, certain qualitative factors, such as the level of the person’s accounting or financial 
education, whether the person is a CPA, whether the person has previously served as a CFO 
or controller of a public company, the person’s past or current membership on other audit 
committees, and any other relevant qualifications or experience that would assist in 
understanding and evaluating the company’s financial statements. The SEC emphasizes that 
such factors are merely examples and should be considered only as part of an evaluation of 
the person’s knowledge and experience as a whole. 
 
To dissuade hesitancy to serve as an audit committee financial expert, the SEC has expressly 
stated that the duties, obligations, and liability of the member serving as the expert are no 
greater than the duties, obligations, and liability of all other members of the audit committee. 
Similarly, the designation of an audit committee member as a financial expert does not 
change the duties, obligations, or liability of any other board or audit committee members.  
 
Responsibilities Relating to External Auditors 
The audit committee has sole responsibility for hiring, paying, retaining, overseeing, and, if 
necessary, firing the company’s outside auditors, as well as the ultimate authority to approve 
all audit engagement fees and terms. As a result, the external auditors must report directly to 
the audit committee. The committee is also charged with resolving any disputes that arise 
between the external auditors and management regarding financial reporting issues. 
 
All audit and permitted non-audit services, other than de minimis services, provided by the 
external auditor must be pre-approved by the audit committee. The audit committee can 
accomplish this either by approving all services separately prior to each engagement or by 
establishing a detailed set of pre-approval policies and procedures covering all engagements, 
as long as the audit committee is informed on a timely basis of each service and the 
responsibility of pre-approval cannot be shifted to management. If the committee chooses 
to implement a set of pre-approval policies and procedures, then either a clear description or 
copy of those policies and procedures must be included with the company’s proxy 
statement. 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.215 
Procedures for Handling Complaints 
The audit committee is required to establish procedures (e.g., a hotline) for receiving, 
retaining, and dealing with complaints, including confidential or anonymous employee tips, 
regarding irregularities in the company’s accounting methods, internal controls, or auditing 
matters.  
 
The SEC does not require any specific procedures for handling complaints, but rather allows 
the audit committee to determine the most appropriate procedures for the company’s 
circumstances. Included in this flexibility is the ability of the audit committee to defer the 
receipt and screening of the complaints to another party, such as a messaging service. 
However, when complaints are received by a party outside of the audit committee, the 
procedures should dictate that the tips are ultimately directed to the audit committee for 
resolution. Further, the procedures should be designed such that management is not 
exclusively responsible for receiving and screening the complaints, to prevent unscrupulous 
managers from mishandling complaints or retaliating against employee complainants. 
Ultimately, the enactment of formal procedures should encourage the disclosure of concerns 
and promote proper conduct throughout the organization. The established procedures 
should also allow the audit committee to be alerted to potential problems before serious 
consequences arise. 
 
Authority to Engage Outside Advisors 
In certain situations, audit committees may want to consult experts other than those hired by 
management, especially when faced with possible conflicts of management interests. The 
rules provide that audit committees are allowed to engage any outside advisors, such as 
experts in specific accounting issues, that may be necessary to properly carry out their duties.  
 
Funding 
The audit committee is entitled to receive appropriate funding from the company for: 
• Fees paid to the external auditors for performance of any audit, review, or attestation 
engagements; 
• Payments to any outside advisors retained by the audit committee; and 
• Any administrative expenses necessary for the audit committee to carry out its duties. 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.216                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
External Auditors 
Reports to the Audit Committee 
Auditors must report directly to the audit committee—not management—and must make 
timely reports on the following: 
• All critical accounting policies and practices used; 
• Alternative GAAP methods that were discussed with management, the ramifications of 
the use of those alternative treatments, and the treatment preferred by the auditors; and 
• Any other material written communications between the auditors and management, such 
as any management letter or the schedule of unadjusted audit differences. 
 
Report over Internal Controls 
Auditors must also now attest to and issue a report on management’s assessment of internal 
control over financial reporting under Section 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley. This requirement is 
covered in more detail in the previous section on PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 5 — An 
Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is Integrated with  An Audit of Financial 
Statements. 
 
Whistleblower Protection 
In addition to requiring the audit committee to establish procedures to handle employee tips 
and complaints, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act includes two provisions that create broad 
protections for corporate whistleblowers.  
 
Civil Liability 
Section 806 of the Act creates a civil liability for an employer who, out of retaliation, fires, 
demotes, suspends, threatens, harasses, or discriminates against an employee who provided 
information or otherwise assisted in an investigation of fraudulent activity. Employees are 
also protected against retaliation for filing, testifying, participating, or otherwise assisting in a 
proceeding filed or about to be filed relating to an alleged violation of securities laws and 
regulations. Employees that were retaliated against in such a manner are entitled to 
compensatory damages under Section 806, including reinstatement with back pay and 
interest and compensation for legal fees. It should be noted, however, that this provision 
does not provide protection to all whistleblowers as it only covers employees of publicly 
traded companies.  
 
Financial Transactions Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.217 
Criminal Sanctions 
Section 1107 of the Act establishes criminal sanctions for anyone who intentionally retaliates 
against another party for providing information regarding an alleged Federal offense to a law 
enforcement officer. Punishments for violating the provision include fines of up to $250,000 
and up to 10 years in prison for individuals and fines of up to $500,000 for corporations. 
Unlike the civil liability, the protection provided under Section 1107 applies to all individuals, 
regardless of where they work.  
 
The whistleblower protection provisions are discussed in more detail in the “Law Related to 
Fraud” chapter in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
Civil and Criminal Penalties for Noncompliance 
Depending on which particular provision of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is violated, the penalties 
can be severe. In addition to creating additional criminal offenses (e.g., the whistleblower 
retaliation crime discussed above), it increases the jail term for existing crimes such as mail 
fraud and wire fraud from five to twenty years. It also makes it a crime to destroy documents 
and requires auditors of public companies to keep work papers for at least five years. 
 
The Act also authorizes the SEC to freeze questioned assets during an investigation. 
Additionally, section 304 of the Act requires that if a public company is required to prepare 
an accounting restatement due to misconduct that results in material non-compliance with 
any financial reporting requirement, the CEO and CFO shall reimburse the company for:  
• Any bonuses or other incentive-based or equity-based compensation that they received 
during the 12-month period following the first public issuance or filing (whichever is 
earlier) of a financial document embodying such financial reporting requirement; and 
• Profits on the sale of company securities during such 12-month period. 
 
Private Securities Litigation Reform Act  
The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 drastically changed the procedures and 
proof required in securities fraud cases. It also included additional responsibilities for 
independent auditors of public companies. Under the Act, each audit of the financial 
statements of a public company must include the following: 
• Procedures designed to provide reasonable assurance of detecting illegal acts that would 
have a direct and material effect on the determination of financial statement amounts. 
• Procedures designed to identify related-party transactions that are material to the 
financial statements or otherwise require disclosure therein. 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.218                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• An evaluation of whether there is substantial doubt about the ability of the issuer to 
continue as a going concern during the ensuing fiscal year. 
 
The term illegal act is defined to mean any act or omission “that violates any law, rule, or 
regulation having the force of law.” 
 
Additionally, if in the course of an audit, an auditor “detects or otherwise becomes aware 
that an illegal act (whether or not perceived to have a material effect on the financial 
statements of the issuer) has or might have occurred,” the auditor must then: 
• Determine and consider the possible effect of the illegal act on the financial statements 
of the company, including any contingent monetary effects such as fines, penalties, and 
damages; 
• Inform the appropriate level of management “as soon as practicable”; and 
• Assure that the audit committee (or the board of directors in the absence of an audit 
committee) is adequately informed of the illegal acts that have been detected unless such 
acts are “clearly inconsequential.” 
 
The Reform Act provides further that the auditor must take notice of what, if any, action is 
taken by the company in response. If the auditor concludes that the illegal act has a material 
effect on the financial statements of the company, the auditor must then determine: 
• Whether senior management has taken “tim ely and appropriate remedial actions,” and 
• Whether the failure to take remedial action is “reasonably expected to warrant departure 
from a standard report of the auditor, when made, or warrant resignation from the audit 
engagement.”  
 
If the auditor concludes that senior management has failed to appropriately address the 
situation, he must report his conclusions to the board of directors. If the board receives such 
a report, the board is then required to notify the SEC within one business day and send a 
copy of the SEC notice to the auditor. If the auditor does not receive a copy of this notice 
before the one-day deadline, then the auditor is required to furnish the SEC with a copy of 
his report to the board. 
 
The auditor is provided with some protection, however. The Act expressly provides that the 
auditor cannot be liable in a private action for any statements contained in the auditor’s 
report to the SEC.  
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.219 
Management 
Ultimately, management is responsible for the prevention and detection of fraud within an 
organization. It is management’s job to ensure the proper internal controls are in place to 
prevent fraud, as well as to detect it. Although management may not execute all of the 
controls—as the performance of internal cont rol functions are generally spread across 
individuals throughout the entire organization, including individual contributors, 
management, and even the Board of Directors—management is also responsible for 
monitoring and remediating internal controls to ensure they are effectively designed and 
operating to prevent and detect fraud. 
 
As mentioned above, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 includes several requirements of 
management in public companies. Also discussed above, COSO provided several guidelines 
for management’s prevention and detection of fraud through the internal control 
environment. 
 
Although preparing the financial statements is the responsibility of management, fraud is 
also frequently investigated by members of management or by people under the direction 
and control of management. This can present potential conflicts.   
 
Document Retention Policies 
Management of an organization should ensure that the organization has a proper and 
effective document retention policy (DRP) in place. When establishing a document retention 
policy, it is imperative that the organization consider all federal and state laws and 
regulations regarding record-keeping requirements. Industries such as health care, banking, 
and auditing contain trade-specific rules for documenting and retaining records. 
Furthermore, companies should continuously check for legal updates concerning these 
requirements. To have a document retention policy that ignores pertinent record-keeping 
requirements could lead to statutory violations. 
 
An effective document retention policy requires that a company (1) establish retention 
protocols before it foresees litigation or official investigation; (2) develop, review, and/or 
amend a policy for compliance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations; (3) 
ensure the reasonableness of the policy according to the company’s business practices; (4) 
provide a concise explanation of what is to be destroyed and when; (5) provide adequate 
protocols for management of electronic documents; and (6) clearly set forth when the policy 
should be immobilized due to a pending investigation or foreseeable litigation.  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.220                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Because industries vary significantly in the types of documents produced, received, and 
distributed, courts lean toward a subjective “reasonableness” standard in determining 
whether a particular policy is adequate. Thus, each company must develop a policy that is 
specifically tailored to its business practices. A company may find it helpful to refer to 
retention policies of other companies for guidance, but should avoid duplicating such 
policies. By establishing individual business policies and compartmentalizing low-value and 
high-value documents, companies can gain quick access to internal documents. 
 
A properly planned and executed document retention policy will do little good if individuals 
within the company are unaware of it. Not only must employees be aware of the policy, they 
must also understand what is to be destroyed and when. 
 
While electronic communication continues to soar, companies struggle to catch up with its 
agility. It is vital that companies include protocols for preserving and destroying electronic 
documents. Companies with information technology (IT) departments should develop 
procedures for handling electronic data. Company counsels, executives, and managers 
should be aware of how electronic data is stored and destroyed. For example, an e-mail 
deleted by an employee may remain in a company’s computer systems until an administrator 
permanently deletes it. Such situations must be recognized and addressed when designing a 
document retention policy. 
 
What Documents Should Be Kept?   
One of the first steps in establishing a document retention policy is to identify the types of 
documents that need to be retained or destroyed. It is important to remember that every 
organization is different; thus, an organization may require the retention of documents that 
are not provided for in this text. All types of documents produced by an organization must 
be initially accounted for. This includes tangible and electronic documents, and is never 
limited to financial documents. Accounting records, corporate tax records, bank records, 
employment records, various workplace records (including in-house e-mails and client 
correspondence), and legal records must be considered when constructing a DRP for a 
particular organization.  
 
A sample document retention policy that contains a list of records to be taken into account 
when determining retention protocol is included at the end of this chapter. A company 
should check with its local counsel regarding specific state statutes requiring different 
periods. 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.221 
Other factors to consider in identifying documents include member/constituent 
expectations, IRS regulations, business taxable income regulations, standards under 
Sarbanes-Oxley, and internal factors (e.g., changes in Board of Directors, Board resolutions, 
patents, and copyrights). 
 
Records typically generated by a company that reflect or materially relate to professional 
services must also be identified in the DRP. For example, accounting and auditing firms 
should mention the retention and destruction of documents that make up client files, such as 
client billing and payment records, correspondence, and time records. 
 
Document Storage 
In this electronic age, most companies are backing up documents via electronic media rather 
than filling file cabinets. Storage expense scares small businesses. Document storage 
companies are available for storing tangible and electronic documents, but can be costly. 
Hard drive back-up appears to be the most cost efficient means of storage, but it requires 
companies to have the computer gusto to withstand large amounts of information.  
 
Most importantly, documents must remain safe (for confidentiality and destruction 
purposes) and be easily accessible in the event of potential litigation and legal requests for 
documents. 
 
Document Destruction 
An organization must cease destruction of documents when faced with potential litigation or 
when a legal document request is pending or imminent. Destruction under a valid DRP will 
be ineffective if documents are not actually destroyed before a potential litigation trigger 
occurs. Thus, it is imperative that the DRP provides for complete destruction of documents 
that can be validly expunged during the proper periods under the policy. Documents should 
be destroyed by shredding or by some other means that will render them unreadable. 
Similarly, a protocol for the destruction of electronic data should be in place to ensure that 
documents to be destroyed are actually destroyed. The deletion of e-mails or other files on 
one’s computer does not mean that such records are removed from evidence.  
 
DRP Managers 
Finally, in order to properly execute a DRP, someone with detailed knowledge of the DRP 
should be in charge of the policy and should ensure that employees understand and follow it 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.222                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
as designed. This individual should be a senior-level employee with the power to enforce the 
policy. A DRP manager is responsible for: 
• Implementing the DRP; 
• Ensuring that employees understand and follow the DRP’s purpose; 
• Providing oversight on actual retention and destruction of documents;  
• Ensuring proper storage of documents; 
• Periodically following-up with counsel to ensure proper retention periods are in place;  
• Suspending the destruction of documents upon foreseeable litigation; and 
• Informing corporate officers, directors, and employees of changes in relation to the 
DRP. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, and other rules and 
regulations either require or strongly encourage the implementation of one or more fraud 
prevention programs. In most instances, management is responsible for the institution of 
such programs. 
 
These programs, as well as further details regarding management’s responsibility for fraud, 
are discussed in detail in the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud 
Examiners  Manual. 
 
Certified Fraud Examiners, external auditors, and internal auditors also play key roles in the 
detection and deterrence of fraudulent financial reporting. Following is a discussion of their 
professional responsibilities. 
 
 
External Auditors 
Changes in the auditing landscape, primarily those stemming from the passage of the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, have led to a dichotomy of standards for external auditors. Auditors of 
public companies — companies registered with the SEC—must adhere to the auditing rules 
promulgated by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). Conversely, 
for audits of non-SEC-registered entities, the generally accepted auditing standards laid out 
by the AICPA’s Auditing Standards Board (ASB) apply. It should be noted, however, that 
the PCAOB adopted all of the ASB’s standards already in existence on April 16, 2003 (i.e., 
all standards issued through Statement on Auditing Standard (SAS) No. 101) as interim 
standards applicable to auditors of public companies, unless and until such standards are 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.223 
superseded or amended by the PCAOB. Therefore, the discussion below on AU Section 
316, which codifies SAS No. 99, applies to all external auditors; whereas, AU sections 314 
and 339, which respectively codify SAS Nos. 109 and 103, apply to audits of non-public 
entities only. Likewise, the PCAOB standards discussed apply only to auditors of SEC-
 registered companies.  
 
AU Section 316 — Consideration of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit (Source: SAS Nos. 99 and 113) 
In 1996, the AICPA’s Auditing Standards Board issued SAS No. 82, Consideration of Fraud in a 
Financial Statement Audit, in response to questions and criticisms of the auditing and 
accounting profession’s lack of adequate addre ssing of the subject of fraud. Following the 
high-profile financial frauds that occurred in 2001 and 2002, the ASB replaced SAS No. 82 
with SAS No. 99, Consideration of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit, to give expanded 
guidance to auditors for detecting material fraud. Per the AICPA, the standard was part of 
an effort to “restore investor confidence in U.S. capital markets and re-establish audited 
financial statements as a clear picture window into Corporate America.” The standard 
became effective for audits of financial statements for periods beginning on or after 
December 15, 2002, and is codified in AU section 316, Consideration of Fraud in a Financial 
Statement Audit. 
 
AU section 110, Responsibilities and Functions of the Independent Auditor,  states, “The auditor has 
a responsibility to plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether 
the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether caused by error or fraud.” 
The purpose of AU section 316 is to “establis h standards and provide guidance to auditors 
in fulfilling that responsibility.”  
 
AU section 316 is divided into 10 main sections: 
• Description and characteristics of fraud 
• Importance of exercising professional skepticism 
• Discussion among engagement personnel regarding risk of material misstatement due to 
fraud 
• Obtaining information needed to identify risks of material misstatements due to fraud 
• Identifying risks that may result in material misstatements due to fraud 
• Assessing the identified risks after taking into account an evaluation of the entity’s 
programs and controls 
• Responding to the results of the assessment 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.224                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Evaluating audit evidence 
• Communicating about fraud to management, the audit committee, and others 
• Documenting the auditor’s consideration of fraud 
 
Following is a brief description of each of these sections. Practitioners in this area should 
review AU section 316 in its entirety for more detailed information. A copy of the entire 
standard can be obtained from the AICPA (www.aicpa.org). 
 
Description and Characteristics of Fraud 
AU section 316 emphasizes that while auditors do not make legal determinations about the 
existence of fraud, they should be interested in all acts that result in material misstatements 
of the financial statements. Such misstatements can be the result of either fraud or error, 
depending on whether the misstatements are intentional or unintentional.  
 
Two types of misstatements are considered relevant for audit purposes: 
• Misstatements arising from fraudulent financial reporting 
• Misstatements arising from misappropriation of assets 
 
MISSTATEMENTS ARISING FROM FRAUDULENT FINANCIAL REPORTING 
This category is defined as intentional misstatements or omissions of amounts or disclosures 
in financial statements that are “designed to deceive financial statement users.”   
 
Fraudulent financial reporting may be accomplished by: 
• Manipulating, falsifying, or altering acco unting records or supporting documents; 
• Misrepresenting or intentionally omitting events, transactions, or other significant 
information; or  
• Intentionally misapplying accounting principles relating to amounts, classification, 
manner of presentation, or disclosure. 
 
MISSTATEMENTS ARISING FROM MISAPPROPRIATION OF ASSETS 
Also referred to as theft or defalcation, this category includes the theft of an entity’s assets 
where the effect of the theft causes the financial statements, in all material respects, not to be 
in conformity with GAAP. 
 
AU section 316 goes on to remind the auditor that, by definition, fraud often is concealed, 
and management is in a position to perpetrate fraud more easily because it is in a position of 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.225 
being able to directly or indirectly manipulate accounting records. Auditors cannot obtain 
absolute assurance that material misstatements are not present, but auditors should be aware 
of the possibility that fraud might be concealed and that employees might be in collusion 
with each other or outside vendors. If auditors notice records or activities that seem unusual, 
then they should at least consider the possibility that fraud might have occurred. 
 
Importance of Exercising Professional Skepticism 
AU section 230, Due Professional Care in the Performance of Work, states that due professional 
care requires the auditor to exercise professional skepticism. Because of the characteristics of 
fraud, the auditor should conduct the audit “w ith a mindset that recognizes the possibility 
that a material misstatement due to fraud could be present.” AU section 230 also requires an 
“ongoing questioning” of whether information the auditor obtains could suggest a material 
misstatement due to fraud. 
 
Discussion Among Engagement Personnel Regarding Risk of Material Misstatement Due to Fraud 
Prior to or in conjunction with the information-gathering procedures discussed below, the 
members of the audit team should discuss the potential for material misstatements due to 
fraud. 
 
The discussion should include “brainstorming” among the audit team members about the 
following: 
• How and where they believe the entity’s financial statements might be susceptible to 
fraud; 
• How management could perpetrate or conceal fraud; and  
• How assets of the entity could be misappropriated. 
 
This discussion should also include a consideration of known external and internal factors 
affecting the entity that might: 
• Create incentives/pressures for management and others to commit fraud; 
• Provide the opportunity for fraud to be perpetrated; and 
• Indicate a culture or environment that enables management and others to rationalize 
committing fraud. 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.226                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Furthermore, the discussion should emphasize the need to maintain “a questioning mind” in 
gathering and evaluating evidence throughout the audit and to obtain additional information 
if necessary. 
 
Obtaining Information Needed to Identify Risks of Material Misstatements Due to Fraud 
AU section 314, Understanding the Entity and Its Environment and Assessing the Risks of Material 
Misstatement, provides guidance on how the auditor obtains knowledge about the entity and 
its environment, including its internal control. As part of that process, the auditor should 
perform the following procedures to obtain information to use in identifying the risks of 
material misstatement due to fraud: 
• Make inquiries of management and others within the entity to obtain their views on the 
risks of fraud and how those risks are addressed; 
• Consider any unusual or unexpected relationships that have been identified in 
performing analytical procedures in planning the audit; 
• Consider whether one or more fraud risk factors exist; and 
• Consider other information that may be helpful in the identification of risks of material 
misstatement due to fraud. 
 
MAKING INQUIRIES OF MANAGEMENT AND OTHERS WITHIN THE ENTITY TO OBTAIN THEIR VIEWS ABOUT THE RISKS OF FRAUD AND HOW THOSE RISKS ARE ADDRESSED 
This step involves asking management about a number of issues, including: 
• Whether management has knowledge of fraud or suspected fraud; 
• Management’s understanding of the risks of fraud; 
• Programs and controls the entity has established to help prevent, deter, or detect fraud; 
and 
• Whether and how management communicates to employees its views on business 
practices and ethical behavior. 
 
The auditor should also question the audit committee directly about its views concerning the 
risks of fraud and whether the committee has knowledge of fraud or suspected fraud. The 
same should be done with the company’s internal audit department.  
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.227 
Additionally, the auditor may need to conduct similar inquiries of the entity’s other 
personnel if the auditor believes they may have additional information about the risks of 
fraud. 
 
CONSIDERING THE RESULTS OF ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES PERFORMED IN PLANNING THE AUDIT  
AU section 329, Analytical Procedures, requires that analytical procedures be performed in 
planning the audit with the objective of identifying the existence of unusual transactions or 
events, and amounts, ratios, and trends that might indicate matters “that have financial 
statement and audit planning implications.” If  the results of these procedures yield unusual 
or unexpected relationships, the auditor should consider the results in identifying the risks of 
material misstatement due to fraud. 
 
CONSIDERING FRAUD RISK FACTORS 
As discussed above, even though fraud is concealed, the auditor may identify events or 
conditions that indicate incentives or pressures to commit fraud, opportunities to carry out 
fraud, or attitudes and rationalizations to justify fraudulent conduct. These events and 
conditions are referred to as “fraud risk factors.” The auditor should consider whether one 
or more fraud risk factors are present and should be considered in identifying and assessing 
the risks of material misstatement due to fraud. However, the auditor should be careful not 
to create a laundry list of factors that are only given cursory consideration. The Appendix to 
AU section 316 contains a list of examples of fraud risk factors. 
 
CONSIDERING OTHER INFORMATION THAT MIGHT BE HELPFUL IN IDENTIFYING RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT DUE TO FRAUD 
Finally, the auditor should consider any other information that might be helpful in 
identifying the risks of material misstatement due to fraud. 
 
Identifying Risks that May Result in Material Misstatements Due to Fraud 
After gathering the information as discussed above, the auditor should consider the 
information in the context of the three conditions present when fraud occurs—
 incentives/pressures, opportunities, and attitudes/rationalizations. 
 
The auditor should consider: 
• The type of risk that may exist, i.e., whether it involves fraudulent financial reporting or 
misappropriation of assets; 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.228                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The significance  of the risk, i.e., whether it is of a magnitude that could result in a possible 
material misstatement; 
• The likelihood  of the risk, i.e., the likelihood that it will result in a material misstatement; 
and 
• The pervasiveness of the risk, i.e., whether the potential risk is pervasive to the financial 
statement as a whole or is specifically related to a particular assertion, account, or class of 
transactions. 
 
Assessing the Identified Risks After Taking into Account an Evaluation of the Entity’s Programs and Controls 
AU section 314 requires the auditor to obtain an understanding of each of the five 
components of internal controls sufficient to plan the audit. As part of this requirement, the 
auditor should evaluate whether the entity’s prog rams and controls that address identified 
risks of fraud have been suitably designed and placed in operation. These programs and 
controls may involve: 
• Specific controls designed to mitigate specific risks of fraud (e.g., controls to prevent 
misappropriation of particular, susceptible assets), and  
• Broader programs designed to prevent, deter, and detect fraud (e.g., ethics policies). 
 
Exhibit I of AU section 316 provides examples of programs and controls an entity might 
implement to create a culture of honesty and to prevent fraud (see also the chapter on 
“Fraud Prevention Programs” in the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual ). 
 
Responding to the Results of the Assessment 
Once the auditor has gathered the information and assessed the risk of fraud, he must 
determine what impact the assessment will have on how the audit is conducted. For 
example, the auditor may need to design additional or different audit procedures to obtain 
more reliable evidence in support of account balances, transactions, etc., or to obtain 
additional corroboration of management’s expl anations and representations concerning 
material matters (e.g., third-party confirmation, documentation from independent sources, 
use of a specialist, and analytical procedures). 
 
OVERALL RESPONSES TO THE RISK OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT 
Judgments about the risk of material misstatem ent due to fraud have an overall effect on 
how the audit is conducted in several ways: 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.229 
• Assignment of personnel and supervision. The auditor may need to consult with 
specialists in a particular field. 
• Accounting principles. The auditor should consider management’s selection and 
application of significant accounting principles, particularly those related to subjective 
measurements and complex transactions. 
• Predictability of auditing procedures. The auditor should incorporate an “element of 
unpredictability” in the selection of auditing procedures to be performed, such as using 
differing sampling methods, and performing procedures at different locations or at 
locations on an unannounced basis. 
 
RESPONSES INVOLVING THE NATURE, TIMING, AND EXTENT OF PROCEDURES TO BE PERFORMED TO ADDRESS THE IDENTIFIED RISKS 
This section notes that the auditing procedures performed in response to identified risks will 
vary depending on the type of risks identified. Such procedures may involve both 
substantive tests and tests of the operating effectiveness of the entity’s internal controls. 
However, because management may have the ability to override controls that may otherwise 
appear to be operating effectively, it is unlikely that the audit risk can be reduced 
appropriately by performing only tests of controls. 
  
Therefore, the auditor’s response to specifically identified risks of fraud should include the 
following: 
• Changing the nature  of the auditing procedures to obtain more reliable or additional 
corroborative information by, for example, consulting independent sources or 
conducting physical inspections; 
• Changing the timing  of substantive tests by, for example, conducting substantive tests at 
or near the end of a reporting period; and 
• Ensuring the extent  of the procedures reflects the assessment of the risk of fraud by, for 
example, increasing sample sizes or performing analytical procedures at a more detailed 
level. 
 
EXAMPLES OF RESPONSES TO IDENTIFIED RISKS OF MISSTATEMENTS ARISING FROM FRAUDULENT FINANCIAL REPORTING  
AU section 316 provides a number of examples of responses the auditor may take in regard 
to risks of misstatements arising from both fraudulent financial reporting and asset 
misappropriation. 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.230                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Some of the examples of testing auditors may perform to address the risk of fraudulent 
financial reporting include: 
• Revenue recognition—Performing substantive analytical procedures relating to revenue 
using disaggregated data (for example, comparing revenue reported by month and by 
product line during the current reporting period with comparable prior periods); 
confirming with customers relevant contract terms; or questioning staff about shipments 
near the end of a period. 
• Inventory quantities—Examining inventory records to identify locations or items that 
require specific attention during or after the physical inventory count; performing a more 
rigorous examination of the count, such as examining contents of boxed items; and 
conducting additional testing of count sheets, tags, or other records. 
• Management estimates—Developing or engaging  a specialist to develop an independent 
estimate for comparison to management’s estimate and gathering further information to 
help evaluate the reasonableness of management’s estimates and underlying assumptions. 
 
EXAMPLES OF RESPONSES TO IDENTIFIED RISKS OF MISSTATEMENTS ARISING FROM MISAPPROPRIATIONS OF ASSETS 
If the auditor identifies a risk of material misstatement due to fraud relating to 
misappropriation of assets, the auditor may wish to include additional procedures. For 
example, if a particular asset is highly susceptible to misappropriation, the auditor may wish 
to conduct further testing of the controls to prevent and detect such misappropriation. 
 
RESPONSES TO FURTHER ADDRESS RISK OF MANAGEMENT OVERRIDE OF CONTROLS 
Because management is in a unique position to override existing controls, if such a risk is 
identified, the auditor may need to perform additional procedures to further address the risk 
of management override of controls. 
 
EXAMINING JOURNAL ENTRIES AND OTHER ADJUSTMENTS FOR EVIDENCE OF POSSIBLE MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT DUE TO FRAUD  
Material misstatements of financial statements often involve recording inappropriate or 
unauthorized journal entries, or making adjustments to amounts reported in the financial 
statements that are not reflected in journal entries (e.g., consolidating adjustments or 
reclassifications). Therefore, the auditor should design procedures to test the appropriateness 
of journal entries recorded in the general ledger and of other adjustments (e.g., entries 
posted directly to financial statement drafts). 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.231 
REVIEWING ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES FOR BIASES THAT COULD RESULT IN MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT DUE TO FRAUD  
In preparing financial statements, management is responsible for making a number of 
judgments or assumptions that affect significant accounting estimates. Fraudulent financial 
reporting is often accomplished through intentional misstatement of these estimates. In 
performing the audit, the auditor should consider whether the differences between estimates 
supported by the audit evidence and the estimates included in the financial statements 
indicate a possible bias on the part of management. If so, the auditor should perform a 
retrospective review of significant accounting estimates of the prior year. This review should 
provide the auditor with additional information about whether management may have a bias 
in presenting the current-year estimates. 
 
EVALUATING THE BUSINESS RATIONALE FOR SIGNIFICANT UNUSUAL TRANSACTIONS  
During the course of the audit, the auditor may become aware of significant transactions that 
are outside the normal course of the entity’s business or appear unusual given the auditor’s 
understanding of the entity’s operations. The auditor should gain an understanding of the 
business rationale for these transactions and whether the rationale (or lack thereof) suggests 
the transactions may have been entered into to engage in fraudulent financial reporting or to 
conceal misappropriation of assets. 
Some questions the auditor should consider include: 
• Are the transactions overly complex? 
• Has management discussed the transactions with the board of directors and audit 
committee? 
• Has management placed more emphasis on the need for a particular accounting 
treatment than on the underlying economics of the particular transaction? 
• Do the transactions involve unconsolidated, unrelated parties (including special purposes 
entities), or parties that do not have the substance or financial strength to support the 
transaction? 
 
Evaluating Audit Evidence 
ASSESSING RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT DUE TO FRAUD THROUGHOUT THE AUDIT 
During the performance of the audit, the auditor may identify conditions that either change 
or support a judgment regarding the assessment of risks. Examples include: 
• Discrepancies in the accounting records (e.g., transactions that are not recorded, 
unsupported or unauthorized balances or transactions, or last minute adjustments). 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.232                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Conflicting or missing evidential matter (e.g., missing or altered documents or records, 
unexplained items on reconciliations, or missing inventory). 
• Problematic or unusual relationships between the auditor and management (e.g., denial 
of access to records, facilities, employees, or customers; complaints by management 
about the conduct of the audit team; unusual delays in providing information; or 
unwillingness to add or revise disclosures). 
 
EVALUATING WHETHER ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES PERFORMED INDICATE A PREVIOUSLY UNRECOGNIZED RISK OF FRAUD 
Analytical procedures performed during the audit may result in identifying unusual or 
unexpected relationships that should be considered in assessing the risk of material 
misstatement due to fraud. Determining whether a particular trend or relationship is a risk of 
fraud requires professional judgment. Unusual relationships involving year-end revenue and 
income often are particularly relevant and might include (1) uncharacteristically large 
amounts of income reported in the last week or two of the reporting period from unusual 
transactions and (2) income that is inconsistent with trends in cash flow from operations. 
 
Analytical procedures are useful because management or employees generally are unable to 
manipulate all the information necessary to produce normal or expected relationships. AU 
section 316 provides several examples, including the following: 
• The relationship of net income to cash flows from operations may appear unusual 
because management recorded fictitious revenues and receivables, but was unable to 
manipulate cash. 
• Changes in inventory, accounts payable, sales, or costs of sales from the prior period to 
the current period may be inconsistent, indicating a possible theft of inventory because 
the employee was unable to manipulate all of the related accounts. 
• An unexpected or unexplained relationship between sales volume as determined from 
the accounting records and production statistics maintained by operations personnel 
(which are more difficult for management to manipulate) may indicate a possible 
misstatement of sales. 
 
EVALUATING RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT AT OR NEAR THE COMPLETION OF FIELDWORK 
At or near the completion of fieldwork, the auditor should evaluate whether the accumulated 
results of auditing procedures and other observations affect the assessment of risk of 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.233 
material misstatements due to fraud made earlier. Such an evaluation might identify whether 
there is a need to perform further audit procedures.  
 
RESPONDING TO MISSTATEMENTS THAT MAY BE THE RESULT OF FRAUD 
If the auditor believes that misstatements are or may be the result of fraud, but the effect of 
the misstatements is not material to the financial statements, the auditor nevertheless should 
evaluate their implications. The auditor should be especially concerned with any implications 
pertaining to the “organizational position” of the person involved as they may require a 
reevaluation of the assessment of the risk of material misstatement. For example, in the 
event of theft of cash from a small petty cash fund, the amount of the theft generally would 
not be of significance to the auditor; however, if the theft was perpetrated by higher-level 
management, then it might be indicative of a more pervasive problem such as  
management integrity. 
 
If the auditor believes that a misstatement is or may be the result of fraud, and either has 
determined that the effect of the misstatement is material to the financial statements, or has 
been unable to evaluate whether the effect is material, the auditor should: 
• Attempt to obtain additional evidence to determine whether material fraud occurred and 
its effect on the financial statements; 
• Consider the implications for other aspects of the audit; 
• Discuss the matter and the approach for further investigation with an appropriate level 
of management that is at least one level above those involved, and with senior 
management and the audit committee; and 
• If appropriate, suggest the client consult with legal counsel. 
 
Communicating About Possible Fraud to Management, the Audit Committee, and Others 
AU section 316 states, “Whenever an auditor has determined that there is evidence that 
fraud may exist, the matter should be brought to the attention of an appropriate level of 
management.” It is considered appropriate to do  so even if the matter might be considered 
inconsequential. Fraud involving senior management and fraud (by anyone) that causes a 
material misstatement should be reported directly to those charged with governance. 
 
If the auditor has identified risks of material misstatement due to fraud that have continuing 
control implications, the auditor should consider whether these risks should be 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.234                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
communicated to those charged with governance. Conversely, the auditor should consider 
whether the absence of controls to deter, detect, or prevent fraud should be reported.  
 
The disclosure of possible fraud to parties other than the client’s senior management and 
those charged with governance is ordinarily not part of the auditor’s responsibilities and may 
be precluded by the auditor’s legal or ethical obligations of confidentiality, unless the matter 
is reflected in the auditor’s report. 
 
However, AU section 316 points out that there may be a duty to disclose the information to 
outside parties in the following circumstances: 
• To comply with certain legal and regulatory requirements (e.g., SEC rules); 
• To inform successor auditors pursuant to AU section 315, Communications Between 
Predecessor and Successor Auditors; 
• In response to a subpoena; and 
• To a funding agency or other specified agency in accordance with the requirements for 
audits of entities that receive governmental financial assistance. 
 
Documenting the Auditor’s Consideration of Fraud 
AU section 316 concludes by requiring that auditors document the following: 
• Discussion among engagement personnel regarding the susceptibility of the entity’s 
financial statements to material misstatement due to fraud (including how and when the 
discussion occurred, the team members who participated, and the subject matter 
discussed); 
• Procedures performed to obtain information necessary to identify and assess the risks of 
material misstatement due to fraud; 
• Specific risks of material misstatement due to fraud that were identified and the auditor’s 
response to those risks; 
• The reasons supporting the auditor’s conclusion, if the auditor has not identified 
improper revenue recognition as a risk; 
• The results of the procedures performed to further address the risk of management 
override of controls; 
• Other conditions and analytical relationships that caused the auditor to believe that 
additional auditing procedures or other responses were required to address such risks; 
and  
• The nature of the communication about fraud made to management, those charged with 
governance, or others. 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.235 
PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 5—An Audit of Internal Control over Financial Reporting that Is Integrated with an Audit of Financial Statements  
In May 2007, the PCAOB adopted Auditing Standard No. 5, An Audit of Internal Control Over 
Financial Reporting That Is Integrated With An Audit of Financial Statements, as a replacement to 
Auditing Standard No. 2, An Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting Performed in 
Conjunction With an Audit of Financial Statements,  the previous standard governing audits of 
internal control over financial reporting (ICO FR) as mandated by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. 
The auditing standard was intended to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of internal 
control audits, while also reducing unnecessary costs, especially for smaller public 
companies. Auditing Standard No. 5 supersedes Auditing Standard No. 2 for all audits of 
ICOFR for fiscal years ending on or after November 15, 2007.  
 
Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act mandates that management must assess and report 
on the effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR,  and the external auditor must attest to 
management’s internal control assessment. Auditing Standard No. 5 lays out the 
requirements and provides guidance for auditors who are engaged to perform an audit of 
management’s assessment of the internal controls that is integrated with an audit of the 
financial statements.  
 
Following is a descriptive summary of some of the requirements laid out in the standard. 
Practitioners in this area should review Auditing Standard No. 5 in its entirety for more 
detailed information. A copy of the entire standard can be obtained from the PCAOB 
(www.pcaobus.org). 
 
Performing an ICOFR Audit 
INTEGRATING THE INTERNAL CONTROL AUDIT AND THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT AUDIT 
Auditing Standard No. 5 states that although the objectives of financial statement audits and 
audits of ICOFR are not identical, the two au dits should be integrated, with the auditor 
planning and performing the work to achieve the objectives of both audits. The auditor 
should design and perform the tests of controls in a manner that yields sufficient evidence to 
support both the auditor’s opinion at year-end and the auditor’s control risk assessment for 
the financial statement audit. 
 
PLANNING THE AUDIT 
When planning an integrated audit of ICOFR and the financial statements, the auditor must: 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.236                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Evaluate whether the following matters are important to the financial statements and to 
ICOFR and, if so, how they w ill affect the audit procedures: 
? Knowledge of the company’s ICOFR obtained during other engagements; 
? Information about the company’s industry, including financial reporting practices, 
economic conditions, laws and regulations, and technological changes;  
? Information about the company’s business activities, organization, operating 
characteristics, and capital structure;  
? The existence and extent of any recent changes in the company, its operations, or its 
ICOFR;  
? The auditor’s preliminary judgments about materiality, risk, and other factors relating 
to the determination of material weaknesses;  
? Any control deficiencies previously communicated to the audit committee, board of 
directors, or company management;  
? Legal or regulatory issues of which the company is aware;  
? The type and extent of evidence related to the effectiveness of the company’s 
ICOFR; 
? Preliminary judgments about the effectiveness of ICOFR;  
? Public information about the company related to the evaluation of the likelihood of 
material misstatements in the company’s financial statements and the effectiveness of 
the company’s ICOFR; 
? Knowledge about the risks related to the company that were considered as part of 
the auditor’s client acceptance and retention evaluation; and 
? The relative complexity of the company’s operations. 
• Assess the risk that material weaknesses exist in areas of the company’s ICOFR in order 
to determine which accounts, disclosures, and assertions are significant and relevant to 
the audit, which controls to test, and what evidence is necessary for a given control. In 
forming this assessment, the complexity of the organization, business unit, or process 
will play an important role. 
• Focus the audit attention on those areas of the company’s ICOFR that are assessed to 
have the highest risk that a material weakness exists. The auditor should keep in mind 
that the risk a company’s ICOFR will fail to  prevent or detect a misstatement caused by 
fraud usually is higher than the risk of failure to prevent or detect errors. 
• Scale the audit appropriately based on the ways the company meets its control 
objectives, with attention given to the size and complexity of the company, its business 
processes, and its business units.  
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.237 
• Evaluate the extent to which he will use the work of others to reduce his own audit 
work. 
• Use the same materiality considerations used in planning the audit of the company’s 
financial statements. 
 
USING A TOP-DOWN APPROACH 
In an audit of ICOFR, auditors should implement a top-down approach. According to 
Auditing Standard No. 5, a top-down approach “begins at the financial statement level and 
with the auditor’s understanding of the over all risks to internal control over financial 
reporting. The auditor then focuses on entity-level controls and works down to significant 
accounts and disclosures and their relevant assertions.” (Paragraph 21) This approach 
focuses auditors on those accounts, disclosures, and assertions that are most likely to result 
in material misstatement of the company’s financial statements. The standard makes explicit 
mention, however, that this approach describes the auditor’s thought process when 
identifying risks and the controls to test, rather than the order in which the auditor should 
perform the audit procedures.  
 
TESTING CONTROLS 
The auditor should test both the design and operating effectiveness of the company’s 
ICOFR. In testing the design effectiveness of the controls, the auditor should determine 
whether the controls, if operated as prescribed, satisfy the company’s control objectives and 
can effectively prevent or detect errors or fraud that could result in material misstatements. 
This testing may include inquiry of staff members, observation of operations, and 
examination of relevant documentation. 
 
In testing the operating effectiveness of the controls, the auditor should determine whether 
the control is operating as designed, as well as whether the person operating the control has 
the appropriate authority and competence to perform the control effectively. An auditor may 
test the operations of the controls through inquiry of staff members, observation of 
operations, examination of relevant documentation, and re-performance of the control. 
 
Fraud Considerations 
As part of an audit of ICOFR, the auditor must specifically evaluate (1) the controls enacted 
to address the risk of management override of other controls and (2) whether the company’s 
internal controls adequately address the risk of material misstatement due to fraud. These 
controls include:  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.238                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Controls over significant unusual transactions;  
• Controls over journal entries and adjustments made during the end of the period 
financial reporting process;  
• Controls over related party transactions; 
• Controls related to significant management estimates; and 
• Controls that mitigate the motivations for, and pressures on, management to engage in 
inappropriate earnings management and financial statement fraud. 
 
Further, if the auditor discovers any deficiencies in these controls, the auditor should address 
the deficiencies when responding to the risks of material misstatement during the financial 
statement audit. 
 
Forming an Opinion on the Effectiveness of ICOFR 
In forming an opinion on the effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR, the auditor must 
evaluate evidence from all sources. This includes not only the auditor’s tests of controls, but 
also any misstatements detected during the financial statement audit, as well as any identified 
control deficiencies. The auditor should also review any reports issued during the year by the 
internal audit function that pertain to ICOFR and should evaluate any deficiencies  
identified therein.  
 
The auditor must also evaluate management’s assessment of ICOFR, included in its annual 
reports filed with the SEC, to ensure that all required elements in management’s report are 
complete and properly presented. 
 
At the close of the integrated audit, the auditor may choose to issue a single report 
containing both an opinion on the company’s financial statements and an opinion on 
ICOFR, or to issue a separate report for each opinion.  
 
Statement of Standards for Attestation Engagements No. 15—An Examination of an 
Entity’s Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is Integrated With an Audit of Its Financial Statements  
Non-public entities may wish to have auditors examine the internal controls over financial 
reporting as a matter of best practice or to comply with lender or regulatory requirements. 
The Auditing Standards Board issued Statement of Standards for Attestation Engagements 
(SSAE) No. 15, An Examination of an Entity ’s Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is 
Integrated With an Audit of Its Financial Statements, as guidance to auditors of non-public 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.239 
organizations when undertaking this type of engagement alongside an audit of the financial 
statements. SSAE No. 15 converges the standards for these engagements for auditors of 
non-public companies with those provided for auditors of public companies in PCAOB 
Auditing Standard No. 5. More information about SSAE No. 15 is available at 
www.AICPA.org.  
 
Risk-Based Audit Approach 
The PCAOB and the AICPA have issued standards that indicate both organizations’ 
emphasis on using a risk-based approach to auditing. This approach involves beginning the 
audit process with a risk assessment and selecting the particular areas of focus based upon 
the level of risk to the organization. In a risk-based approach, auditors focus their resources 
on the areas of highest concern as opposed to auditing areas on a rotational basis or other 
method of selecting audit areas. This works well for both internal and external audits, and 
also works well at both the macro (e.g., overall financial statements or the organization as a 
whole) and micro (e.g., accounts payable) levels.  
 
As the risk of fraud is significant in most organizations, it is normally a major factor in the 
risk assessment process. Focusing audit resources on the areas with the highest risk of fraud 
gives auditors a significantly higher probability of detecting fraud if/when it occurs. 
 
The standards go into effect for fiscal periods beginning on or after December 15, 2010.   
 
The PCAOB standards include: 
• AS No. 8 — Audit Risk 
• AS No. 9 — Audit Planning 
• AS No. 10 — Supervision of the Audit Engagement 
• AS No. 11 — Consideration of Materiality in Planning and Performing the Audit 
• AS No. 12 — Identifying and Assessing Risks of Ma terial Misstatement 
• AS No. 13 — The Auditor’s Responses to  the Risks of Material Misstatement 
• AS No. 14 — Evaluating Audit Results 
• AS No. 15 — Audit Evidence 
 
• The AICPA standards include: 
• AU section 326—Audit Evidence 
• AU section 312—Materiality in Planning and Performing an Audit 
• AU section 312—Evaluation of Misstatements Identified During an Audit 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.240                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• AU section 311—Planning an Audit 
• AU section 314—Understanding the Entity and Its Environment and Assessing the 
Risks of Mat erial Misstatement 
• AU section 318—Performing Audit Procedures in Response to Assessed Risks and 
Evaluating the Audit Evidence Obtained 
 
The specific details of the standards can be found at the PCAOB website at 
www.pcaobus.org and at the AICPA website at www.aicpa.org 
 
PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 3—Audit Documentation  
PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 3, Audit Documentation, provides general guidance on the 
content and extent of the documentation public company auditors should prepare when 
conducting audits of financial statements, audits of internal control over financial reporting, 
and reviews of interim financial information.  
 
Audit documentation includes all memoranda, confirmations, correspondence, schedules, 
audit programs, and letters of representation prepared and obtained during the audit 
engagement. This documentation “should be prepared in sufficient detail to provide a clear 
understanding of its purpose and source, and the conclusions reached.” Additionally, 
because the documentation serves as the foundation for the representations in the auditor’s 
report, the standard asserts that it should: 
• Demonstrate that the engagement was conducted in compliance with the standards of 
the PCAOB,  
• Support the basis for the auditor’s conclusions concerning all relevant financial 
statement assertions, and  
• Demonstrate that the underlying accounting records agree to or reconcile with the 
financial statements.  
 
To meet these requirements, the standard states that audit documentation should “contain 
sufficient information to enable an experienced auditor, having no previous connection with 
the engagement: 
• To understand the nature, timing, extent, and results of the procedures performed, 
evidence obtained, and conclusions reached, and 
• To determine who performed the work and the date such work was completed as well as 
the person who reviewed the work and the date of such review.” 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.241 
The standard also requires auditors to retain audit documentation for seven years from the 
date the auditors’ report is released or, if no report is issued, from the date the audit work is 
substantially completed.  
 
The full text of the auditing standard, which also includes guidance about documentation of 
specific matters and subsequent changes to audit documentation, can be found on the 
PCAOB’s website (www.pcaobus.org).  
 
AU Section 339—Audit Documentation (Source: SAS No. 103) 
The ASB counterpart to PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 3 appears in the form of SAS No. 
103, Audit Documentation. SAS No. 103 supersedes SAS No. 96, Audit Documentation, as the 
guidance on audit documentation that applies to auditors of non-public entities. The 
standard is codified in AU section 339.  
 
In developing AU section 339, the ASB considered the provisions of PCAOB Auditing 
Standard No. 3; consequently, the requirements of the two standards are similar in many 
respects. Specifically, AU section 339 does the following:  
• Changes the date of the auditor’s report from the final day of fieldwork to the date on or 
after which the auditor obtained sufficient evidence to support the audit opinion;  
• Requires the audit documentation to be sufficient such that an experienced auditor with 
no previous connection to the audit could understand the work performed, the evidence 
obtained, and the conclusions reached;  
• Requires documentation of departures from generally accepted auditing standards, along 
with the justification and alternative procedures used; 
• Provides that oral explanations may be used to clarify or explain audit documentation, 
but alone are insufficient support for audit work; 
• Requires specific documentation of matters that the auditor identified as contradictory or 
inconsistent with the final audit conclusions, as well as how the auditor addressed such 
findings;  
• Instructs the auditor to assemble all of the audit documentation into the audit file within 
60 days following the audit report release date; 
• States that after 60 days following the audit report release date, workpapers may not be 
deleted, and all additions must be noted as such; and 
• Specifies a minimum retention period for audit documentation of five years from the 
report release date.  
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.242                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Internal Auditor Responsibilities 
Internal auditors play a key role in helping organizations prevent and detect fraudulent 
activity. Because of their proximity to and understanding of the inner workings of the 
organization, internal auditors are in a unique position to uncover potential unscrupulous 
acts. In fact, the ACFE’s 2010 Report to the Nations on  Occupational Fraud and Abuse  shows that 
the internal audit function plays a vital role in detecting occupational frauds, accounting for 
the detection of 13.9 percent of the 1,843 cases included in the study. 
 
As part of its International Professional Practices Framework  (IPPF), The Institute of Internal 
Auditors (IIA) has developed the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal 
Auditing. This section includes those IIA standards that pertain to the internal auditor’s 
responsibilities for preventing, detecting, and assessing the risk of fraud within an 
organization. More detail on these and all other IIA standards can be found at the IIA’s 
website (www.theiia.org).    
 
Standard 1210—Proficiency 
Internal auditors must possess the knowledge, skills, and other competencies needed to 
perform their individual responsibilities. The internal audit activity collectively must possess 
or obtain the knowledge, skills, and other competencies needed to perform its 
responsibilities.  
 
1210.A2 
Internal auditors must have sufficient knowledge to evaluate the risk of fraud and the 
manner in which it is managed by the organization, but are not expected to have the 
expertise of a person whose primary responsibility is detecting and investigating fraud. 
 
Standard 1220—Due Professional Care 
Internal auditors must apply the care and skill expected of a reasonably prudent and 
competent internal auditor. Due professional care does not imply infallibility. 
 
1220.A1   
Internal auditors must exercise due professional care by considering the: 
• Extent of work needed to achieve the engagement’s objectives;  
• Relative complexity, materiality, or significance of matters to which assurance procedures 
are applied;  
• Adequacy and effectiveness of governance, risk management, and control processes;  
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.243 
• Probability of significant errors, fraud, or noncompliance; and     
• Cost of assurance in relation to potential benefits.  
 
1220.A3    
Internal auditors must be alert to the significant risks that might affect objectives, operations, 
or resources. However, assurance procedures alone, even when performed with due 
professional care, do not guarantee that all significant risks will be identified.  
 
Standard 2060—Reporting to Senior Management and the Board 
The chief audit executive must report periodically to senior management and the board on 
the internal audit activity’s purpose, authority, responsibility, and performance relative to its 
plan. Reporting must also include significant risk exposures and control issues, including 
fraud risks, governance issues, and other matters needed or requested by senior management 
and the board. 
 
Standard 2110—Governance
The internal audit activity must assess and make appropriate recommendations for 
improving the governance process in its accomplishment of the following objectives: 
• Promoting appropriate ethics and values within the organization; 
• Ensuring effective organizational performance management and accountability; 
• Communicating risk and control information to appropriate areas of the organization; 
and 
• Coordinating the activities of and communicating information among the board, external 
and internal auditors, and management.  
 
2110.A1    
The internal audit activity must evaluate the design, implementation, and effectiveness of the 
organization’s ethics-related objectives, programs, and activities. 
 
Standard 2120—Risk Management 
The internal audit activity must evaluate the effectiveness and contribute to the 
improvement of risk management processes. 
 
2120.A1 
The internal audit activity must evaluate risk exposures relating to the organization's 
governance, operations, and information systems regarding the: 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.244                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Reliability and integrity of financial and operational information;  
• Effectiveness and efficiency of operations; 
• Safeguarding of assets; and  
• Compliance with laws, regulations, and contracts.   
 
2120.A2 
The internal audit activity must evaluate the potential for the occurrence of fraud and how 
the organization manages fraud risk. 
 
Standard 2130—Control 
The internal audit activity must assist the organization in maintaining effective controls by 
evaluating their effectiveness and efficiency and by promoting continuous improvement. 
 
2130.A1 
The internal audit activity must evaluate the adequacy and effectiveness of controls in 
responding to risks within the organization’s governance, operations, and information 
systems regarding the: 
• Reliability and integrity of financial and operational information; 
• Effectiveness and efficiency of operations; 
• Safeguarding of assets; and  
• Compliance with laws, regulations, and contracts. 
 
Standard 2210—Engagement Objectives 
Objectives must be established for each engagement. 
 
2210.A1 
Internal auditors must conduct a preliminary assessment of the risks relevant to the activity 
under review. Engagement objectives must reflect the results of this assessment. 
 
2210.A2 
Internal auditors must consider the probability of significant errors, fraud, noncompliance, 
and other exposures when developing the engagement objectives. 
     
IIA's IPPF—Practice Guide: Internal Auditing and Fraud  
To help auditors comply with their responsibilities pertaining to fraud, the IIA, in December 
of 2009, released IPPF—Practice Guide: Internal Auditing and Fraud  (Practice Guide). Although 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.245 
not mandatory, the guidance included in the Practice Guide is strongly recommended. 
Specifically, the Practice Guide addresses fraud awareness; potential fraud indicators; roles 
and responsibilities for fraud prevention and detection; the internal auditor’s role during 
audit engagements; fraud risk assessment; fraud prevention and detection; fraud 
investigation; and forming an opinion on internal controls related to fraud. The Practice 
Guide also includes an appendix that lists IPPF Practice Advisories that pertain to fraud. 
Following is a discussion of selected topics from the Practice Guide. The complete guide is 
available from the IIA’s website (www.theiia.org). 
 
Internal Audit's Role in Fighting Fraud 
Fighting fraud in an organization requires the combined efforts of many different 
departments, including internal audit. Internal auditors assist in the prevention and detection 
of fraud by evaluating the adequacy and effectiveness of internal controls, assisting 
management in establishing effective fraud prevention measures, proactively auditing for 
fraud, and investigating suspected fraud. Specifically, the Practice Guide states that in 
conducting audit engagements, the internal auditor should: 
• Consider fraud risks in the assessment of internal control design and determination of 
audit steps to perform.  
• Have sufficient knowledge of fraud to identify red flags indicating fraud may have been 
committed. 
• Be alert to opportunities that could allow fraud, such as control deficiencies. 
• Evaluate whether management is actively retaining responsibility for oversight of the 
fraud risk management program, whether timely and sufficient corrective measures have 
been taken with respect to any noted control deficiencies or weaknesses, and whether 
the plan for monitoring the program continues to be adequate for the program’s ongoing 
success. 
• Evaluate the indicators of fraud and decide whether any further action is necessary or 
whether an investigation should be recommended. 
• Recommend investigation when appropriate.  
 
The role internal audit plays in fraud investigations varies by organization. Internal audit may 
have primary responsibility for fraud investigations, may serve as a resource for the 
investigations, or may have no involvement at all in the investigations. For internal auditors 
who find themselves involved in fraud investigations, the Practice Guide discusses the 
investigation process, the role of the internal auditor, conducting the investigation, reporting 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.246                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the investigation, resolution and communication of fraud incidents, and analysis of lessons 
learned. 
 
The Practice Guide also emphasizes that internal auditors must exercise professional 
skepticism — an attitude that includes a questioning mind and a critical assessment of audit 
evidence — in all audit work. By exercising professional skepticism and focusing on the 
effectiveness of internal controls, auditors increase the likelihood that they will uncover 
possible fraudulent activity. 
 
Other Roles and Responsibilities for Fraud Prevention and Detection 
Other typical roles and responsibilities for fraud detection and prevention outlined in the 
Practice Guide include the following: 
 
Board of directors — The board of directors is responsible for effective and responsible 
corporate fraud governance and is tasked with overseeing management’s actions to manage 
fraud risks. 
 
Audit committee — The audit committee’s role is to evaluate management’s identification of 
fraud risks and the implementation of anti-fraud measures, and to provide the tone at the 
top that fraud will not be accepted in any form. The audit committee is also responsible for 
overseeing controls to prevent or detect management fraud. 
 
Management — Management is responsible for overseeing the activities of employees, 
assessing the vulnerability of the entity to fraud, and establishing and maintaining an 
effective internal control system at a reasonable cost. 
 
Legal counsel — Legal counsel advises the organization on legal matters pertaining to fraud. 
 
External auditors — External auditors have a responsibility to comply with professional 
standards and to plan and perform the audit of the organization’s financial statements to 
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material 
misstatements, whether caused by error or fraud. (For more information on the external 
auditor’s responsibilities for fraud, see the previous section “External Auditors.” 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.247 
Loss prevention manager—The loss prevention manager deals with crimes, disasters, 
accidents, waste, and other business risks, and usually works closely with internal auditors to 
identify areas of weak internal controls within the organization. 
 
Fraud investigators — Fraud investigators are responsible for detecting and investigating 
fraud, and recovering assets. 
 
Other employees — All employees have a responsibility to report suspicious activity to a 
hotline, the internal audit department, or management. 
 
 
GAO Auditing Standards  
Standards for government auditors are fundamentally based on the generally accepted 
auditing standards (GAAS) set for auditors of public companies. However, for audits of 
government organizations, programs, activities, functions, and funds, the requirements of 
Government Auditing Standards, also known as the Yellow Book, go beyond GAAS. (The 
following discussion of the Yellow Book standards is based upon the July 2007 revision of 
the standards. For more information, please see the full text of the GAO standards, available 
at www.gao.gov.) 
 
Purpose and Applicability 
The Yellow Book provides generally a ccepted government auditing standards (GAGAS) that 
form a framework of guidance for auditors of government entities and entities that receive 
government awards. Audits performed using Yellow Book standards provide information 
that is used for oversight, accountability, and improvement of government programs and 
operations. By following the requirements and guidance contained in GAGAS, auditors 
perform their duties in a way that can lead to improved government management, better 
decision making and oversight, effective and efficient operations, and accountability for 
resources and results. 
 
The use of GAGAS standards is frequently required under specific laws, regulations, 
contracts, grant agreements, or policies. However, many auditors and organizations may 
voluntarily choose to adhere to the standards as well. As such, the standards in the Yellow 
Book apply to audits and attestation engagements of government entities, programs, 
activities, and functions, and of government assistance administered by contractors, 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.248                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
nonprofit entities, and other nongovernmental entities when the use of GAGAS is required 
or is voluntarily followed. 
 
Ethical Principles in Government Auditing 
Management 
According to the Yellow Book, management is re sponsible for setting the ethical tone of the 
organization by: 
• Maintaining and demonstrating an ethical culture;  
• Clearly communicating expectations about acceptable behavior to employees; and 
• Creating an environment that reinforces and encourages ethical behavior throughout the 
organization.  
 
Auditors 
The Yellow Book stresses the importance of the auditors’ ethical responsibilities while 
conducting government audits, emphasizing that the public expects auditors in the 
government sector to conduct their professional work in accordance with ethical principles. 
To underscore this responsibility, GAGAS lay out five specific, overarching ethical 
principles that must guide the work of all auditors performing government audit 
engagements. 
 
THE PUBLIC INTEREST 
Serving the public interest and honoring the public trust are crucial components of the 
auditor’s responsibilities when performing en gagements in the government environment. 
GAGAS define the public interest as “the collective well-being of the community of people 
and entities the auditors serve.” 
 
INTEGRITY 
To strengthen the public confidence in the government, auditors must maintain the highest 
level of integrity when discharging their professional duties during a GAGAS engagement. 
This involves conducting the audit with an attitude that is “objective, fact-based, 
nonpartisan, and nonideological with regard to audited entities and users of the auditors’ 
reports.” Specifically, auditors are instructed to: 
• Ensure that all communications regarding the audit are honest, candid, and constructive;  
• Make decisions that are consistent with the public interest of the program or activity 
under audit; and 
  
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.249 
• Place priority on their responsibilities to the public interest in resolving any conflicting 
pressures that may arise during the audit engagement. 
 
OBJECTIVITY 
The auditor’s credibility in performing an audit of a governmental entity is based upon his 
ability to remain objective. GAGAS state that objectivity includes: 
• Being independent in fact and appearance; 
• Maintaining an attitude of impartiality; 
• Having intellectual honesty; and  
• Being free of conflicts of interest. 
 
PROPER USE OF GOVERNMENT INFORMATION, RESOURCES, AND POSITION 
During an audit of a governmental entity, the auditor must use all government information, 
resources, and positions for official purposes only. Auditors must not use their access to 
these assets for personal gain, in illegal manners, or to the detriment of the legitimate 
interests of the audited entity. 
 
PROFESSIONAL BEHAVIOR 
In conducting an audit or attestation engagement for a governmental entity, auditors must 
behave in a professional manner. This includes: 
• Complying with laws and regulations; 
• Avoiding any conduct that may discredit the auditors’ work; and 
• Putting forth an honest effort in performing their duties and professional services. 
 
Types of Government Audit Engagements 
The Yellow Book describes and promulgates standards for two types of audits that 
government and non-government audit organizations conduct: financial audits and 
performance audits. The Yellow Book also contains standards covering attestation 
engagements, such as examinations and reviews, and other non-audit services performed on 
government organizations and programs.  
 
Financial Audits 
Financial audits are defined as those audits that “provide an independent assessment of 
whether an entity’s reported financial condition, results, and use of resources are presented 
fairly in accordance with recognized criteria.” In addition to traditional financial statement 
audits, the Yellow Book also includes in this category those engagements for: 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.250                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Reporting on internal control, compliance with laws and regulations, and provisions of 
contracts and grant agreements as they relate to financial transactions, systems,  
and processes. 
• Providing special reports for specified elements, accounts, or items of a  
financial statement; 
• Reviewing interim financial information; 
• Issuing letters for underwriters or other requesting parties; 
• Reporting on the processing of transactions by service organizations; and 
• Auditing compliance with regulations relating to federal award expenditures and other 
governmental financial assistance in conjunction with or as a by-product of a financial 
statement audit. 
 
Performance Audits 
Performance audits are described in the Yellow Book as audits that “provide assurance or 
conclusions based on an evaluation of sufficient, appropriate evidence against stated criteria, 
such as specific requirements, measures, or defined business practices.” The objectives of 
these audits can vary, and may include the assessment of program economy, efficiency, or 
effectiveness; internal control; compliance; and prospective analyses. Additionally, a 
performance audit may cover more than one of these objectives.  
 
Attestation Engagements 
Attestation engagements can cover financial or non-financial information. These 
engagements involve expressing a specified level of assurance about the subject matter or 
assertion related to the subject matter depending on the users’ needs. There are three types 
of attestation engagements: 
• Examination, which involves expressing an opinion on “whether the subject matter is 
based on (or in conformity with) the criteria in all material respects or the assertion is 
presented (or fairly stated), in all material respects, based on the criteria.” 
• Review, consisting of expression of a conclusion about “whether any information came 
to the auditors’ attention that indicates that the subject matter is not based on (or not 
in conformity with) the criteria or the assertion is not presented (or not fairly stated) in 
all material respects based on the criteria.” 
• Agreed-upon procedures engagement, which involves performing specific procedures on 
the subject matter. 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.251 
Audit Standards 
The Yellow Book sets out three types of government audit standards: general standards, field 
work standards, and reporting standards. The general standards apply to both financial and 
performance audits. However, GAGAS provide a separate set of field work and reporting 
standards for each type of government audit. Additionally, the Yellow Book provides a 
separate set of standards — general, field work, and reporting — for attestation engagements. 
The discussion below contains a brief overview of the Yellow Book standards for audit 
engagements.  
 
General Standards 
The following general standards, coupled with the ethical principles outlined above, establish 
a foundation for credibility of auditors’ work.  
 
INDEPENDENCE 
Both the audit organization and the individual auditor must remain independent in both fact 
and appearance throughout the engagement so that all opinions, conclusions, judgments, and 
recommendations made by the auditor will be impartial and will be viewed as impartial by 
knowledgeable third parties. In determining independence, auditors must consider three 
types of potential impairments— personal impairments, such as family relationships, financial 
interests, or biases; external impairments  arising from actual or perceived pressures from the 
audited organization’s management or employees; and organizational impairments, which occur 
when the audit function is organizationally located within the reporting line of the areas 
under audit or when the auditor is assigned or takes on responsibilities that affect operations 
of the area under audit. 
 
The performance of nonaudit services must also be considered when assessing auditor 
independence. Specifically, auditors must apply the following two principles in regard to 
maintaining independence while performing nonaudit services for an audited program or 
entity: 
• Audit organizations must not provide nonaudit services that involve performing 
management functions or making management decisions; and  
• Audit organizations must not audit their own work or provide nonaudit services in 
situations in which the nonaudit services are significant or material to the subject matter 
of the audits. 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.252                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
PROFESSIONAL JUDGMENT 
The auditor must use professional judgment, including exercising professional skepticism 
and reasonable care, in planning, performing, and reporting the results of the audit or 
attestation engagement. In applying professional judgment, it is imperative that the auditor 
retain an attitude of professional skepticism, assuming that management is neither inherently 
honest nor inherently dishonest. Thus, auditors must approach the engagement with a 
questioning mind and a critical assessment of all evidence. The application of professional 
judgment also requires auditors to use their professional knowledge, skills, and experience to 
diligently gather information and objectively evaluate the sufficiency and appropriateness of 
evidence. 
 
COMPETENCE 
The staff assigned to an engagement must collectively possess adequate professional 
knowledge, skills, and experience to properly conduct the audit. The necessary competence 
includes knowledge of GAGAS and other applicable auditing and accounting standards; 
general knowledge of the organization’s operating environment; skills to communicate 
clearly and effectively, both orally and in writing; and any specific skills appropriate to the 
work being performed, such as statistical sampling skills or information technology skills. In 
order to maintain their professional competence, all auditors performing governmental 
audits must meet the continuing professional education requirements under GAGAS.  
 
QUALITY CONTROL AND ASSURANCE 
Audit organizations performing government audits must have an internal quality control 
system in place. This system is composed of the organization’s leadership, and its policies 
and procedures established to provide reasonable assurance that the organization is in 
compliance with all applicable audit standards. As part of the system, organizations should 
establish policies and procedures that collectively address: 
• Leadership responsibilities for quality of audit and attestation engagements; 
• Independence, legal, and ethical requirements;  
• Initiation, acceptance, and continuation of audit and attestation engagements;  
• Human resource issues;  
• Performance, documentation, and reporting of audit and attestation engagements; and 
• Monitoring of quality. 
 
Additionally, audit organizations conducting audits and attestations under GAGAS must 
have periodic external peer reviews of their auditing and attestation engagement practices at 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.253 
least once every three years. In addition, the results of the most recent peer review should be 
made publicly available.  
 
Field Work Standards for Financial Audits 
GAGAS field work standards for financial audits include the three generally accepted 
standards of fieldwork established by the AICPA, as well as five additional fieldwork 
standards.  
 
The three AICPA standards of fieldwork are as follows: 
• The auditor must adequately plan the work and must properly supervise any assistants. 
• The auditor must obtain a sufficient understanding of the entity and its environment, 
including its internal control to assess the risk of material misstatement of the financial 
statements whether due to error or fraud, and to design the nature, timing, and extent of 
further audit procedures. 
• The auditor must obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence by performing procedures 
to afford a reasonable basis for an opinion regarding financial statements under audit. 
 
The five additional fieldwork standards prescribed by GAGAS state that: 
• Auditors should communicate with the audited entity their understanding of the services 
to be performed for each engagement and document that understanding through a 
written communication. In their communications, auditors should specifically address 
their planned work and the level of assurance to be provided related to testing internal 
control over financial reporting and compliance with laws, regulations, and provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements. Auditors should also communicate any potential 
restrictions on the auditors’ reports in order to reduce the risk that the needs or 
expectations of the parties involved may be misinterpreted. 
• Auditors should evaluate whether the audited entity has taken appropriate corrective 
action to address findings and recommendations from previous engagements that could 
have a material effect on the financial statements. 
• Auditors should design the audit to provide reasonable assurance of detecting material 
misstatements resulting from violations of contract provisions or grant agreements that 
have a direct and material effect on the determination of financial statement amounts. If 
during the course of the audit, auditors become aware of indications of abuse that could 
have a material, indirect effect on the financial statements, auditors should apply audit 
procedures specifically directed to ascertain whether material abuse has occurred and the 
potential effect on the financial statements or other financial data significant to the audit 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.254                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
objectives. However, because the determination of abuse is subjective, auditors are not 
required to provide reasonable assurance of detecting abuse. 
• When auditors identify problems such as internal control deficiencies, fraud, illegal acts, 
violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, or abuse, they should plan 
audit procedures to develop an explanation of the criteria, condition, cause, and effect or 
potential effect of the problem to facilitate the achievement of the audit objectives.  
• Audit documentation should contain sufficient information to provide a clear 
understanding of the work performed, the audit evidence obtained and its source, and 
the conclusions reached. The audit documentation should enable an experienced auditor, 
having no previous connection with the audit, to understand from the documentation 
the nature, timing, extent, and results of the audit procedures performed, the conclusions 
reached on significant matters, and that the accounting records reconcile to the financial 
statements. The documentation should be completed prior to the issuance of the 
auditors’ report, and should also include evidence of supervisory review of the work 
performed, as well as any departures from GAGAS.  
 
Reporting Standards for Financial Audits 
For reporting standards for financial statement audits, GAGAS incorporate the following 
four AICPA generally accepted standards of reporting: 
• The auditors’ report must state whether the financial statements are presented in 
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). 
• The auditors’ report must identify any circumstances in which GAAP was not 
consistently applied in the current period in relation to the preceding period.  
• Informative disclosures in the financial statements are considered reasonably adequate 
unless otherwise stated in the auditors’ report. 
• The auditors’ report must contain either an expression of opinion regarding the financial 
statements, taken as a whole, or an assertion that such an opinion cannot be expressed. 
If an overall opinion cannot be expressed, the reasons should be stated. In all cases 
where an auditor’s name is associated with financial statements, the report should 
contain a clear-cut indication of the character of the auditor’s work, if any, and the 
degree of responsibility the auditor is taking. 
 
GAGAS prescribe eight additional reporting standards for government financial audits. They 
are: 
• The auditors’ report should specifically state that the audit was performed in accordance 
with GAGAS. 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.255 
• The auditors’ report should either (1) describe  the scope of the auditors’ testing internal 
control over financial reporting and compliance with laws, regulations, and provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements, and present the results of those tests or an opinion, if 
sufficient work was performed, or (2) refer to separate reports containing that 
information. If a separate report is used, the auditors’ report should state that the 
separate report is an integral part of the audit and should be considered in assessing the 
results of the audit.  
• Auditors should report (1) significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in internal 
control, (2) all material instances of fraud and illegal acts, and (3) significant violations of 
contract provisions or grant agreements and abuse. In some situations, the auditors 
should report the occurrence of these problems directly to parties outside of the audited 
organization.  
• Auditors may add a separate paragraph or separate section of the auditors’ report to 
emphasize certain information that may be critical to the proper use and understanding  
of the audited financial statements. Examples of matters that require such emphasis may 
include significant uncertainties and catastrophic or unusual events.  
• Auditors have specific responsibilities related to potential material misstatements and 
restatements of previously-issued financial statements. In situations where auditors 
become aware of new information that previously issued financial statements were 
materially misstated and that management intends to restate and reissue the misstated 
financial statements, auditors should advise management to disclose the information and 
its impact on the financial statements to parties who rely on the financial statements. 
Additionally, the auditors must (1) evaluate the timeliness and appropriateness of 
management’s disclosure of the misstatements and the actions taken to correct the 
misstatements, (2) perform audit procedures sufficient to reissue or update the auditors’ 
report on the restated financial statements, and (3) report directly to appropriate officials 
when the audited entity does not take the necessary steps. 
• If the auditors’ report contains any disclosures regarding deficiencies in internal control, 
fraud, illegal acts, violations of contract provisions or grant agreements, or abuse, the 
report should also include the views of the organization’s responsible officials 
concerning the findings, conclusions, and recommendations, as well as any planned 
corrective actions. 
• If any pertinent information about the audited entity is prohibited by law or regulation 
from being disclosed to the general public, the auditors’ report should state the nature of 
the omitted information and the reason for its omission.  
• Government auditors should submit their audit reports to those charged with 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.256                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
governance, to the appropriate officials of the audited organization, to the parties 
requiring or arranging for the audit, to officials with oversight authority for the 
organization, to parties who may be responsible for acting on audit findings and 
recommendations, and to others who are authorized to receive such reports. 
Nongovernment auditors should distribute the report according to applicable auditing 
standards, as well as the agreement reached with the party contracting the audit.  
 
Field Work Standards for Performance Audits 
The GAGAS field work standards for performance audits relate to planning the audit; 
supervising staff; obtaining sufficient, appropriate evidence; and preparing audit 
documentation: 
• Auditors must adequately plan and document the planning of the audit work. This 
includes assessing significance (defined as “the relative importance of a matter within the 
context in which it is being considered, including quantitative and qualitative factors”) 
and audit risk (defined as “the possibility that the auditors’ findings, conclusions, 
recommendations, or assurance may be improper or incomplete, as a result of factors 
such as evidence that is not sufficient and/or appropriate, an inadequate audit process, 
or intentional omissions or misleading information due to misrepresentation or fraud”) 
while defining the audit objectives, scope, and methodology. Additionally, as part of 
planning the engagement, auditors must: 
? Consider the nature and profile of the entity, as well as the needs of the users of the 
audit report; 
? Consider the entity’s internal control and information systems controls; 
? Consider all significant legal and regulatory requirements, contract provisions, grant 
agreements, and potential fraud and abuse affecting the audited entity;  
? Consider the results of previous audits and attestation engagements;  
? Identify potential criteria needed to evaluate the audit matters and potential sources 
of audit evidence based on the amount and type of evidence needed;  
? Consider relying on the work of other auditors and experts to help achieve audit 
objectives;  
? Assign staff and specialists with sufficient professional competence to perform the 
audit;  
? Identify other resources needed to complete the audit; 
? Communicate matters about the audit planning and performance to management 
officials; and  
? Prepare a written audit plan. 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.257 
• Audit supervisors must properly supervise the audit staff, which involves providing 
guidance and direction to the staff, staying informed about significant problems 
encountered, reviewing the work performed, and providing effective on-the-job training. 
• Auditors must obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for 
the auditors’ findings, conclusions, and recommendations.  
• Auditors should prepare sufficiently detailed audit documentation to provide a clear 
understanding of the nature, timing, extent, and results of the work performed; the 
evidence obtained and its source; and the conclusions reached. 
 
Reporting Standards for Performance Audits 
The Yellow Book standards for performance audits relate to the form of the report, the 
report contents, and the report issuance and distribution: 
• Auditors should prepare audit reports communicating the results of each audit. The 
report should be written or presented in some other retrievable form, and should be 
appropriate for its intended use.  
• The auditors’ report should contain: 
? The audit objectives, scope, and methodology; 
? The audit results, including findings, conclusions, and recommendations; 
? A reference to compliance with GAGAS; 
? The views of responsible officials; and 
? The nature of any privileged and confidential information omitted, if applicable. 
• The reported findings should include any significant deficiencies in internal control, all 
material instances of fraud and illegal acts, significant violations of provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements, and significant abuse. 
• Government auditors should submit audit reports to those charged with governance, to 
the appropriate officials of the audited entity, and to the appropriate oversight bodies or 
organizations requiring or arranging for the audits. Auditors should also send copies of 
the reports to other officials who have legal oversight authority or who may be 
responsible for acting on audit findings and recommendations, and to others authorized 
to receive such reports.  
 
In addition to these standards, auditors should refer to AU 801 (SAS No. 74), Compliance 
Auditing Considerations in Audits of Governmental Entities and Recipients of Governmental Financial 
Assistance. This standard incorporates a discussion of responsibilities under certain laws and 
government bulletins, and auditors should know these requirements. A thorough review of 
this statement will provide additional guidance. 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.258                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
More information about the Yellow Book and government auditing is contained in the 
chapter entitled “Public Sector Fraud.” The fu ll text of all of the Government Auditing 
Standards is also available at the Government Accountability Office’s website 
(www.gao.gov). 
 
 
Certified Fraud Examiners 
Certified Fraud Examiners are not normally responsible for the initial detection of fraud; 
instead, Certified Fraud Examiners usually become involved after sufficient predication 
exists. Certified Fraud Examiners commonly supervise or direct a fraud examination or 
investigation. The responsibilities of Certified Fraud Examiners are to: 
• Help resolve allegations of fraud, from inception to disposition 
• Obtain evidence 
• Take statements 
• Write reports of fraud examinations 
• Testify to findings 
• Assist in fraud detection and prevention 
 
Help Resolve Allegations of Fraud 
Allegations of fraud often are based on insufficient evidence. They must be resolved through 
lawful evidence-gathering methods. The Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional 
Ethics requires Certified Fraud Examiners to assist in that resolution. The disposition of a 
case might be a settlement or some other form of agreement, rather than a trial and 
conviction or acquittal. 
 
Obtain Evidence 
Certified Fraud Examiners are responsible for gathering and maintaining custody of 
evidence that will either confirm or refute a fraud allegation. The available evidence might 
demonstrate that the fraud allegation is without merit. Such evidence is equally as important 
as evidence that might prove the commission of fraud. 
 
Take Statements
Certified Fraud Examiners use the skills of interviewing. These skills are invaluable in 
obtaining statements from witnesses as well as securing admissions of guilt from 
perpetrators. 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.259 
Write Reports 
Report writing is an important step in fraud examinations. The report is a narration of the 
series of events that has occurred, the witnesses who will testify to the facts, and, if 
appropriate, the signed admission of the perpetrator. 
 
Testify to Findings 
Certified Fraud Examiners might testify to the findings of an examination. Although this 
step is not always necessary (for example, in cases that do not proceed to trial), it is 
important that all examinations be conducted under the premise that the case will go to trial 
and testimony will be required. Keeping this premise in mind helps the fraud examiner 
remember to take the time to perform the examination scrupulously. 
 
Assist in the Detection and Prevention of Fraud 
Because of their education, experience, and training, Certified Fraud Examiners are uniquely 
qualified to assist companies with proactive fraud prevention and detection programs. 
Certified Fraud Examiners assist in the investigation of fraud allegations and also aid 
management with designing and implementing internal control systems so that fraud 
schemes will be less common and not go undetected. 
 
It is common for a Certified Fraud Examiner to hold another designation, such as Certified 
Public Accountant, Certified Protection Professional, or Certified Internal Auditor. Dealing 
with accounting and auditing matters often requires the opinions of these professionals. 
Although Certified Fraud Examiners might hold other designations, they are bound by the 
Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics, which specifically states, in part: 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner, when conducting examinations, will obtain  evidence or other 
documentation to establish a reasonable basis for any opinion required. No opinion shall be 
expressed regarding the guilt or innocence of any person or party. 
 
This article means that the Certified Fraud Examiner will not express an opinion, even if 
personally convinced of the guilt of an individual. Determining the guilt or innocence of an 
individual is reserved for a judge and jury; the Certified Fraud Examiner is a gatherer of 
facts, not the ultimate judge of them. 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.260                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SAMPLE DOCUMENT RETENTION POLICY 
 
This is only a SAMPLE DOCUMENT RETENTION POLICY (DRP), and is NOT LEGAL 
ADVICE. It is only an example of a general DRP and should not be used without revision to meet the 
particular administrative and legal needs of your organi zation. There are many federal, state, and local laws 
that require organizations to retain documents for a certain period of time that may not be represented in this 
sample policy. All companies should contact counsel licensed to practice law in their state before implementing 
a DRP. 
 
I. Purpose  
 
To ensure the most efficient and effective operation of ORGANIZATION (Organization), we are 
implementing this Document Retention Policy (DRP or policy). The records of Organization and its 
subsidiaries are important to the proper functioning of Organization. Our records include virtually all 
of the records you produce as an Organization employee. Such records can be in electronic or paper 
form. Thus, items that you may not consider important, such as interoffice e-mails, desktop 
calendars, and printed memoranda are records that are considered important under this policy. If you 
are ever uncertain as to any procedures set forth in this policy (e.g., what records to retain or destroy, 
when to do so, or how to do so) it is your responsibility to seek answers from Organization’s DRP 
Manager. 
 
The goals of this DRP are to: 
 
1. Retain important documents for reference and future use; 
2. Delete documents that are no longer necessary for the proper functioning of Organization; 
3. Organize important documents for efficient retrieval; and 
4. Ensure that you, as an Organization employee, know what documents should be retained, 
the length of their retention, means of storage, and when and how they should be destroyed. 
 
Federal and state laws require Organization to maintain certain types of records for particular 
periods. Failure to maintain such records could subject you and Organization to penalties and fines, 
obstruct justice, spoil legal evidence, and/or seriously harm Organization’s position in litigation. 
Thus, it is imperative that you fully understand and comply with this, and any future records 
retention or destruction policies and schedules, UNLESS you have been notified by Organization, or 
if you believe that (1) such records are or could be relevant to any future litigation, (2) there is a 
dispute that could lead to litigation, or (3) Organization is a party to a lawsuit, in which case you 
MUST PRESERVE such records until Organization’s legal counsel determines that the records are 
no longer needed.  
 
“Records” discussed herein refers to all business records of Organization (and is used 
interchangeably with “documents”), including written, printed, and recorded materials, as well as 
electronic records (i.e., e-mails and documents saved electronically). All business records shall be 
retained for a period no longer than necessary for the proper conduct and functioning of 
Organization. No business records shall be retained longer than five (5) years, EXCEPT  those that 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.261 
(1) have time periods provided for herein, (2) are in the Document Retention Schedule, found at 
Appendix “A,” or (3) are specifically exempted by Organization’s DRP Manager.  
 
II. Management  
 
To ensure compliance with this DRP, Organization’s DRP Manager is responsible for the following 
oversight functions: 
 
• Implementing the DRP; 
• Ensuring that employees are properly educated, understand, and follow the DRP’s purpose; 
• Providing oversight on actual retention and destruction of documents;  
• Ensuring proper storage of documents; 
• Periodically following-up with counsel to ensure proper retention periods are in place;  
• Ensuring the proper storage of documents; 
• Suspending the destruction of documents upon foreseeable litigation; and 
• Keeping corporate officers, directors, and employees informed of changes in relation to the 
DRP. 
 
Organization’s DRP Manager shall annually review the DRP, modify it accordingly, and inform and 
educate all Organization employees on any such changes. All questions relating to document 
retention and/or destruction should be directly addressed to Organization’s DRP Manager. 
 
III. Types of Records 
 
Appendix “A,” attached at the end of this DRP, lists several categories of records, as well as specific 
records that contain specific retention periods. This is referred to as a Document Retention Schedule 
(DRS). All records not provided for in the DRS or described herein, shall be classified into three 
types: (1) Temporary Records, (2) Final Records, and (3) Permanent Records. 1   
 
Temporary Records 
 
Temporary records consist of all business documents that have not been completed, including, but 
not limited to: written memoranda and dictation to be typed in the future; reminders; to-do lists; 
report, case study, and calculation drafts; interoffice correspondence regarding a client or business 
transaction; and running logs. 
 
Temporary records can be destroyed, or permanently deleted if in electronic form (see protocol 
below for proper destruction of data in electronic form), when a project/case/file closes. Upon the 
closing of a project/case/file, gather and review all such temporary records. Before you destroy or 
permanently delete these documents, make sure you have duplicates of all the final records pertaining 
                                                          
1 See Ashcraft, H., Document Retention:  Gu idelines for Managing Project Files, February 2002. Available at 
http://terrarrg.com/images/pdfs/DocumentRetention.pdf.  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.262                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to the project/case/file. Upon destruction or deletion, organize the final records (and duplicates) in a 
file marked “FINAL” and store them appropriately. 
 
Final Records 
 
Final records include all business documents that are not superseded by modification or addition, 
such as, but not limited to: documents given (or sent via electronic form) to any third-party not 
employed by Organization or government agency, final memoranda and reports, correspondence, 
handwritten telephone memoranda not further transcribed, minutes, design/plan specifications, 
journal entries, and cost estimates. All accounting records shall be deemed final. 
 
Except as provided for in the DRS, all final documents are to be discarded 10 years after the close of 
a project/case/file. 
 
Permanent Records 
 
Permanent records include all business documents that define Organization’s scope of work, 
expressions of professional opinions, research, and reference materials, and include, but are not 
limited to: contracts, proposals, materials referenc ing expert opinions, annual financial statements, 
federal tax returns, payroll registers, copyright registration, and patents.  
 
Except as provided for in the Document Retention Schedule (Appendix “A”), all permanent 
documents are to be retained indefinitely. 
 
Accounting and Corporate Tax Records 
 
Accounting and corporate tax records include, but are not limited to: financial statements; ledgers; 
audit records; invoices and expense records; federal, state, and property tax returns; payroll; 
accounting procedures; gross receipts; customer records; and purchases.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of six years 
or until the statute of limitations for a particular record expires (please consult Organization’s counsel 
for time periods if you manage/control such records). 
 
Workplace Records 
 
Workplace records include, but are not limited to: Articles of Incorporation; bylaws; meeting 
minutes; deeds and titles; leases; policy statements; contracts and agreements; and patents and 
trademark records.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained in perpetuity. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.263 
Employment, Employee, and Payroll Records 
 
Employment records include, but are not limited to: job announcements and advertisements, 
employment applications, background investigations, resumes, and letters of recommendation for 
persons not hired.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of one year. 
 
Employee records include, but are not limited to: employment applications, background 
investigations, resumes, and letters of recommendation of current and past employees; and records 
relating to current and past employees’ performance reviews and complaints.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of three years 
following unemployment with Organization. 
 
Payroll records include, but are not limited to: wage rate tables; salary histor y; current rate of pay; 
payroll deductions; time cards; forms W-2 and W-4; and bonuses.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of six years. 
 
Bank Records 
 
Bank records include, but are not limited to: bank deposits, check copies, stop payment orders, bank 
statements, check signature authorizations, and bank reconciliations.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of three 
years. 
 
Legal Records  
 
Legal records include, but are not limited to: a ll contracts; all legal records, statements, and 
correspondence; trademark and copyright registrations; patents; personal injury records and 
statements; press releases; and public findings.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of 10 years. 
 
Historical Records 
 
Historical records are those that are no longer of use to Organization, but by virtue of their age or 
research value may be of historical interest or significance to Organization. Historical records should 
be retained indefinitely. 
 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.264                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
IV. Storage  
 
Tangible Records 
 
Tangible records are those which you must physically move to store, such as paper records (including 
printed versions of electronically saved documents), photographs, audio recordings, advertisements, 
and promotional items. Active records and records that need to be readily accessible may be stored in 
Organization’s office space or equipment. Inactive records can be sent to Organization’s off-site 
storage facility. 
 
Electronic Records 
 
Electronic mail (e-mail) should be either printed and stored as tangible evidence, or stored 
electronically.  
 
Organization has computer software that duplicates files, which are then backed up on central 
servers. If you have a notebook computer from Organization that you work on out of the office, 
your computer contains synchronization software that duplicates and backs up files when you log 
into the network. However, it is important that all employees take precautionary measures to save 
work and records on Organization’s network drive. 
 
V. Destruction / Deletion  
 
Tangible Records 
 
Tangible records should be destroyed by shredding or some other means that will render them 
unreadable. If you have a record that you do not know how to destroy, such as a photograph, 
compact disk, or tape recording, ask the advice of Organization’s DRP Manager.  
 
Electronic Records 
 
E-mail records that you “delete” remain in Organi zation’s system. Thus, Organization’s information 
technology (IT) department will be responsible for permanently removing deleted e-mails from the 
computer system. 
 
Deleting files and emptying the recycling bin is usually sufficient in most circumstances to get rid of a 
record. However, because electronic records can be stored in many locations, Organization’s IT 
department will be responsible for permanently removing deleted files from the computer system.  
 
Keep in mind, where duplicate records are involved, both must be destroyed/deleted where proper. 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.265 
VI. Cessation of Record  Destruction / Deletion 
 
If a lawsuit is filed or imminent, or a legal document request has been made upon Organization, ALL 
RECORD DESTRUCTION MUST CEASE IMMEDIATELY. Organization’s DRP Manager may 
suspend this DRP to require that documents relating to the lawsuit or potential legal issue(s) be 
retained and organized. A critical understanding of this section is imperative. Should you fail to 
follow this protocol, you and/or Organization may be subject to fines and penalties, among other 
sanctions.  
 
VII. Acknowledgement 
 
I have read and understand the purpose of this DRP. I understand that strict adherence to this DRP 
is a condition of my employment with Organization. If I do not understand something regarding this 
DRP, I will contact Organization’s DRP Manager im mediately for clarification. I agree to abide by 
Organization’s DRP. 
 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ 
Employee’s Signature    Date 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ 
Employee’s Name (print)  
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.266                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SAMPLE DOCUMENT RETENTION SCHEDULE 
 
This is only a SAMPLE DOCUMENT RETENTION SCHEDULE (“DRS”), and is 
NOT LEGAL ADVICE. There are many federal, state, and local laws that require 
organizations to retain documents for a certain period  of time that may be different in your state (or 
different to your particular industry), or that may not be represented in this sample policy. All 
companies should contact counsel licensed to practice  law in their state for proper retention periods. 
 
 
TYPE OF RECORD SPECIFIC RECORD SUGGESTED RETENTION PERIOD  
Accounting Records   
 Annual financial statements Permanent 
 Monthly financial statements 3 years 
 General ledgers 20 years 
 Annual audit records 10 years 
 Journal entries 8 years 
 Special reports 8 years 
 Canceled checks 8 years 
 A/P paid invoices 8 years 
 Business expense records 8 years 
 Credit card receipts 3 years 
 Cash receipts 3 years 
 A/R invoices 8 years 
 Data for acquisitions/divestitures Permanent 
 Data for aborted 
acquisitions/divestitures 
5 years 
 Accounts payable 7 years 
 Accounts receivable 7 years 
 Audit reports 7 years 
 Chart of accounts Permanent 
 Expense records  7 years 
 Inventory records 7 years 
 Loan documents 7 years after final payment 
 Purchase orders 7 years 
 Sales records 7 years 
 Stop payment orders 3 years 
 Bank reconciliations 3 years 
   
Tax Records   
 Federal tax returns (non-payroll) Permanent 
 State & local tax returns (non-Permanent 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.267 
payroll) 
 Forms 990 and supporting 
documentation 
Permanent 
 Forms 990-T and supporting 
documentation 
Permanent 
 Supporting documentation for 
taxes 
4 years 
 City and state excise tax reports, 
and supporting documentation 
5 years (or longer if designated 
by state law) 
 Unclaimed property filings and 
supporting documentation 
6 years (or longer if designated 
by state law) 
 Forms 1099 8 years 
 Magnetic tape and similar records 1 year 
 Payroll taxes (Forms W2 and W3) Permanent 
 Payroll taxes (Forms 940 and 
941, state withholding returns, 
and state unemployment returns)
 8 years (or longer if designated 
by state law) 
   
Payroll Records   
 Wage rate tables  3 years 
 Cost of living tables 3 years 
 Wage histories  6 years 
 Salary histories 6 years 
 Payroll deductions 6 years 
 Time cards or forms 5 years 
 Forms W-2  8 years 
 Forms W-4 8 years 
 Garnishments 4 years following unemployment
  Payroll registers Permanent 
 State employment forms 4 years 
 State unemployment tax records Permanent 
 Cancelled payroll checks  8 years 
 Deductions registers 8 years 
 Earnings records 8 years 
 Changes or adjustments to 
salaries 
8 years 
   
Insurance Records   
 Policies (including expired 
policies) 
Permanent 
 Claims for loss/damage, accident 
reports, appraisals  
5 years 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.268                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
   
Workplace Records   
 Incorporation and reorganization 
records (Articles of 
Incorporation, Bylaws, etc.) 
Permanent 
 Meeting minutes Permanent 
 Policy statements 10 years 
 Employee directories 5 years 
   
Legal Records   
 General Contracts 3 years after termination 
 Real estate contracts and records 20 years–Permanent 
 Personal injury records 8 years 
 Trademark registration Permanent 
 Copyright registration Permanent 
 Patents Permanent 
 Litigation claims 5 years following close of case 
 Court documents and records 5 years following close of case 
 Deposition transcripts 5 years following close of case 
 Discovery materials 3 years following close of case 
 Leases 6 years after termination 
   
Personnel Records   
 Employment applications 
(persons not hired) 
1 year 
 Employment applications 
(persons hired) 
3 years following employment  
 Employee resumes and 
employment history 
3 years following employment 
period 
 Evaluations  3 years following employment  
 Promotions, raises, 
reclassifications, and job 
descriptions 
5 years following employment  
 Disciplinary warnings, 
demotions, lay-offs, and 
discharges 
5 years following employment  
 Employment and termination 
agreements 
Permanent 
 Promotions and raises 3 years following employment  
 Beneficiary information 3 years following employment  
 Medical and safety records 6 years 
 Accident reports 6 years 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.269 
 Education assistance While employed 
 Sick-leave benefits While employed 
 Retirement plans (after 
expiration) 
6 years 
 Incentive plans (after expiration) 6 years 
 Pension plans (after expiration) 6 years 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.301 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD 
 
Financial statement schemes are one of a large category of frauds that fall under the heading 
of Occupational Fraud and Abuse, which is defined as “the use of one’s occupation for personal 
enrichment through the deliberate misuse or misapplication of the employing organization’s 
resources or assets.” Simply stated, occupational frauds are those in which an employee, 
manager, officer, or owner of an organization commits fraud to the detriment of that 
organization. The three major types of occupational fraud are: Corruption, Asset 
Misappropriation, and Fraudulent Statements (which include financial statement schemes). 
The complete classification of occupational fraud is shown below:   
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.302                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.303 
What Is Financial Statement Fraud? 
Financial statement fraud is the deliberate misrepresentation  of the financial condition of an 
enterprise accomplished through the intentional misstatement or omission  of amounts or 
disclosures in the financial statements to deceive  financial statement users.  
 
Financial statement fraud is usually a means to an end rather than an end in itself. When 
people “cook the books” they may be doing it to “buy more time” to quietly fix business 
problems that prevent their company from achieving its expected earnings or complying 
with loan covenants. It may also be done to obtain or renew financing that would not be 
granted, or would be smaller, if honest financial statements were provided. People who are 
intent on profiting from crime may commit financial statement fraud to obtain loans they 
can then siphon off for personal gain or to inflate the price of the company’s shares, 
allowing them to sell their holdings or exercise stock options at a profit. However, in many 
past cases of financial statement fraud, the perpetrators have gained little or nothing 
personally in financial terms. Instead the focus appears to have been preserving their status 
as leaders of the organization—a status that might have been lost had the real financial 
results been published promptly.  
 
Financial statement fraud usually involves overstating assets, revenues, and profits and 
understating liabilities, expenses, and losses. However, the overall objective of the 
manipulation may sometimes require the opposite action, e.g., concealing over-budget results 
in a good year in order to help the subsequent year, which is expected to be tougher. 
 
 
The Cost of Financial Statement Fraud 
Financial statement fraud frequently has a devastating impact on the reputation and the 
financial position of organizations and people involved. The stock market capitalization of 
companies affected by financial statement fraud may fall substantially almost overnight, 
losing billions of dollars for investors. A 2006 report by the United States Government 
Accountability Office (GAO-06-678) found that in the three trading days surrounding the 
initial announcement of a restatement, the companies studied lost an adjusted amount of $36 
billion in market capitalization. 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.304                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Many jobs may be lost as companies restructu re to try to restore profitability. As media 
interviews of former Enron employees showed, financial statement fraud can exert a high 
toll on the well-being of employees, who may lose their jobs, their pensions, their savings 
invested in their employer’s stock, and health care and other benefits. The company’s 
auditors are likely to be sued for the amount of investors’ losses, which these days may mean 
tens of billions of dollars for large public companies. For large and small companies alike, 
financial statement fraud can be hugely costly and, potentially, a corporate deathblow. 
 
 
Why Financial Statement Fraud Is Committed 
There are a number of reasons why individuals commit financial statement fraud. Most 
commonly, financial statement fraud is used to make a company’s earnings look better on 
paper. It sometimes covers up the embezzlement of company funds. Financial fraud occurs 
through a variety of methods, such as valuation judgments and fine points of timing the 
recording of transactions. These more subtle types of fraud are often dismissed as either 
mistakes or errors in judgment and estimation. Some of the more common reasons why 
people commit financial statement fraud include: 
• To encourage investment through the sale of stock. 
• To demonstrate increased earnings per share or partnership profits interest, thus 
allowing increased dividend/distribution payouts. 
• To cover inability to generate cash flow.  
• To dispel negative market perceptions. 
• To obtain financing, or to obtain more favorable terms on existing financing. 
• To receive higher purchase prices for acquisitions. 
• To demonstrate compliance with financing covenants. 
• To meet company goals and objectives. 
• To receive performance-related bonuses. 
 
This limited list of reasons shows that the motivation for financial fraud does not always 
involve direct personal financial gain. Sometimes, the cause of fraudulent financial reporting 
is the combination of situational pressures on either the company or the manager and the 
opportunity to commit the fraud without the perception of being detected. These pressures 
are known as “red flags.” That is to say, if red flags (situational pressures and opportunity) 
are present, then the risk of financial reporting fraud increases significantly. 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.305 
Examples of situational pressures include: 
• Sudden decreases in revenue or market share experienced by a company or an industry. 
• Unrealistic budget pressures, particularly for short-term results (the pressures become 
even greater with arbitrarily established budgets that are without reference to current 
conditions).  
• Financial pressures resulting from bonus plans that depend on short-term economic 
performance (these pressures are particularly acute if the bonus is a significant 
component of the individual’s total compensation). 
 
Opportunities to commit fraud most often arise gradually. Generally, these opportunities can 
stem from a lack of adequate oversight functions within the company. The existence of an 
oversight function does not, in and of itself, guarantee the detection of fraudulent acts; the 
oversight function must also respond effectively. The perception of detection, not internal 
control per se, is arguably the strongest deterrent to fraud.  
 
Some of the more obvious opportunities for the existence of fraud are: 
• Absence of a board of directors or audit committee. 
• Improper oversight or other neglectful behavior by the board of directors or audit 
committee. 
• Weak or nonexistent internal controls, including an ineffective internal audit staff and a 
lack of external audits. 
• Unusual or complex transactions (an understanding of the transactions, their component 
parts, and their impact on financial statements is paramount to fraud deterrence).  
• Financial estimates that require significant subjective judgment by management. 
 
 
Trends in Financial Statement Fraud 
Financial statement fraud is estimated to comprise about 10 percent of all occupational 
frauds. According to the ACFE’s 2010 Report to the Nations on  Occupational Fraud a nd Abuse, 
fraudulent statements comprised 4.8 percent of the frauds reported in the study, with a 
median loss of $4,100,000. However, it is im portant to note that quoted losses resulting 
from financial statement fraud are often measuring lost market capitalization or lost 
shareholder value rather than direct loss of financial assets. This does not make the scheme 
any less harmful; in fact, the lost shareholder value resulting from financial statement fraud 
can have crippling effects on even the largest companies, as we have seen with high-profile 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.306                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
frauds such as the Enron and WorldCom scandals. It can also have a tremendous impact on 
the organization’s shareholders. 
 
Similar results came out of a Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) study required 
under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX). The agen cy was charged with reviewing incidents of 
financial statement fraud in the five years prior to passage of the legislation. From July 31, 
1997 through July 30, 2002, the SEC filed 51 5 enforcement actions for financial reporting 
and disclosure violations arising out of 227 Division of Enforcement investigations 
(enforcement matters). The 515 actions included 869 named parties, consisting of 164 
entities and 705 individuals. The year-over-year numbers reveal the growing problem of 
financial reporting violations during the study period.  
 
 
(Source: SEC, Report Pursuant to Section 704 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 
http://www.sec.gov/news/s tudies/sox704report.pdf) 
 
Most of the actions involved improper revenue recognition. In 126 of the 227 enforcement 
matters, management reported fictitious sales, improperly timed revenue recognition, or 
improperly valued revenue. Another 101 enforcement matters involved improper expense 
recognition, including improper capitalization or deferral of expenses; improper use of 
reserves; or other understatements of expenses. Additionally, 23 enforcement matters 
involved improper accounting for business combinations. And 137 enforcement matters 
involved other accounting and reporting issues, such as inadequate Management’s 
Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) disclosure and improper use of off-balance sheet 
arrangements. (See the following chart. Note:  The sum of the numbers in the second 
column is greater than the total number of 227 because most of the actions involved more 
than one type of improper conduct.)  
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.307 
 
Improper Accounting Practice Number of Enforcement Matters 
Involving Each Practice 
Improper Revenue Recognition 126 
Improper Expense Recognition 101 
Improper Accounting in Connection with Business 
Combinations 
23 
Other Accounting and Reporting Issues: 130 
Inadequate Disclosures in MD&A and Elsewhere 43 
Failure to Disclose Related-Party Transactions 23 
Inappropriate Accounting for Non-Monetary and 
Roundtrip Transactions 
19 
Improper Accounting for Foreign Payments in Violation 
of the FCPA 
6 
Improper Use of Of f-Balance Sheet Arrangements 3 
Improper Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures 2 
(Source: SEC, Report Pursuant to Section 704 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 
http://www.sec.gov/news/s tudies/sox704report.pdf) 
 
The SEC study revealed further proof of management’s involvement in financial statement 
fraud. In these enforcement matters, charges were brought against 75 chairmen of the board, 
111 chief executive officers (CEOs), 111 presidents, 105 chief financial officers (CFOs), 21 
chief operating officers (COOs), 16 chief accounting officers (CAOs), and 27 vice presidents 
(VPs) of finance.  
 
Studies by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO)—formerly known as the 
General Accounting Office—also revealed compar able trends in financial statement fraud. 
In July 2006, the GAO issued an update to its 2002 report, Financial Statement Restatements: 
Trends, Market Impacts, Regulatory Responses, and Remaining Challenges. The original report was 
based on the GAO’s analysis of 689 of 919 financial statement restatements occurring from 
January 1, 1997 through June 30, 2002. To update the information in the original, the GAO 
undertook a similar analysis of 1,390 public company restatements that occurred between 
January 1, 2002 and September 30, 2005. The following are some of the findings of the two 
studies:  
• The percentage of publicly traded companies announcing restatements increased from 
less than one percent in 1997 to over three percent by the end of 2002. This percentage 
rose again, to 6.8 percent, by September of 2005.  
• The quantity of restatements resulting from accounting irregularities grew from 92 in 
1997 to 314 in 2002, or approximately 241 percent. In the first 9 months of 2005 
(through September 30), there were 523 restatements announced, which amounted to an 
increase of approximately 67 percent from 2002 and more than 468 percent from 1997.  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.308                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The average size of a company restating its financial statements increased from $500 
million in 1997 to $2 billion in 2002. By September 30, 2005, the average market 
capitalization of a company announcing a restatement had grown to $6 billion. 
• Cost and expense issues were the most common reason for restatements between July 
2002 and September 2005. These restatements, which include over- or understating costs 
or expenses, improper classification of costs, and other misreporting of costs, accounted 
for over 35 percent of restatements examined during that period. In the 2002 study, cost 
and expense issues were the second most common reason for restatement, comprising 
16 percent of all restatements.  
• Twenty percent of the restatements analyzed in the 2006 study were due to revenue 
recognition issues, making this the second most common reason for restatement during 
the period studied. This represents a decline from the 2002 study in which revenue 
recognition was the most common reason for restatement, comprising 38 percent of the 
population. Revenue recognition restatements include recognizing revenue sooner or 
later than allowed under GAAP or recognizing questionable or fictitious revenue. 
 
Today, financial statement and accounting fraud cases continue to be the single largest 
category of SEC actions filed. Many relate to the subprime mortgage market, and another 
large group relate to executive compensation. Most notably, the SEC filed civil suits 
expanding the scope of substantive claims and remedies, aggressively applying the 
"clawback" provision of Section 304 of the Sa rbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and alleging false 
disclosures of non-GAAP financial metrics in violation of Regulation G. 
 
In the summer of 2010, COSO issued the Fraudulent Financial Reporting 1998-2 0 0 7 : An 
Analysis of U.S. Public Companies.  Highlights of the report are as follows: 
• 347 companies were involved in alleged incidents of financial statement fraud during the 
10 year period. 
• Seventy-two percent of the cases named the CEO, and 65 percent named the CFO as 
being associated with the fraud. 
• The average fraud lasted 31.4 months, with the median fraud lasting 24 months. 
• Virtually all of the firms received an un qualified audit opinion on the last set of 
fraudulently misstated financial statements. 
• Twenty percent of the frauds of public companies occurred in the computer 
hardware/software industry.  Manufacturing also represented 20 percent of the frauds. 
• Improper revenue recognition occurred 61 percent of the fraud methods. Overstatement 
of assets occurred in 51 percent of the cases. Understatement of liabilities/expenses 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.309 
occurred in 31 percent of the cases.  Insider trading was cited in 24 percent of the cases 
as well. 
 
 
Financial Statement Fraud Schemes 
Fraud in financial statements typically takes the form of: 
• Overstated assets or revenue 
• Understated liabilities and expenses 
 
Overstating assets and revenues falsely reflects a financially stronger company by inclusion 
of fictitious asset costs or artificial revenues. Understated liabilities and expenses are shown 
through exclusion of costs or financial obligations. Both methods result in increased equity 
and net worth for the company. This manipulation results in increased earnings per share or 
partnership profit interests, or a more stable picture of the company’s true situation.  
 
However, in government contracts, just the opposite may be true: 
• Assets and revenues are understated. 
• Liabilities and expenses are overstated. 
 
Why? As explained by government auditors, entities may rely on understated revenues or 
overstated expenses to get more money for a project or contract. However, such schemes 
are by far the minority of financial statement fraud cases. 
 
To demonstrate the over- and understatements typically used to fraudulently enhance the 
financial statements, the schemes have been divided into five classes. Because the maintenance 
of financial records involves a double-entry system, fraudulent accounting entries always affect 
at least two accounts and, therefore, at least two categories on the financial statements. While 
the areas described below reflect their financial statement classifications, keep in mind that the 
other side of the fraudulent transaction exists elsewhere. It is common for schemes to involve 
a combination of several methods. The five classifications of financial statement schemes are: 
• Fictitious revenues 
• Timing differences  
• Improper asset valuations 
• Concealed liabilities and expenses 
• Improper disclosures 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.310                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Fictitious Revenues  
Fictitious or fabricated revenues involve the recording of sales of goods or services that did 
not occur. Fictitious sales most often involve fake or phantom customers, but can also 
involve legitimate customers. For example, a fictitious invoice can be prepared (but not 
mailed) for a legitimate customer although the goods are not delivered or the services are not 
rendered. At the beginning of the next accounting period, the sale might be reversed to help 
conceal the fraud, but this may lead to a revenue shortfall in the new period, creating the 
need for more fictitious sales. Another method is to use legitimate customers and artificially 
inflate or alter invoices reflecting higher amounts or quantities than are actually sold.  
 
Generally speaking, revenue is recognized when it is (1) realized or realizable, and (2) earned. 
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) issued Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) 
Topic 13, Revenue Recognition (now codified in FASB ASC 605-10-S99), to provide additional 
guidance on revenue recognition criteria and to rein in some of the inappropriate practices 
that had been observed. FASB ASC 605-10-S99 states that revenue is typically considered 
realized or realizable, and earned when all of the following criteria are met: 
• Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists; 
• Delivery has occurred or services have been rendered; 
• The seller’s price to the buyer is fixed or determinable; and 
• Collectibility is reasonably assured. 
 
EXAMPLE OF FICTITIOUS REVENUES 
In one case, a foreign subsidiary of a U.S. company recorded several large fictitious sales to 
a series of companies. They invoiced the sa les but did not collect any of the accounts 
receivable, which became severely past due. The manager of the foreign subsidiary arranged 
for false confirmations of  the accounts receivable for audit purposes and even hired actors to 
pretend to be the customers during a visit fr om U.S. management. Background checks on 
the customers would have revealed that some of the companies were fictitious while others 
either were undisclosed related parties or operated in industries that would have no need for 
the goods supposedly supplied. An investigation  revealed that the manager of the foreign 
subsidiary directed the scheme to record fictitious revenues in order to meet unrealistic 
revenue goals set by U.S. management.  
 
In some cases, companies go to great lengths to conceal fictitious sales. A sample journal 
entry from such a case is detailed below. A fictional entry is made to record a purported 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.311 
purchase of fixed assets. This entry debits fixed assets for the amount of the alleged 
purchase and the credit is to cash for the payment: 
 
Date Description Ref. Debit Credit 
12/01/X1 Fixed Assets 104 350,000  
 Cash 101  350,000 
 
A fictitious sales entry is then made for the same amount as the false purchase, debiting 
accounts receivable and crediting the sales account. The cash outflow that supposedly paid 
for the fixed assets is “returned” as payment on the receivable account, though in practice 
the cash might never have moved if the fraudsters didn’t bother to falsify that extra 
documentary support. 
 
Date Description Ref. Debit Credit 
12/01/X1 Accounts Rec 120 350,000  
 Sales 400  350,000 
12/15/X1 Cash 101 350,000  
 Accounts Rec 120  350,000 
 
The result of this completely fabricated sequence of events is an increase in both fixed assets 
and revenue. The debit could alternatively have been directed to other accounts, such as 
inventory or accounts payable, or simply left in accounts receivable if the fraud were 
committed close to the year’s end and the receivable could be left outstanding without 
attracting undue attention. 
 
Sales with Conditions  
Sales with conditions are those that have terms that have not been completed and the rights 
and risks of ownership have not passed to the purchaser. They do not qualify for recording 
as revenue. These types of sales are similar to schemes involving the recognition of revenue 
in improper periods, since the conditions for sale may become satisfied in the future, at 
which point revenue recognition would become appropriate. The recognition of revenue in 
improper periods is discussed further in the next section.  
 
What Red Flags Are Associated with Fictitious Revenues? 
The following red flags are associated with fictitious revenues:  
• Rapid growth or unusual profitability, especially compared to that of other companies in 
the same industry.  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.312                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Recurring negative cash flows from operations or an inability to generate positive cash 
flows from operations while reporting earnings and earnings growth.  
• Significant transactions with related parties or special purpose entities not in the ordinary 
course of business or where those entities are not audited or are audited by a separate 
firm.  
• Significant, unusual, or highly complex transactions, especially those close to the period’s 
end that pose difficult “substance over form” questions. 
• Unusual growth in the days’ sales in receivables ratio (receivables/average daily sales). 
• A significant volume of sales to entities whose substance and ownership is not known. 
• An unusual surge in sales by a minority of units within a company, or in sales recorded 
by corporate headquarters. 
 
Timing Differences (Including Premature Revenue Recognition)  
Financial statement fraud might also involve timing differences, that is, the recording of 
revenues or expenses in improper periods. This can be done to shift revenues or expenses 
between one period and the next, increasing or decreasing earnings as desired. 
 
Premature Revenue Recognition 
As previously mentioned, revenue should be recognized in the accounting records when the 
following four criteria as set out in FASB ASC 605-10-S99 have been satisfied: 
• Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists; 
• Delivery has occurred or services have been rendered; 
• The seller’s price to the buyer is fixed or determinable; and 
• Collectibility is reasonably assured. 
 
One or more of these criteria is typically  not met when managers recognize revenues 
prematurely. Examples of common problems with premature revenue recognition are set 
out below. 
 
PERSUASIVE EVIDENCE OF AN ARRANGEMENT DOES NOT EXIST 
• No written or verbal agreement exists. 
• A verbal agreement exists but a written agreement is customary. 
• A written order exists but is conditional upon sale to end users (such as a consignment 
sale). 
• A written order exists but contains a right of return. 
• A written order exists but a side letter alters the terms in ways that eliminate the required 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.313 
elements for an agreement. 
• The transaction is with a related party, which has not been disclosed. 
 
DELIVERY HAS NOT OCCURRED OR SERVICES HAVE NOT BEEN RENDERED 
• Shipment has not been made and the criteria for recognizing revenue on “bill-and-hold” 
transactions set out in FASB ASC 605-10-S99 have not been met. 
• Shipment has been made not to the customer but to the seller’s agent, an installer, or to a 
public warehouse. 
• Some, but not all, of the components required for operation were shipped. 
• Items of the wrong specification were shipped. 
• Delivery is not complete until installation, customer testing, and customer acceptance 
has occurred. 
• Services have not been provided at all. 
• Services are being performed over an extended period and only a portion of the service 
revenues should have been recognized in the current period. 
• The mix of goods and services in a contract has been misstated in order to improperly 
accelerate revenue recognition. 
 
THE SELLER’S PRICE TO THE BUYER IS NOT FIXED OR DETERMINABLE 
• The price is contingent upon some future events. 
• A service or membership fee is subject to unpredictable cancellation during the contract 
period. 
• The transaction includes an option to exchange the product for others. 
• Payment terms are extended for a substantial period and additional discounts or 
upgrades may be required to induce continued use and payment instead of switching to 
alternative products. 
 
COLLECTIBILITY IS NOT REASONABLY ASSURED 
• Collection is contingent upon a future event, such as resale of the product, receipt of 
additional funding, or litigation. 
• The customer does not have the ability to pay; for example, it is financially troubled, it 
has purchased far more than it can afford, or it is a shell company with minimal assets. 
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC, Inc. sells products that require engineering and adapting work before they are 
acceptable to customers. However, the company records sales revenue before completing the 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.314                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
engineering, testing, evaluation, and customer acceptance stages of production. In some cases, 
sales do not take place for weeks or months.  In other cases, the sales are specifically 
contingent upon the customer’s trial and acceptance of the product.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Another company is engaged in the design, development, manufacture, marketing, and 
servicing of computer peripheral subsystems. The company recognized revenue prior to a time 
when collection of the sales price was reasonably assured and at  a time prior to completion 
of the underlying sales transaction. 
 
It was the company’s policy to recognize revenue  when the products we re shipped. However, 
the sales were not complete as of the time of shipment because customers were not obligated 
to pay for the equipment until it had been installed; the company had substantial 
obligations to the customers for installation  and adjustments; and there remained major 
uncertainties concerning the customers’ true willingness to complete the transaction because 
of the volatile nature of the high-tech product. 
 
Long-Term Contracts 
Long-term contracts pose special problems for revenue recognition. Long-term construction 
contracts, for example, use either the completed-contract method or the percentage-of-completion 
method, depending partly on the circumstances. The completed-contract 
method does not record revenue until the project is 100 percent complete. Construction 
costs are held in an inventory account until completion of the project. The percentage-of-completion 
method recognizes revenues and expenses as measurable progress on a project is 
made, but this method is particularly vulnerable to manipulation. Managers can often easily 
manipulate the percentage-of-completion and the estimated costs to complete a construction 
project in order to recognize revenues prematurely and conceal contract overruns.  
 
Multiple Deliverables 
Product and service sales sometimes involve multiple deliverables (or multiple-element 
arrangements). For example, a cell phone company provides a discounted or free cell phone 
to a customer who signs up for a two-year service agreement; in this situation, the 
deliverables include both the product (cell phone) and the service, which spans two years. In 
multiple-element arrangements, the seller completes the earnings process—and thus must 
recognize revenue—over a period of time.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.315 
Under FASB ASC 605-25, Revenue Recognition—Multiple-Element Arrangements, companies are 
required to estimate the price of the individual components in a multiple-element sale. 
Companies must then recognize the revenue related to each of the components as they are 
delivered. The inherent inexact nature of the estimates involved in this process leaves this 
revenue recognition method vulnerable to fraud as managers can manipulate the estimated 
price of the individual components in order to delay or accelerate revenue recognition. 
 
Channel-Stuffing 
A challenging area of revenue recognition that has attracted the attention of the SEC is 
known as “channel-stuffing.” Channel-stuffing refers to the sale of an unusually large 
quantity of a product to distributors who are encouraged to overbuy through the use of deep 
discounts or extended payment terms. This practice is especially attractive to industries with 
high gross margins, such as tobacco, pharmaceuticals, perfume, soda concentrate, and 
branded consumer goods, because it can increase short-term earnings. On the downside, 
however, stealing from future periods’ sales makes it harder to achieve sales goals in those 
future periods. The pressure to meet sales goals can, in turn, lead to increasingly disruptive 
levels of channel-stuffing and, ultimately, to a restatement. Although orders are received, the 
terms of the order might raise questions about the collectibility of the accounts receivable, 
and any existing side agreements that grant a right of return may, effectively, turn the sales 
into consignment sales. Also, there might be a greater risk of returns for certain products if 
they cannot be sold before their shelf life ends.  
 
In recent years, the SEC has brought enforcement actions or charges related to channel-stuffing 
against a number of major U.S. corporations, including McAfee, Inc. and The Coca-Cola 
Company. In 2006, the SEC released a press release stating that McAfee agreed to settle 
the proceedings and pay a $50 million penalty after being charged by the SEC with 
accounting fraud (http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2006-3.htm). According to the press 
release, the accounting fraud charges included allegations that “McAfee used a variety of 
undisclosed ploys during [the years 1998 throug h 2000] to aggressively oversell its products 
to distributors in amounts that far exceeded the public’s demand for the products.” The 
SEC alleged that, as part of this channel-stuffing scheme, McAfee: 
• Improperly recorded the sales to distributors as revenue; 
• Offered its distributors lucrative sales incentives, including deep price discounts and 
rebates, in an effort to persuade the distributors to continue to buy and stockpile 
McAfee products; 
• Secretly paid distributors millions of dollars to hold the excess inventory rather than 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.316                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
return it to McAfee for a refund and consequent reduction in McAfee’s revenues; 
• Used an undisclosed, wholly-owned subsidiary, Net Tools, Inc. to repurchase inventory 
that McAfee had oversold to its distributors; and, 
• Took action to conceal the fraud from investors by, among other things, wrongly 
recording in its books the payments and discounts that it offered to distributors, and 
improperly manipulating reserve accounts to increase inadequate sales reserves and cover 
the costs of the distributor payments. 
 
In 2005, the SEC issued a press release announcing an enforcement action against The 
Coca-Cola Company relating to its channel-stuffing practice in Japan known as “gallon 
pushing” ( http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2005-58.htm). According to the press release, 
the SEC found that, from 1997 through 1999, Coca-Cola failed to disclose certain end-of-
 quarter sales practices used to meet earnings expectations. Specifically, Coca-Cola was 
alleged by the SEC to have offered extended credit to Japanese bottlers to induce them to 
purchase quantities of beverage concentrate the bottlers otherwise would not have 
purchased until a following period. Although Coca-Cola’s accounting treatment for sales 
made in connection with gallon pushing was found to be without issue, the SEC did find 
that Coca-Cola’s failure to disclose the impact of gallon pushing on current and future 
earnings, as well as related false statements and omissions within a pertinent Form 8-K, 
violated the antifraud and periodic reporting requirements of the federal securities laws.  
 
Recording Expenses in the Wrong Period 
The timely recording of expenses is often compromised due to pressures to meet budget 
projections and goals, or due to lack of proper accounting controls. As the expensing of 
certain costs is pushed into periods other than the ones in which they actually occur, they are 
not properly matched against the income that they help produce. For example, revenue may 
be recognized on the sale of certain items, but the cost of goods and services that went into 
the items sold might intentionally not be recorded in the accounting system until the 
subsequent period. This might make the sales revenue from the transaction almost pure 
profit, inflating earnings. In the next period, earnings would be depressed by a similar 
amount. 
 
What Red Flags Are Associated with Timing Differences (Including Premature Revenue Recognition)? 
• Rapid growth or unusual profitability, especially compared to that of other companies in 
the same industry.  
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.317 
• Recurring negative cash flows from operations or an inability to generate positive cash 
flows from operations while reporting earnings and earnings growth.  
• Significant, unusual, or highly complex transactions, especially those close to the period’s 
end that pose difficult “substance over form” questions. 
• Unusual increase in gross margin or gross margin in excess of industry peers. 
• Unusual growth in the days’ sales in receivables ratio (receivables/average daily sales). 
• Unusual decline in the days’ purchases in accounts payable ratio (accounts 
payable/average daily purchases). 
 
Improper Asset Valuation 
Under the “lower of cost or market value” ru le, where an asset’s  cost exceeds its current 
market value (as happens often with obsolete technology), the asset must be written down to 
market value. With the exception of certain securities, asset values are generally not increased 
to reflect current market value. It is often necessary to use estimates in accounting. For 
example, estimates are used in determining the residual value and the useful life of a 
depreciable asset, the uncollectible portion of accounts receivable, or the excess or obsolete 
portion of inventory. Whenever estimates are used, there is an additional opportunity for 
fraud by manipulating those estimates.  
 
Many schemes are used to inflate current assets  at the expense of long-term assets. The net 
effect is seen in the current ratio. The misclassification of long-term assets as current assets 
can be of critical concern to lending institutions that often require the maintenance of 
certain financial ratios. This is of particular consequence when the loan covenants are on 
unsecured or under-secured lines of credit and other short-term borrowings. Sometimes 
these misclassifications are referred to as “window dressing.” 
 
Most improper asset valuations involve the fraudulent overstatement of inventory or 
receivables. Other improper asset valuations include manipulation of the allocation of the 
purchase price of an acquired business in order to inflate future earnings, misclassification of 
fixed and other assets, or improper capitalization of inventory or start-up costs.  
 
Improper asset valuations usually take the form of one of the following classifications:  
• Inventory valuation 
• Accounts receivable 
• Business combinations 
• Fixed assets 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.318                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inventory Valuation 
Inventory should be recorded at the lower of cost or market value. This means that 
inventory must be valued at its acquisition cost, except when the cost is determined to be 
higher than the current market value, in which case it should be written down to its current 
value, or written off altogether if it has no value. Failing to write down inventory results in 
overstated assets and the mismatching of cost of goods sold with revenues. Other methods 
by which inventory can be improperly stated include manipulation of the physical inventory 
count, inflation of the unit costs used to price out inventory, and failure to relieve inventory 
for the costs of goods sold. Fictitious inventory schemes usually involve the creation of fake 
documents, such as inventory count sheets and receiving reports. Companies have even 
programmed special computer reports of inventory for auditors that incorrectly added up 
the line item values so as to inflate the overall inventory balance. Computer-assisted audit 
techniques can significantly help auditors to detect many of these inventory fraud 
techniques. 
 
In some instances, friendly coconspirators claim to be holding inventory for companies in 
question. Other times, companies falsely report large values of inventory in transit (perhaps 
in the middle of the Pacific Ocean), knowing that the auditors will have a difficult time 
observing it. “Bill and hold” items that have already been recorded as sales might be 
included in the physical inventory count, as might goods owned by third parties but held by 
companies on consignment or for storage. Companies have even made up pallets of 
inventory with hollow centers, placed bricks in sealed boxes instead of high value products, 
and shuttled inventory overnight between locations being observed by auditors on different 
days so as to double count the inventory. Finally, it is also common for companies to insert 
phony count sheets during the inventory observation or change the quantities on the  
count sheets. 
 
Accounts Receivable  
Accounts receivable are subject to manipulation in the same manner as sales and inventory, 
and in many cases, the schemes are conducted together. The two most common schemes 
involving accounts receivable are fictitious receivables and failure to write off accounts 
receivable as bad debts (or failure to establish an adequate allowance for bad debts). 
Fictitious receivables commonly arise from fictitious revenues, which were discussed earlier. 
Accounts receivable should be reported at net realizable value, that is, the amount of the 
receivable less the amount expected not to be collected.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.319 
FICTITIOUS ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE  
Fictitious accounts receivable are common among companies with financial problems, as 
well as with managers who receive a commission based on sales. The typical entry under 
fictitious accounts receivable is to debit (increase) accounts receivable and credit (increase) 
sales. Of course, these schemes are more common around the end of the accounting period, 
since accounts receivable are expected to be paid in cash within a reasonable time. 
Fraudsters commonly attempt to conceal fictitious accounts receivable by providing false 
confirmations of balances to auditors. They get the audit confirmations because the mailing 
address they provide for the phony customers is typically either a mailbox under their 
control, a home address, or the business address of a coconspirator. Such schemes can be 
detected by using business credit reports, public records, or even the telephone book, to 
identify significant customers with no physical existence or no apparent business need for 
the product sold to them. 
 
FAILURE TO WRITE DOWN 
Companies are required to accrue losses on uncollectible receivables when the criteria in 
Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies, are met. 
Companies struggling for profits and income may be tempted to omit the recognition of 
such losses because of their negative impact on income.  
 
Business Combinations 
Companies are required to allocate the purchase price they have paid to acquire another 
business to the tangible and intangible assets of that business. Any excess of the purchase 
price over the value of the acquired assets is treated as goodwill. Current standards 
governing goodwill accounting have decreased the incentive for companies to minimize the 
amount allocated to goodwill that previously was required to be amortized against future 
earnings. However, companies may still be tempted to over-allocate the purchase price to in-
 process research and development assets, in order to then write them off immediately. Or 
they may establish excessive reserves for various expenses at the time of acquisition, 
intending to quietly release those excess reserves into earnings at a future date.  
 
Fixed Assets  
Bogus fixed assets can be created by a variety of methods. They are subject to manipulation 
through several different schemes. Some of the more common schemes are booking 
fictitious assets, misrepresenting asset valuation, and capitalizing non-asset costs. 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.320                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
BOOKING FICTITIOUS ASSETS 
One of the easiest methods of asset misrepresentation is the recording of fictitious assets. 
This false creation of assets affects account totals on a company’s balance sheet. The 
corresponding account commonly used is the owners’ equity account. Because company 
assets are often physically found in many different locations, this fraud can sometimes be 
easily overlooked. One of the most common fictitious asset schemes is to simply create 
fictitious documents. In other instances, the equipment is leased, not owned, and this fact is 
not disclosed during the audit of fixed assets. Bogus fixed assets can sometimes be detected 
because the fixed asset addition makes no business sense. 
 
MISREPRESENTING THE VALUE OF FIXED ASSETS 
Fixed assets should be recorded at cost. Although assets may appreciate in value, this 
increase in value should not be recognized on company financial statements. Many financial 
statement frauds have involved the reporting of fixed assets at market values instead of the 
lower acquisition costs, or at even higher inflated values with phony valuations to support 
them. Further, companies may falsely inflate the value of fixed assets by failing to record 
impairments of long-lived assets (as required by FASB ASC 350-30-35) and of goodwill (as 
required by FASB ASC 350-20-35). Misrepresentat ion of asset values frequently goes hand 
in hand with other schemes.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In October 2002, the SEC filed a civil enforcement action against former Enron CFO 
Andrew S. Fastow, who also faced criminal charges, relating to an alleged self-enriching 
scheme to defraud Enron’s security holders through the use of  certain off-balance-sheet 
entities. One of the six transactions in the SEC’s complaint against Andrew Fastow 
involved Raptor I and Avici. According to the complaint, Enron and the Fastow-
 controlled partnership LJM2 engaged in complex transactions with an entity called Raptor 
I. Raptor I was used to manipulate Enron’s balance sheet and income statement and to 
generate profits for LJM2 and Fastow at Enron’s expense. In September 2000, Fastow 
and others used Raptor I to effectuate a fraudulent hedging transact ion and thus avoid a 
decrease in the value of Enron’s investment in  the stock of a public company called Avici 
Systems Inc. Specifically, Fastow and others back-dated documents to make it appear that 
Enron had locked in the value of its investment in Avici in August of 2000, when Avici’s 
stock was trading at its all time high price. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.321 
CAPITALIZING NON-ASSET COSTS 
Excluded from the cost of a purchased asset are interest and finance charges incurred in the 
purchase. For example, when a company finances a capital equipment purchase, monthly 
payments include both principal liability reduction and interest payments. On initial 
purchase, only the original cost of the asset should be capitalized. The subsequent interest 
payments should be charged to interest expense and not to the asset. Without a reason for 
intensive review, fraud of this type can go unchecked.  
 
Understating Assets 
In some cases, as with some government-related or -regulated companies, it is advantageous 
to understate assets. Additional funding is often based on asset amounts. This 
understatement can be done directly or through improper depreciation. 
 
Misclassifying Assets 
In order to meet budget requirements, and for various other reasons, assets are sometimes 
misclassified into general ledger accounts in which they don’t belong. For example, fixed 
assets may be fraudulently reclassified as current assets. The manipulation can skew financial 
ratios and help the company comply with loan covenants or other borrowing requirements.  
 
What Red Flags Are Associated with Improper Asset Valuation? 
• Recurring negative cash flows from operations or an inability to generate positive cash 
flows from operations while reporting earnings and earnings growth. 
• Significant declines in customer demand and increasing business failures in either the 
industry or the overall economy. 
• Assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that involve 
subjective judgments or uncertainties that are difficult to support. 
• Non-financial management’s excessive part icipation in or preoccupation with the 
selection of accounting principles or the determination of significant estimates.  
• Unusual increase in gross margin or margin in excess of industry peers. 
• Unusual growth in the number of days’ sales in receivables ratio. 
• Unusual growth in the number of days’ purchases in inventory ratio. 
• Reduction in allowances for bad debts, excess inventory, obsolete inventory, etc., 
especially if relevant ratios are out of line with those of industry peers. 
• Unusual change in the relationship between fixed assets and depreciation. 
• Adding to assets while competitors are reducing capital tied up in assets. 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.322                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Concealed Liabilities and Expenses 
Understating liabilities and expenses is one of the ways financial statements can be 
manipulated to make a company appear more profitable than it actually is. Because pre-tax 
income will increase by the full amount of the expense or liability not recorded, this financial 
statement fraud method can have a significant impact on reported earnings with relatively 
little effort by the fraudster. It is much easier to commit than falsifying sales transactions. 
Missing transactions can also be harder for auditors to detect than improperly recorded ones 
since the missing transactions leave no audit trail. 
 
There are three common methods for concealing liabilities and expenses:  
• Liability/expense omissions 
• Capitalized expenses 
• Failure to disclose warranty costs and liabilities 
 
Liability/Expense Omissions  
The preferred and easiest method of concealing liabilities or expenses is to simply fail to 
record them. Multi-million-dollar judgments ag ainst a company from a recent court decision 
might be conveniently ignored. Vendor invoices might be thrown away or stuffed into 
drawers rather than posted into the accounts payable system, thereby increasing reported 
earnings by the full amount of the invoices. In a retail environment, debit memos might be 
created for chargebacks to vendors, supposedly to claim permitted rebates or allowances but 
sometimes solely to create additional income. Whether or not these items are properly 
recorded in a subsequent accounting period does not change the fraudulent nature of the 
current financial statements. 
 
Often, perpetrators of liability and expense omissions believe they can conceal their frauds in 
future periods. They frequently plan to compensate for their omitted liabilities with visions 
of other income sources such as profits from future price increases. 
 
Just as they are easy to conceal, omitted lia bilities are probably one of the most difficult 
schemes to uncover. A thorough review of all post-financial-statement-date transactions, 
such as accounts payable increases and decreases, can aid in the discovery of omitted 
liabilities in financial statements, as can a computerized analysis of expense records. 
Additionally, if the auditor requested and was granted unrestricted access to the client’s files, 
a physical search could turn up concealed invoices and unposted liabilities. Probing 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.323 
interviews of accounts payable and other personnel can reveal unrecorded or delayed items 
too.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In July 2002, the SEC filed suit in the United States Dis trict Court for the Southern 
District of New York, charging major cable television producer Adelphia Communications 
Corporation (“the Company” or “Adelphia”); its founder John J. Rigas; his three sons, 
Timothy J. Rigas, Michael J. Rigas, and James P. Rigas; and two senior executives at 
Adelphia, James R. Brown and Michael C. Mulcahey, in one of the most extensive 
financial frauds ever to take place at a public company. The SEC charged that Adelphia, 
at the direction of the individual defendants (1) fraudulently excluded over $2.3 billion in 
liabilities from its consolidated financial statements by hiding them in off balance sheet 
affiliates; (2) falsified operations statistics and inflated Adelphia’s earnings to meet Wall 
Street’s expectations; and (3) concealed rampant self-dealing by the Rigas Family, 
including the undisclosed use of corporate fu nds for Rigas Family stock purchases and the 
acquisition of luxury condominiums in New York and elsewhere. 
 
With respect to the concealed liabilities, the complaint alleged that between mid-1999 and 
the end of 2001, John J. Rigas, Timothy J. Ri gas, Michael J. Rigas, James P. Rigas, and 
James R. Brown, with the assistance of Michael C. Mulcahey, caused Adelphia to 
fraudulently exclude from the Company’s a nnual and quarterly consolidated financial 
statements over $2.3 billion in bank debt by deliberately shifting those liabilities onto the 
books of Adelphia’s off balance sheet, unconsolidated affiliates. Failure to record this debt 
violated GAAP requirements and precipitated a series of misrepresentations about those 
liabilities by Adelphia and the defendants, including the creation of (1) sham transactions 
backed by fictitious documents to give the false appearance that Adelphia had actually 
repaid debts when, in truth, it had simply shi fted them to unconsoli dated Rigas-controlled 
entities, and (2) misleading financial statements  by giving the false impression through the 
use of footnotes that liabilities listed in the Company’s financials included all outstanding 
bank debt. 
 
In November 2002, in exchange for his testimony against the Rigas men, James Brown 
was released from prosecution by  consenting to an entry of a permanent injunction against 
him for federal securities law violations. Additionally, Brown has been permanently barred 
from becoming an officer or director of a public corporation.  
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.324                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In July 2004, after a three-month trial, a federal jury convicted John and Timothy Rigas of 
conspiracy, securities fraud, and bank fraud. John Rigas received a 15-year prison sentence 
and was fined $2,300, and Timothy Rigas was sentenced to 20 years in prison. James 
Rigas was never criminally charged by the Court. In November 2005, Michael Rigas 
pleaded guilty to a charge of making a false entry in a financial record. 
 
In April 2005, the SEC filed permanent injunctions against John, Timothy, Michael, 
and James Rigas, as well as James Brown, Michael Mulcahey, and Adelphia 
Communications Corporation. The defendants were charged with violating anti-fraud, 
periodic reporting, record keep ing, and internal control provisions of federal securities laws. 
In addition, the Rigas family members were barred from ever holding officer or director 
positions in a public company.  
 
Capitalized Expenses  
Capitalizing expenses is another way to increase income and assets because capitalized items 
are depreciated or amortized over a period of years rather than expensed immediately. If 
expenditures are capitalized as assets and not expensed during the current period, income 
will be overstated. As the assets are depreciated, income in subsequent periods will be 
understated.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In November 2002, the SEC filed an am ended complaint against WorldCom, Inc., 
broadening its charges to allege that WorldCom  misled investors from at least as early as 
1999 through the first quarter of 2002. The complaint stated that the company had 
acknowledged that during that period Worl dCom materially overstated the income it 
reported on its financial statements by approx imately $9 billion, main ly using two methods. 
First, WorldCom reduced its operating expenses  by improperly releasing as a credit to 
operating expenses certain provisions previously established for line costs and for taxes. 
Second, the company improperly reduced its operating expenses by recharacterizing certain 
expenses as capital assets. Much  of the $9 billion related to  improper accounting for “line 
costs,” which were among WorldCom’s major operating expenses. The SEC complaint 
alleges that, in a scheme directed and approved by members of senior management, 
WorldCom concealed the true extent of its “l ine costs.” By improperly reducing provisions 
held against “line costs” and by transferring  certain “line costs” to its capital asset 
accounts, WorldCom falsely portrayed itself as a profitable business when it was not and 
concealed large losses. These improp er accounting practices were designed to and did inflate 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.325 
income to correspond with estimates by Wall Street analysts and to support the price of 
WorldCom’s stock. 
 
In March 2005, former WorldCom CEO Bernard Ebbers was convicted of one count of 
conspiracy, one count of securities fraud, and seven counts of false regulatory filing, and was 
later sentenced to 25 years in prison. He also agreed to forfeit nearly all of his personal 
assets to settle a civil suit filed by aggrieved WorldCom investors.  
 
Scott Sullivan, the former CFO under Ebbers and “the architect” behind the fraud 
scheme, pled guilty to fraud charges and agreed to testify against Ebbers. Due to his 
cooperation during the investigation, he was sentenced to only five years in prison. He also 
agreed to forfeit the proceeds from the sale of his $10 million home, along with his 401(k) 
holdings, to settle the civil suit brought by shareholders.  
 
Former WorldCom Controller David F. Myers and former Director of General 
Accounting Buford “Buddy” Yates, Jr., pled gu ilty to criminal charges prosecuted by the 
U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York. Myers received a sentence  
of one year and one day in prison. Yates was also sentenced to one year and one day in 
prison and ordered to pay a $5,000 fine. Additionally, each man was permanently 
enjoined from acting as an officer or director  of any public company and was suspended from 
practicing before the SEC as an accountan t, under Rule 102(2) of the Commission’s 
Rules of Practice.  
 
The SEC also brought civil actions against former members of the WorldCom General 
Accounting Department, Betty L. Vinson, CPA and Troy M. Normand. Both were 
permanently enjoined from securities violation s. Vinson was suspended from appearing or 
practicing before the SEC as an accountant. In addition, she pled guilty to one count of 
securities fraud and one count of conspiracy to commit securities fraud and was sentenced to 
five months in prison and five  months of house arrest. Norm and pled guilty to similar 
charges and received three years of probation for his role in the fraud.  
 
EXPENSING CAPITAL EXPENDITURES 
Just as capitalizing expenses is improper, so is expensing costs that should be capitalized. 
The organization may want to minimize its net income due to tax considerations, or to 
increase earnings in future periods. Expensing an item that should be depreciated over a 
period of time helps to accomplish just that—net income is lower and, therefore, so are 
taxes.  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.326                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Returns and Allowances and Warranties   
Improper recording of sales returns and allowances occurs when a company fails to properly 
record or present the expense associated with sales returns and customer allowances 
stemming from customer dissatisfaction. It is inevitable that a certain percentage of products 
sold will, for one reason or another, be returned. When this happens, management must 
record the related expense as a contra-sales account, which reduces the amount of net sales 
presented on the company’s income statement.  
 
Likewise, when a company offers a warranty on product sales, it must estimate the amount 
of warranty expense it reasonably expects to incur over the warranty period and accrue a 
liability for that amount. In warranty liability fraud, the warranty liability is usually either 
omitted altogether or substantially understated. Another similar area is the liability resulting 
from defective products (product liability). 
 
What Red Flags Are Associated with Concealed Liabilities and Expenses? 
• Recurring negative cash flows from operations or an inability to generate positive cash 
flows from operations while reporting earnings and earnings growth. 
• Assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that involve 
subjective judgments or uncertainties that are difficult to support. 
• Non-financial management’s excessive part icipation in or preoccupation with the 
selection of accounting principles or the determination of significant estimates. 
• Unusual increase in gross margin or margin in excess of industry peers. 
• Allowances for sales returns, warranty claims, etc., that are shrinking in percentage terms 
or are otherwise out of line with industry peers. 
• Unusual reduction in the number of days’ purchases in accounts payable ratio. 
• Reducing accounts payable while competitors are stretching out payments to vendors. 
 
Improper Disclosures 
Accounting principles require that financial statements include all the information necessary 
to prevent a reasonably discerning user of the financial statements from being misled. The 
notes should include narrative disclosures, supporting schedules, and any other information 
required to avoid misleading potential investors, creditors, or any other users of the financial 
statements.  
 
Management has an obligation to disclose all significant information appropriately in the 
financial statements and in management’s discussion and analysis. In addition, the disclosed 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.327 
information must not be misleading. Improper disclosures relating to financial statement 
fraud usually involve the following: 
• Liability omissions 
• Subsequent events 
• Management fraud 
• Related-party transactions 
• Accounting changes 
 
Liability Omissions 
Typical omissions include the failure to disclose loan covenants or contingent liabilities. 
Loan covenants are agreements, in addition to or as part of a financing arrangement, that a 
borrower has promised to keep as long as the financing is in place. The agreements can 
contain various types of covenants, including certain financial ratio limits and restrictions on 
other major financing arrangements. Contingent liabilities are potential obligations that will 
materialize only if certain events occur in the future. A corporate guarantee of personal loans 
taken out by an officer or a private company controlled by an officer is an example of a 
contingent liability. The company’s potential lia bility, if material, must be disclosed.  
 
Subsequent Events 
Events occurring or becoming known after the close of the period may have a significant 
effect on the financial statements and should be disclosed. Fraudsters typically avoid 
disclosing court judgments and regulatory decisions that undermine the reported values of 
assets, that indicate unrecorded liabilities, or that adversely reflect upon management 
integrity. Public record searches can reveal this information.  
 
Management Fraud 
Management has an obligation to disclose to the shareholders significant frauds committed 
by officers, executives, and others in positions of trust. Withholding such information from 
auditors would likely also involve lying to auditors, an illegal act in itself.  
 
Related-Party Transactions 
Related-party transactions occur when a company does business with another entity whose 
management or operating policies can be controlled or significantly influenced by the 
company or by some other party in common. There is nothing inherently wrong with 
related-party transactions, as long as they are fully disclosed. If the transactions are not 
conducted on an arm’s-length basis, the company may suffer economic harm, injuring 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.328                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
stockholders. The financial interest that a company official might have may not be readily 
apparent. For example, common directors of two companies that do business with each 
other, any corporate general partner and the partnerships with which it does business, and 
any controlling shareholder of the corporation with which he/she/it does business may be 
related-parties. Family relationships can also be considered related parties, such as all lineal 
descendants and ancestors, without regard to financial interests. Related-party transactions 
are sometimes referred to as “self-dealing.” While these transactions are sometimes 
conducted at arm’s length, often they are not.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In September 2002, the SEC charged former top executives of Tyco International Ltd., 
including former CEO L. Dennis Kozlowski, with violating the federal securities laws by 
failing to disclose to shareholders hundreds of millions of dollars of low-interest and interest-free 
loans they took from the company, and in some cases, never repaid. The SEC 
complaint, which also charged former Tyc o CFO Mark H. Swartz and Chief Legal 
Officer Mark A. Belnick, alleges that the three former executives also sold shares of Tyco 
stock valued at millions of dollars while their self-dealing remained undisclosed. The 
complaint alleges numerous improper transact ions, including Kozlowski’s use of $242 
million of loans for impermissible and una uthorized purposes, including funding an 
extravagant lifestyle. With these undisclosed loans, Kozlowski allegedly amassed millions of 
dollars in fine art, yachts, and estate jewelry, as well as a $31 million Park Avenue 
apartment and a palatial estate in Nantucket.  Kozlowski and Swartz allegedly engaged in 
undisclosed non-arm’s-length real estate transactions with Tyco or its subsidiaries and 
received undisclosed compensation and perqui sites, including forgiveness of multi-million- 
dollar loans, rent-free use of large New York apartments, and use of corporate aircraft for 
personal purposes at little or no cost. 
 
In July 2004, Belnick was acquitted of all the charges brought against him. In a separate 
trial, Kozlowski and Swartz were each found gu ilty of 22 charges, in cluding grand larceny, 
falsifying business records, cons piracy, and securities fraud, and were sentenced to eight and 
one-third to 25 years in prison. 
 
Accounting Changes 
In general, three types of accounting changes must be disclosed to avoid misleading the user 
of financial statements: accounting principles, estimates, and reporting entities. Although the 
required treatment for each type of change is different, they are all susceptible to 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.329 
manipulation by a determined fraudster. For example, fraudsters may fail to properly 
retroactively restate financial statements for a change in accounting principle if the change 
causes the company’s financial statements to appear weaker. Likewise, they may fail to 
disclose significant changes in estimates such as the useful lives and estimated salvage values 
of depreciable assets, or the estimates underlying the determination of warranty or other 
liabilities. They may even secretly change the reporting entity, by adding entities owned 
privately by management or by excluding certain company-owned units, in order to improve 
reported results.  
 
Backdating Stock Options 
As a supplement to salary, companies frequently offer employees stock options, which grant 
the recipient the privilege to purchase a share of the company’s stock at a future date for a 
specific price called the strike price. A strike price is the value of a share at a particular date. 
Generally, the strike price is set at the price of the underlying stock on the day the option is 
granted; therefore, the option becomes valuable only with future increases in the stock price.  
In this way, companies grant stock options as an incentive for employees to boost company 
performance and thus raise the stock price. The practice of backdating stock options, 
however, gives the employee a chance to profit by purchasing stock at past low prices, 
providing an immediate payoff. Backdating stock options occurs when a company alters the 
date of the grant to a time when the stock was trading at a lower price in the interest of 
making the option instantly valuable and further increasing the employee’s gain if the stock 
price continues to rise.  
 
EXAMPLE 
On June 1, 20X1, Company XYZ grants its CEO a stock option that provides the 
executive the right to purchase 100 shares of XYZ stock on January 1, 20X2 for the 
strike price. Per its usual policy, the strike price is set at the price of the company stock on 
the date of the option grant. On June 1, 2008  (the grant date), XYZ stock was trading at 
$40 per share. Therefore, if the stock price increases to $45 per share by January 1, 
20X2, the CEO could exercise the option and purchase the shares for $40 per share, then 
sell them immediately on the market for $45 per share, resulting in a gain of $5 per share. 
However, the company has recently experienced a dramatic increase in its share price. On 
May 24, 20X1, the stock was trading for $15 per share. To provide the CEO with an 
opportunity to exploit this increase in share price, the company chooses to backdate the 
stock options to make it appear that they  were granted on May 24, 20X1. Because the 
strike price is set at the price of the stock on the option grant date, the strike price is 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.330                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
effectively changed to $15 per share. As a result, the CEO now has the option to buy 100 
shares of XYZ stock on January 1, 20X2 for $15 per share. Thus, the CEO has 
immediately gained $25 per share (the difference  between the stock price on the actual grant 
date of June 1 and the stated grant date of May 24) based solely on the manipulation of 
the grant date used.  
 
Backdating stock options came to the attention of the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) when academic research revealed a pattern of stock prices descending 
just prior to many reported dates of option grants, then ascending immediately afterwards. 
Backdating is not necessarily illegal, but can be if not handled appropriately. In order to be 
legal, the practice must be explicitly reported to shareholders and the government. Failure to 
do so may constitute securities fraud.  
 
In August of 2002, certain provisions laid out under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act took effect, 
requiring companies to report stock option grants within two business days after the grants. 
The rules greatly reduced the time companies had to choose a favorable grant date; 
companies were previously allowed weeks or months before they were required to report 
stock option grants. Consequently, the apparent pattern of backdating nearly disappeared 
around the time the rules were enacted. However, reports of actual practices in stock options 
and the recorded data remain inconsistent in many cases because not all companies adhere 
to Sarbanes-Oxley. Additionally, the revelation of the prevalence of backdating has caused 
concern that companies may not have recorded and disclosed the option grants on the 
financial statements in an accurate manner. In response to this issue, the Public Company 
Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) issued a practice alert to prepare auditors for the 
possibility of financial misstatements due to backdating of stock options. To keep a tight 
rope on the possibility of this type of illegal activity, auditors should assess the information 
obtained from the audit to determine if there is a need for further audit procedures. 
 
What Red Flags Are Associated with Improper Disclosures? 
• Domination of management by a single person or small group (in a nonowner-managed 
business) without compensating controls. 
• Ineffective board of directors or audit committee oversight over the financial reporting 
process and internal control. 
• Ineffective communication, implementation, support, or enforcement of the entity’s 
values or ethical standards by management or the communication of inappropriate 
values or ethical standards. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.331 
• Rapid growth or unusual profitability, especially compared to that of other companies in 
the same industry. 
• Significant, unusual, or highly complex transactions, especially those close to a period’s 
end that pose difficult “substance over form” questions. 
• Significant related-party transactions not in the ordinary course of business or with 
related entities either not audited or audited by a different firm. 
• Significant bank accounts or subsidiary or branch operations in tax-haven jurisdictions 
for which there appears to be no clear business justification. 
• Overly complex organizational structure invo lving unusual legal entities or managerial 
lines of authority. 
• Known history of violations of securities la ws or other laws and regulations, or claims 
against the entity, its senior management, or board members alleging fraud or violations 
of laws and regulations. 
• Recurring attempts by management to justify marginal or inappropriate accounting on 
the basis of materiality. 
• Formal or informal restrictions on the auditor that inappropriately limit access to people 
or information, or limit the ability of the auditor to communicate effectively with the 
board of directors or audit committee. 
 
 
What Red Flags Are Associated with Financial Statement Fraud Generally? 
Red flags associated with particular financial statement fraud schemes have been discussed 
above. There are many red flags associated with financial statement fraud generally. An 
extensive list of such red flags can be found in an appendix to AU section 316, Consideration 
of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit, where they are called “risk factors.” Some red flags 
indicate increased vulnerability to financial statement fraud; others indicate a greater 
likelihood that financial statement fraud has occurred. 
 
Some of the more significant red flags listed in AU section 316 are: 
• Domination of management by a single person or small group (in a nonowner-managed 
business) without compensating controls. 
• Profitability or trend level expectations of investment analysts, institutional investors, 
significant creditors, or other external parties (particularly expectations that are unduly 
aggressive or unrealistic), including expectations created by management in, for example, 
overly optimistic press releases or annual report messages. 
• Ineffective communication, implementation, support, or enforcement of the entity’s 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.332                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
values or ethical standards by management, or the communication of inappropriate 
values or ethical standards.  
• Recurring negative cash flows from operations or an inability to generate positive cash 
flows from operations while reporting earnings and earnings growth. 
• Rapid growth or unusual profitability, especially compared to that of other companies in 
the same industry. 
• Significant, unusual, or highly complex transactions, especially those close to a period’s 
end that pose difficult “substance over form” questions. 
• Significant related-party transactions not in the ordinary course of business or with 
related entities not audited or audited by another firm. 
• Recurring attempts by management to justify marginal or inappropriate accounting on 
the basis of materiality. 
• Formal or informal restrictions on the auditor that inappropriately limit access to people 
or information, or limit the ability of the auditor to communicate effectively with those 
charged with governance. 
 
 
Detection of Fraudulent Financial Statement Schemes 
To better understand basic accounting concepts and to see how an analysis of accounting 
records and procedures can reveal a fraud, consider the following example: 
  
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.333 
EXAMPLE 
Jackson Hardware Supply is a medium-sized pl umbing and electrical wholesale distributor. 
On December 31, the balance sheet and income statement were as follows: 
 
Jackson Hardware Supply  
Balance Sheet  
As of December 31  
 
 Assets  Liabilities & Owners’ Equities   
    
 Cash $2,427,000  Liabilities  
 Accounts Receivable 300,000    Accounts Payable $ 300,000
  Inventory 300,000    Salaries Payable 70,000
  Supplies 11,000    Rent Payable    50,000
  Prepaid Insurance 44,000    Deferred Taxes Payable    438,000
  Equipment   440,000    Total Liabilities 858,000
     
   Owners’ Equities  
     Common Stock $2,000,000
      Retained Earnings      664,000
      Total Owners’ Equity 2,664,000
   
Total Assets 
 
$3,522,000
    
 Total Liabilities & 
   Owners’ Equity 
 
$3,522,000
  
 
Jackson Hardware Supply  
Income Statement  
For the year ending December 31  
  
 Revenues   
 Sales Revenue $3,470,000  
 Cost of Goods Sold (2,100,000)  
 Gross Profit from Sales 1,370,000  
 Rent Revenue      10,000  
  Gross Profit   $ 1,380,000 
  
 General and Administrative Expenses  
 Insurance Expense $4,000
  Salary Expense 220,000
  Supplies Expense 14,000
  Rental Expense    40,000
     
  Total General and 
Administrative Expenses 
  
(278,000) 
  Net Income Before Taxes 1,102,000 
  Income Taxes    (438,000) 
  Net Income $  664,000  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.334                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
An anonymous tip was received that the paymaster is stealing cash from the company. 
Lately, he has been seen driving a new BMW and has taken expensive vacations. The 
president of the company wants to follow up on the tip. Although the paymaster is a 
longtime, trusted employee, the president asks the fraud examiner to determine if the 
paymaster has been stealing. Although there are several ways to proceed with the 
investigation, the fraud examiner with accounting knowledge decides to first compare this 
year’s total salary expense with last year’s balance. He theorizes that if the paymaster is 
dishonest, he might be concealing the theft in the salaries expense account. Past experience 
has taught the fraud examiner to look  in the most obvious place first. 
 
The examiner notes that the balance of $220,000 in the salary expense account this year is 
significantly larger than the $180,000 balance last year. He asks the owner if there is an 
increase in the number of employees and how large across-the-board raises were this year. 
He discovers that the work force has not incr eased and all employees, including the owner, 
received 10 percent raises. He recalculates this year’s salaries by increasing last year’s 
salaries 10 percent and determines that the balance in the salary ex pense account should be 
approximately $198,000 ($180,000 x 1.10 = $198,000). He now believes that excess 
salaries went to someone.  
 
The next step is to follow the overstatement in salary expense backward from the income 
statement through the accounts and journal entries to the source documents—the payroll 
checks in this case. He finds that there are 12 checks payable to John Doe, an employee 
who quit in January of last year. He compares the endorsements on John Doe’s checks with 
those on the paymaster’s checks and notices di stinct similarities in the signatures. Armed 
with this evidence, he interviews the paymaster who confess es that he has stolen $22,000 
and concealed the theft by issuing payroll checks to a nonexistent employee, checks that he 
subsequently endorsed and cashed.  
 
Obviously, this example is relatively simple; but most fraud schemes are simple, especially 
for an examiner who understands concealment techniques and accounting. 
 
Other detection techniques are available for deter mining if the paymaster is stealing. These 
include running a computer listing of all employees who do not elect insurance coverage and 
other payroll withholdings (withholdings on fictitious employees create additional 
concealment problems for perpetrators), having someone else distribute the checks, and 
checking Social Security numbers of all active employees. Any of these methods might have 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.335 
revealed the spurious paychecks to John Doe. The approach shows, however, how an 
understanding of accounting can be invaluable for detecting fraud. 
 
 
Financial Statement Analysis  
Comparative financial statements provide information for current and past accounting 
periods. Accounts expressed in whole dollar amounts yield a limited amount of information. 
The conversion of these numbers into ratios or percentages allows the reader of the 
statements to analyze them based on their relationship to each other; in addition, it allows 
the reader to more readily compare current performance with past performance. In fraud 
detection and investigation, the determination of the reasons for relationships and changes 
in amounts can be important. These determinations are the red flags that point an examiner 
in the direction of possible fraud. If large enough, a fraudulent misstatement will affect the 
financial statements in such a way that relationships between the numbers become 
questionable. Many schemes are detected because  the financial statements, when analyzed 
closely, do not make sense. Financial statement analysis includes the following: 
• Vertical analysis 
• Horizontal analysis 
• Ratio analysis 
 
Percentage Analysis — Horizontal and Vertical  
There are traditionally two methods of percentage analysis of financial statements. Vertical 
analysis  is a technique for analyzing the relationships between the items on an income 
statement, balance sheet, or statement of cash flows by expressing components as 
percentages. This method is often referred to as “common sizing” financial statements. In 
the vertical analysis of an income statement, net sales is assigned 100 percent. For a balance 
sheet, total assets is assigned 100 percent on the asset side, and total liabilities and equity is 
expressed as 100 percent. All other items in each of the sections are expressed as a 
percentage of these numbers. 
 
Horizontal analysis  is a technique for analyzing the percentage change in individual financial 
statement items from one period to the next. The first period in the analysis is considered 
the base period, and the changes in the subsequent period are computed as a percentage of 
the base period. If more than two periods are presented, each period’s changes are computed 
as a percentage of the preceding period. As is the case with vertical analysis, this technique 
will not work for small, immaterial frauds.  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.336                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The following is an example of financial statements that are analyzed by both horizontal and 
vertical analysis: 
 
 
 
Vertical Analysis Discussion 
Vertical analysis  is the expression of the relationship or percentage of component items to a 
specific base item. In the above example, vertical analysis of the income statement includes 
total sales as the base amount, and all other items are then analyzed as a percentage of that 
total. Vertical analysis emphasizes the relationship of statement items wi thin each accounting 
period. These relationships can be used with historical averages to determine statement 
anomalies.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.337 
In the above example, we can observe that accounts payable makes up 29 percent of total 
liabilities in Year One. Historically, we may find that this account averages slightly over 25 
percent of total liabilities. In Year Two, accounts payable, as a percentage of total liabilities, 
increased to 51 percent. Although this increase may be explainable through a correlation 
with a rise in sales, such a significant increase could also be the starting point of a fraud 
examination. Source documents should be examined to determine the reason for the rise in 
this percentage. With this type of examination, fraudulent activity might be detected. The 
same type of change can be seen as selling expenses decline as a percentage of sales in Year 
Two from 20 percent to 17 percent. Again, this change may be explainable with higher 
volume sales or another bona fide explanation. But close examination may point a fraud 
examiner to uncover fictitious sales, since there was not a corresponding increase in selling 
expenses.  
 
Horizontal Analysis Discussion 
Horizontal statement analysis uses percentage comparison from one accounting period to the 
next. The percentage change is calculated by dividing the amount of increase or decrease for 
each item by the base period amount. The resulting percentages are then studied in detail. It 
is important to consider the amount of change as well as the percentage in horizontal 
comparisons. A 5 percent change in an account with a very large dollar amount may actually 
be much more of a change than a 50 percent change in an account with much less activity. 
 
In the above example, it is obvious that the 80 percent increase in sales has a much greater 
corresponding increase in cost of goods sold, which rose 140 percent. These accounts are 
often used to hide fraudulent expenses, withdrawals, or other illegal transactions.  
 
Ratios Analysis 
Ratio analysis  is a means of measuring the relationship between two different financial 
statement amounts. The relationship and comparison are the keys to the analysis. Many 
professionals, including bankers, investors, and business owners, as well as major investment 
firms, use this method. Ratio analysis allows for internal evaluations using financial statement 
data. Traditionally, financial statement ratios are compared to an entity’s industry averages. 
The ratios and comparisons can be very useful in detecting red flags for a fraud examination.  
 
The financial ratios present a significant change from one year to the next, or over a period 
of years, it becomes obvious that there may a problem. As in all other analysis, specific 
changes are often explained by changes in the business operations. Analyses change in 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.338                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Current Assets 
Current Liabilities 
Cash+Securities+Receivables
 Current Liabilities 
specific ratios is detected, the appropriate source accounts should be researched and 
examined in detail to determine if fraud has occurred. For instance, a significant decrease in 
a company’s current ratio may point to an incr ease in current liabilities or a reduction in 
assets, both of which could be used to cover fraud.  
 
In the analysis of financial statements, each reader of the statements will determine which 
portions are most important. Like the statement analysis discussed previously, the analysis of 
ratios is limited by its inability to detect fraud on a smaller, immaterial scale. Some of the 
types of financial ratio comparisons are shown below. 
 
Many of the possible ratios are used in industry-specific situations, but the nine comparisons 
mentioned below are ratios that may lead to discovery of fraud. The following calculations 
are based on the example financial statements presented earlier: 
 
Common Financial Ratios 
CURRENT RATIO 
The current ratio—current assets to current 
liabilities—is probably the most commonly used ratio in financial statement analysis. This 
comparison measures a company’s ability to meet  present obligations from its liquid assets. 
The number of times that current assets exceed current liabilities has long been a quick 
measure of financial strength.  
 
In detecting fraud, this ratio can be a prime indicator of manipulation of the accounts 
involved. Embezzlement will cause the ratio to decrease. Liability concealment will cause a 
more favorable ratio. 
 
In the case example, the drastic change in the current ratio from Year One (2.84) to Year 
Two (1.70) should cause an examiner to look at these accounts in more detail. For instance, 
a check-tampering scheme will usually result in a decrease in the current asset, cash, which 
will in turn decrease the ratio.  
 
QUICK RATIO 
The quick ratio, often referred to as the acid test ratio, 
compares the most liquid assets to current liabilities. This calculation divides the total of 
cash, securities, and receivables by current liabilities to yield a measure of a company’s ability 
to meet sudden cash requirements. The quick ratio is a conservative measure of liquidity that 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.339 
Net Sales on Account 
Average Net Receivables 
365 
Receivable Turnover 
Cost of Goods Sold 
Average Inventory 
is often used in turbulent economic times to provide an analyst with a worst-case scenario of 
a company’s working capital situation.  
 
An examiner will analyze the quick ratio for fraud indicators. In Year One of the example, 
the company balance sheet reflects a quick ratio of 2.05. This ratio drops to 1.00 in Year 
Two. In this situation, a closer review of accounts receivable shows they are increasing at an 
unusual rates, which could indicate that fictitious accounts receivable have been added to 
inflate sales. Of more concern perhaps is the increase in accounts payable, which might 
require, at a minimum, a closer review to determine why. 
 
RECEIVABLE TURNOVER 
Receivable turnover is defined as net sales on account 
divided by average net receivables. It measures the number of times accounts receivable is 
turned over during the accounting period. In other words, it measures the time between on-
 account sales and collection of funds. This ratio is one that uses both income statement and 
balance sheet accounts in its analysis. If the fraud includes fictitious sales, this bogus income 
will never be collected. As a result, the turnover of receivables will decrease.  
 
COLLECTION RATIO   
Accounts receivable aging is measured by the 
collection ratio. It divides 365 days by the receivable turnover ratio to arrive at the average 
number of days to collect receivables. In general, the lower the collection ratio, the faster 
receivables are collected. A fraud examiner may use this ratio as a first step in detecting 
fictitious receivables or larceny and skimming schemes. Normally, this ratio will stay fairly 
consistent from year to year, but changes in billing policies or collection efforts may cause a 
fluctuation. The example shows a favorable reduction in the collection ratio from 226.3 in 
Year One to 170.33 in Year Two. This means that the company is collecting its receivables 
more quickly in Year Two than in Year One.  
 
INVENTORY TURNOVER  
The relationship between a company’s cost of goods 
sold and average inventory is shown through the inventory turnover ratio. This ratio 
measures the number of times inventory is sold during the period. This ratio is a good 
determinant of purchasing, production, and sales efficiency. In general, a higher inventory 
turnover ratio is considered more favorable. For example, if cost of goods sold has increased 
due to theft of inventory (ending inventory has declined, but not through sales), then this 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.340                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
365 
Inventory Turnover 
Total Liabilities  
Total Equity 
Net Income 
Net Sales 
ratio will be abnormally high. In the case example, inventory turnover increases in Year Two, 
signaling the possibility that an embezzlement is buried in the inventory account. An 
examiner should investigate the changes in the components of the ratio to determine where 
to look for possible fraud. 
 
AVERAGE NUMBER OF DAYS INVENTORY IS IN STOCK  
The average number of days inventory is in stock ratio is a 
restatement of the inventory turnover ratio expressed in days. This rate is important for 
several reasons. An increase in the number of days inventory stays in stock causes additional 
expenses, including storage costs, risk of inventory obsolescence, and market price 
reductions, as well as interest and other expenses incurred due to tying up funds in inventory 
stock. Inconsistency or significant variance in this ratio is a red flag for fraud investigators. 
Examiners may use this ratio to examine inventory accounts for possible larceny schemes. 
Purchasing and receiving inventory schemes can affect the ratio. As well, understating the 
cost of goods sold will result in an increase in the ratio. Significant changes in the inventory 
turnover ratio are good indicators of possible fraudulent inventory activity. 
 
DEBT TO EQUITY RATIO  
The debt to equity ratio is computed by dividing total 
liabilities by total equity. This ratio is one that is heavily 
considered by lending institutions. It provides a clear picture of the relative risk assumed by 
the creditors and owners. The higher the ratio, the more difficult it will be for the owners to 
raise capital by increasing long-term debt. Debt to equity requirements are often included as 
borrowing covenants in corporate lending agreements. The example displays a very 
favorable Year One ratio of 0.89. Year Two, however, shows a ratio of 1.84, which indicates 
that debt is greatly increasing. In this case, the increase in the ratio corresponds with the rise 
in accounts payable. Sudden changes in this ratio may signal an examiner to look for fraud.  
 
PROFIT MARGIN    
Profit margin ratio is defined as net income divided by 
net sales. This ratio is often referred to as the efficiency ratio, in that it reveals profits earned 
per dollar of sales. This percentage of net income to sales relates not only the effects of gross 
margin changes, but also charges to sales and administrative expenses. As fraud is 
committed, net income will be artificially overstated, and the profit margin ratio will be 
abnormally high. False expenses and fraudulent disbursements will cause an increase in 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.341 
Net Sales 
Average Assets 
expenses and a decrease in the profit margin ratio. Over time, this ratio should be  
fairly consistent. 
 
ASSET TURNOVER 
Net sales divided by average operating assets is the 
calculation used to determine the asset turnover ratio. This ratio is used to determine the 
efficiency with which asset resources are utilized. The case example displays a greater use of 
assets in Year Two than in Year One. 
 
By performing an analysis of the financial statements, the examiner may be directed toward 
the direct evidence to resolve an allegation of fraud. After performing a financial statement 
analysis, the examiner can select statistical samples in the target account and eventually 
examine the source documents. If an irregularity of overstatement is suspected, begin the 
examination with the financial statements. If, however, an irregularity of understatement is 
suspected, begin the examination with a review of the source documents. This rule of thumb 
is especially effective in the area of omission of liabilities, such as litigation, contingent 
liabilities, leases, and some product warranties.  
 
Tax Return Review 
Tax returns are good sources of additional and comparative information on the operations 
of the business. A complete review and comparison to the financial statement may provide 
information unknown to the lender, or disclose unexplained discrepancies. Again, the lack of 
properly prepared or timely filed tax returns may be a method of stalling or not providing 
the required information. Most perpetrators of fraud are reluctant to continue the deception 
and falsify a tax return. Year-after-year extensions and filing of the tax returns on the last 
possible date could be a ploy to cover up financial statement and tax return differences. 
 
 
Interviews in Fraudulent Financial Statement Cases 
For in-depth interviewing techniques, please refer to the “Interview Theory and 
Application” chapter in the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
Financial statement fraud does not occur in an isolated environment. People in organizations 
who have both motive and opportunity are the prime candidates to commit fraudulent 
misstatement. In the overwhelming majority of situations, two key managers participate 
actively in the fraud: the chief executive officer and the chief financial officer. Others 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.342                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
become involved largely out of necessity. Those who are not directly involved most often 
are not aware that anything is wrong.  
 
Investigations of financial statement frauds are unique in that they almost always involve 
interviewing the executive management of the organization. To detect or deter financial 
statement fraud, it is absolutely necessary that top management be interviewed by a 
competent and experienced fraud examiner who possesses the ability to solicit honest 
answers to tough — but vital— questions about whether anyone has tampered with the books.  
 
Interviewing Techniques 
Situations in which accountants are tempted to misstate financial statements most often 
involve pressure connected with financial performance. The following is a fictitious 
conversation between upper managers of a corporation. The example shows how the 
pressure to commit financial statement fraud can greatly influence accounting personnel. 
 
CFO: (To CEO) “Boss, it looks like we will not have a good year financially. We told 
the shareholders (or bank) that our earnings would be $4 a share, and it looks like we’ll 
be very lucky to even make $3.” 
 
CEO: “Well, what are we going to do about it? If we miss the earnings projections (or 
don’t get the loan) our gooses will be cooked; we’ll both lose our jobs. We must get those 
earnings up to where they should be.” 
 
CFO: “What do you mean?” 
 
CEO: “What I mean is that it is your job to bring in the numbers. You’re going to have 
to find a way to get them up. I’m sure we can probably make up the difference next year, 
but for now, you get our earnings/assets/equity up however you have to. All financial 
statements are essentially estimates anyhow. So you figure out how to ‘estimate’ the numbers 
more in our favor. I don’t know how to do it, and I don’t want you to tell me. But get it 
done.” 
 
The CFO faces a dilemma: cook the books or lose his job. The actions of the CFO are very 
hard to predict. If he steps over the edge, chances are he will need to enlist the aid of 
accounting and clerical personnel to carry out the details, even if these employees do not 
know what they are actually doing. For example, the CFO might tell the chief accountant to 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.343 
book certain receivables and income, which would produce the needed effect—pumping up 
the equity. Such a scheme might only be apparent to the real insiders.  
 
In order to detect financial statement frauds through interviews, management and key 
support staff must be interviewed. Fraud examiners and auditors (collectively referred to as 
“examiners”) must consider many import ant issues when conducting interviews. One 
important issue examiners should keep in mind when conducting interviews is that there is 
generally no liability in asking questions in which they have a legitimate interest, no matter 
how insulting the questions might be to the respondents. Examiners, therefore, have the 
legal right to be fearless in asking questions, as long as the questions are asked privately and 
under reasonable circumstances. This legal right doesn’t extend to accusations—only to 
questions. “Are you still cooking the books?” is an accusation, whereas, “Are you cooking 
the books?” is a question. It is important to know the difference and to frame questions 
accordingly.  
 
Examiners should also be sure to interview only one person at a time. Groups of people 
should not be interviewed together because members tend to influence each other. The 
interviews should always be conducted under private conditions, which permit the 
respondent to answer candidly. 
 
It is important that examiners aim to be nonthreatening in their interview approaches. The 
less threatening the interviewer appears, the less reluctant the respondent will be to answer 
questions. An interviewer should not be judgmental or show surprise or disgust; such actions 
can inhibit the flow of information.  
 
Examiners should warm up respondents thoroughly before asking sensitive questions. It is 
best to obtain all of the procedural information and information pertaining to internal 
controls prior to discussing fraud. Fraud should usually be the last thing covered in an 
interview.  
 
In order to reduce the possibility of offending respondents, examiners can explain the nature 
of their interests before asking sensitive questions. For example, an examiner can say “As you 
know, as an auditor, I am required to actively look  for fraud. This means I must ask you some direct 
questions about the subject. Do you understand?” Then, after obtaining a positive response, the 
examiner can proceed to ask questions about fraud. It is best to ask the least difficult 
questions first. 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.344                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Another approach examiners can take to make tough interview questions more palatable is 
to phrase them hypothetically, especially during the beginning of the interview. For example, 
rather than asking a chief financial officer, “Have you committed fraud?” an examiner can 
say to the executive, “Suppose someone in the po sition of chief financial officer decided to 
pump up the financials. How would he do it?” The latter question is far more likely to illicit 
specific information than the former. Later in the interview, the executive should be asked 
specifically if he has committed the fraud. The examiner can say something along the lines of 
“My professional responsibilities require me to ask you one particularly sensitive direct 
question. Have you committed fraud or other illegal acts against the company?” The vast 
majority of respondents will answer “No” to  such a question without hesitation, whether 
they have or not; however, simply asking the question places the examiner in a much more 
favorable position if attacked professionally for not detecting a fraud. 
 
The Interview 
Fraud examiners and auditors should ask questions designed to elicit the most specific 
information possible in a professional manner.  
 
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
Generally, the CEO should be interviewed first in any proactive or reactive fraud situation. 
There are several good reasons for this approach. First of all, the auditor or fraud examiner 
must have a thorough understanding with management as to what his responsibilities in this 
area are. Second, it is unwise to conduct sensitive inquiries within any organization without 
first advising the CEO. If he learns from some other source that you are making discreet 
fraud-related inquiries without telling him, he is more likely to misunderstand your objectives 
and take the inquiry as a personal affront. Third, if there is any significant cooking of the 
books, the CEO is almost always involved. The fraud-related questions you should ask in 
connection with a regular audit should include, at a minimum, the following. Note how the 
questions are for “set up” purposes. 
 
1. Mr. CEO, as you know, we are required to assess the risk that material fraud exists in every company, 
not just yours. This is sort of a sensitive area for everyone, but our professional responsibilities dictate 
that we address this area. Do you understand? (Wait for an affirmative response before proceeding). 
 
2. Do you have any reason to believe that material fraud is being committed at any level within the 
organization? 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.345 
3. Mr. CEO, one trend in fraud is that small frauds  are committed by employees with little authority, 
which means that the largest ones are usually committed with the knowledge of upper management. Do 
you understand that? (Wait for an affirmative response before proceeding.) 
 
4. Because of that, we are required to at least look at the possibility that all CEOs, including you, might 
commit significant fraud against customers, investors,  or shareholders. Do you understand our situation? 
(Wait for an affirmative response.) 
 
5. So during this audit (examination) we need to ask direct questions ab out this subject to you and your 
staff. As a matter of fact, we will at least discuss the possibility of fraud with every employee we talk with 
in connection with this audit (exa mination). Do you have any problem with that? (Wait for a negative 
response. If the CEO protests, satisfy his objections. If he cannot be satisfied, assess the risk of whether 
the CEO is attempting to obstruct the audit or examination.) 
 
6. First, let’s look at your CFO. Can you think of a reason he might have to get back at you or the 
company by committing fraud? 
 
7. Has the CFO ever asked you to approve any financial transaction  you thought might be improper or 
illegal?   
 
8. Do you know whether the CFO has any outside business interests that might conflict with his duties 
here? 
 
9. Does the CFO employ any friends or relatives in the company? (Look for possible conflicts or sweetheart 
deals.) 
 
10.  What information do you have about the CFO’s lifestyle? (Look for expensive homes, cars, toys, and 
habits.) 
 
11.  What is your general impression of how the CFO gets along with his staff? (Look for abuses of 
authority, etc., that would motivate employees di rectly below the CFO to participate in fraud.) 
 
12.  How do you think fraud in your company compares with others in the same industry? 
 
13.  Of course, Mr. CEO, I must ask you many of the same questions about yourself. Is there any reason 
that anyone below you might claim you are committing fraud against the company? 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.346                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
14.  I must also ask you some personal financial quest ions. Do you have any problem with this? (Wait for 
negative response.) 
 
15.  Please give me a current estimate of your personal asset s, liabilities, income, and expenses. (List) What 
percentage of your net worth is tied directly to this  company? (Look for highly leveraged individuals whose 
company holdings are a significant portion of their net worth.) 
 
16.  Are you currently experiencing any personal financial problems? (Look for lawsuits, liens, judgments, or 
other indicators.)    
 
17.  Do you have friends or relatives working for this  company? (Look for conflicts of interest.) 
 
18.  Do you have friends or relatives working for major suppliers or vendors to this company? (Look for 
conflicts of interest.) 
 
19.  Do you own any portion of a company that does business  with this organization? (Look for conflicts of 
interest.) 
 
20.  Hypothetically, if you wanted to pump up your company’s profits, what would be the easiest way to do it? 
 
21.  As I said, we will be required to ask many questions of your staff. Is there any reason why someone who 
works for you would say you are at  risk to commit significant fraud against the company or its 
shareholders? 
 
22.  Mr. CEO, this is the last question, and it should be obvious why I have to ask it. Have you committed 
fraud or other illegal acts against the company? (Do not apologize for asking the question; it’s your job.)     
 
THE CEO’S TOP STAFF 
CEOs of corporations, large and small, are busy individuals. Because they tend to be “big 
picture” people by nature, they rely heavily on their staffs—principally their personal 
assistants—to take care of details. But personal assistants do not usually become closely tied 
to the boss without a demonstrated history of loyalty and discretion. In short, if you make 
the boss’s assistant mad, your fraud-related questions are going to be interpreted in the worst 
possible light, thereby making your job much more difficult. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.347 
So the key to interviewing the CEO’s top sta ff is to approach the interviewing process 
correctly from the outset. This means laying a great deal of groundwork before asking 
sensitive questions. Start with procedural matters or some other non-sensitive topic, and ask 
the fraud-related questions toward the end of your conversation. 
 
1. Mr. Assistant, part of my job as an auditor (fraud examiner) is to assess the risk that the company’s 
books are not materially correct as a result of fraud by employees or management. I have already talked 
about these issues with your boss. He understands their importance and he is aware that, as part of the 
audit, I will be talking to everyone about the subject to some extent. Do you have any problem with this? 
(Wait for negative response.) 
 
2. Do you think fraud is a problem for bu siness in general? (Icebreaker.) 
 
3. How do you think this company stacks up to others in terms of honesty of its employees and managers? 
 
4. Have you ever heard rumors in the company that someone is committing fraud, especially someone high 
up in the organization? 
 
5. Is the company in any kind of financial trouble that would motivate management to misstate the 
company’s profits? 
 
6. Do you think your coworkers are essentially honest?  
 
7. Has anyone you work with ever asked you to do something you felt was not legal or ethical? 
 
8. How would you handle such a situation? (Solic it information on fraud reporting program.) 
 
9. If someone in a position of authority in the company wanted to commit fraud, what would be the easiest 
way to do it? 
 
10.  As your auditor, may I ask you to report any instances in the future of anyone asking you to do anything 
to the books and records that you feel is not right? (Solicit future cooperation.) 
 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.348                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER 
In the vast majority of cases the CFO is an integral part of any financial statement fraud, as 
illustrated previously. As a result, the interview with the CFO should concentrate not only 
on possible motivations to commit fraud, but also on the opportunity to do so. Since most 
CFOs are accountants, they should more readily  understand your fraud-related mission. This 
can be good or bad; good if the CFO is hone st, and bad if he isn’t. Among all financial 
personnel, the CFO is in the best position to know how to cook the books and keep it from 
being uncovered. As if that weren’t enough, many CFOs are hired directly from the firms 
that audit the company. Is there any other person more likely to be at the center of the 
fraud?  
 
1. Mr. CFO, you now know that audit standards require us to actively assess the risk that material fraud 
could be affecting the financial statements. We have ta lked with the CEO, and he  is fully aware that we 
will be asking most everyone we  speak with about the possibility of fraud or irregularities. You 
understand this, don’t you? (Wait for affirmative response.) 
 
2. Of the accounts on the company’s books, which do  you suspect might be the most vulnerable to 
manipulation, and why? 
 
3. What kind of history does the company have with fraud in general, including defalcations and employee 
thefts? (Look for signs of a weak corporate culture.) 
 
4. We know that fraud usually exists to some extent—even if it is small—in most companies. How do you 
think your company compares to others? 
 
5. What is your overall impression of the company’s ethics and corporate culture? 
 
6. During our assessment of risk of fraud in your company, are there any specific ar eas you’d like to discuss 
with us? 
 
7. Is there any reason that anyone in  the company might say that management had a motive to misstate the 
financials? 
 
8. Has anyone you work with ever asked you to do  anything with the books that you thought was 
questionable, unethical, or illegal?  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.349 
9. Are you involved in the personal finances of the CEO?  If so, is there anything about them that might 
make you think he is under personal financial pressure? 
 
10. Do either the CEO’s lifestyle or habits give you any reason to think he may be living beyond his means? 
 
11. Has anyone in a position of authority ever asked that you withhold in formation from the auditors, alter 
documents, or make fictitious en tries in the books and records? 
 
12.  Is there anything about your own background or finances that would cause someone to suspect that you 
had a motive for committing fraud? 
 
13.  Because of your importance as CF O, I must ask you one final question: Have you, yourself, committed 
fraud or illegal acts against this company? (Remember—don’t apologize.) 
 
THE ACCOUNTING STAFF 
If a financial statement fraud has been ordered by the CFO, he will either do the actual dirty 
work himself or get his staff to do it. In some cases, the staff will understand the big picture, 
but in most situations, the employee is told only what he needs to know. It is uncommon for 
a CFO to share with a lower staff person the fact that he is cooking the books.  
 
As a result, the examiner generally must complete his audit work before beginning the 
interviews of the accounting staff. This will allow specific transactions to be discussed with 
the people who actually entered them into the company’s records. For example, all thorough 
audits will examine the major journal entries. Frequently, these journal entries will be ordered 
by the CFO, but actually entered by a staff member. There would generally be no record of 
the CFO requesting the entry, so this fact must be established through interviews.  
 
Interviews of the accounting staff will allow sufficient examination of procedures and 
controls over assets. After these questions are answered, you can generally pursue the line of 
inquiry suggested above for the CEO’s assistant. 
 
It should be noted that there are similarities and differences in the questions asked of the 
CEO, the CFO, and their staffs. In the case of the CEO and the CFO, both were specifically 
asked if they had committed fraud against the company, albeit in a nice way. The staffers 
were not asked that specific question.  
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.350                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The reasoning is this: significant financial statement fraud, as we have stated, generally 
originates with one or both of these two executives. Staffers have less motivation to engage 
in financial statement fraud, and are, therefore, at less risk to do so. They are also less likely 
to have the financial authority to enter transactions into the books without higher approval.  
 
So absent any specific information to the contrary, asking the employees point blank if they 
have committed fraud is less likely to produce information and more likely to offend them. 
But with the CFO and the CEO, asking the direct question will add measurably to the 
prevention of fraud. There are few defenses to not asking the question, other than the 
specter of embarrassing the executives you are auditing. That will, of course, sound pretty 
weak in a court of law where you are fighting for your professional life.  
 
 
Prevention of Financial Statement Fraud 
Prevention and deterrence of financial statement fraud consists of those actions taken to 
discourage the perpetration of fraud and limit the exposure, if fraud does occur.  
 
Internal Auditors 
Internal auditors are responsible for helping to deter fraud by examining and evaluating the 
adequacy and the effectiveness of controls, commensurate with the extent of the potential 
exposure in the various segments of an entity’s operations. The internal auditing standards 
state that the principal mechanism for deterring fraud is internal control. Primary 
responsibility for establishing and maintaining internal control rests with management. The 
Treadway Commission addresses this issue by recommending that internal audit departments 
or staffs have not only the support of top management, but also the necessary resources 
available to carry out their mission. The internal auditors’ responsibility is to aid management 
in the deterrence of fraud by evaluating the adequacy and effectiveness of the company’s 
internal control system, as well as the company’s potential exposure to fraud, with particular 
consideration given to the five elements of internal control laid out by COSO.  
 
Management  
It is management’s respo nsibility to set the ethical tone of the organization. As with other 
types of occupational fraud and abuse, reducing the three factors that contribute to fraud 
will greatly help in the prevention of financial statement fraud. Reducing existing pressures 
to commit fraud, removing potential opportunities to commit fraud, and relieving possible 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.351 
rationalizations for committing fraud will greatly aid in the prevention of financial statement 
fraud. 
 
Reduce the Situational Pressures that Encourage Financial Statement Fraud 
• Avoid setting unachievable financial goals. 
• Eliminate external pressures that might tempt accounting personnel to prepare 
fraudulent financial statements. 
• Remove operational obstacles that block effective financial performance, such as 
working capital restraints, excess production volume, or inventory restraints. 
• Establish clear and uniform accounting procedures that do not contain exception 
clauses. 
 
Reduce the Opportunity to Commit Fraud 
• Maintain accurate and complete internal accounting records. 
• Carefully monitor the business transactions and interpersonal relationships of suppliers, 
buyers, purchasing agents, sales representatives, and others who interface in the 
transactions between financial units. 
• Establish a physical security system to secure company assets, including finished goods, 
cash, capital equipment, tools, and other valuable items. 
• Divide important functions between employees, separating total control of one area. 
• Maintain accurate personnel records, including background checks (where permitted by 
law) on new employees. 
• Encourage strong supervisory and leadership relationships within groups to ensure 
enforcement of accounting procedures. 
 
Reduce the Rationalization of Fraud — Strengthen Employee Personal Integrity  
• Managers should set an example by promot ing honesty in the accounting area. It is 
important that management practice what it preaches. Dishonest acts by management, 
even if they are directed at someone outside of the organization, create a dishonest 
environment that can spread to other business activities and other employees, both 
internal and external. 
• Honest and dishonest behavior should be defined in company policies. Organizational 
accounting policies should clear up any gray areas in accounting procedures. 
• The consequences of violating the rules, including the punishment of violators, should 
be clear. 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.401 
ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS  
 
Asset misappropriations are by far the most common of all occupational frauds. There are 
three major categories of asset misappropriation schemes. Cash receipts schemes will be 
discussed in this section, fraudulent disbursements of cash will be addressed in the next 
section, and the following section will cover schemes involving the theft of inventory and 
other non-cash assets.  
 
Cash is the focal point of most accounting entries. Cash, both on deposit in banks and on 
hand as petty cash, can be misappropriated through many different schemes. These schemes 
can be either on-book or off-book, depending on where they occur.  
 
Cash receipts schemes fall into two categories, skimming  and larceny. The difference in the two 
types of fraud depends completely on when the cash is stolen. Cash larceny is the theft of 
money that has already appeared  on a victim organization’s books, while skimming is the theft 
of cash that has not yet been recorded  in the accounting system. The way in which an employee 
extracts the cash may be exactly the same for a cash larceny or skimming scheme.  
 
 
Skimming 
Skimming is the removal of cash from a victim entity prior to its entry in an accounting 
system. Employees who skim from their companies steal sales or receivables before they are 
recorded in the company books. Skimming schemes are known as “off-book” frauds, 
meaning money is stolen before it is recorded in the victim organization’s accounts. This 
aspect of skimming schemes means they leave no direct audit trail. Because the stolen funds 
are never recorded, the victim organization may not be aware that the cash was ever 
received. Consequently, it may be very difficult to detect that the money has been stolen. 
This is the prime advantage of a skimming scheme to the fraudster.  
 
Skimming is one of the most common forms of occupational fraud. It can occur at any point 
where cash enters a business, so almost anyone who deals with the process of receiving cash 
may be in a position to skim money. This includes salespeople, tellers, waitpersons, and 
others who receive cash directly from customers.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.402                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In addition, many skimming schemes are perpetrated by employees whose duties include 
receiving and logging payments made by customers through the mail. These employees slip 
checks out of the incoming mail instead of posting those checks to the proper revenue or 
receivables accounts. Those who deal directly with customers or who handle customer 
payments are obviously the most likely candidates to skim funds.  
 
Sales Skimming 
The most basic skimming scheme occurs when an employee sells goods or services to a 
customer, collects the customer’s payment, but makes no record of the sale. The employee 
simply pockets the money received from the customer instead of turning it over to his 
employer. (See “Unrecorded Sales” flowchart.)   
 
Consider one of the simplest and most common sales transactions, a sale of goods at the 
cash register. In a normal transaction, a customer purchases an item and an employee enters 
the sale on the register. The register tape reflects that the sale has been made and shows that 
a certain amount of cash (the purchase price of the item) should have been placed in the 
register. By comparing the register tape to the amount of money on hand, it may be possible 
to detect thefts. For instance, if there were $500 worth of sales recorded on a particular 
register on a given day, but only $400 cash in the register, it would be obvious that someone 
had stolen $100 (assuming no beginning cash balance).  
 
If the employee is skimming money, however, it will be impossible to detect theft simply by 
comparing the register tape to the cash drawer. Returning to the example in the paragraph 
above, assume that an employee wants to make off with $100. Through the course of the 
day, there are $500 worth of sales at his register ; one sale is for $100. When the $100 sale is 
made, the employee does not record the transaction on his register. The customer pays $100 
and takes the merchandise home, but instead of placing the money in the cash drawer, the 
employee pockets it. In order to create the appearance that the sale is being entered in the 
register, the employee might ring a “no sale” or some other non-cash transaction. Since the 
employee did not record the sale, at the end of the day the register tape will only reflect $400 
in sales. There will be $400 on hand in the re gister ($500 in total sales minus the $100 that 
the employee stole) so the register will balance. Thus by not recording the sale the employee 
is able to steal money without the missing funds appearing on the books. Of course, the 
theft will show up indirectly in the company’s records as inventory shrinkage. But the books 
will provide no direct evidence of the theft. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.403 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.404                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 The most difficult part in skimming at the register is that the employee must commit the 
overt act of taking money. If the employee takes the customer’s money and shoves it into his 
pocket without entering the transaction on the register, the customer will probably suspect 
that something is wrong and might report the conduct to another employee or a manager. It 
is also possible that a manager, a fellow employee, or a surveillance camera will spot the 
illegal conduct. Therefore, it is often desirable for a perpetrator to act as though he is 
properly recording a transaction while he skims sales.  
 
Register Manipulation 
Some employees might ring a “no sale” or ot her non-cash transaction to mask the theft of 
sales. The false transaction is entered on the register so that it appears a sale is being rung up. 
The perpetrator opens the register drawer and pretends to place the cash he has just received 
in the drawer, but in reality he pockets the cash. To the casual observer it looks as though 
the sale is being properly recorded.  
 
Some employees may also rig their registers so that a sale can be entered on the register keys, 
but will not appear on the register tapes. The employee can then safely skim the sale. Anyone 
observing the employee will see the sale entered, see the cash drawer open, etc., yet the 
register tape will not reflect the transaction.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A service station employee hid stolen gasoline sales by simply  lifting the ribbon from the 
printer on his register. He collected and pocketed the sales, which were not recorded on the 
register tape. The fraudster would then roll back the tape to the point where the next 
transaction should appear and replace the ribb on. The next transaction would be printed 
without leaving any blank space on the tape, apparently leaving no trace of the fraud.   
 
When the ribbon is removed from the register, the result is a blank space on the register tape 
where the skimmed sale should have been printed. Unusual gaps between transactions on a 
register tape may mean that someone is skimming sales.  
 
Fraudsters will often manually roll back the tape when they replace the ribbon on their 
registers so that there is no gap between transactions. Most register transactions, however, 
are sequentially numbered. If a transaction has been omitted from the register tape, the result 
is a break in the sequence. For instance, if an employee skimmed sale #155, then the register 
tape would only show transactions #153, #154, #156, #157 and so on. The missing 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.405 
transaction numbers, omitted because the ribbon was lifted when they took place, would 
indicate fraud.  
 
Skimming During Nonbusiness Hours 
Another way to skim unrecorded sales is to conduct sales during nonbusiness hours. For 
instance, some employees will open stores on weekends or after hours without the 
knowledge of the owners. They can pocket the proceeds of all sales made during these times 
because the owners have no idea that their stores are even open for business.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager of a retail facility went to work two hours early every day, opening his store at 
8:00 a.m. instead of 10:00 a.m., and pocketed all the sales made during these two hours. 
He rang up sales on the register as if it was business as usual, but then removed the register 
tape and all the cash he had accumulated. The manager then started from scratch at 10:00 
as if the store was just opening. The tape was destroyed so there was no record of the before-
 hours revenue. 
 
To this point skimming has been discussed in the context of cash register transactions, but 
skimming does not have to occur at a register. Some of the most costly skimming schemes 
are perpetrated by employees who work at remote locations or without close supervision. 
This can include on-site sales persons who do not deal with registers, independent salesmen 
who operate off-site, and employees who work at branches or satellite offices. These 
employees have a high level of autonomy in their jobs, which often translates into poor 
supervision and, in turn, to fraud.  
 
Skimming of Off-Site Sales 
Several industries rely on remote salespersons to generate revenue. The fact that these 
employees are largely unsupervised puts them in a good position to skim revenues. For 
example, consider the apartment rental industry, where apartment managers handle the 
day-to-day operations without much oversight. A common scheme is for an on-site employee to 
identify the tenants who pay in currency and remove them from the books. This causes a 
particular apartment to appear as vacant on the records when, in fact, it is occupied. The 
manager can skim the rental payments from the “vacant” unit, and the revenue will never be 
missed. As long as no one physically checks the apartment, the perpetrator can continue 
skimming indefinitely.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.406                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Another rental-skimming scheme occurs when apartments are rented out but no lease is 
signed. On the books, the apartment will still a ppear to be vacant, even though there are 
tenants on the premises. The perpetrator can skim the rental payments from these tenants 
without fear that they will show up as past due in the company records. Sometimes the 
employees in these schemes work in conjunction with the renters and give a “special rate” to 
these people. In return, the renter’s payments are made directly to the employee and any 
complaints or maintenance requests are directed only to that employee so the tenant’s 
presence in the apartment remains hidden.  
 
Instead of skimming rent, some property managers focus on less predictable forms of 
revenue like application fees and late fees. Ownership may know when rent is due and how 
many apartments are occupied, but often there is no control in place to track the number of 
people who fill out rental applications or how many tenants pay their rent a day or two late. 
Property managers can make thousands of dollars by skimming these “nickel and dime” 
payments.  
 
Off-site skimming is by no means limited to the apartment rental industry. The schemes 
described above can easily translate into any arena where those who generate or collect 
revenues operate in an independent fashion. A prime example is the insurance agent who 
sells policies to customers, then neglects to file the policies with the carrier. Most customers 
do not want to file claims on a policy, especially early in the term, for fear that their 
premiums will rise. Knowing this, the agent k eeps all documentation on the policies instead 
of turning it over to the carrier. The agent is able to skim the customer’s payments because 
the carrier does not know the policy exists. The customer continues to make his payments, 
thinking that he is insured, when in fact the policy is a ruse.  
 
Poor Collection Procedures 
Poor collection and recording procedures can make it easy for an employee to skim sales or 
receivables.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A governmental authority that dealt with public housing was victimized because it failed to 
itemize daily receipts. This agency received pa yments from several public housing tenants, 
but at the end of the day, “money” received from tenants was listed as a whole. Receipt 
numbers were not used to item ize the payments made by tenants, so there was no way to 
pinpoint which tenant had paid how much. Consequently, the employee in charge of 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.407 
collecting money from tenants was able to skim a portion of their payments. She simply did 
not record the receipt of over $10,000. Her actions caused certain accounts receivable to be 
overstated where tenant payments were not properly recorded.  
 
Understated Sales  
The discussion above focused on purely off-book sales, those which are never recorded. 
Understated sales work differently because the transaction in question is posted to the 
books, but for a lower amount than what the perpetrator actually collected. (See 
“Understated Sales” flowchart.) One way employees commit understated sales schemes is by 
altering receipts or preparing false receipts that misstate the amount of sales. 
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee wrote receipts to customers for their purchases, but she removed the carbon 
paper backing on the receipts so that they did not produce a company copy. The employee 
then used a pencil to prepare company copies that showed lower purchase prices. For 
example, if the customer had paid $100, the company copy might reflect a payment of $80. 
The employee skimmed the difference between the actual amount  of revenue and the amount 
reflected on the fraudulent receipt. 
 
Understated sales schemes are commonly undertaken by employees who work at the cash 
register. In a typical scheme an employee enters a sales total that is lower than the amount 
actually paid by the customer. The employee skims the difference between the actual 
purchase price of the item and the sales figure recorded on the register. For instance, if an 
item is sold for $100, the employee could ring up  the sale of an $80 item and skim the excess 
$20.  
 
Rather than reduce the price of an item, an employee might record the sale of fewer items. If 
100 units are sold, for instance, an employee might only record the sale of 50 units and skim 
the excess receipts.  
 
A similar method is used when sales are made on account. The bill to the customer reflects 
the true amount of the sale, but the receivable is understated in the company books. For 
instance, a company might be owed $1,000, but the receivable is recorded as $800. (Sales are 
correspondingly understated by $200.) When the customer makes payment on the account, 
the employee can skim $200 and post the $800 to the account. The account will appear to 
have been paid in full.  
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.408                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.409 
FALSE DISCOUNTS 
Those employees with the authority to grant discounts may utilize this authority to skim 
sales and receivables. In a false discount skimming scheme, an employee accepts full 
payment for an item, but records the transaction as if the customer had been given a 
discount. The employee skims the amount of the discount. For example, on a $100 
purchase, if an employee granted a false discount of 20 percent, he could skim $20 and leave 
the company’s books in balance.  
 
Theft of Checks Received Through the Mail 
Checks received through the mail are a frequent target of employees seeking illicit gains. 
Theft of incoming checks usually occurs when a single employee is in charge of opening the 
mail and recording the receipt of payments. This employee simply steals one or more 
incoming checks instead of posting them to customer accounts. (See “Theft of Incoming 
Checks” flowchart.) When the task of receiving and recording incoming payments is left to a 
single person, it is all too easy for that employee to make off with an occasional check.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A mailroom employee stole over $2 million in government checks arriving through the mail. 
This employee simply identified and removed envelopes delivered from a government agency 
known to send checks to the company. Using a group of accomplices acting under the names 
of fictitious persons and companies, this indi vidual was able to launder the checks and 
divide the proceeds with his cronies. 
 
The theft of checks is not usually complicated, but it is sometimes more difficult to conceal a 
check theft scheme than other forms of skimming. If the stolen checks were payments on 
the victim company’s receivables, then these payments were expected. As receivables become 
past due, the victim company will send notices of nonpayment to its customers. A customer 
is likely to complain when he receives a second bill for a payment he has already made. In 
addition, the cashed check will serve as evidence that the customer made his payment. The 
methods used to conceal check theft schemes will be discussed later in this section. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.410                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.411 
Check for Currency Substitutions 
The intelligent criminal will generally prefer to steal currency rather than checks if given the 
opportunity. The reasons why are obvious. First, currency is harder to trace than a check. A 
cashed check eventually returns to the person who wrote it and may provide evidence of 
who cashed it or where it was spent. Endorsements, bank stamps, and so forth may indicate 
the identity of the thief. Currency, on the other hand, disappears into the economy once it is 
stolen.  
 
The second reason that currency is preferable to a check is the difficulty in converting the 
check. When currency is stolen it can be spent immediately. A check, on the other hand, 
must be endorsed and cashed or deposited before the thief can put his hands on the money 
it represents. To avoid this problem, employees who steal unrecorded checks will frequently 
substitute them for receipted currency. If, for example, an employee skims an incoming 
check worth $500, he can add the check to the day’s receipts and remove $500 in currency. 
The total receipts will match the amount of cash on hand, but payments in currency are 
replaced by the check.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee responsible for receipting ticket and fine payments on behalf of a municipality 
abused her position and stole incoming revenu es for nearly two years. When payments in 
currency were received by this individual, she issued receipts, but when checks were received 
she did not. The check payments were theref ore unrecorded revenues—ripe for skimming. 
These unrecorded checks were placed in the days’ receipts  and an equal amount of cash was 
removed. The receipts matched the amount of  money on hand except that payments in 
currency had been replaced with checks.  
 
The check for currency substitution is very common. While these substitutions make it easier 
for a crook to convert stolen payments, the problem of concealing the theft still remains. 
The fact that the stolen checks are not posted means that some customers’ accounts are in 
danger of becoming past due. If this happens, the perpetrator’s scheme is in danger because 
these customers will almost surely complain about the misapplication of their payments. 
However, the misapplied payments can be concealed on the books by forcing account totals, 
stealing customers’ account statements, lapping, and making other fraudulent accounting 
entries. These concealment techniques will be discussed in more detail in the Skimming 
Receivables section.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.412                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Check for currency substitutions are especially common when an employee has access to 
some unexpected source of funds such as a manufacturer’s refund that arrives outside the 
regular stream of sales and receivables payments. In these cases the check can be swapped 
for cash and there is usually no additional step required to conceal the crime. The refund 
check, an unexpected source of funds, will not be missed by the victim organization, and the 
party who issued the check expects no goods or services in return.  
 
Skimming Receivables
It is generally more difficult to conceal the skimming of receivables than the skimming of 
sales because receivables payments are expected. The victim organization knows the customer 
owes money and it is waiting for the payment to arrive. When unrecorded sales are skimmed, 
it is as though the sale never existed. But when receivables are skimmed, the absence of the 
payment appears on the books as a delinquent account. In order to conceal a skimmed 
receivable, a perpetrator must somehow account for the payment that was due to the 
company but never received. There are a number of common techniques fraudsters use to 
conceal the skimming of receivables.  
 
Forcing Account Balances or Destroying Transaction Records 
Among the most dangerous receivables skimming schemes are those in which the 
perpetrator is in charge of collecting and posting payments. If a fraudster has a hand in both 
ends of the receipting process, he can falsify records to conceal the theft of receivables 
payments. For example, the fraudster might post the customer’s payments to their 
receivables accounts, even though the payments will never be deposited. This keeps the 
receivable from aging, but it creates an imbalance in the cash account. The perpetrator hides 
the imbalance by forcing the total on the cash account, overstating it to match the total 
postings to accounts receivable. 
 
EXAMPLE 
The chief financial officer of a small corporation stole approximately $100,000 from his 
company by diverting customer checks. This in dividual controlled all the books and records 
for the victim company. He stole checks from customers and deposited them in his personal 
bank account. The customers’ payments were still posted to keep the receivables from aging.  
 
The perpetrator stole checks in an amount equal to the victim company’s tax liability. To 
keep the books in balance, he would prepare checks payable to the IRS, but he never 
mailed them. The checks were recorded in the victim’s records and the false disbursements 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.413 
offset the amount of false postings to acco unts receivable. The scheme was uncovered when 
the IRS notified the victim company that its taxes were delinquent.  
 
Some fraudsters simply destroy all records that might prove that they have been stealing. 
Destroying records en masse does not prevent the victim organization from realizing that it 
is being robbed, but it may help conceal the identity of the thief.  
 
Lapping 
Lapping customer payments is one of the most common methods of concealing receivables 
skimming. Lapping is the crediting of one a ccount through the abstraction of money from 
another account. It is the fraudster’s version of “robbing Peter to pay Paul.”   
 
Suppose a company has three customers, A, B, and C. When A’s payment is received, the 
fraudster steals it instead of posting it to A’s account. Customer A expects that his account 
will be credited with the payment he has made. If the payment has not been posted by the 
time A’s next statement is mailed, he will see that the payment was not applied to his 
account and will almost certainly complain. To avoid this, the thief must take some action to 
make it appear that the payment was posted.  
 
When B’s check arrives, the thief posts this money to A’s account. Payments now appear to 
be up-to-date on A’s account, but B’s account is behind. When C’s payment is received, the 
perpetrator applies it to B’s account. This process continues indefinitely until one of three 
things happens: (1) someone discovers the scheme, (2) restitution is made to the accounts, or 
(3) some concealing entry is made to adjust the accounts receivable balances.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A clerk working for a government agency committed a lapping scheme that involved the 
theft of more than 150 customer payments, causing a total misappropriation of more than 
$30,000 in government funds. This individual stole taxes, fees, and other incoming 
payments from customers to cover his personal expenses. When a customer’s payment was 
stolen, the documentation on that payment would be hidden until a later payment was 
received. The later payment would be applied to the earlier customer’s records.  
 
As the rotating schedule of applying and misapplying payments became more and more 
complicated, the perpetrator insisted on exerting more and more control over the receipting 
process. He insisted on handling all incoming mail, preparing the deposit and delivering the 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.414                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
deposit to the bank so that he could continue to delay the posting of payments. The fraud 
was detected in large part because several consumers complained that they had not received 
confirmation of their payments, even though their checks had cleared months earlier. 
 
Because lapping schemes can become very intricate, fraudsters sometimes keep a second set 
of books on hand detailing the true nature of the payments received. In many skimming 
cases, a search of the fraudster’s work area will reveal a set of records tracking the actual 
payments and how they have been misapplied to conceal the theft. It may seem odd that 
people would keep records of their illegal activity on hand, but many lapping schemes 
become extremely complicated as more and more payments are misapplied. The second set 
of records helps the perpetrator keep track of the funds that were stolen and which accounts 
need to be credited to conceal the fraud. Uncovering these records, if they exist, will greatly 
facilitate the investigation of a lapping scheme.  
 
While lapping is more commonly used to conceal receivables skimming, it can also be used 
to disguise the skimming of sales. Employees sometimes steal all or part of one day’s receipts 
and replace them with the receipts from the following day. This type of concealment 
requires the employee to delay making the company deposit until enough money can be 
collected to recoup the stolen funds. If an organization rigidly adheres to a deposit schedule, 
it is unlikely that lapping will be effective in concealing this type of fraud.  
 
Stolen Statements  
When employees skim receivables, they may let the targeted accounts age instead of 
attempting to force the balances. In other words, they steal an incoming check intended as 
payment on a receivable, and they simply act as if the check never arrived. This method 
keeps the victim organization’s cash account in balance, because the stolen payment is never 
posted.  
 
Of course, if the customer’s payment is not posted, the receivable will eventually become 
past due. The customer will have proof in the form of a canceled check that a payment was 
made on the account. The question will arise: where did the payment go? The answer, of 
course, is that it went into the fraudster’s pocket. So the goal of the fraudster must be to 
keep the customer from realizing that his account was not credited with the payment. If this 
can be accomplished, the customer will not complain about the missing payment, and the 
victim organization will not realize that skimming has occurred.  
 
Financial Transactions Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.415 
One way fraudsters attempt to conceal the fact that they have skimmed a payment from a 
customer is to intercept the customer’s account statement and/or late notices. In some 
cases, the perpetrator intercepts the account statement by changing the customer’s address in 
the billing system so that statements are sent directly to the perpetrator’s home or to an 
address where he can retrieve them. In other instances, the perpetrator physically intercepts 
the statements before they are mailed.  
 
Once the real statement indicating that the payment was not received has been intercepted, 
the fraudster usually alters the statement or produces a counterfeit. The false statements 
indicate that the customer’s payment was properly posted. This leads the customer to believe 
that his account is up-to-date and keeps the customer from complaining about stolen 
payments.  
 
False Account Entries 
Intercepting the customer’s statements will keep him in the dark as to the status of his 
account, but as long as the customer’s payments are being skimmed, his account is slipping 
further and further past due. The perpetrator must bring the account back up to date in 
order to conceal his crime. Lapping is one way to keep accounts current as the employee 
skims from them. Another way is to make false entries in the victim organization’s 
accounting system.  
 
DEBITS TO EXPENSE ACCOUNTS 
An employee might conceal the skimming of funds by making unsupported entries in the 
victim company’s books. If a payment is made on a receivable, for instance, the proper entry 
is a debit to cash and a credit to the receivable. Instead of debiting cash, the employee might 
choose to debit an expense account. This transaction still keeps the company’s books in 
balance, but the incoming cash is never recorded. In addition, the customer’s receivable 
account is credited, so it will not become delinquent.  
 
DEBITS TO AGING OR FICTITIOUS RECEIVABLES 
The same method discussed above is used when employees debit existing or fictitious 
accounts receivable in order to conceal skimmed cash. For example, an employee who has 
skimmed one customer’s payments might add the stolen amounts to aging accounts that are 
soon to be written off as uncollectible, or to very large accounts where a small debit might 
go unnoticed.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.416                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Some perpetrators also set up completely fictitious accounts and debit them for the cost of 
skimmed receivables. The employees then simply wait for the fictitious receivables to age 
and be written off as uncollectable. In the meantime, the fictitious receivables carry the cost 
of a skimming scheme where it will not be detected.  
 
WRITING OFF ACCOUNT BALANCES 
Some employees cover their skimming by posting entries to contra revenue accounts such as 
“discounts and allowances.” If, for instance, an employee intercepts a $1,000 payment, he 
would create a $1,000 “discount” on the acco unt to compensate for the missing money. 
Another account that might be used in this type of concealment is the bad debts expense 
account.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A billing manager was author ized to write off certain patient balances as hardship 
allowances. This employee accepted payments from  patients, then instructed billing personnel 
to write off the balance in question. The payments were never posted; they were intercepted 
by the billing manager. She covered approximately $30,000 in stolen funds by using her 
authority to write off patients’ balances.  
 
Inventory Padding 
A problem for fraudsters in some skimming schemes is the victim organization’s inventory. 
Off-book sales of goods will always leave an in ventory shortage and a corresponding rise in 
the cost of goods sold.  
 
When a sale of goods is made, the physical inventory is reduced by the amount of 
merchandise sold. For instance, when a retailer sells a pair of shoes there is one less pair of 
shoes in the stock room If this sale is not recorded, however, the shoes are not removed 
from the perpetual inventory records. Thus, there is one less pair of shoes on hand than in 
the perpetual inventory. A reduction in the physical inventory without a corresponding 
reduction in the perpetual inventory is known as “shrinkage.”  
 
When an employee skims sales of services there is no shrinkage (because there is no 
inventory for services), but when sales of goods are skimmed, shrinkage always occurs. Some 
amounts of shrinkage are expected due to customer theft, faulty products, and spoilage, but 
high levels of shrinkage serve as a warning that a company could be a victim of occupational 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.417 
fraud. The general methods used to conceal inventory shrinkage are discussed in detail in the 
Inventory and Other Assets section.  
 
Detection of Skimming Schemes 
The following are some detection methods that may be effective in detecting skimming 
schemes. 
 
Receipt or Sales Level Detection 
Key analytical procedures, such as vertical and horizontal analysis of sales accounts, can be 
used for skimming detection on a grand scale. These procedures analyze changes in the 
accounts and can possibly point to skimming problems including understated sales.  
Ratio analysis can also provide keys to the detection of skimming schemes. These 
procedures are discussed in detail in the Fraudulent Financial Statement section.  
 
Detailed inventory control procedures can also be utilized to detect inventory shrinkage due 
to unrecorded sales. Inventory detection methods include statistical sampling, trend analysis, 
reviews of receiving reports and inventory records, verification of material requisition and 
shipping documentation, as well as actual physical inventory counts. These procedures are 
reviewed in the section on Inventory and Other Assets. 
 
Journal Entry Review 
Skimming can sometimes be detected by reviewing and analyzing all journal entries made to 
the cash and inventory accounts. Journal entries involving the following topics should be 
examined: 
• False credits to inventory to conceal unrecorded or understated sales. 
• Write-offs of lost, stolen, or obsolete inventory. 
• Write-offs of accounts receivable accounts. 
• Irregular entries to cash accounts. 
 
Detecting Lapping of Sales or Receivables   
Lapping can usually be detected by comparing the dates of the customer’s payments with the 
dates the customer’s accounts are posted. This will require an examination of the source 
documents, such as the composition of bank deposits. Discrepancies should be investigated. 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.418                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Confirmation of customers’ accounts is another method that might detect lapping. 
Confirmations are especially effective on large accounts where the time value of money is an 
issue. However, customers who pay on invoice rather than on balance might not know the 
exact balance of their account. If this is the case, it might be more effective to confirm by 
invoice and reconstruct the account balance using the source documents in the files and the 
results of the confirmation. If fraud is suspected, ask the customer or the bank to return a 
copy of both the front and the back of the check(s) used to pay specific invoices. Match the 
data on the check copies with the posting dates in the customer’s account. 
 
Prevention of Skimming Schemes 
Receipt or Sales Level Control  
As with most fraud schemes, internal control procedures are a key to prevention of 
skimming schemes. An essential part of developing control procedures is management’s 
communication to employees. Controlling whether or not an employee will not record a sale, 
understate a sale, or steal incoming payments is extremely difficult.  
 
General Controls 
Sales entries and general ledger access controls should include documented policies and 
procedures, which are communicated directly from management. The control procedures 
will generally cover the following subjects: 
• Appropriate segregation of duties and access control procedures regarding who makes 
ledger transactions will be followed. 
• Transactions must be properly recorded as to amount, date of occurrence, and ledger 
account.  
• Proper safeguard measures will be adopted to ensure physical access to the account 
systems. Additional measures should ensure the security of company assets.  
• Independent reconciliations as well as internal verification of accounts will be performed 
on ledger accounts.1 
 
Skimming Controls 
The discovery of thefts of checks and cash involves proper controls on the receipt process. 
Deficiencies in the answers to these typical audit-program questions may be red flags.  
• Is mail opened by someone independent of cashier, accounts receivable bookkeeper, or 
other accounting employees who may initiate or post journal entries? 
                                                          
1 George Georgiades, Audit Procedures  (New York: Harcourt Brace Professional Publishing, 1995). 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.419 
• Is the delivery of unopened business mail prohibited to employees having access to the 
accounting records? 
• Does the employee who opens the mail: 
? Place restrictive endorsements (“For Deposit Only”) on all checks received? 
? Prepare a list of the money, checks, and other receipts? 
? Forward all remittances to the person responsible for preparing and making the daily 
bank deposit? 
? Forward the total of all remittances to the person responsible for comparing it to the 
authenticated deposit ticket and amount recorded? 
• Is a lock box used? 
• Do cash sales occur? If yes: 
? Are cash receipts prenumbered? 
? Is an independent check of prenumbered receipts done daily and reconciled to cash 
collections? 
• Do cash refunds require approval? 
• Are cash receipts deposited intact daily? 
• Are employees who handle receipts bonded? 
• Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper restricted from: 
? Preparing the bank deposit? 
? Obtaining access to the cash receipts book? 
? Having access to collections from customers? 
? Are banks instructed not to cash checks drawn to the order of the company? 
• Is the cashier restricted from gaining access to the accounts receivable records and bank 
and customer statements? 
• Are areas where physical handling of cash takes place reasonably safeguarded? 
• Is the person who makes postings to the general ledger independent of the cash receipts 
and accounts receivable functions?  
• Does a person independent of the cashier or accounts receivable functions handle 
customer complaints? 
 
 
Cash Larceny 
In the occupational fraud setting, a cash larceny may be defined as the intentional taking of 
an employer’s cash (the term cash includes both currency and checks) without the consent 
and against the will of the employer.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.420                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A cash larceny scheme can take place in any circumstance in which an employee has access 
to cash. Every company must deal with the receipt, deposit, and distribution of cash, so 
every company is potentially vulnerable to a cash larceny scheme. While the circumstances in 
which an employee might steal cash are nearly limitless, most larceny schemes involve the 
theft of incoming cash, currency on hand (in a cash register, cash box, etc.), or theft of cash 
from the victim organization’s bank deposits.  
 
Incoming Cash 
Theft of Cash from the Register 
A large percentage of cash larceny schemes occur at the cash register, and for good reason—
 the register is usually where the cash is. The register (or similar cash collection points like 
cash drawers or cash boxes) is usually the most common point of access to cash for 
employees, so it is understandable that this is where larceny schemes frequently occur. 
Furthermore, there is often a great deal of activity at the register, numerous transactions that 
require employees to handle cash. This can serve as a cover for the theft of cash. In a flurry 
of activity, with money being passed back and forth between customer and employee, an 
employee can often slip cash out of the register and into his pocket undetected.  
 
The most straightforward cash larceny scheme is to simply open the register and remove 
currency or checks. (See “Cash Larceny from the Register” flowchart.) The theft is often 
committed as a sale is being conducted so that it appears to be part of the transaction. In 
other circumstances, the perpetrator waits for a slow moment when no one is around to 
notice him digging into the cash drawer.  
 
Recall that the difficulty in detecting skimming schemes comes from the fact that the stolen 
funds are never entered on the victim organization’s accounts. In a larceny scheme, on the 
other hand, the funds that the perpetrator steals have already been reflected on the register 
tape. As a result, an imbalance will result between the register tape and the cash drawer.  
 
A register is balanced by comparing the transactions on the register tape to the amount of 
cash on hand. Sales, returns, and other register transactions that are recorded on the register 
tape are added to or subtracted from a known balance to arrive at a total for the period in 
question. The actual cash is then counted and the two totals are compared. If the register 
tape shows that there should be more cash in the register than what is present, the 
discrepancy may be due to larceny. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.421 
 
 
The actual method for taking money at the register — opening the register and removing 
currency — rarely varies. It is the methods used by perpetrators to avoid getting caught that 
distinguish larceny schemes. Oddly, in many instances the perpetrator has no plan for 
avoiding detection. A large part of fraud is rationalizing; the employee convinces himself that 
he is somehow entitled to what he is taking, or that what he is doing is not actually a crime. 
Register larceny schemes frequently begin when the perpetrator convinces himself that he is 
only “borrowing” the funds to cover a temporary monetary need. These people might carry 
the missing currency in their registers for several days, deluding themselves in the belief that 
they will one day repay the funds they have stolen.  
 
The employee who does nothing to camouflage his crimes is easily caught. More dangerous 
is the person taking active steps to hide his crimes. One basic way for an employee to 
disguise the fact that he is stealing currency is to take money from someone else’s register.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.422                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In some retail organizations, employees are assigned to certain registers. Alternatively, one 
register is used and each employee has an access code. When cash is missing from a certain 
cashier’s register, that cashier is obviously the most likely suspect for the theft. Therefore, by 
stealing from a coworker’s register, or by using someone else’s access code to enter the 
register, the perpetrator makes sure that another employee will be the prime suspect in the 
theft.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A teller for a retail sales company simply signed onto a register, rang a “no sale” and took 
currency from the drawer. Over  a period of time, the teller took approximately $6,000 
through this simple method. In order to get away with the theft, the teller waited until a 
coworker was on break, then logged onto that person’s register, rang a “no sale” and took 
the cash. The resulting cash shortage therefore appeared in the register of an honest 
employee, deflecting attention from the true thief.  
 
A very unsophisticated way to avoid detection is to steal currency in very small amounts over 
an extended period of time. Because the missing amounts are small, the shortages may be 
dismissed as accounting errors rather than theft. Typically, the employee becomes dependent 
on the extra money he is pilfering and his thefts increase in scale or become more frequent, 
which causes the scheme to be uncovered. Most retail organizations track overages or 
shortages by employee, making this method largely ineffective. 
 
REVERSING TRANSACTIONS 
Some employees conceal cash larceny by processing reversing transactions, which cause the 
register tape to reconcile to the amount of cash on hand after the theft. By processing false 
voids or refunds, an employee can reduce the cash balance reflected on the register tape.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A cashier received payments from a customer and recorded the transactions on her system. 
She stole the payments from the customers, then destroyed the company’s receipts that 
reflected the transactions. To complete the cover-up, the cashier went back and voided the 
transactions that she had entered at the time the payments were received. The reversing 
entries brought the receipt totals in to balance with the cash on hand.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.423 
REGISTER MANIPULATION 
Instead of using reversing entries, an employee might manually alter the register tape. Again, 
the purpose of this activity is to force a balance between the cash on hand and the actual 
cash received. An employee might use white-out to cover up a sale whose proceeds were 
stolen, or he might simply cross out or alter the numbers on the tape so that the register 
total and the cash drawer balance. This type of concealment is not common because, in 
general, the alterations will be noticeable. 
 
ALTERING CASH COUNTS 
Another method for concealing cash larceny is to alter the cash counts on registers. When 
cash from a register is totaled and prepared for deposit, an employee simply records the 
wrong amount so that the cash on hand appears to balance with the total on the register 
tape. Obviously, employees who deal with the receipt of cash should not be charged with 
verifying the amount of cash on hand in their own register, but this control is often 
overlooked.  
 
DESTROYING REGISTER TAPES   
If the fraudster cannot make the cash and the tape balance, the next best thing is to prevent 
others from computing the totals and discovering the imbalance. Employees who are 
stealing from the register sometimes destroy detail tapes that would implicate them in a 
crime. When detail tapes are missing or defaced, it may be because someone is trying to 
conceal a fraud.  
 
Other Larceny of Sales and Receivables 
Not all receipts arrive via the cash register. Employees can just as easily steal money received 
at other points. One of the more common methods is to take checks received through the 
mail, post the payments to the accounting system, but steal the checks. (See “Other Cash 
Larceny” flowchart.) Obviously, this type of scheme leaves the cash account out of balance. 
From a perpetrator’s perspective, it would make  much more sense to take checks that have 
not yet been posted to customer accounts. Often, this type of cash larceny scheme is 
committed by an employee who claims to only be “borrowing” the funds for a short while—
 one of the classic rationalizations in occupational fraud schemes.  
 
Those employees who have total control of a company’s accounting system can overcome 
the problem of out-of-balance accounts. It is common, especially in small businesses, for a 
single person to control all of a company’s deposits and ledgers. These employees can steal 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.424                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
incoming cash that has already been posted, then conceal the crime by making unsupported 
entries in the victim organization’s books. Poor separation of duties is very often the 
weakness that allows cash larceny schemes to go undetected.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee posted customer payments to the accounts receivable journal but stole the cash 
received. This resulted in an imbalance in the victim company’s cash account. But the 
perpetrator had control over the company’s deposits and all its ledgers. This allowed her to 
conceal her crime by making unsupported entr ies in the company’s books that produced a 
fictitious balance between receipts and ledgers.  
 
In circumstances in which payments are stolen but nonetheless posted to the cash receipts 
journal, reversing entries are sometimes used to balance the victim company’s accounts. The 
incoming payment is initially credited to the customer’s account, but the entry is later 
reversed with an unauthorized adjustment such as a “courtesy discount.” 
 
A less elegant way to hide a crime is to simply destroy all records that might prove that the 
perpetrator has been stealing. This “slash and burn” concealment technique does not 
prevent the victim company from realizing that it has been robbed, but it may help conceal 
the identity of the thief.  
 
Cash Larceny from the Deposit 
At some point in every revenue-generating business, someone must physically take the 
company’s currency and checks to the bank. This person or persons, left alone literally 
holding the bag, will have an opportunity to take a portion of the money prior to depositing 
it into the company’s accounts.  
 
Typically, when a company receives cash, someone is assigned to tabulate the receipts, list 
the form of payment (currency or check), and prepare a deposit slip for the bank. Then 
another employee takes the cash and deposits it in the bank. The person who made out the 
deposit generally retains one copy of the slip. This copy is matched to a receipted copy of 
the slip, which is stamped by the bank when the deposit is made.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.425 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.426                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
This procedure is designed to prevent the theft of funds from the deposit, but thefts still 
occur, often because the process is not adhered to. (See “Cash Larceny from the Deposit” 
flowchart.) For example, when one person is in charge of preparing the deposit slips, making 
the deposit, and reconciling the bank statement, that person can pilfer money from the day’s 
receipts and conceal it by falsifying the deposit slips. If the day’s receipts are $1,000, the 
perpetrator might fill out a deposit slip for $5 00 and steal the other $500. The employee then 
makes correspondingly false entries in the books, understating the day’s receipts. This 
process creates a false balance in the victim organization’s records.  
 
A failure to reconcile the bank copy of the deposit slip with the office copy can result in 
fraud. When the person making the deposit knows his company does not reconcile the two 
copies, he can steal cash from the deposit on the way to the bank and alter the deposit slip 
so that it reflects a lesser amount. In some cases sales records will also be altered to match 
the diminished deposit.  
 
When cash is stolen from the deposit, the receipted deposit slip will of course be out of 
balance with the company’s copy of the deposit slip (unless the perpetrator also prepared the 
deposit). To correct this problem, some perpetrators alter the bank copy of the deposit slip 
after it has been validated. This brings the two copies back into balance.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee altered 24 deposit slips and validated bank receipts in the course of a year to 
conceal the theft of over $15, 000. These documents were altered with white-out or a ball 
point pen to match the company’s cash reports.  
 
One common-sense issue that is sometimes over looked by organizations is the handling of 
the deposit on the way to the bank. Once prepared, the deposit should immediately be put in 
a safe place until it is taken to the bank. Unfortunately, some organizations leave their 
deposits carelessly unattended. For example, some companies prepare the daily deposit, then 
leave it in the office overnight to be taken to the bank the next morning. Employees familiar 
with this routine have little trouble pilfering checks and currency from the deposit after 
hours.  
 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.427 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.428                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
As with all cash larceny schemes, stealing from the company deposit can be rather difficult 
to conceal. In most cases these schemes are only successful in the long term when the 
person who counts the cash also makes the deposit. In any other circumstance the success of 
the scheme depends primarily on the inattentiveness of those charged with preparing and 
reconciling the deposit. 
 
Deposit Lapping   
One method that fraudsters sometimes use to conceal cash larceny from the deposit is 
lapping. Lapping occurs when an employee steals the deposit from day one, then replaces it 
with day two’s deposit. Day two is replaced with day three, and so on. The perpetrator is 
always one day behind, but as long as no one demands an up-to-the minute reconciliation of 
the deposits to the bank statement—and if daily receipts do not drop precipitously — he may 
be able to avoid detection for a period of time. Lapping is discussed in more detail in the 
Skimming section.  
 
Deposits in Transit 
A final strategy used to conceal stolen deposits is to carry the missing money as deposits in 
transit, which are a way of accounting for discrepancies between the company’s records and 
the bank statement.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee was responsible for receiving collections, issuing receipts, posting transactions, 
reconciling accounts, and making deposits. This employee took over $20,000 in collections 
from her employer over a five-month period. To hide her theft, the perpetrator carried the 
missing money as deposits in transit, meaning that the missing money would appear on the 
next month’s bank statement. Of course, it never did. The balance was carried for several 
months as “d.i.t.” until an auditor recognized the discrepancy and put a halt to the fraud.  
 
Detection of Cash Larceny 
Receipt Recording  
In-depth analysis of the cash receipts and recording process is the key to detecting a cash 
larceny scheme. Areas of analysis may include: 
• Mail and register receipt points. 
• Journalizing and recording of the receipts. 
• Security of the cash from receipt to deposit. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.429 
Control Objectives 
In analyzing the cash receipt process, it is important to meet the following control 
objectives: 
• Cash receipts must be complete. Each day’s receipts must be promptly collected and 
deposited in full. 
• Each receivable transaction recorded must be legitimate and have supporting 
documentation.  
• All information included in the transaction must be correctly verified as to amount, date, 
account coding, and descriptions. 
• The cash must be safeguarded while in the physical possession of the company. 
• There must be appropriate personnel responsible for overseeing cash control processes.  
• Cash register tape totals should be reconciled to the amount of cash in drawer. 
• An independent listing of cash receipts should be prepared before the receipts are 
submitted to the cashier or accounts receivable bookkeeper. 
• An independent person should verify the listing against the deposit slips. 
• Authenticated deposit slips should be retained and reconciled to the corresponding 
amounts in the cash receipts records. 
• The bank deposit should be made by someone other than the cashier or the accounts 
receivable bookkeeper. A person independent of the cash receipts and accounts 
receivable functions should compare entries to the cash receipts journal with: 
? Authenticated bank deposit slips 
? Deposit per the bank statements 
• Areas where physical handling of cash takes place should be reasonably safeguarded. 
 
Analytical Review 
Analyzing the relationship between sales, cost of sales, and the returns and allowances can 
detect inappropriate refunds and discounts.  
• If a large cash fraud is suspected, a thorough review of these accounts may enlighten the 
examiner as to the magnitude of the suspected fraud.  
• An analysis of refunds and returns and allowances with the actual flow of inventory may 
reveal some fraud schemes. The refund should cause an entry to inventory, even if it is 
damaged inventory. Likewise, a return will cause a corresponding entry to an inventory 
account.  
  
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.430                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• There should be a linear relationship between sales and returns and allowances over a 
relevant range. Any change in this relationship may point to a fraud scheme unless there 
is another valid explanation such as a change in the manufacturing process, change in 
product line, or change in price. 
 
Detection at the Register 
• As cash is received, whether at a register or through the mail, it is important to ensure 
that the employees responsible for completing these important tasks are informed of 
their responsibility and properly supervised.  
• Access to the register must be closely monitored and access codes must be kept secure.  
• An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and agreeing them to register totals.  
• Popular concealment methods must be watched for. These methods, discussed earlier, 
include checks for cash, reversing transactions, register tape destruction or alteration, 
and sales cash counts. 
• Complete register documentation and cash must be delivered to the appropriate 
personnel in a timely manner.  
• Cash thefts are sometimes revealed by customers who have either paid money on an 
account and have not received credit, or in some cases, when they notice that the credit 
they have been given does not agree with the payment they have made. Complaints and 
inquiries are also received frequently from banks. 
 
Cash Account Analysis 
Cash larceny can be detected by reviewing and analyzing all journal entries made to the cash 
accounts. This review and analysis should be performed on a regular basis. If an employee is 
unable to conceal the fraud through altering the source documents, such as the cash register 
tape, then he may resort to making a journal entry directly to cash. In general (and except in 
financial institutions), there are very few instances in everyday business activity where an 
independent journal entry is necessary for cash. One of these exceptions is the recording of 
the bank service charge. However, this is an easy journal entry to trace to its source 
documentation, namely the bank statement. Therefore, all other entries directly to cash are 
suspect and should be traced to their source documentation or explanation. Suspect entries 
will generally credit the cash account and correspondingly debit various other accounts such 
as a sales contra account or bad debt expenses. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.431 
Prevention of Cash Larceny 
Segregation of Duties 
The primary prevention of cash larceny is segregation of duties. Whenever one individual 
has control over the entire accounting transaction (e.g., authorization, recording, and 
custody), the opportunity is present for cash fraud. Each of the following duties and 
responsibilities should ideally be segregated:  
• Cash receipts 
• Cash counts 
• Bank deposits 
• Deposit receipt reconciliation 
• Bank reconciliations 
• Posting of deposits 
• Cash disbursements 
 
If any one person has the authority to collect the cash, deposit the receipts, record that 
collection, and disburse company funds, the risk that fraud can occur is high. 
 
Assignment Rotation and Mandatory Vacations 
Many internal fraud schemes are continuous in nature and require ongoing efforts by the 
employee to conceal defalcations. Mandatory job rotation is an excellent method of 
detecting cash fraud. By establishing a mandatory job or assignment rotation, the 
concealment element is interrupted. If mandatory vacations are within the company’s 
policies, it is important that during the employee’s absence, the normal workload of that 
employee be performed by another individual. The purpose of mandatory vacations is lost if 
the work is allowed to remain undone during the employee’s time off.  
 
Surprise Cash Counts and Procedure Supervision 
Surprise cash counts and supervisory observations are a useful fraud prevention method if 
properly used. It is important that employees know that cash will be counted on a sporadic 
and unscheduled basis. These surprise counts must be made at all steps of the process from 
receiving the check to deposit. 
 
Physical Security of Cash 
• Ensure proper segregation of duties of key personnel. 
• Review the check and cash composition of the daily bank deposit during unannounced 
cash counts and during substantive audit tests of cash receipts. 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.432                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Review the entity’s records of the numerical series of printed prenumbered receipts, and 
verify that these receipts are used sequentially (including voided documents). 
• Review the timeliness of deposits from locations to the central treasurer function. 
• Observe cash receipting operations of locations. 
• Prepare and review a schedule of all cash receipting functions from a review of revenue 
reports, from cash receipt forms at the central treasurer function, and from discussion 
with knowledgeable employees. 
• Prepare and analyze an inventory of all imprest and change funds by purpose, amount, 
custodian, date, and location. 
• Audit all revenue sources on a cycle. 
• Periodically use comparative analytical reviews to determine which functions have 
unfavorable trends. 
• Determine reason(s) why revenue has changed from previous reporting periods. 
• Confirm responses obtained from managers by using alternative records or through 
substantive audit tests. 
• Adhere to a communicated policy of unannounced cash counts. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.501 
ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS 
 
In fraudulent disbursement schemes, an employee makes a distribution of company funds 
for a dishonest purpose. Examples of fraudulent disbursements include forging company 
checks, the submission of false invoices, doctoring timecards, and so forth. On their face, 
the fraudulent disbursements do not appear any different from valid disbursements of cash. 
For instance, when an employee runs a bogus invoice through the accounts payable system, 
the victim organization cuts a check for the bad invoice right along with all the legitimate 
payments it makes. The perpetrator has taken money from his employer in such a way that it 
appears to be a normal disbursement of cash. Someone might notice the fraud based on the 
amount, recipient, or destination of the payment, but the method of payment is legitimate.  
 
 
Register Disbursement Schemes 
Fraudulent disbursements at the cash register are different from the other schemes that 
often take place at the register, such as skimming and cash larceny. When cash is stolen as 
part of a register disbursement scheme, the removal of the cash is recorded on the register 
tape. A false transaction is entered so it appears that the disbursement of money was 
legitimate.  
 
There are two basic register disbursements schemes: false refunds and false voids. While the 
schemes are largely similar, there are a few differences between the two that merit discussing 
them separately.  
 
False Refunds 
A refund is processed at the register when a customer returns an item of merchandise that 
was purchased from the store. The transaction that is entered on the register indicates the 
merchandise is being replaced in the store’s inventory and the purchase price is being 
returned to the customer. In other words, a refund shows cash being disbursed from the 
register to the customer. (See “False Refunds” flowchart.) 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.502                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.503 
Fictitious Refunds 
In a fictitious refund scheme, an employee processes a transaction as if a customer were 
returning merchandise, even though there is no actual return. Two things result from this 
fraudulent transaction. The first is that the employee takes cash from the register in the 
amount of the false return. For instance, if the employee processes a fictitious return for a 
$100 pair of shoes, he removes $100 from the register. The register tape will indicate that the 
shoes were returned, so the disbursement appears to be legitimate. The register tape balances 
with the amount of cash on hand because the fraudulent refund accounts for the cash that 
the employee stole.  
 
The second thing that happens in a fictitious refund scheme is that a debit is made to the 
inventory system showing that the merchandise has been returned to the inventory. Since 
the transaction is fictitious, no merchandise is actually returned. The result is that the 
company’s inventory is overstated.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager created $5,500 worth of false re turns, resulting in a large shortage in the 
company’s inventory. He was able to carry his scheme on for several months, however, 
because (1) inventory was not counted regularly, and (2) the perpetrator, a manager, was 
one of the people who performed inventory counts.  
 
Overstated Refunds 
Rather than create an entirely fictitious refund, some employees merely overstate the amount 
of a legitimate refund and steal the excess money. For example, if a customer returns $100 
worth of merchandise, the employee might ring up a $200 return. The employee gives the 
customer $100 in return for the merchandise, then pockets the remaining $100. This will 
result in shrinkage of $100 worth of inventory.  
 
Credit Card Refunds 
When purchases are made with a credit card rather than cash, refunds appear as credits to 
the customer’s credit card rather than as cash disbursements. Some dishonest employees 
process false refunds on credit card sales in lieu of processing a normal cash transaction. 
One benefit of the credit card method is that the perpetrator does not have to physically take 
cash from the register and carry it out of the store. By processing the refunds to a credit card 
account, a perpetrator reaps a financial gain and avoids the potential embarrassment of being 
caught red-handed taking cash.  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.504                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In a typical credit card refund scheme, the perpetrator rings up a refund on a credit card sale, 
even though the merchandise is not actually being returned. The employee credits his own 
credit card number rather than the customer’s. The result is that the cost of the item is 
credited to the perpetrator’s credit card account.  
 
A more creative and wide-ranging application of the credit card refund scheme occurs when 
employees process refunds to the accounts of other people, and in return receive a portion 
of the refund as a kickback. Suppose a person is $100 short on the rent. That person goes to 
the retail store where his friend is a teller and has the teller process a credit of $150 to his 
account. The “customer” then goes to an ATM machine and withdraws $150 in cash. He 
pays $50 to the teller and keeps $100 for himself.  
 
Refund schemes are more difficult to perpetrate in many high-tech retail stores where the 
cash registers have anti-fraud controls that require the refund to be made to the original 
credit card used for the purchase or that only allow for refunds in the form of a store credit 
for the current value of the item purchased.    
 
False Voids 
Fictitious voids are similar to refund schemes in that they make fraudulent disbursements 
from the register appear to be legitimate. When a sale is voided on a register, a copy of the 
customer’s receipt is usually attached to a void slip, along with the signature or initials of a 
manager indicating that the transaction has been approved. (See “False Voids” flowchart.) In 
order to process a false void, then, the first thing the perpetrator needs is the customer’s 
copy of the sales receipt. Typically, when an employee sets about processing a fictitious void, 
he simply withholds the customer’s receipt at the time of the sale. In many cases customers 
do not notice that they are not given a receipt.  
 
With the customer’s copy of the receipt in hand, the culprit rings a voided sale. Whatever 
money the customer paid for the item is removed from the register as though it is being 
returned to a customer. The copy of the customer’s receipt is attached to the void slip to 
verify the authenticity of the transaction.  
 
Before the voided sale will be perceived as valid, a manager generally must approve the 
transaction. In many instances, the manager in question simply neglects to verify the 
authenticity of the voided sale. A number of managers will sign most anything presented to 
them and thus leave themselves vulnerable to voided sales schemes. It is not a coincidence 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.505 
that the perpetrators of these crimes present their void slips to managers who are 
lackadaisical about authorizing them. These kinds of managers are generally targeted by the 
fraudsters and are essential to the success of the schemes.  
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.506                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.507 
EXAMPLE 
An employee processed fraudulent voids, kept customer receipts, and presented them to her 
supervisors for review at the end of her shift, long after the alleged transactions had taken 
place. Her supervisors approved the voided sales and the accounts receivable department 
failed to notice the excessive number of voided sales processed by this employee.  
 
Obviously, not all managers give rubber-stamp approval to voided sales. Some employees 
must therefore take other routes to get their voided sales “approved.” In most of these cases 
the perpetrator simply forges his supervisor’s authorization on the fraudulent void slips. It is 
also possible that managers will conspire with register employees and approve false voids in 
return for a share of the proceeds from the scheme.  
 
Concealing Register Disbursement Schemes 
As has already been discussed, two things happen when a false refund or void is entered into 
the register. The first is that the employee committing the fraud removes cash from the 
register, and the second is that the item allegedly being returned is debited back into the 
perpetual inventory. Of course, there really is no merchandise being returned. This leads to 
inventory shrinkage, a situation in which there is less inventory actually on hand than the 
perpetual inventory records reflect. A certain amount of shrinkage is expected in any retail 
industry, but too much of it raises concerns of fraud. It is therefore in the perpetrator’s best 
interests to conceal the appearance of shrinkage on the books.  
 
Inventory is essentially accounted for by a two-step process. The first part of the process is 
the perpetual inventory, which is a running tabulation of how much inventory should be on 
hand. When a sale of merchandise is made, the perpetual inventory is credited to remove this 
merchandise from the records. The amount of merchandise that should be on hand is 
reduced. (Conversely, when merchandise is returned the perpetual inventory is debited.) 
Periodically, someone from the company takes a physical count of the inventory, going 
through the stockroom or warehouse and counting the amount of inventory that is actually on 
hand. The two figures are then compared to see if there is a discrepancy between the 
perpetual inventory (what should be on hand) and the physical inventory (what is on hand). 
 
In register disbursement schemes, shrinkage is often concealed by overstating inventory 
during the physical count, especially if taking inventory is one of the perpetrator’s duties. 
The perpetrator simply overstates the amount of inventory on hand so it matches the 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.508                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
perpetual inventory. For a more detailed analysis of methods used to conceal inventory 
shrinkage, please see the Inventory and Other Assets section.  
 
Small Disbursements 
Another way for employees to avoid detection in a refund scheme is to keep the sizes of the 
disbursements low. Many companies set limits below which management review of a refund 
is not required. Where this is the case, employees simply process copious numbers of 
refunds that are small enough that they do not have to be reviewed.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee created over 1,000 false refunds, all under the review limit of $15. He was 
eventually caught because he began processing refunds before store hours and another 
employee noticed that refunds were appearing on the system before the store opened. 
Nevertheless, before his scheme was detected the man made off with over $11,000 of his 
employer’s money.  
 
Destroying Records 
One final means of concealing a register scheme, as with many kinds of fraud, is to destroy 
all records of the transaction. Most concealment methods are concerned with keeping 
management from realizing that fraud has occurred. When an employee resorts to destroying 
records, however, he typically has conceded that management will discover his theft. The 
purpose of destroying records is usually to prevent management from determining who the 
thief is.  
 
Detection of Register Disbursement Schemes 
Fictitious Refunds or Voided Sales 
Fictitious refunds or voided sales can often be detected when closely examining the 
documentation submitted with the cash receipts.  
• One detection method is to evaluate the refunds or discounts given by each cashier or 
salesperson. This analysis may point out that a single employee or group of employees 
has a higher incidence of refunds or discounts than others. Further examination is then 
necessary to determine if the refunds are appropriate and properly documented. 
• Signs in the register area asking customers to ask for and examine their receipts employ 
the customer as part of the internal control system. This helps ensure that the cashier or 
salesperson is properly accounting for the sale and prevents employees from using 
customer receipts as support for false void or refunds. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.509 
• Random service calls to customers who have returned merchandise or voided sales can 
be used to verify the legitimacy of transactions.  
 
Review and Analysis of Decreases in Gross Sales and/or Increases in Returns and Allowances 
Analyzing the relationship between sales, cost of sales, and the returns and allowances can 
detect inappropriate refunds and discounts. If a large cash fraud is suspected, a thorough 
review of these accounts might enlighten the examiner as to the magnitude of the suspected 
fraud. An analysis of refunds and returns and allowances with the actual flow of inventory 
might reveal some fraud schemes. The refund should cause an entry to inventory, even if it is 
damaged inventory. Likewise, a return will cause a corresponding entry to an inventory 
account. There should be a linear relationship between sales and returns and allowances over 
a relevant range. Any change in this relationship might point to a fraud scheme unless there 
is another valid explanation such as a change in the manufacturing process, change in 
product line, or change in price. 
 
Register Scheme Red Flags 
• Inappropriate employee segregation of duties. For example, register counting and 
reconciling should not be done by the cashier. 
• Cashiers, rather than supervisors, have access to the control keys that are necessary for 
refunds and voids. 
• Register employee has authority to void own transactions. 
• Register refunds are not methodically reviewed. 
• Multiple cashiers operate from a single cash drawer without separate access codes. 
• Personal checks from cashier found in register. 
• Voided transactions are not properly documented or not approved by a supervisor. 
• Voided cash receipt forms (manual systems) or supporting documents for voided 
transactions (cash register systems) are not retained on file. 
• Missing or obviously altered register tapes. 
• Gaps in the sequence of transactions on register tape. 
• An inordinate number of refunds, voids, or no-sales on register tape. 
• Inventory totals appear forced. 
• Multiple refunds or voids for am ounts just under the review limit. 
 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.510                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Prevention of Register Disbursement Schemes 
• Review the segregation of duties of key employees who staff the register as well as the 
duties of their supervisors.  
• As cash is received it is important to ensure that the employees responsible for 
completing these important tasks are informed of their responsibilities and properly 
supervised.  
• An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and agreeing them to register totals.  
• Complete register documentation and cash must be delivered to the appropriate 
personnel in a timely manner.  
• Cash thefts are sometimes revealed by customers who have paid money on an account 
and have not received credit, or in some cases, who have been credited for an amount 
that does not agree with the payment they have made. Complaints and inquiries are also 
received frequently from banks. 
• Access to the register must be closely monitored and access codes must be kept secure.  
• Quantity of refunds should be analyzed to detect multiple small refunds. 
• Communicate and adhere to company policy of performing unannounced cash counts. 
• Maintain the presence of a manager or supervisor near the area of the cash register as a 
deterrent to theft. 
• Review supporting documents for voided and refunded transactions for propriety (i.e., 
legitimacy and approvals). 
• Review the numerical sequence and completeness of cash register tapes. 
 
 
Check Tampering
Check tampering is unique among the fraudulent disbursement schemes because it is the one 
group in which the perpetrator physically prepares the fraudulent check. In most fraudulent 
disbursement schemes, the culprit generates a payment to himself by submitting some false 
document to the victim organization such as an invoice or a timecard. The false document 
represents a claim for payment and causes the victim organization to issue a check that the 
perpetrator can convert.  
 
Check tampering schemes are fundamentally different. In these schemes the perpetrator 
takes physical control of a check and makes it payable to himself through one of several 
methods. Check tampering frauds depend upon factors such as access to the company 
checkbook, access to bank statements, and the ability to forge signatures or alter other 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.511 
information on the face of the check. Most check tampering crimes fall into one of four 
categories: forged maker schemes, forged endorsement schemes, altered payee schemes, and 
authorized maker schemes.  
 
Forged Maker Schemes    
The legal definition of forgery includes not only the signing of another person’s name to a 
document (such as a check) with a fraudulent intent, but also the fraudulent alteration of a 
genuine instrument. This definition is so broad that it would encompass all check tampering 
schemes. For the purposes of this text, the definition of forgery has been narrowed to fit the 
fraud examiner’s needs. In order to properly distinguish the various methods used by 
individuals to tamper with checks, the concept of “forgeries” will be limited to those cases in 
which an individual signs another person’s name on a check.  
 
The person who signs a check is known as the “maker” of the check. A forged maker 
scheme, then, may be defined as a check tampering scheme in which an employee 
misappropriates a check and fraudulently affixes the signature of an authorized maker 
thereon. (See “Forged Maker Schemes” flowchart.) Frauds that involve other types of check 
tampering, such as the alteration of the payee or the changing of the dollar amount, are 
classified separately.  
 
In order to forge a check, an employee must have access to a blank check, he must be able 
to produce a convincing forgery of an authorized signature, and he must be able to conceal 
his crime. Concealment is a universal problem in check tampering schemes; the methods 
used are basically the same whether one is dealing with a forged maker scheme, an 
intercepted check scheme, a concealed check scheme, or an authorized maker scheme. 
Therefore, concealment issues will be discussed as a group later in this section.  
 
Obtaining the Check 
EMPLOYEES WITH ACCESS TO COMPANY CHECKS 
One cannot forge a company check unless one first possesses a company check. Most 
forgery schemes are committed by accounts payable clerks, office managers, bookkeepers, or 
other employees whose duties typically include the preparation of company checks. These 
are people who have access to the company checkbook on a regular basis and are therefore 
in the best position to steal blank checks.  
                                                          
1 Henry Campbell Black, Black’s Law Dictionary, Fifth Edition  (St. Paul: West Publishing Co., 1979) p. 585.   
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.512                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EMPLOYEES LACKING ACCESS TO COMPANY CHECKS 
If the perpetrator does not have access to the company checkbook through his work duties, 
he will have to find other means of misappropriating a check. The way a person steals a 
check depends largely on how the checkbook is handled within a particular company. In 
some circumstances the checkbook is poorly guarded, left in unattended areas where anyone 
can get to it. In other companies where blank checks are kept in a restricted area, the 
perpetrator might have surreptitiously obtained a key or combination to this area. An 
accomplice might provide blank checks for the perpetrator in return for a portion of the 
stolen funds. Perhaps a secretary sees the checkbook left on a manager’s desk or a custodian 
comes across blank checks in an unlocked desk drawer.  
 
In some companies, checks are computer generated. When this is the case, an employee who 
knows the password for preparing and issuing checks can usually obtain as many unsigned 
checks as he desires. There are an unlimited number of ways to steal a check, each 
dependent on the way in which a particular company guards its blank checks. In some 
instances, employees go so far as to produce counterfeit checks.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee had an accomplice who worked for a check-printing company. The accomplice 
was able to print blank checks with the account number of the perpetrator’s company. The 
perpetrator then wrote over $100,000 worth of forgeries on these counterfeit checks.  
 
To Whom Is the Check Made Payable?  
TO THE PERPETRATOR 
Once a blank check has been obtained, the perpetrator must decide to whom it should be 
made payable. In most instances forged checks are made payable to the perpetrator himself 
so that they can be easily converted. Canceled checks that are payable to an employee should 
be closely scrutinized for the possibility of fraud.  
 
If the perpetrator owns his own business or has established a shell company, he will usually 
write fraudulent checks to these entities rather than himself. These checks are not as 
obviously fraudulent on their faces as checks made payable to an employee. At the same 
time, these checks are easy to convert because the perpetrator owns the entity to which the 
checks are payable.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.513 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.514                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
TO AN ACCOMPLICE  
If a fraudster is working with an accomplice, he can make the forged check payable to that 
person. The accomplice then cashes the check and splits the money with the employee-fraudster. 
Because the check is payable to the accomplice in his true identity, it is easily 
converted. An additional benefit to using an accomplice is that a canceled check payable to a 
third-party accomplice is not as likely to raise suspicion as a canceled check to an employee. 
The obvious drawback to using an accomplice in a scheme is that the employee-fraudster 
usually has to share the proceeds of the scheme. 
 
TO “CASH”   
The perpetrator may also write checks payable to “cash” in order to avoid listing himself as 
the payee. Checks made payable to cash, however, must still be endorsed. The perpetrator 
will have to sign his own name or forge the name of another in order to convert the check. 
Checks payable to “cash” are usually viewed more  skeptically than checks payable to persons 
or businesses. Some institutions may refuse to cash checks made payable to “cash.”  
 
TO VENDORS 
Not all fraudsters forge company checks to obtain cash. Some employees use forged maker 
schemes to purchase goods or services for their own benefit. These fraudulent checks are 
made payable to third-party vendors who are uninvolved in the fraud. For instance, an 
employee might forge a company check to buy a computer for his home. The computer 
vendor is not involved in the fraud at all. Furthermore, if the victim organization regularly 
does business with this vendor, the person who reconciles the company’s accounts may 
assume that the check was used for a legitimate business expense.  
 
Forging the Signature 
After the employee has obtained and prepared a blank check, he must forge an authorized 
signature in order to convert the check. The most obvious method, and the one that comes 
to mind when one thinks of the word “forgery,” is to simply take pen in hand and sign the 
name of an authorized maker.  
 
FREE-HAND FORGERY 
The difficulty a fraudster encounters when physically signing the authorized maker’s name is 
in creating a reasonable approximation of the true signature. If the forgery appears authentic, 
the perpetrator will probably have no problem cashing the check. In truth, the forged 
signature may not have to be particularly accurate. Many fraudsters cash forged checks at 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.515 
liquor stores, grocery stores, or other institutions that are known to be less than diligent in 
verifying signatures and identification. Nevertheless, a poorly forged signature is a clear red 
flag of fraud. The maker’s signature on can celed checks should be reviewed for forgeries 
during the reconciliation process.  
 
PHOTOCOPIED FORGERIES 
To guarantee an accurate forgery, some employees make photocopies of legitimate 
signatures. The signature of an authorized signer is copied from some document (such as a 
business letter) onto a transparency, then the transparency is laid over a blank check so that 
the signature copies onto the maker line of the check. The result is a check with a perfect 
signature of an authorized maker.  
 
AUTOMATIC CHECK-SIGNING INSTRUMENTS 
Companies that issue a large number of checks sometimes utilize automatic check-signing 
instruments. Automated signatures are either produced with manual instruments like 
signature stamps or they are printed by computer. Obviously, an employee who has access to 
an automatic check-signing instrument will have no trouble forging the signatures of 
authorized makers. Even the most rudimentary control procedures should severely limit 
access to these instruments.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A fiscal officer maintained a set of manual checks that were unknown to other persons in 
the company. The company used an automated check signer and the custodian of the signer 
let the officer have uncontrolled access to it. Using the manual checks and the company’s 
check signer, the fiscal officer was able to write over $90,000 worth of fraudulent checks to 
himself over a period of approximately four years.  
 
The same principle applies to computer-generated signatures. Access to the password or 
program that prints signed checks should be restricted, specifically excluding those who 
prepare checks and those who reconcile the bank statement.  
 
Converting the Check 
In order to convert the forged check, the perpetrator must endorse it. The endorsement is 
typically made in the name of the payee on the check. Since identification is typically 
required when one seeks to convert a check, the perpetrator usually needs fake identification 
if he forges checks to real or fictitious third persons. As discussed earlier, checks payable to 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.516                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
“cash” require the endorsement of the person converting them. Without a fake ID the 
perpetrator will likely have to endorse these checks in his own name. An employee’s 
endorsement on a canceled check is obviously a red flag.  
 
Forged Endorsement Schemes 
Forged endorsements are those check tampering schemes in which an employee intercepts a 
company check intended to pay a third party and converts the check by endorsing it in the 
third-party’s name. In some cases the employee also signs his own name as a second 
endorser. (See “Forged Endorsement Schemes” flowchart.) 
 
A fraudster’s main dilemma in a forged endorsement scheme (and in all intercepted check 
schemes, for that matter) is gaining access to a check after it has been signed. The fraudster 
must either steal the check between the point where it is signed and the point where it is 
delivered, or he must re-route the check, causing it to be delivered to a location where he can 
retrieve it. The manner used to steal a check depends largely upon the way the company 
handles outgoing disbursements. Anyone who is allowed to handle signed checks may be in 
a good position to intercept them.  
 
Intercepting Checks Before Delivery 
EMPLOYEES INVOLVED IN DELIVERY OF CHECKS 
Obviously, the employees in the best position to intercept signed checks are those whose 
duties include the handling and delivery of signed checks. The most obvious example is a 
mailroom employee who opens outgoing mail containing signed checks and steals the 
checks. Other personnel with access to outgoing checks might include accounts payable 
employees, payroll clerks, and secretaries. 
 
POOR CONTROL OF SIGNED CHECKS 
Unfortunately, employees are often able to intercept signed checks because of poor internal 
controls. For instance, many employees simply find signed checks left unattended in the 
work areas of the persons who signed them or the persons charged with their delivery. In 
these cases it is easy for the perpetrator to steal the check. Another common breakdown 
occurs when the person who prepares a check is also involved in the delivery of that check 
once it has been signed.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.517 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.518                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A high-level manager with authority to disburse employee benefits instructed accounts 
payable personnel to return signed benefits checks to him instead of immediately delivering 
them to their intended recipients. These instructions were not questioned due to the 
manager’s level of authority within the company. The perpetrator simply took the checks 
that were returned to him and deposited them  into his personal bank account, forging the 
endorsements of the intended payees.  
 
In addition to the preceding example, secretaries or clerks who prepare checks for their 
bosses to sign are often responsible for mailing those checks. It is very simple for those 
employees to make out a fraudulent check and obtain a signature, knowing that the boss will 
give the signed check right back to them. This scheme is indicative of the key problem with 
occupational fraud: trust. In order for an office to run efficiently, high-level employees must 
be able to rely on their subordinates. Yet this reliance is precisely what puts subordinates in a 
position to defraud their employer.  
 
Theft of Returned Checks 
Checks that have been mailed and are later returned to the victim for some reason, such as 
an incorrect address, are often targeted for theft by fraudsters. Employees with access to 
incoming mail are able to intercept these returned checks and convert them by forging the 
endorsement of the intended payee.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager took and converted approximately $130,000 worth of checks that were 
returned due to noncurrent addresses (he also stole outgoing checks, cashed them, and then 
declared them lost). The fraudster was well known at his bank and was able to convert the 
checks by claiming that he was doing it as a favor to the real payees, who were “too busy to 
come to the bank.” The fraudster was able to continue with his scheme because the nature 
of his company’s business was such that the recipients of the misdelivered checks were often 
not aware that the victim company owed them  money. Therefore, they did not complain 
when their checks failed to arrive. In addition, the perpetrator had complete control over the 
bank reconciliation, so he could issue new checks to those payees who did complain, then 
“force” the reconciliation, making it appear that the bank balance and book balance 
matched when, in fact, they did not.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.519 
Re-Routing the Delivery of Checks 
Employees may also misappropriate signed checks by altering the addresses to which those 
checks are mailed. These perpetrators usually replace the legitimate address of the payee with 
an address where the employee can retrieve the check, such as the employee’s home or a 
P.O. box the employee controls. In other instances, the perpetrator might purposely 
misaddress a check so that it will be returned as undeliverable. The employee steals the check 
after it is returned to the victim organization.  
 
Obviously, proper separation of duties should  preclude anyone who prepares disbursements 
from being involved in their delivery. Nevertheless, the person who prepares a check is often 
allowed to address and mail it as well. In some instances where proper controls are in place, 
employees are still able to cause the misdelivery of checks. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A clerk in the customer service department of a mortgage company was in charge of 
changing the mailing addresses of property ow ners. She was assigned a password that gave 
her access to make these changes. The clerk was transferred to a new department where one 
of her duties was the issuance of checks to property owners. Unfortunately, her supervisor 
forgot to cancel her old password. When the clerk realized this oversight, she would request 
a check for a certain property owner, then sign onto the system with her old password and 
change the address of that property owner. The check would be sent to her. The next day 
the employee would use her old password to re-enter the system and replace the proper 
address so that there would be no record of where the check h ad been sent. This fraudster’s 
scheme resulted in a loss of over $250,000 to the victim company.  
 
Converting the Stolen Check 
Once a check has been intercepted, the perpetrator can cash it by forging the payee’s 
signature, hence the term forged endorsement scheme. Depending on where he tries to cash the 
check, the perpetrator may or may not need fake identification at this stage. If a perpetrator 
is required to produce identification in order to cash his stolen check, and if he does not 
have a fake ID in the payee’s name, he may use a dual endorsement to cash or deposit the 
check. In other words, the perpetrator forges the payee’s signature as though the payee had 
transferred the check to him, then the perpetrator endorses the check in his own name and 
converts it. When the bank statement is reconciled, dual endorsements on checks should 
always raise suspicions, particularly when the second signer is an employee of the company. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.520                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Altered Payee Schemes 
The second type of intercepted check scheme is the altered payee scheme. This is a form of 
check tampering in which an employee intercepts a company check intended for a third 
party and alters the payee designation so that the check can be converted by the employee or 
an accomplice. (See “Altered Payee Schemes” flowchart.) The employee inserts his own 
name, the name of an accomplice, or the name of a fictitious entity on the payee line of the 
check. The alteration essentially makes the check payable to the employee (or an 
accomplice), so there is no need to forge an endorsement and no need to obtain false 
identification.  
 
Altering Checks Prepared by Others: Inserting a New Payee 
The method used to alter the payee designation on a check depends largely on how that 
check is prepared and intercepted. (Incidentally, the amount  of the check may also be altered 
at the same time and by the same method as the payee designation.) Checks prepared by 
others can be intercepted by any of the methods discussed in the forged endorsements 
section above. When the perpetrator intercepts a check that has been prepared by someone 
else, there are basically two methods that may be employed to change the payee. The first is 
to insert the false payee’s name in place of  the true payee’s. The true name might be 
scratched out with a pen or covered up with white-out. Another name is then entered on the 
payee designation line. These kinds of alterations are usually simple to detect.  
 
A more sophisticated method occurs when the perpetrator of the fraud enters the accounts 
payable system and changes the names of payees before checks are generated. This can be 
accomplished by anyone with a password that permits access to the accounts payable  
address file.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An accounts payable employee was so trusted that her manager allowed her to use his 
computer password in his absence. The password permitted access to the accounts payable 
address file. This employee waited until the manager was absent, then selected a legitimate 
vendor with whom her company did a lot of business. She held up the vendor’s invoices for 
the day, and after work used the manager’s log-in code to change the vendor name and 
address to that of a fictitious company. The new name and address were run through the 
accounts payable cycle with an old invoice number, causing a fraudulent check to be issued. 
The victim company had an automated duplicate invoice test, but the perpetrator 
circumvented it substituting “1” for “I” and “0” (zero) for capital “O.” The next day, 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.521 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.522                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 the employee would replace the true vendor’s name and address, and mutilate the check 
register so that the check payable to the fi ctitious vendor was concealed. Approximately 
$300,000 in false checks was issued using this method.  
 
Altering Checks Prepared by Others: “Tacking On” 
The other method that can be used by perpetrators to alter checks prepared by others is 
“tacking on” additional letters or words to the end of the real payee designation. For 
instance, checks payable to “ABC” company might be altered to read “A.B. Collins.” The 
employee then cashes the checks in the name of A.B. Collins. It sounds like an odd scheme, 
but it really happens. In these cases, the simple inclusion of a filler line after the payee 
designation would prevent the loss.  
 
In addition to altering the payee designation, the amount of the check can be altered by 
tacking on extra numbers if the person preparing the check is careless and leaves space for 
extra numbers in the “Amount” portion of the check. 
 
Altering Checks Prepared by the Fraudster: Erasable Ink 
When the perpetrator prepares the check that is to be altered, the schemes tend to be a bit 
more sophisticated. The reason for this is obvious:  If the perpetrator is able to prepare the 
check himself, he can prepare it with the thought of how the payee designation will be 
changed. One of the most common ways to prepare a check for alteration is to write or type 
the payee’s name (and possibly the amount) in erasable ink. After an authorized maker signs 
the check, the perpetrator retrieves the check, erases the payee’s name, and inserts his own. 
In some cases, employees even obtain signatures on checks written in pencil. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A bookkeeper typed out small checks to a local supplier and had the owner of the company 
sign them. The bookkeeper then used her erasing typewriter to lift the payee designation and 
amount from the check. She entered her own name as the payee and raised the amount 
precipitously. For instance, the owner might si gn a $10 check that later became a $10,000 
check. These checks were entered in the disbursements journal as payments for aggregate 
inventory to the company’s largest supplier, who received several large checks each month. 
The bookkeeper stole over $300,000 fr om her employer in this scheme.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.523 
Where a proper separation of duties is in place, a person who prepares a check should not be 
permitted to handle the check after it has been signed. Nevertheless, this is exactly what 
happens in most altered payee schemes. The person who prepares the check knows that the 
maker of the check will return it to him after it has been signed. 
 
Altering Checks Prepared by the Fraudster: Blank Checks 
The most egregious example of poor controls in the handling of signed checks is one in 
which the perpetrator prepares a check, leaves the payee designation blank, and submits it to an 
authorized maker who signs the check and returns it to the employee. Obviously, this makes 
it quite easy for the perpetrator to designate himself or an accomplice as the payee. Common 
sense should prevent anyone from giving a signed, blank check to another person. 
Nevertheless, this is a fairly common occurrence, especially when the perpetrator is a trusted 
long-time employee.  
 
Converting Altered Checks 
As with all other types of fraudulent checks, conversion is accomplished by endorsing the 
checks in the name of the payee. Conversion of fraudulent checks has already been discussed 
in previous sections and will not be re-examined here.  
 
Authorized Maker Schemes  
The final check tampering scheme, the authorized maker scheme, may be the most difficult 
to defend against. An authorized maker scheme occurs when an employee with signature 
authority on a company account writes fraudulent checks for his own benefit and signs his 
own name as the maker. (See “Authorized Maker Schemes” flowchart.) The perpetrator in 
these schemes can write and sign fraudulent checks himself. He does not have to alter a pre-
 prepared instrument or forge the maker’s signature.  
 
Overriding Controls Through Intimidation 
When a person is authorized to sign company checks, preparing the checks is easy. The 
employee simply writes and signs the instruments the same way he would with any legitimate 
check. In most situations, check signers are owners, officers, or otherwise high-ranking 
employees, and thus have or can obtain access to all the blank checks they need. Even if 
company policy prohibits check signers from handling blank checks, the perpetrator can 
normally use his influence to overcome this impediment. What employee is going to tell the 
CEO that he can’t have a blank check?   
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.524                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The most basic way an employee accomplishes an authorized maker scheme is to override 
controls designed to prevent fraud. Most authorized signatories have high levels of influence 
within their companies. The perpetrators use this influence to deflect questions about 
fraudulent transactions.  
 
A common authorized maker scheme is one in which a majority owner or sole shareholder 
uses his company as a sort of alter ego, paying personal expenses directly out of company 
accounts. Instead of paying personal expenses, the perpetrator might cut checks directly to 
himself, his friends, or family. Using fear of job security as a weapon, the owner can 
maintain a work environment in which employees are afraid to question these transactions.  
 
High-level managers or officers might also use their authority to override controls in 
companies with absent or inattentive ownership. Intimidation can play a large part in the 
commission and concealment of types of occupational fraud involving powerful individuals.  
 
EXAMPLE 
The manager of a sales office stole approximately $150,000 from his employers over a two-
 year period. This manager had primary check-signing authority and abused this power by 
writing company checks to pay his personal expenses. The manager’s fraudulent activities 
were well known by certain members of his staff, but these employees’ careers were controlled 
by the perpetrator. Fear of losing their jobs combined with lack of a proper whistleblowing 
structure prevented the manager’s employees from reporting his fraud.  
 
Poor Controls 
Although overriding controls is the most blatant way to execute an authorized maker 
scheme, it is not the most common. Far more of these schemes occur because no one is 
paying attention to the accounts and few controls are present to prevent fraud. Some 
employees who write checks to themselves or to purchase items for themselves simply code 
the checks to expense accounts that they know are not likely to be reviewed.  
 
The failure to closely monitor accounts is supplemented by lack of internal controls, 
specifically the absence of separation of duties in the cash disbursements process. 
Employees who commit authorized maker fraud are often in charge of reconciling the bank 
accounts of the business. This is especially common in small businesses. Employees with 
total control over the disbursements process are in a perfect position to write fraudulent 
checks for their own benefit.  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.525 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.526                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
The bookkeeper of a medium-sized company was charged with paying all bills and 
preparing the company payroll. She had access to an automatic check signer and total 
control over company bank accounts. The bookkeeper wrote extra checks to herself, coded 
the expenditures to payroll, and destroyed the ca nceled checks when they were returned with 
the bank statement.  
 
Concealing Check Tampering Schemes  
Most check tampering schemes do not consist of a single occurrence but instead continue 
over a period of time. Therefore, concealing the fraud is arguably the most important aspect 
of the scheme. If an employee intended to steal a large sum of money and escape to South 
America, hiding the fraud might not be so important. But the vast majority of occupational 
fraudsters remain employees of their companies as they continue to steal from them, which 
makes concealment the key to the crime.  
 
Concealment of the fraud means not only hiding the identity of the criminal, but in most 
cases hiding the fact that a fraud has even occurred. The most successful frauds are those in 
which the victim organization is unaware that it is being robbed. Obviously, once a business 
learns that it is being victimized it will take steps to staunch its bleeding and the end of the 
scheme will be at hand.  
 
Check tampering schemes can present especially tricky concealment problems for dishonest 
employees. In other types of fraudulent disbursements such as invoice or payroll schemes, 
the fraudulent payment is entered in the books as a legitimate transaction by someone other 
than the perpetrator. The payments in those schemes are generated by the production of 
false documents that cause accounts payable personnel to think that money is owed to a 
particular person or vendor. When accounts payable issues a disbursement for a bogus 
invoice, it does so because it believes the invoice to be genuine. The payment is then entered 
in the books as a legitimate payment. In other words, the perpetrator generally does not have 
to worry about concealing the payment in the books, because someone else unwittingly does 
it for him. But in forgery and authorized maker schemes the perpetrator is the one writing 
the check, and he is usually the one coding the check in the disbursements journal. He must 
“explain” the check on the books.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.527 
Forged endorsement schemes and altered payee schemes are different because they involve 
the alteration of checks that were already prepared and coded by someone else. 
Nevertheless, they create a problem for the perpetrator because the intercepted check was 
intended for a legitimate recipient. Someone is out there waiting for the check that the 
perpetrator has taken. The culprit in these schemes must worry not only about hiding the 
fraud from his employer, but also about appeasing the intended payee.  
 
The Fraudster Reconciling the Bank Statement 
A large percentage of those who perpetrate check tampering frauds are involved in 
reconciling the company’s bank statement. The bank statement that a company receives 
normally includes the canceled checks that have been cashed in the preceding period. A 
person who reconciles the accounts is therefore in a position to hide the existence of any 
fraudulent checks he has written to himself. He can remove the fraudulent checks or doctor 
the bank statement or both. 
 
In forged maker and authorized maker schemes, the perpetrator usually has to code the 
check in the disbursements journal. The most basic way to hide the check is to code it as 
“void” or to include no listing at all in the journal. Then, when the bank statement arrives, 
the perpetrator removes the fraudulent check from the stack of returned checks and destroys 
it. Now there is no record of the payment in the journal and no physical evidence of the 
check on hand. Of course, the bank will have  a copy of the check, but unless someone 
questions the missing check it is unlikely that the company will discover the problem. And 
since the perpetrator is the one who reconciles the account, it is unlikely that anyone will 
even notice that the check is missing.  
 
The problem with simply omitting the fraudulent check from the disbursements journal is 
that the bank balance will not reconcile to the book balance. For instance, if the perpetrator 
wrote a $25,000 check to himself and did not record it, then the book balance will be 
$25,000 higher than the bank balance ($25,000  was taken out of the bank account by the 
perpetrator, but was not credited out of the company’s cash account). Employees usually 
omit their illicit checks from the disbursement journal only in situations where they 
personally reconcile the bank statement and no one reviews their work. This allows the 
perpetrator to “force” the reconciliation. In ot her words, the perpetrator reports that the 
bank balance and book balance match, when in fact they do not.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.528                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Some victim organizations simply do not regularly reconcile their accounts. This makes it 
easy for employees to write checks without recording them. In a system where controls are 
so lax, almost any concealment method will be effective to disguise fraud. In fact, it may not 
be necessary to make any effort at all to conceal the crime.  
 
Some fraudsters physically alter the bank statement to cause it to match the company’s book 
balance. For instance, a person engaging in a forged maker scheme may decide to steal blank 
checks from the back of the checkbook. These checks are out of sequence and therefore will 
be listed last on the bank statement. This employee can delete the clump of fraudulent 
checks at the end of the statement and alter the balance to match the victim company’s 
books.  
 
Re-Alteration of Checks 
In altered payee schemes, remember that it is common for the perpetrator to take a check 
intended for a legitimate recipient, then doctor the instrument so that the perpetrator 
becomes the designated payee. But a canceled check payable to an employee will obviously 
raise suspicions of fraud. Therefore, some employees re-alter their fraudulent checks when 
the bank statement arrives. It has already been discussed how employees can alter checks by 
writing the payee’s name in erasable ink when the check is prepared. These employees obtain 
a signature for the check, then erase the true payee’s name and insert their own. When the 
fraudulent checks return with the bank statement, the employee erases his own name and re-
 enters the name of the proper payee. Thus there will be no appearance of mischief.  
 
Miscoding Fraudulent Checks 
Rather than omit a fraudulent check from the disbursements journal or list it as void, the 
perpetrator might write a check payable to himself but list a different person as the payee on 
the books. Usually, the fake payee is a regular vendor - a person or business that receives 
numerous checks from the victim company. Employees tend to pick known vendors for 
these schemes because one extra disbursement to a regular payee is less likely to be noticed 
than a check to an unknown person. 
 
The fraudster can also conceal a fraudulent check overstating the amounts of legitimate  
disbursements in the journal in order to absorb the cost of a fraudulent check. For instance, 
assume that a company owes $10,000 to a part icular vendor. The fraudster would write a 
check to the vendor for $10,000, but enter the check in the disbursements journal as a 
$15,000 payment. The company’s disbursements are now overstated by $5,000. The 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.529 
fraudster can write a $5,000 check to himself and list that check as void in the disbursements 
journal. The bank balance and the book balance will still match, because the cost of the 
fraudulent check was absorbed when the amount of the legitimate check was overstated. Of 
course, the fact that the canceled checks do not match the entries in the journal should 
indicate potential fraud. This type of concealment is really only effective when the bank 
accounts are not closely monitored or where the employee is in charge of reconciling the 
accounts.  
 
If possible, employees will try to code their fraudulent checks to existing accounts that are 
rarely reviewed or to accounts that are very active. Most of these checks are coded to 
expense accounts or liability accounts. This particular method can be very effective in 
concealing fraud, particularly when the victim company is not diligent in reconciling its bank 
accounts. For instance, some organizations reconcile their accounts by cross-referencing 
check numbers with the amounts of the checks, but they do not verify that the payee on the 
actual check matches the payee listed in the disbursements journal. These organizations will 
be unable to detect checks that have been coded to the wrong payee in the disbursements 
journal.  
 
Re-Issuing Intercepted Checks 
In intercepted check schemes, the employee faces detection not only through his employer’s 
normal control procedures, but also from the intended recipients of the stolen checks. When 
the real payees do not receive their checks, they are likely to complain. These complaints, in 
turn, could trigger a fraud investigation. One way for an employee to avoid this problem is 
to issue new checks to the intended payees.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An accounts payable troubleshooter was in char ge of auditing payments to all suppliers, 
reviewing supporting documents, and mailing checks. Every once in a while, she would 
purposely fail to mail a check to a vendor. The vendor, of course, would call accounts 
payable about the late payment and would be told that his invoice had been paid on a 
certain date. Since accounts payable did not have a copy of the canceled check (because the 
fraudster was still holding it), they would call the troubleshooter to research the problem. 
Unfortunately for the company, the troubleshooter was the one who had stolen the check. 
She would tell accounts payable to issue another check to the vendor while she stopped 
payment on the first check. Thus the vendor received his payment. Meanwhile, instead of 
stopping payment on the first check, the troubleshooter deposited it into her own account. 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.530                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bogus Supporting Documents 
While some perpetrators attempt to wipe out all traces of their fraudulent disbursements by 
destroying the checks, forcing the bank reconciliation and so on, others opt to justify their 
checks by manufacturing fake support for them. These persons prepare false payment 
vouchers, including false invoices, purchase orders, and/or receiving reports to create an 
appearance of authenticity. This concealment strategy is only practical when the employee 
writes checks payable to someone other than himself (such as an accomplice or a shell 
company). A check made payable to an employee may raise suspicions regardless of any 
supporting documents that he manufactures. 
 
Detection of Check Tampering Schemes 
Account Analysis Through Cut-Off Statements 
Bank cut-off statements should be requested for 10 to 15 days after the closing date of the 
balance sheet. These statements may be used to detect cash fraud during periods between 
monthly bank statements. Cut-off statements are often used by auditors to ensure that 
income and expenses are reported in the proper period. If employees know that at any time 
during the month a cut-off statement may be ordered and reviewed independently, cash 
fraud will be less likely. 
 
A cut-off statement is generally ordered from the bank, delivered unopened to the auditor 
(or outsider), and reconciled. It can be ordered at any time during the accounting cycle. If 
cut-off bank statements are not ordered or received, obtain the following period bank 
statement and perform account analysis and investigation. 
 
Bank Reconciliations 
Copies of the bank reconciliations and account analysis should be obtained along with the 
complete set of bank statements on all checking and savings accounts, as well as certificates 
of deposit and other interest bearing and non-interest bearing accounts. From the 
reconciliations, perform the following tests: 
• Confirm the mathematical accuracy of the reconciliation. 
• Examine the bank statement for possible alterations. 
• Trace the balance on the statement back to the bank cut-off and bank confirmation 
statements. 
• Foot the balance to the company’s ledger. 
                                                          
2 George Georgiades, Audit Procedures  (New York: Harcourt Brace Professional Publishing, 1995). 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.531 
• Trace the deposits in transit to the bank cut-off statement to ensure recording in  
proper period. 
• Examine canceled checks and compare to the list of outstanding checks. 
• Sample supporting documentation of checks written for a material amount. 
• Verify supporting documentation on outstanding checks written for a material amount. 
• Verify accuracy of nonoperational-cash or ca sh-equivalent accounts (CDs and other 
investment accounts). Analysis should include the verification of the institution holding 
the funds, interest rate, maturity date, beginning and ending balances, and current period 
activity. Book and bank balances should be compared and any accruals of interest 
analyzed.3 
 
Bank Confirmation  
Another method related to the cut-off statement is the bank confirmation request. Unlike 
the cut-off statement, this detection method is merely a report of the balance in the account 
as of the date requested. This balance should be requested to confirm the statement balance 
as well as any other necessary balance date. If fraud is occurring at the bank reconciliation 
stage, this independent confirmation may prove to be very helpful. 
 
Check-Tampering Red Flags 
The following irregularities may indicate fraud:  
• Voided checks may indicate employees have embezzled cash and charged the 
embezzlement to expense accounts. When the expense is paid (from accounts payable), 
fraudulent checks are marked and entered as void and removed from distribution points. 
An account-balancing journal entry is then made. The list of voided checks should be 
verified against physical copies of the checks. Bank statements should be reviewed to 
ensure that voided checks have not been processed. 
• Missing checks may indicate lax control over the physical safekeeping of checks. Stop 
payments should be issued for all missing checks. 
• Checks payable to employees, with the exception of regular payroll checks, should be 
closely scrutinized. Such an examination may indicate other schemes such as conflicts of 
interest, fictitious vendors, or duplicate expense reimbursements. 
• Altered endorsements or dual endorsements of returned checks may indicate possible 
tampering.  
  
                                                          
3 Id. 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.532                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Returned checks with obviously forged or questionable signature endorsements should 
be verified with original payee.  
• Altered payees on returned checks should be verified with intended payee. 
• Duplicate or counterfeit checks indicate fraud. These checks may be traceable to 
depositor through bank check coding.  
• Questionable deposit dates should be matched to the corresponding customer accounts. 
• An examination of all cash advances may reveal that not all advances are properly 
documented and, therefore, inappropriate payments have been made to employees. 
• Customer complaints regarding payments not being applied to their accounts should be 
investigated. 
• A questionable payee or payee address on a check should trigger review of the 
corresponding check and support documentation. 
 
Prevention of Check Tampering Schemes  
Check Disbursement Controls 
The following list of activities will help tighten controls and possibly deter employees from 
giving in to the temptation to commit check fraud. 
• Check “cutting” and preparation is not done by a signatory on the account.  
• Checks are mailed immediately after signing. 
• Theft control procedures are adhered to (see below). 
• Accounts payable records and addresses are secure from possible tampering. Changes in 
vendor information should be verified. 
• Bank statements should be reviewed diligently ensuring that amounts and signatures 
have not been altered. 
• Bank reconciliations should be completed immediately after monthly statements are 
received. The Uniform Commercial Code states that discrepancies must be presented 
within 30 days from the bank statement in order to hold the bank liable.  
• Bank reconciliations are not made by signatories on the account.  
• Bank statements should be reconciled and reviewed by more than one person.  
• Appropriate separation of duties should be documented and adhered to. 
• Detailed comparisons are routinely made between check payees and the payees listed in 
the cash disbursement journal. 
• Personnel responsible for handling and coding checks are periodically rotated, keeping 
total personnel involved to a minimum. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.533 
Bank-Assisted Controls 
Companies should work in a cooperative effort with banks to prevent check fraud. Consider 
the following control measures that may be taken in regard to a firm’s checking accounts.  
• Establish maximum dollar amounts above which the company’s bank will not accept 
checks drawn against the account. 
• Use positive pay banking controls. Positive pay allows a company and its bank to work 
together to detect fraudulent items presented for payment. The company provides the 
bank with a list of checks and amounts that are written each day. The bank verifies items 
presented for payment against the company’s lis t. The bank rejects items that are not on 
the list. Investigations are conducted as to the origin of “nonlist” items. 
 
Physical Tampering Prevention 
The following list details check-tampering prevention techniques that are being used today, 
by some institutions, to secure businesses’ check integrity. These methods can be used 
individually or in combination.  
• Signature line void safety band — The word VOID appears on the check when 
photocopied. 
• Rainbow foil bar — A horizontal colored bar placed on the check fades and is shaded 
from one bar to the next. Photocopied foil bars appear solid. 
• Holographic safety border — Holographic images are created in a way that reflect light to 
reveal a three-dimensional graphic. 
• Embossed pearlescent numbering—Checks are numbered using a technique that is 
revealed by a colored highlighter pen or by a bright light held behind the check. 
• Other chemical voids—Checks reveal an image or the word VOID when treated with an 
eradicator chemical. 
• Micro line printing — Extremely small print is too small to read with the naked eye and 
becomes distorted when photocopied. 
• High resolution microprinting—Images are produced on the check in high resolution, 
2,400 dots per inch or higher. This technique is very difficult to reproduce. 
• Security inks—Checks contain inks that react with eradication chemicals, reducing a 
forger’s ability to modify the check. 
• Chrome coloring — The use of chrome-like coloring deters photocopying even with 
color copiers. The chrome pattern or numbering develops solid black. 
• Watermark backers — Hidden images can only be  seen when the check is held at an 
angle. This image is very difficult to reproduce. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.534                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Ultraviolet ink — This ink displays an image or message when held under ultraviolet 
lighting. 
 
Check Theft Control Procedures 
It is very important to provide internal controls that will minimize the possibility of check 
tampering and theft. Below is a list of items that should be incorporated into companies’ 
policies and procedures to help deter check tampering.  
• New checks should be purchased from reputable, well-established check producers. 
• Unused checks should be stored in a secure area such as a safe, vault, or other locked 
area. Security to this area should be restricted to authorized personnel only. Routinely 
change keys and access codes to storage areas. 
• Review all hiring procedures. One of the most  important means of fighting fraud is to 
not hire people with questionable backgrounds. Develop a distinct separation of duties 
in the accounts payable department, including written policies and procedures for all 
personnel who have the opportunity to handle checks, from mailroom clerks to the 
CEO.  
• Use electronic payment services to handle large vendor and financing payments, 
eliminating the use of paper checks. 
• Report lost or stolen checks immediately. 
• Properly and securely store canceled checks. 
• Destroy unused checks for accounts that have been closed.  
• Printed and signed checks should be mailed immediately after signing. 
 
 
Billing Schemes 
The asset misappropriation schemes discussed up to this point—skimming, larceny, register 
schemes, and check tampering—all require the perpetrator of the scheme to physically take 
cash or checks from his employer. The next three sections will cover a different kind of asset 
misappropriation scheme, one which allows the perpetrator to misappropriate company 
funds without ever actually handling cash or checks while at work. These succeed by making 
a false claim for payment upon the victim organization. This group consists of billing schemes  
(which attack the purchasing function of a company), payroll schemes, and expense reimbursement 
schemes. The most common of these is the billing scheme.  
 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.535 
Billing schemes are a popular form of employee fraud mainly because they offer the 
prospect of large rewards. Since the majority of most businesses’ disbursements are made in 
the purchasing cycle, larger thefts can be hidden through false-billing schemes than through 
other kinds of fraudulent disbursements. There are three principal types of billing schemes: 
false invoicing via shell companies, false invoicing via non-accomplice vendors, and personal 
purchases made with company funds.  
 
Invoicing Via Shell Companies 
Forming a Shell Company 
Shell companies are fictitious entities created for the purpose of committing fraud. They may 
be nothing more than a fabricated name and a post office box that an employee uses to 
collect disbursements from false billings. However, since the checks received will be made 
out in the name of the shell company, the perpetrator will normally also set up a bank 
account in his new company’s name, so he can deposit and cash the fraudulent checks. (See 
“False Billings from Shell Companies” flowchart.) 
 
A person will probably have to present a bank with a certificate of incorporation or an 
assumed-name certificate in order to open a bank account for a shell company. These are 
documents that a company must obtain through a state or local government. The documents 
can be forged, but it is more likely that the perpetrator will simply file the requisite 
paperwork and obtain legitimate documents from his state or county. This can usually be 
accomplished for a small fee, the cost of which will be more than offset by a successful fraud 
scheme.  
 
If it is discovered that a vendor is falsely billing a company, investigators for the victim 
company may be able to identify the owner of the suspect company by reviewing its business 
registration filings, which are a matter of public record.  
 
To avoid being detected through a records search, some perpetrators form their shell 
companies under another name. It is common, for instance, for employees to set up shell 
companies in the name of a spouse or other close relative. Male fraudsters often establish 
shell companies under their wives’ maiden names. An employee might also form the 
company under a completely fictitious name. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.536                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.537 
EXAMPLE 
An employee used a coworker’s identification to form a shell vendor. The fraudster then 
proceeded to bill his employer  for approximately $20,000 in false services. The resulting 
checks were deposited in the account of the shell company and currency was withdrawn from 
the account through an ATM.  
 
Another issue involved in forming a shell company is the entity’s address—the place where 
fraudulent checks will be collected. Often, an employee rents a post office box and lists it as 
the mailing address of his shell company. Some employees list their home address instead. A 
comparison of employee addresses to vendor addresses might reveal shell companies in an 
accounts payable system.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A department head set up a dummy company us ing his residence as the mailing address. 
Over a two-year period, this man submitted over $250,000 worth of false invoices. 
Eventually, the scheme was detected by a newly hired clerk. The clerk was processing an 
invoice when she noticed that the address of the vendor was the same as her boss’s address. 
(By a lucky coincidence, the clerk had typed a personal letter for her boss earlier that day 
and remembered his address.) Had the department head used a P.O. box instead of his 
home address on the invoices, his scheme might have continued indefinitely. 
 
Employees often use their home addresses to collect fraudulent disbursements because 
many businesses are wary of sending checks to vendors that have a post office box for a 
mailing address. Other common collection sites for shell company schemes are the addresses 
of relatives, friends, or accomplices.  
 
Submitting False Invoices 
Once a shell company has been formed and a bank account has been opened, the corrupt 
employee begins billing his employer. Invoices can be manufactured by various means such 
as a professional printer, a personal computer, or a typewriter. False invoices do not always 
have to be of professional quality to generate fraudulent disbursements. Typewritten 
invoices are often sufficient to generate checks.  
 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.538                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Self-Approval of Fraudulent Invoices 
The difficulty in a shell company scheme is not usually in producing the invoices, but in 
getting the victim organization to pay them. Authorization for the fictitious purchase (and 
therefore payment of the bill) is the key. In a large percentage of shell company cases, the 
perpetrator is in a position to approve payment on the very invoices he is fraudulently 
submitting. It is obvious the duties of preparing and approving vouchers should be separated 
to avoid this kind of scheme. 
 
In companies where a proper separation of duties exists, the employee with approval 
authority sometimes creates fraudulent vouchers or purchase orders and forges the signature 
of the person who is in charge of preparing these documents. Then the perpetrator approves 
payment on the fraudulent vouchers he has generated. This makes it appear that two 
employees have signed off on the voucher as mandated by the victim organization’s 
controls.  
 
Not all companies require the completion of payment vouchers before they will issue checks. 
In some enterprises, checks are written based on less formal procedures, such as the 
submission of “check requests.” These requests simply list the name of the payee, the 
amount to be paid, and a brief narrative stating the reason for the check. Obviously, this is 
not a very sound procedure for preventing fraud. Dishonest employees have little trouble 
running shell company schemes in organizations that operate this way.  
 
“Rubber Stamp” Supervisors  
If an employee cannot authorize payments himself, the next best thing is if the person who 
has that authority is inattentive or overly trusting. “Rubber stamp” supervisors like this are 
destined to be targeted by unethical employees. In some cases, supervisors are attentive to 
the purchase orders they are asked to authorize, but they lack the technical knowledge to 
spot fraud as it is happening. For instance, a manager or administrator might not completely 
understand the costs associated with upgrading computer software to modernize a work 
area. This manager will have to rely on his subordinates who have the necessary technical 
expertise to determine that costs are being kept in line. The subordinates may be able to take 
advantage of this situation to cause the company to overpay for the equipment required to 
upgrade the system.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.539 
Reliance on False Documents  
When an employee does not have approval authority for purchases and does not have the 
benefit of a rubber stamp supervisor, he must run his vouchers through the normal accounts 
payable process. The success of this kind of scheme will depend on the apparent authenticity 
of the false voucher he creates. If the perpetrator can generate purchase orders and receiving 
reports that corroborate the information on the fraudulent invoice from his shell company, 
he can fool accounts payable into issuing a check. 
 
Collusion 
Collusion among several employees is sometimes used to overcome well-designed internal 
controls. For example, in a company with proper separation of duties, the functions of 
purchasing goods or services, authorizing the purchase, receiving the goods or services, and 
making the payment to the vendor should all be separated. If this process is strictly adhered 
to, it will be extremely difficult for any single employee to commit a false-billing scheme. But 
if several employees work together, they can overcome the internal controls of their 
employer.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A warehouse foreman and a parts ordering clerk conspired to purchase approximately 
$300,000 of nonexistent supplies. The parts ordering clerk would initiate the false 
transactions by obtaining approval to place orders for parts he claimed were needed. The 
orders were then sent to a vendor who, acting in conjunction with the two employee 
fraudsters, prepared false invoices, which were sent to the victim company. Meanwhile, the 
warehouse foreman verified receipt of the fi ctitious shipments of incoming supplies. The 
perpetrators were therefore able to compile complete vouchers for the fraudulent purchases 
without overstepping their normal duties.  
 
Even if all internal controls are observed, at some point a company must rely on its 
employees to be honest. One of the purposes of separating duties is to prevent any one 
person from having too much control over a particular business function. It provides a built-in 
monitoring mechanism where every person’s actions are in some way verified by another 
person. But if everyone is corrupt, even proper controls will not prevent fraud.  
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.540                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Purchases of Services Rather than Goods   
Most shell company schemes involve the purchase of services rather than goods. The 
primary reason for this is that services are not tangible. If an employee sets up a shell 
company to make fictitious sales of goods to his employer, these goods will obviously never 
arrive. By comparing its purchases to its inventory levels, the victim organization might 
detect the fraud. It is much more difficult, on the other hand, for the victim organization to 
verify that the services were never rendered. For this reason, many employees involved in 
shell company schemes bill their employers for things like “consulting services.” 
 
Pass-Through Schemes 
In most shell company schemes, victim organizations are billed for completely fictitious 
purchases of goods or services. However, there is a subcategory of shell-company schemes 
in which actual goods or services are sold to the victim company. These are known as pass-through 
schemes.  
 
Pass-through schemes are usually undertaken by employees in charge of purchasing on 
behalf of the victim company. Instead of buying merchandise directly from a vendor, the 
employee sets up a shell company and purchases the merchandise through that fictitious 
entity. He then resells the merchandise to his employer from the shell company at an  
inflated price.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A department director was put in charge of purchasing computer equipment. Because of his 
expertise on the subject and his high standing within the company, he was unsupervised in 
this task. The director set up  a shell company in another state and bought used computers 
through the shell company, then turned around and sold them to his employer at a greatly 
exaggerated price. The money from the victim company’s first installment on the computers 
was used to pay the shell company’s debts to the real vendors. Subsequent payments were 
profits for the bogus company. The scheme cost the victim company over $1 million.  
 
Invoicing Via Nonaccomplice Vendors 
Pay-and-Return Schemes 
Instead of using shell companies in their overbilling schemes, some employees generate 
fraudulent disbursements by using the invoices of legitimate third-party vendors who are not 
a part of the fraud scheme. In a pay-and-return  scheme, an employee intentionally mishandles 
payments that are owed to legitimate vendors. (See “Pay and Return Schemes” flowchart.) 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.541 
One way to do this is to purposely double-p ay an invoice. For instance, a clerk might 
intentionally pay an invoice twice, then call the vendor and request that one of the checks be 
returned. The clerk then intercepts the returned check.  
 
Another way to accomplish a pay-and-return scheme is to intentionally pay the wrong 
vendor. In this type of scheme an employee sends Vendor A’s check to  Vendor B. After the 
checks are mailed, the employee calls the vendors to explain the “mistake” and requests that 
they return the checks to his attention. When the checks arrive, the employee converts them 
and keeps the money. The employee usually runs the vouchers through the accounts payable 
system a second time so that the vendors eventually get their money.  
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.542                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
An employee might also pay the proper vendor, but intentionally overpay him. Once again, 
the employee contacts the vendor, this time to request that the excess payment be returned. 
Finally, an employee might intentionally purchase excess merchandise, return the excess, and 
pocket the refund.  
 
Overbilling with a Nonaccomplice Vendor’s Invoices 
In most instances where an employee creates fraudulent invoices to overbill his employer, he 
uses a shell company. It is not as common for an employee to submit the invoice of an 
existing vendor. Nevertheless, in some instances an employee will undertake such a scheme 
by altering an existing vendor’s invoice or by  creating a counterfeit copy of a vendor’s 
invoice form.  
 
Personal Purchases With Company Funds  
Instead of undertaking billing schemes to generate cash, many fraudsters simply purchase 
personal items with their company’s money. Company accounts are used to buy items for 
employees, their businesses, their families, and so on.  
 
Personal Purchases Through False Invoicing 
Employees who undertake purchases schemes may do so by running unsanctioned invoices 
through the accounts payable system. The perpetrator in this type of scheme buys an item 
and submits the bill to his employer as if it represented a legitimate company expense. The 
victim company ends up unknowingly buying goods or services for a dishonest employee. 
(See “Invoice Purchasing Schemes” flowchart.) 
 
THE FRAUDSTER AS AUTHORIZER OF INVOICES 
The person who engages in a purchases scheme is often the very person in the company 
whose duties include authorizing  purchases. Obviously, proper controls should preclude 
anyone from approving his own purchases. Such poorly separated functions leave little other 
than his conscience to dissuade an employee from fraud. Fraud arises in part because of a 
perceived opportunity. An employee who sees that no one is reviewing his actions is more 
likely to turn to fraud than one who knows his company works diligently to detect employee 
theft.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.543 
EXAMPLE 
A manager of a remote location of a large, publicly traded company was authorized to 
order supplies and approve vend or invoices for payment. For over a year, the manager 
routinely added personal items and supplies for his own business to orders made on behalf 
of his employer. The orders often included a strange mix of items. For instance, technical 
supplies and home furnishings might be purchased in the same order. Because the manager 
was in a position to approve his own purcha ses, he could get away with such blatantly 
obvious frauds. In addition to ordering personal items, the perpetrator changed the delivery 
address for certain supplies so that they would be delivered directly to his home or side 
business. This scheme cost the victim comp any approximately $300,000 in unnecessary 
purchases.  
 
In some situations, the perpetrator is authorized to approve purchases, but controls prevent 
him from also initiating purchase requests. This procedure is supposed to prevent an 
employee from purchasing personal items with company funds. Unfortunately, those with 
authority to approve purchases often have a good deal of control over their subordinates. 
These persons can use their influence to force subordinates to assist in purchases schemes. 
In other cases, the manager might simply initiate the purchase order himself by forging the 
subordinate’s signature.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Purchases for under $1,000 at a certain utility company could be made with limited value 
purchase orders (LPOs), which required the signatures of two people: the originator of a 
purchase request and the approver of the request. An LPO attached to an invoice for less 
than $1,000 would be paid by the accounts payable department. In this case, a manager 
bought goods and services on company accounts, and prepared LPOs for the purchases. (In 
some cases, the LPO would falsely describe the item to conceal the natu re of the purchase.) 
Once the LPO was prepared, the manager forced a clerk in his department to sign the 
document as the originator of  the transaction. The clerk, in timidated by her boss, did not 
question the authenticity of the LPOs. With two signatures affixed, the LPO appeared to 
be legitimate and the bills were paid. The sche me cost the victim company at least $25,000. 
 
FALSE PURCHASE REQUISITIONS 
If an employee does not have purchasing authority, he may get approval for a fraudulent 
purchase by misrepresenting the nature of the acquisition. In many companies, those with 
the power to authorize purchases are not always attentive to their duties. If a trusted 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.544                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subordinate says that the company needs to buy a certain item or items, busy supervisors 
often give rubber stamp approval to the purchase requisition. Additionally, employees 
sometimes misrepresent the nature of the items they are purchasing in order to pass a 
cursory review by their superiors.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An engineer bought over $30,000 worth of personal items. The engineer dealt directly with 
vendors and was also in charge of overseeing the receipt of the materials he purchased. He 
was therefore able to misrepresent the nature of the merchandise he bought, listing it as 
“maintenance items.” Vendor invoices were altered to agree to this description.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.545 
 
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.546                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If the perpetrator falsifies his purchase requisition in this manner, the fraud should be 
detected when delivery occurs. For example, if the purchase requisition says “maintenance 
items” but the vendor delivers home furnishings, it will be obvious that the perpetrator has 
committed fraud. The problem of delivery can be avoided if the perpetrator is in charge of 
receiving incoming shipments. He can verify that delivery of “maintenance items” was 
received. This is a breach of separation of duties, but unfortunately, it is fairly common for 
purchasing agents to verify delivery of their own orders. Even if the victim organization 
enforces a centralized delivery point, the perpetrator might enlist the aid of an accomplice in 
the receiving department to falsify the organization’s receiving reports.  
 
Another way to avoid detection at the delivery stage is to change the delivery address for 
purchases. Instead of being shipped to the victim organization, the items that the employee 
buys are sent directly to his home or business. The perpetrator might also order the goods 
drop shipped to a remote location.  
 
Personal Purchases on Credit Cards or Other Company Accounts  
Instead of running false invoices through accounts payable, some employees make personal 
purchases on company credit cards or on running accounts with vendors. (See “Purchases 
on Credit Card or Company Account” flowchar t.) Unlike invoicing schemes, prior approval 
for these purchases is not required. An employee with a company credit card can buy an 
item merely by signing his name (or forging someone else’s) at the time of purchase. Later 
review of the credit card statement, however, may detect the fraudulent purchase. 
Unfortunately, many high-level employees approve their own credit card expenses, making it 
very easy to carry out a purchasing scheme. 
 
Of course, only certain employees are authorized to use company credit cards. Employees 
without this privilege can only make fraudulent purchases with a company card if they first 
manage to get hold of one. To this end, company cards are sometimes stolen or “borrowed” 
from authorized users.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.547 
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.548                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An accountant falsely added her name to a list of employees to whom cards were to be 
issued. She used her card to make fraudulent purchases, but forged the signatures of 
authorized cardholders to cover her tracks. Since no one knew she even had a company 
card, she would not be a prime suspect in the fraud even if someone questioned the 
purchases. For over five years this employee continued her scheme, racking up a six figure 
bill on her employer’s account. In addition, she had control of the credit card statement and 
was able to code her purchases to various expense accounts, thereby further delaying 
detection of her crime. 
 
Another way to conceal a credit card purchasing scheme is to doctor the credit card 
statement so that fraudulent purchases do not show up. Some employees go so far as to 
destroy the real credit card statement and produce counterfeit copies on which their 
fraudulent purchases are omitted.  
 
Returning Merchandise for Cash 
The fraudulent purchases schemes discussed to this point have all involved false purchases 
of merchandise for the sake of obtaining the merchandise. In some cases, however, an 
employee buys items and then returns them for cash.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee made fraudulent gains from a business travel account. The employee’s scheme 
began by purchasing tickets for herself and her family through her company’s travel budget. 
Poor separation of duties allowed the fraudster to order the tickets, receive them, prepare 
claims for payments, and distribute checks. The only review of her activities was made by a 
busy and rather uninterested supervisor who approved the employee’s claims without 
requiring support documentation. Eventually, the employee’s scheme evolved. She began to 
purchase airline tickets and return them for their cash value. An employee of the travel 
agency assisted in the scheme by encoding the tickets as though the fraudster had paid for 
them herself. That caused the airlines to pay refunds directly to the fraudster rather than to 
her employer. In the course of two years, this employee embezzled over $100,000 through 
her purchases scheme.  
 
Detection of Billing Schemes 
Because there are many variations of purchasing fraud schemes, there are also several 
detection methods. Detection methods are most effective when used in combinations. Each 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.549 
detection method is likely to point out anomalies that can then be investigated further to 
determine if a fraud scheme has occurred or is currently underway. Additionally, the 
detection methods will point out the weaknesses in internal controls and alert the auditor to 
potential opportunities for future fraud schemes. 
 
Analytical Review 
A review of the various general ledger accounts might reveal unusual or unexpected events. 
These events could be undetected purchasing fraud. For example, a comparison of inventory 
purchases in relationship to net sales might indicate that purchases are too high or too low 
for that level of sales. This might be a “red flag,” indicating excess purchasing schemes or 
fictitious sales schemes, respectively. 
 
Another analytical method uses a comparison of the inventory purchases of prior years with 
those of the current year. This comparison might indicate that an overbilling scheme or a 
duplicate-payment scheme is in progress. 
 
Analyses such as those described above can be performed for any acquisition of goods or 
services of a company. Analytical reviews are most effective in detecting fraud schemes that 
are large, such that the anomalies will be apparent. Other detection methods are more 
effective for fraud schemes that are smaller in relationship to the financial statements taken 
as a whole. Regardless of fraud size, examination of source documentation will be necessary. 
When an anomaly is detected, further investigation is required, which will demand an 
examination of source documentation. 
 
Computer-Assisted Analytical Review 
The computer can assist the auditor in determining the presence of unusual patterns in the 
acquisition or purchasing function. The computer can provide the auditor with a matrix of 
the purchasing activity to determine the presence of unusual patterns. An analysis of the 
following data might uncover purchasing schemes, such as: 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.550                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FRAUD SCHEME DETECTION METHOD 
Fictitious vendors Vendors and employees with matching addresses  
More than one vendor with the same address  
Vendors with only post office box addresses 
Overbilling 
 
Unusual, or “one-time,” extra charges  
Conflict of interest Vendors with employees who are employee family members 
An unusually high occurrence of complaints  
Complaints about specific vendors 
Higher prices and/or substandard quality 
 
Statistical Sampling 
As with inventory, the source documentation for purchases can be statistically sampled and 
examined for irregularities. Statistical samples can be drawn to test specific attributes. This 
detection method is particularly effective if a single attribute is suspected, such as fictitious 
vendors. A listing of all post office box addresses might reveal fictitious vendors. 
 
Vendor or Outsider Complaints 
Fraudulent schemes will often unravel because a vendor or other outsider complains to the 
employer or company. Complaints from customers, vendors, and others are good detection 
tools that can lead the fraud examiner to further inquiry. 
 
Site Visits — Observation 
A site visit will often reveal much about the internal control, or lack thereof, for any 
location. The observation of how the accounting transactions are actually transcribed will 
sometimes alert the fraud examiner to potential problem areas. 
 
Sample Audit Program 
The following audit program may be beneficial in detecting red flags to billing schemes: 
• Does the company have a purchasing department? If yes, is it independent of (1) the 
accounting department, (2) the receiving department, or (3) the shipping department? 
• Are purchases made only after the respective department heads sign purchase 
requisitions? 
• Are purchases made by means of purchase orders sent to vendors for all purchases or 
only for purchases over a predetermined dollar limit? 
• Do purchase orders specify a description of items, quantity, price, terms, delivery 
requirements, and dates? 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.551 
• Is a list of unfilled purchase orders maintained and reviewed periodically? 
• Are purchase order forms prenumbered and is the sequence accounted for periodically? 
• Does the client maintain an approved vendors list? 
• Are items purchased only after competitive bids are obtained? If so, are competitive bids 
obtained for all purchases or only for purchases over a predetermined dollar limit? 
• Is a log maintained of all receipts? 
• Does the receiving department prepare receiving reports for all items received? If yes, 
are receiving reports (1) prepared for all items, (2) prepared only for items that have 
purchase orders, or (3) renumbered? 
• At the time the items are received, does someone independent of the purchasing 
department check the merchandise before acceptance as to description, quantity,  
and condition? 
• Are copies of receiving reports (1) furnished to the accounting department, (2) furnished 
to the purchasing department, or (3) filed in the receiving department? 
• Are receipts under blanket purchase orders monitored, and are quantities exceeding 
authorized total returned to the vendor? 
• Are procedures adequate for the proper accounting for partial deliveries of  
purchase orders? 
• Are purchasing and receiving functions separate from invoice processing, accounts 
payable, and general ledger functions? 
• Are vendors’ invoices, receiving reports, and purchase orders matched before the related 
liability is recorded? 
• Are invoices checked as to prices, extensions, footings, freight charges, allowances, and 
credit terms? 
• Are controls adequate to ensure that all available discounts are taken? 
• Are purchases recorded in a purchase register or voucher register before being processed 
through cash disbursements? 
• Does a responsible employee assign the appropriate general ledger account distribution 
to which the invoices are to be posted? 
• Are procedures adequate to ensure that invoices have been processed before payment 
and to prevent duplicate payment (e.g., a block stamp)? 
• Does a responsible official approve invoices for payment? 
• Are procedures adequate to ensure that merchandise purchased for direct delivery to 
customers is promptly billed to the customers and recorded as both a receivable and  
a payable? 
• Are records of goods returned to vendors matched to vendor credit memos? 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.552                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Are unmatched receiving reports, purchase orders, and vendors’ invoices periodically 
reviewed and investigated for proper recording? 
• Is the accounts payable ledger or voucher register reconciled monthly to the general 
ledger control accounts? 
• Are statements from vendors regularly reviewed and reconciled against recorded 
liabilities? 
• Do adjustments to accounts payable (e.g., writing off of debit balances) require the 
approval of a designated official? 
• Are budgets used? If yes, are bu dgets approved by responsible officials, and are actual 
expenditures compared with budgeted amounts and variances analyzed and explained? 
• If excess inventory purchasing is suspected, verify that all inventory purchased was 
received (receiving report) at the proper location. An examination of receiving reports or 
invoices might reveal alternate shipping sites. 
 
Prevention of Billing Schemes 
The preventing of purchasing fraud can be especially difficult. Purchasing personnel are 
often held to a different standard than other employees of a company. For example, sales 
people often are given inducements or perquisites in order to persuade potential customers. 
These same inducements are offered to the purchasing personnel of the company from the 
company’s vendors. And yet, the company ex pects the purchasing personnel to perform 
their function without bias and to make decisions that are in the best interest of the 
company, without regard to the inducements offered by suppliers. Additionally, the 
personnel involved in the purchasing and payment functions are generally not compensated 
on a basis commensurate with their performance, as are salespeople. Therefore, there is a 
reverse incentive to perform in the best interest of the company. 
 
Probably the most effective purchasing fraud prevention measure is education (training) of 
the purchasing and payable personnel. The second most effective purchasing fraud 
prevention measure is an objective compensation arrangement with people responsible for 
purchasing decisions. 
 
Education (Training) 
Purchasing personnel should be trained thoroughly in ethical situations. The National 
Association of Purchasing Management has a code of ethics for its Certified Purchasing 
Managers. As a deterrent to fraud, companies might consider enrollment and certification. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.553 
Compensation 
People responsible for the purchasing decisions (buyers) should be paid well enough to 
reduce the motive and rationalization for fraud. Auditors can examine the compensation of 
purchasers and determine if any buyers were recently passed over for raises. This might be 
an indication of discontent that could lead to the formation of a fraudulent scheme against 
the employer. 
 
Proper Documentation 
Proper documentation for purchasing should include prenumbered and controlled purchase 
requisitions, purchase orders, receiving reports, and checks. 
 
Proper Approvals 
Before adding a vendor to the list, there should be an investigation of the “proposed” 
vendor, performed by someone other than the personnel in purchasing and accounts 
payable. If a vendor number is required before payment is made and the personnel 
responsible for the investigation assigns the vendor that identification number, then the 
buyer cannot place fictitious vendors on the list. Large or unusual purchases should be 
approved by someone independent of the purchasing department. 
 
Segregation of Duties 
For the best results and accountability, each company sufficient in size should have a 
separate purchasing department. Regardless of the company size, the purchasing function 
should be separate from the payment function. 
 
Hotlines 
Companies should study the feasibility of installing hotlines to provide a forum for 
complaints by employees and outsiders. 
 
Competitive Bidding 
Ensure that bid policies and procedures are thoroughly reviewed. Whenever possible, 
enforce competitive bidding. After the bidding process has been completed, a questionnaire 
can be sent to successful and unsuccessful bidders. This questionnaire can reveal areas to not 
only make the bidding process more effective but it also can provide a forum for bidders to 
express concerns over questionable or fraudulent activities. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.554                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Prevention Checklist 
The following is a list of billing scheme prevention methods that may be helpful in the 
deterrence of billing fraud: 
• Authorization procedures of purchase orders, invoicing, and payments should be 
documented and adhered to. 
• The accounts payable list of vendors should be periodically reviewed for strange vendors 
and addresses. 
• Payment codings should be reviewed for abnormal descriptions. 
• Vendor purchases should be analyzed for abnormal levels on both a monthly and yearly 
basis. 
• Purchases and inventory levels should be compared and analyzed. (See Inventory and 
Other Assets). 
• Control methods to check for duplicate invoices and purchase order numbers should be 
in place. 
• A separation of duties between authorization, purchasing, receiving, shipping, and 
accounting should be in place. 
• Payment of vouchers should be periodically reviewed to ensure integrity of proper 
documentation. 
• Receiving and shipping reports should be reviewed for completeness and accuracy. 
• Asset information should include purchasing trails and other information. 
• Journal entries to inventory accounts should be strictly scrutinized. 
• Appropriate bank reconciliation and review procedures should be performed 
periodically, checking for out-of-place vendors and endorsements. 
• Credit card statements should be reviewed often for irregularities. 
• The validity of invoices with a post office box address should be verified. 
• Proper controls for the receipt and handling of “return to sender” checks should be 
installed. 
 
 
Payroll Fraud 
Payroll schemes are similar to billing schemes. The perpetrators of these frauds produce 
false documents, which cause the victim company to unknowingly make a fraudulent 
disbursement. In billing schemes, the false document is usually an invoice (coupled, perhaps, 
with false receiving reports, purchase orders, and purchase authorizations). In payroll 
schemes, the perpetrator typically falsifies a timecard or alters information in the payroll 
records. The major difference between payroll schemes and billing schemes is that payroll 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.555 
frauds involve disbursements to employees rather than to external parties. The most 
common payroll frauds are ghost employee schemes, falsified hours and salary schemes, and 
commission schemes.  
 
Ghost Employees 
The term ghost employee  refers to someone on the payroll who does not actually work for the 
victim company. Through the falsification of personnel or payroll records a fraudster causes 
paychecks to be generated to a ghost. The fraudster or an accomplice then converts these 
paychecks. (See “Ghost Employees” flowchart.) The ghost employee may be a fictitious 
person or a real individual who simply does not work for the victim employer. When the 
ghost is a real person, it is often a friend or relative of the perpetrator.  
 
In order for a ghost employee scheme to work, four things must happen: (1) the ghost must 
be added to the payroll, (2) timekeeping and wage rate information must be collected, (3) a 
paycheck must be issued to the ghost, and (4) the check must be delivered to the perpetrator 
or an accomplice.  
 
Adding the Ghost to the Payroll  
The first step in a ghost employee scheme is entering the ghost on the payroll. In some 
businesses, all hiring is done through a centralized personnel department, while in others the 
personnel function is spread over the managerial responsibilities of various departments. 
Regardless of how hiring of new employees is handled within a business, it is the person or 
persons with authority to add new employees and remove terminated employees that are in 
the best position to put ghosts on the payroll.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager who was responsible for hiring and scheduling janitorial work added over 80 
ghost employees to his payroll. The ghosts in this case were actual people who worked at 
other jobs for different companies. The manager filled out time sheets for the fictitious 
employees and authorized them, then took the resulting paychecks to the ghost employees, 
who cashed them and split the proceeds with the manager. It was this manager’s authority 
in the hiring and supervision of employees that enabled him to perpetrate this fraud.  
 
Employees in payroll accounting also sometimes create ghost employees. In a perfect world, 
every name listed on the payroll would be verified against personnel records to make sure 
that those persons receiving paychecks actually work for the company, but in practice this 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.556                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
does not always happen. Thus, persons in payroll accounting may be able to create fictitious 
employees by simply adding a new name to the payroll records. Access to these records is 
usually restricted, with only high-level employees having the ability to make changes to the 
payroll. These persons would therefore be among the most likely suspects in a ghost 
employee scheme. On the other hand, lower level employees sometimes gain access to 
restricted payroll information and should not be disregarded as possible suspects. 
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee in the payroll department was gi ven the authority to enter new employees into 
the payroll system, make corrections to payroll information, and distribute paychecks. This 
employee’s manager gave rubber-stamp approval to the employee’s actions because of a 
trusting relationship between the two. The lack of separation of duties and the absence of 
review made it simple for the culprit to add a fictitious employee into the payroll system.  
 
One way perpetrators try to conceal the presence of a ghost on the payroll is to create a 
ghost with a name very similar to that of a real employee. The name on the fraudulent 
paycheck, then, will appear to be legitimate to anyone who glances at it. For instance, if a 
victim organization has an employee named John Doe, the ghost may be named “John 
Doer.”   
 
Instead of adding new names to the payroll, some employees undertake ghost employee 
schemes when they fail to remove the names of terminated employees. Paychecks to the 
terminated employee continue to be generated even though the employee no longer works 
for the victim organization. The perpetrator intercepts these fraudulent paychecks and 
converts them to his own use.  
 
Collecting Timekeeping Information 
The second thing that must occur in order for a paycheck to be issued to a ghost employee, 
at least in the case of hourly employees, is the collection and computation of timekeeping 
information. The perpetrator must provide payroll accounting with a timecard or other 
instrument showing how many hours the fictitious employee worked over the most recent 
pay period. This information, along with the wage rate information contained in personnel 
or payroll files, will be used to compute the amount of the fraudulent paycheck.  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.557 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.558                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Timekeeping records can be maintained in a variety of ways. Employees might manually 
record their hours on timecards or punch time clocks that record the time at which a person 
starts and finishes his work. In more sophisticated environments, computer systems can 
track an employee’s hours.  
 
When a ghost employee scheme is in place, someone must create documentation for the 
ghost’s hours. This essentially amounts to preparing a fake timecard showing when the ghost 
was allegedly present at work. Depending upon the normal procedure for recording hours, a 
fraudster might write up a fake timecard and sign it in the ghost’s name, punch the time 
clock for the ghost, and so on. The preparing of the timecard is not a great obstacle to the 
perpetrator. The real key is obtaining approval of the timecard.  
 
A supervisor should approve the timecards of hourly employees before paychecks are issued. 
This verifies to the payroll department that the employee actually worked the hours that are 
claimed on the card. A ghost employee, by definition, does not work for the victim 
organization, so approval will have to be fraudulently obtained. Often, the supervisor 
himself is the one who creates the ghost. When this is the case, the supervisor fills out a 
timecard in the name of the ghost, then affixes his own approval. The timecard is thereby 
authenticated and a paycheck will be issued. When a nonsupervisor is committing a ghost 
employee scheme, he will typically forge the necessary approval, then forward the bogus 
timecard directly to payroll accounting, bypassing his supervisor.  
 
In computerized systems, a supervisor’s signature might not be required. In lieu of this, the 
supervisor inputs data into the payroll system and the use of his password serves to 
authorize the entry. If an employee has access to the supervisor’s password, he can input 
data for the ghost, which will appear in the payroll system with a seal of approval.  
If the perpetrator creates ghosts who are salaried rather than hourly employees, it is not 
necessary to collect timekeeping information. Salaried employees are paid a certain amount 
each pay period regardless of how many hours they work. Because the timekeeping function 
can be avoided, it may be easier for a perpetrator to create a ghost employee who works on 
salary. However, most businesses have fewer salaried employees and they are more likely to 
be members of management. The salaried ghost may therefore be more difficult to conceal. 
 
Issuing the Ghost’s Paycheck 
Once a ghost is entered on the payroll and his timecard has been approved, the third step in 
the scheme is the actual issuance of the paycheck. The heart of a ghost employee scheme is 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.559 
in the falsification of payroll records and timekeeping information. Once this falsification 
has occurred, the perpetrator does not generally take an active role in the issuance of the 
check. The payroll department prints the check—based on the bogus information provided 
by the perpetrator—as it would any other paycheck.  
 
Delivery of the Paycheck  
The final step in a ghost employee scheme is the distribution of the checks to the 
perpetrator. Paychecks might be hand delivered to employees while at work, mailed to 
employees at their home addresses, or — most commonly now — directly deposited into the 
employees’ bank accounts. If employees are paid in currency rather than by check, the 
distribution is almost always conducted in-person and on-site. 
 
Ideally, those in charge of payroll distribution should not have a hand in any of the other 
functions of the payroll cycle. For instance, the person who enters new employees in the 
payroll system should not be allowed to distribute paychecks because this person can include 
a ghost on the payroll, then simply pocket the fraudulent check when paychecks are being 
disbursed. Obviously, when the perpetrator of a ghost employee scheme is allowed to mail 
checks to employees or pass them out at work, he is in a perfect position to ensure that the 
ghost’s check is delivered to himself.  
 
In most instances the perpetrator does not have the authority to distribute paychecks, and so 
must make sure that the victim organization sends the checks to a place where he can 
recover them. When checks are not distributed in the workplace, they are usually mailed to 
employees or deposited directly into those employees’ accounts.  
 
If the fictitious employee was added into the payroll or personnel records by the perpetrator, 
the problem of distribution is usually minor. When the ghost’s employment information is 
entered, the perpetrator simply lists an address or bank account to which the payments can 
be sent. In the case of purely fictitious ghost employees, the address is often the 
perpetrator’s own (the same goes for bank accounts). The fact that two employees (the 
perpetrator and the ghost) are receiving payments at the same destination may indicate 
payroll fraud. Some fraudsters avoid this duplication by having payments sent to a post 
office box or a separate bank account.  
 
Remember that a ghost employee is not always a fictitious person. It may, instead, be a real 
person who is conspiring with the perpetrator to defraud the company. For example, some 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.560                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employees place their relatives or spouses on the company payroll. When real persons are 
falsely included on the payroll, the checks are sent to the homes or accounts of these 
persons.  
 
Distribution is a more difficult problem when the ghost is a former employee who was 
simply not removed from the payroll. If paychecks are distributed through the mail or by 
direct deposit, the perpetrator will have to enter the terminated employee’s records and 
change their delivery information. In companies where paychecks are distributed by hand or 
are held at a central location for employees to collect, the perpetrator can ignore the payroll 
records and simply pick up the fraudulent paychecks.  
 
Falsified Hours and Salary   
The most common method of misappropriating funds from the payroll is the overpayment 
of wages. For hourly employees, the size of a paycheck is based on two factors: the number 
of hours worked and the rate of pay. It is therefore obvious that for an hourly employee to 
fraudulently increase the size of his paycheck, he must either falsify the number of hours he 
has worked or change his wage rate. (See “Falsified Hours and Salary” flowchart.) Since 
salaried employees do not receive compensation based on their time at work, in most cases 
these employees generate fraudulent wages by increasing their rates of pay. 
 
When discussing payroll frauds that involve overstated hours, one must first understand how 
an employee’s time at work is recorded. Time is generally kept by one of three methods. 
Time clocks may be used to mark the time when an employee begins and finishes work. The 
employee inserts a card into the clock at the beginning and end of work, and the time is 
imprinted on that card. In more sophisticated systems, computers may track the time 
employees spend on the job based on log-in codes or a similar indicator. Finally, timecards 
showing the number of hours an employee worked on a particular day are often prepared 
manually by the employee and approved by his manager.  
 
Manually Prepared Timecards 
When hours are recorded manually, an employee typically fills out his timecard to reflect the 
number of hours he has worked, then presents it to his supervisor for approval. The 
supervisor verifies the accuracy of the timecard, signs the card to indicate his approval, then 
forwards it to the payroll department so that a paycheck can be issued.  
If an employee fills out his own timecard, it is easy to falsify the number of hours worked. 
He simply writes down false information, showing that he arrived at work earlier or left later 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.561 
than he actually did. The difficulty is not in falsifying the timecard, but in getting the 
fraudulent card approved by the employee’s supervisor. There are basically three ways for 
the employee to obtain the authorization he needs. 
 
FORGING A SUPERVISOR’S SIGNATURE  
When using this method, an employee typically withholds his timecard from those being sent 
to the supervisor for approval, forges the supervisor’s signature or initials, then adds the 
timecard to the stack of authorized cards, which are sent to the payroll department. The 
fraudulent timecard arrives at the payroll department with what appears to be a supervisor’s 
approval and a paycheck is subsequently issued.  
 
COLLUSION WITH A SUPERVISOR 
The second way to obtain approval of a fraudulent timecard is to collude with a supervisor 
who authorizes timekeeping information. In these schemes, a supervisor knowingly signs 
false timecards and the employee kicks back a portion of the overpaid wages to the 
supervisor. In some cases, the supervisor may take the entire amount of the overpayment. It 
may be particularly difficult to detect payroll fraud when a supervisor colludes with an 
employee, because managers are often relied upon as a control to ensure proper 
timekeeping.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A supervisor assigned employees to better work  areas or better jobs, but in return she 
demanded payment. The payment was arranged by the falsification of the employees’ 
timecards, which the supervisor  authorized. The employees we re compensated for fictitious 
overtime, which was kicked back to the supervisor.  
 
“RUBBER STAMP” SUPERVISORS 
The third way to obtain approval of fraudulent timecards is to rely on a supervisor to 
approve them without reviewing their accuracy. The “lazy manager” method seems risky and 
one would think that it would be uncommon, but the truth is that it occurs quite frequently. 
A recurring theme in occupational fraud schemes is the reliance of perpetrators on the 
inattentiveness of others. When an employee sees an opportunity to make a little extra 
money without getting caught, that employee is more likely to be emboldened to attempt a 
fraud scheme. The fact that a supervisor is known to “rubber stamp” timecards or even 
ignore them can be a factor in an employee’s decision to begin stealing from his company.  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.562                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.563 
EXAMPLE 
A temporary employee noticed that his manager did not reconcile the expense journal 
monthly. Thus, the manager did not know ho w much was being paid  to the temporary 
agency. The fraudster completed fictitious time reports, which were sent to the temporary 
agency and which caused the victim company to pay over $30,000 in fraudulent wages. 
Since the fraudster controlled the mail and the manager did not review the expense journal, 
this extremely simple scheme went undetected for some time.  
 
POOR CUSTODY PROCEDURES 
One form of control breakdown that often occurs is the failure to maintain proper control 
over timecards. In a properly run system, timecards that have been authorized by 
management should be sent directly to payroll. Those who prepare the timecards should not 
have access to them after they have been approved. If this separation of duties is not 
observed, the person who prepared a timecard can alter it after his supervisor has approved 
the timecard but before it is delivered to payroll. For instance, the employee might fill out his 
timecard in erasable ink, obtain his supervisor’s signature on the timecard, and then change 
the hours reflected on the timecard so that he will be overcompensated.  
 
Another way hours are falsified is in the misreporting of leave time. This is not as common 
as timecard falsification, but it does occur with some frequency. Incidentally, this is the one 
instance in which salaried employees commit payroll fraud by falsifying their hours. A leave 
time scheme is very simple. An employee takes a certain amount of time off of work as paid 
leave or vacation, but does not report this leave time. Employees typically receive a certain 
amount of paid leave per year. If a person takes a leave of absence but does not report it, 
those days are not deducted from his allotted days off. In other words, he gets more leave 
time than he is entitled to. The result is that the employee shows up for work less, yet still 
receives the same pay.  
 
Time Clocks and Other Automated Timekeeping Systems 
In companies that use time clocks to collect timekeeping information, payroll fraud is usually 
uncomplicated. In the typical scenario, the time clock is located in an unrestricted area, and a 
timecard for each employee is kept nearby. The employees insert their timecards into the 
time clock at the beginning and end of their shifts and the clock imprints the time. The 
length of time an employee spends at work is thus recorded. Supervisors should be present 
at the beginning and end of shifts to ensure that employees do not punch the timecards of 
absent coworkers, but this simple control is often overlooked. Without proper supervision, 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.564                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employees can punch the timecards of absent coworkers so that it appears the absent 
employee was at work that day. The absent employee is therefore overcompensated on his 
next paycheck. 
 
Rates of Pay 
It should be remembered that an employee can also receive a larger paycheck by changing 
his pay rate. An employee’s personnel or payr oll records reflect his rate of pay. If an 
employee can gain access to these records, or has an accomplice with access to them, he can 
adjust them so that he receives a larger paycheck.  
 
Commission Schemes 
Commission is a form of compensation calculated as a percentage of the amount of 
transactions a salesperson or other employee generates. It is a unique form of compensation 
that is not based on hours worked or a set yearly salary, but rather on an employee’s revenue 
output. A commissioned employee’s wages are based on two factors, the amount of sales he 
generates and the percentage of those sales he is paid. In other words, there are two ways an 
employee on commission can fraudulently increase his pay: (1) falsify the amount of sales 
made, or (2) increase his rate of commission. (See “Commission Schemes” flowchart.) 
 
Fictitious Sales 
Establishing unobtainable sales quotas that employees think are arbitrary will increase the 
pressure to establish fictitious performance levels. If the pressure becomes significant, the 
employee might resort to adding fictitious sales and accounts receivable to meet the sales 
quotas. 
 
An employee can falsify the amount of sales he has made in one of two ways, the first being 
the creation of fictitious sales. The manner in which fictitious sales are created depends on 
the industry in which the perpetrator operates. Fictitious sales might be constructed by the 
creation of fraudulent sales orders, purchase orders, credit authorizations, packing slips, 
invoices, and so on. On the other hand, a culprit might simply ring up a false sale on a cash 
register. The key is that a fictitious sale is created, that it appears to be legitimate, and that 
the victim organization reacts by issuing a commission check to the perpetrator.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.565 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.566                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE  
An unscrupulous insurance agent took advant age of his company’s incentive commissions, 
which paid $1.25 for every $1.00 of premiums generated in the first year of a policy. The 
agent wrote policies to fictitious customers, paid the premiums, and received his 
commissions, which created an illicit profit on the transaction. For instance, if the fraudster 
paid $100,000 in premiums, he would receive $125,000 in commissions, a $25,000 
profit. No payments were made on the fr audulent policies after the first year.  
 
If a salesperson’s primary compensation is based on sales, without regard to collection, then 
there is an incentive to produce quantity rather than quality sales. It is natural for companies 
to push for higher sales levels to sustain growth. If the salespersons’ compensation is based 
solely on quantity and not on a combination of quantity and  quality, however, then the 
compensation incentive is misplaced. This might create an atmosphere which, if coupled 
with opportunity, will produce inflated or fictitious sales. 
 
Altered Sales  
The second way for a fraudster to overstate the amount of sales he has made is to alter the 
prices listed on sales documents. In other words, the perpetrator charges one price to a 
customer, but records a higher price in the company books. This causes the victim company 
to pay a larger commission than the perpetrator deserves. To make these schemes work, the 
employee might have to intercept and alter the invoices that are sent to the customer. (The 
invoices the company sends out will reflect a higher purchase price than the customer agreed 
to, so if the customer receives these invoices he is likely to complain about the discrepancy.) 
The employee may also overstate the revenue received from his customers.  
 
Altering Commission Rates 
As mentioned above, the other way to manipulate the commission process is to change the 
employee’s rate of commission. This would likely necessitate the alteration of payroll or 
personnel records, which should be off-limits to the sales staff.  
 
Detection of Payroll Schemes 
Independent Payroll Distribution 
Ghost employee schemes can be uncovered by having personnel (other than the payroll 
department) distribute the payroll checks or paystubs, and by requiring positive identification 
of the payee. However, as more and more companies are moving to a direct-deposit payroll 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.567 
with pay stubs available for viewing online, hand-delivering paychecks or paystubs is 
becoming an obsolete method of detecting ghost employees.  
 
Analysis of Payee Address or Accounts 
If payroll checks are either mailed or deposited automatically, then a list of duplicate 
addresses or deposit accounts may reveal ghost employees or duplicate payments. 
 
Duplicate Identification Numbers 
Because each employee is required to have a government-issued identification number (such 
as a Social Security or Social Insurance number), a listing of duplicate numbers may reveal 
ghost employees. 
 
Overtime Authorization 
Requiring employees to have overtime authorized by a supervisor, having the supervisor be 
responsible for the timecards, and having the supervisor refer the timecards directly to 
payroll will aid in reducing overtime abuses. In addition, the payroll department should scan 
the time reports and question obvious abuses such as only one employee working overtime 
in a department or excessive overtime on a timecard. By examining the source 
documentation, one may detect unauthorized overtime and falsified hours abuses. 
 
Commissions 
Commission schemes can often be detected with the following techniques: 
• Compare commission expenses to sales figures to verify linear correlation. 
• Prepare a comparative analysis of commission earned by salesperson, verifying rates and 
calculation accuracy. Inordinately high earnings by an individual could signal fraud. 
• Analyze sales by salesperson for uncollected sales amounts. 
• Determine proper segregation of duties in calculation of commission amounts. 
Commissions should be independently provided by personnel outside the sales 
department. 
• Contact a random sample of customers to confirm sales.  
 
TREND ANALYSIS ON WRITTEN-OFF ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE 
Stratify the written-off accounts receivable data and examine it for possible trends and 
patterns. For example, do any of the following trends appear? 
• Same salesperson 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.568                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Same accounting period (unless only an annual review of accounts receivable is 
performed) 
• Same collector 
• Collection rates by agency or collector 
 
Any of these trends might indicate fictitious accounts receivable, or that only new or good 
accounts are being assigned to collectors or collection agencies. 
 
Analysis of Deductions from Payroll Checks 
An analysis of the payroll withholdings may reveal either ghost employees or trust account 
abuses. Ghost employees will often have no withholding taxes, insurance, or other normal 
deductions. Therefore, a listing of any employee without these items may reveal a ghost 
employee. 
 
An analysis of withholding-tax deposits may reveal that trust account taxes have been 
“borrowed,” even for a short period, before the taxes are deposited. Comparing the 
disbursement date with the deposit date should reveal if the trust account taxes have been 
borrowed. Additionally, any delinquent payroll tax notices from the taxing authorities should 
serve as a red flag to potential trust account tax “borrowings.” 
 
Other Detection Methods 
Other methods for detecting ghost employees include:  
• Reviewing company e-mail address directories to ensure that all employees receiving 
paychecks have a company e-mail address issued by the IT Department 
• Comparing employee names, addresses, and social security numbers, as well as direct-
 deposit bank account numbers to determine if there are any unexpected duplicates 
• Comparing employee payroll records to human resources employee files to ensure social 
security numbers and names match 
• Examining payroll checks for dual endorsements 
 
Prevention of Payroll Schemes 
There are two basic preventive measures for payroll-related fraud: segregation of duties and 
periodic payroll review and analysis. 
 
Segregation of Duties 
The following duties should be segregated:  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.569 
• Payroll preparation 
• Payroll disbursement (into payroll and withholding tax accounts) 
• Payroll distribution  
• Payroll bank reconciliations 
• Human resource departmental functions 
 
If payroll is prepared by personnel not responsible for its distribution and reconciliation, it 
will be difficult for anyone to successfully add ghost employees. They will also be prevented 
from “borrowing” the trust account taxes because  they will not have access to the disbursing 
function. In smaller companies, this function is often handled outside the firm at pennies  
per employee. 
 
After the payroll checks are prepared, the transfer of funds from the general accounts to the 
payroll accounts should be handled by accounting. The personnel department should 
distribute checks and require identification in exchange for the payroll checks. This will 
curtail the opportunity to add ghost employees to the payroll. A suggested form of 
identification might be company-issued access passes, if available. 
 
If the bank reconciliation function for the payroll account is assigned to someone other than 
those in the above described functions, then all the payroll functions have been segregated. 
No one is able to add ghost employees or “borrow” the withholding taxes without the 
opportunity for discovery by someone else. 
 
Periodic Review and Analysis of Payroll 
Periodically, an independent review of the payroll might reveal that internal controls are not 
working as designed. Comparing deposit dates with dates of payroll disbursement or transfer 
may reveal ghost employees. An occasional independent payroll distribution may reveal 
ghost employees. 
 
The existence of the following may indicate the presence of ghost employees: 
• More than one employee with the same address. 
• More than one employee with the same government identification number. 
• More than one employee with the same account number (automatic deposit). 
• Employees with no withholding. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.570                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Indicators of Payroll Fraud 
In addition, the following audit program will help spot red flags to payroll distribution fraud 
and help with installing control procedures: 
• Are personnel records maintained independently of payroll and timekeeping functions? 
• Is the payroll accounting function independent of the general ledger function? 
• Are changes to payroll not made unless the personnel department sends approved 
notification directly to the payroll department? 
• Are references and backgrounds checked for new hires? 
• Are all wage rates authorized in writing by a designated official? 
• Are signed authorizations on file for employees whose wages are subject to special 
deductions? 
• Are bonuses, commissions, and overtime approved in advance and reviewed for 
compliance with company policies? 
• Are sick leave, vacations, and holidays reviewed for compliance with company policy? 
• Are appropriate forms completed and signed by employees to show authorization for 
payroll deductions and withholding exemptions? 
• Is the payroll periodically checked against the personnel records for terminated 
employees, fictitious employees, etc.? 
• Is a time clock used for office employees as well as factory workers? 
• If a time clock is used, are timecards (1) punched by employees in the presence of a 
designated supervisor and (2) signed by a supervisor at the end of the payroll period? 
• Are timecards and production reports reviewed and compared with payroll distribution 
reports and production schedules? 
• Are payroll registers reviewed and approved before disbursements are made for (1) 
names of employees, (2) hours worked, (3) wage rates, (4) deductions, (5) agreement with 
payroll checks, and (6) unusual items? 
• Are all employees paid by check out of a separate bank payroll account? 
• Are payroll checks prenumbered and issued in numerical sequence? 
• Is access restricted to unissued payroll checks and signature plates? 
• Are checks drawn and signed by designated officials who do not (1) prepare payroll, (2) 
have access to the accounting records, or (3) have custody of cash funds? 
• Are payroll checks distributed by someone other than the department head or the person 
who prepares the payroll? 
• Is the distribution of the payroll rotated periodically to different employees without 
 prior notice? 
• Is the payroll bank account reconciled by a designated employee who (1) is not involved 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.571 
in the preparing of payroll, (2) does not sign the checks, or (3) does not handle the check 
distributions? 
• Do payroll bank account reconciliation procedures include comparing the paid checks to 
the payroll, and scrutinizing canceled check endorsements? 
• Are the payroll registers reconciled to the general ledger control accounts? 
• Is a liability account set up for all wages that have remained unclaimed for a certain 
period of time? If yes, (1) have these wages been redeposited in a special bank account, 
and (2) is identification required to be presented at the time of their subsequent 
distribution?  
• Are distributions of hours (direct and indirect) to activity or departments reviewed and 
approved by supervisory personnel?  
• Are actual payroll amounts reviewed and compared to budgeted amounts, and are 
variances analyzed regularly?  
• Do adequate procedures exist for timely and accurate preparation and filing of payroll 
tax returns and related taxes?  
• Are employee benefit plan contributions reconciled to appropriate employee  
census data?  
• Are adequate, detailed records maintained of the entity’s liability for vacation pay and 
sick pay? Are they reconciled to the general ledger control accounts periodically?  
 
 
Expense Reimbursement Schemes 
Employees can manipulate an organization’s expense reimbursement procedures to generate 
fraudulent disbursements. Expense reimbursements are usually paid by the company in the 
following manner. An employee submits a report detailing an expense incurred for a 
business purpose, such as a business lunch with a client, airfare, hotel bills associated with 
business travel, and so forth. In preparing an expense report, an employee is usually required 
to explain the business purpose for the expense, as well as the time, date, and location in 
which it was incurred. Support documentation for the expense, typically a receipt, should be 
attached to the report. In some cases canceled checks written by the employee or copies of a 
personal credit card statement showing the expense are allowed in lieu of receipts. The 
report must usually be authorized by a supervisor in order for the expense to be reimbursed. 
The four most common types of expense reimbursement schemes are mischaracterized 
expenses, overstated expenses, fictitious expenses, and multiple reimbursements.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.572                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Mischaracterized Expense Reimbursements 
Most companies only reimburse certain expenses of their employees. Which expenses a 
company will pay for depends to an extent upon policy, but in general, business-related 
travel, lodging, and meals are reimbursed. One of the most basic expense reimbursement 
schemes is perpetrated by simply requesting reimbursement for a personal expense by 
claiming that the expense is business-related. (See “Mischaracterized Expenses” flowchart.) 
Examples of mischaracterized expenses include claiming personal travel as a business trip, 
listing dinner with a friend as “business development,” and so on. Employees submit the 
receipts from their personal expenses along with their expense reports, but concoct business 
reasons for the incurred costs. The false expense report induces the victim organization to 
issue a check, reimbursing the perpetrator for his personal expenses.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.573 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.574                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In cases involving airfare and overnight travel, a mischaracterization can sometimes be 
detected by simply comparing the employee’s expense reports to his work schedule. Often, 
the dates of the so-called “business trip” coincide with a vacation or day off. Detailed 
expense reports allow a company to make this kind of comparison and are therefore very  
helpful in preventing expenses schemes.  
 
A common element to mischaracterized expense schemes is the failure to submit detailed 
expense reports, or any expense reports at all. Some companies allow employees to simply 
turn in receipts, without explaining the business purpose of the expenses reflected in the 
receipts. This makes it exceedingly easy for an employee to turn in, for example, a receipt 
from a restaurant and receive a check to reimburse him for a “business dinner.” Other 
companies provide employees with company credit cards and/or procurement cards and 
allow employees to spend company funds without providing detailed information justifying 
the purchase and sometimes not even requiring receipts. Requiring detailed information 
means more than just supporting documents; it should mean precise statements of what was 
purchased, as well as when, where, and for whom the purchase was made. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A fraudster submitted credit ca rd statements as support for expenses, but he only submitted 
the top portion of the statements, not the port ion that describes what  was purchased. Over 
95 percent of his expenses that were reimbur sed were of a personal rather than a business 
nature.  
 
Even when detailed expense reports are required, it may be difficult to detect a 
mischaracterized expense reimbursement scheme. For example, suppose a traveling salesman 
goes on a trip and runs up a large bar bill one night in his hotel, saves his receipt, and lists 
this expense as “business entertainment” on an expense report. Nothing about the time, 
date, or nature of the expense would readily point to fraud, and the receipt would appear to 
substantiate the expense. Short of contacting the client who was allegedly entertained, there 
may be little a victim organization can do to identify the expense as fraudulent.  
 
Overstated Expense Reimbursements 
Instead of seeking reimbursement for personal expenses, some employees overstate the cost 
of actual business expenses. (See “Overstated Expenses” flowchart.) This can be 
accomplished in a number of ways.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.575 
 
 
                Overstated Expenses 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.576                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Altered Receipts 
The most fundamental example of an overstated expense reimbursement scheme occurs 
when an employee doctors a receipt or other supporting documentation to reflect a higher 
cost than what he actually paid. The employee may use white-out, a ballpoint pen, or some 
other method to change the price reflected on the receipt before submitting his expense 
report. If the company does not require original documents as support, the perpetrator 
generally attaches a copy of the receipt to his expense report. Alterations are usually less 
noticeable on a photocopy than on an original document. For precisely this reason, 
businesses should require original receipts and ink signatures on expense reports. 
 
As with other expense frauds, overstated expense reimbursement schemes often succeed 
because of poor controls. In companies where supporting documents are not required, for 
example, fraudsters simply lie about how much they paid for a business expense. With no 
support available, it may be very difficult to disprove an employee’s false expense claims. 
 
Overpurchasing  
Another way to overstate a reimbursement form is the “overpurchasing” of business 
expenses. This method is typically used by employees seeking reimbursement for travel 
expenses. Assume an employee is scheduled to make a business trip to another city. The 
employee purchases an airline ticket far in advance of the trip when rates are low. When it is 
close to the day of the trip, the employee purchases another ticket to the same destination. 
This ticket will be more expensive than the first one. To further jack up the price, the second 
ticket might include several stops and layovers on a very circuitous route. The employee 
removes the passenger receipt coupon from the second ticket then returns it for a full 
refund. He actually flies on the first (less expensive) ticket he purchased, but attaches the 
receipt from the more expensive ticket to his expense report. 
 
Overstating Another Employee’s Expenses 
Overstated expense reimbursement schemes are not only committed by the person who 
actually incurs the expense. Sometimes, they may be committed by a coworker who handles 
or processes expense reports.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A petty cashier whited out other employees’ requests for travel advances and inserted larger 
amounts. The cashier then passed on the legitimate travel advances and pocketed the excess. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.577 
This kind of scheme is most likely to occur in a system where expenses are reimbursed in 
currency rather than by a check, since the perpetrator would be unable to extract his “cut” 
from a single check made out to another employee.  
 
Orders to Overstate Expenses  
Finally, some employees knowingly falsify their own reports, but do so at the direction of 
their supervisors. The employees may be threatened with loss of their jobs if they do not go 
along with the scheme. Sometimes the supervisor splits the proceeds of the fraud with his 
subordinates. In other cases, the excess money goes into a slush fund or is used for some 
other business purpose that is not in the company budget. The supervisors who engage in 
these schemes often believe they are really acting in the best interests of their companies.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A sales executive instructed his salesmen to inflate their expenses in order to generate cash 
for a slush fund. This fund was used to pay bribes and to provide improper forms of 
entertainment for clients and customers.  
 
Fictitious Expense Reimbursements  
Employees sometimes seek reimbursement for wholly fictitious expenses. Instead of 
overstating a real business expense or seeking reimbursement for a personal expense, an 
employee just invents an expense and requests that it be reimbursed. (See “Fictitious 
Expenses” flowchart.) 
 
Producing Fictitious Receipts  
One way to generate a reimbursement for a fictitious expense is to create bogus support 
documents, such as false receipts. The emergence of personal computers has enabled some 
employees to create realistic-looking counterfeit receipts at home. These counterfeits are 
often very sophisticated, even including the logos of the stores where goods or services were 
allegedly purchased. Computers are not the only means of creating support for a fictitious 
expense. Some employees use calculator tapes, others cut and paste old receipts from 
suppliers, and some even use professional printers to generate fictitious receipts.  
 
Unfortunately, not all companies require receipts to be attached to expense reports. Checks 
written by the employee or copies of his personal credit card bill might be allowed as 
support in lieu of a receipt. Some employees write personal checks that appear to be for 
business expenses, then photocopy these checks and attach them to reimbursement requests. 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.578                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In actuality, nothing is purchased with the checks; they are destroyed after the copies are 
made. The perpetrator ends up receiving a reimbursement from his employer without ever 
actually incurring a business expense. The same method can be used with credit cards, where 
a copy of a statement is used to support a purchase. Once the expense report is filed, the 
perpetrator returns the item and receives a credit to his account. 
 
Obtaining Blank Receipts from Vendors 
If the perpetrator does not create receipts, they can be obtained from legitimate suppliers in 
a number of ways. Some employees request blank receipts from waiters, bartenders, taxi cab 
drivers, etc. These persons fill in the blank receipts to “create” business expenses. A 
fraudster might also have a friend, spouse, relative, etc. who can provide receipts for 
“business expenses” that never really occur.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee’s girlfriend worked at a restaurant near the victim organization. This 
girlfriend validated credit card receipts and gave them to the fraudster so that he could 
submit them with his expense reports.  
 
In some cases a fraudster will steal an entire stack of blank receipts from a hotel, restaurant, 
etc., then fill them in and, over time, use them to verify fictitious business expenses.  
 
Claiming the Expenses of Others 
Another way perpetrators use actual receipts to generate unwarranted reimbursements is by 
submitting expense reports for expenses that were paid by others. For instance, an employee 
might save the receipt from a meal that was paid for by another party, then request 
reimbursement for the meal himself.  
 
Multiple Reimbursements 
The least common of the expense reimbursement schemes involves multiple 
reimbursements. This type of fraud involves the submission of a single expense more than 
one time. The most frequent example of a multiple reimbursement scheme is the submission 
of several types of support for the same expense.  
 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.579 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.580                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An employee would use, for example, an airline ticket stub  and a travel agency invoice on 
separate expense reports so that he could be reimbursed twice for the cost of a single flight. 
The fraudster would have his division president authorize one report and have the vice 
president approve the other so that neither would see both reports. Additionally, the 
perpetrator allowed a time lag of about a month between the filing of the two reports so that 
the duplication would be less noticeable. 
 
In cases where a company does not require original documents as support, some employees 
even use several copies of the same support document to generate multiple reimbursements. 
Rather than file two expense reports, employees may also charge an item to the company 
credit card, save the receipt, and attach it to an expense report as if they paid for the item 
themselves. The victim organization therefore ends up paying twice for the same expense.  
 
Detection of Expense Reimbursement Schemes 
Detecting expense reimbursement fraud involves two basic methods. The first of these is a 
review and analysis of expense accounts. The second detection method is a detailed review 
of expense reports. 
 
Review and Analysis of Expense Accounts 
Generally, expense account review uses one of two methods: historical comparisons or 
comparisons with budgeted amounts. A historical comparison compares the balance 
expended this period in relation to the balance spent in prior, similar periods. When 
performing this review, consider changes to the marketing, servicing, or other company 
operations. 
 
Budgets are estimates of the money and/or time necessary to complete the task. They are 
based on past experience with consideration for current and future business conditions. 
Therefore, when comparing actual and budgeted expenses, determining inordinate expenses 
or inaccurate budget estimates is important. 
 
Detailed Review of Expense Reports 
Overall, the best detection method is a detailed review of employee expense reports. This 
method requires that the fraud examiner have, at the time of the examination, a calendar and 
a copy of the employee’s schedule for the relevant period. The examiner should be familiar 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.581 
with the travel and entertainment policies of the company. Additionally, the following two 
steps may help to detect and deter employee expense abuses: 
• Require employees to submit their expense reports for a detailed review before payment 
is reimbursed. If an employee knows that his expense report will be thoroughly 
reviewed, he will be less likely to include fraudulent expenses on the report.  
• Periodically audit travel and entertainment accounts. This is particularly effective shortly 
before employee performance reviews. 
 
Prevention of Expense Reimbursement Schemes 
Detailed Expense Reports: Submission and Review 
Detailed expense reports should require the following information: 
• Receipts or other support documentation 
• Explanation of the expense including specific business purpose 
• Time period expense occurred  
• Place of expenditure  
• Amount   
 
It is not enough to have the detailed reports submitted if they are not reviewed. A policy 
requiring the periodic review of expense reports, coupled with examining the appropriate 
detail, will help deter employees from submitting personal expenses for reimbursement. 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappro priation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.601 
ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS 
 
Employees target inventory, equipment, supplies, and other non-cash assets for theft in a 
number of ways. These schemes can range from stealing a box of pens to the theft of 
millions of dollars worth of company equipment. The term inventory and other assets is meant 
to encompass the misappropriation schemes involving any assets held by a company other 
than cash.  
 
 
Misuse of Inventory and Other Assets 
There are basically two ways a person can misappropriate a company asset. The asset can be 
misused or it can be stolen. Simple misuse is obviously the less egregious of the two. Assets 
that are misused but not stolen typically include company vehicles, company supplies, 
computers, and other office equipment.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee made personal use of a company vehicle while on an out-of-town assignment. 
The employee provided false information, both written and verbal, regarding the nature of 
his use of the vehicle. The vehicle was returned unharmed and the cost to the perpetrator’s 
company was only a few hundred dollars. Nevertheless, such unauthorized use of a 
company asset does amount to fraud when a false statement accompanies the use.  
 
One of the most common examples of the misuse of company assets occurs when an 
employee uses company equipment to do personal work on company time. For instance, an 
employee might use his computer at work to write letters, print invoices, or do other work 
connected with a business he runs on the side. In many instances, these side businesses are 
of the same nature as the employer’s business, so the employee is essentially competing with 
his employer and using the employer’s equipment to do it.  
 
The Costs of Inventory Misuse 
The costs of inventory misuse are difficult to quantify. To many individuals, this type of 
fraud is not viewed as a crime, but rather as “borrowing.” In truth, the cost to a company 
from this kind of scheme is often immaterial. When a perpetrator borrows a stapler for the 
night or takes home some tools to perform a household repair, the cost to his company is 
negligible, as long as the assets are returned unharmed. 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Oth er Assets Financial Transactions   
1.602                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
On the other hand, misuse schemes could be very costly. Take, for example, the situation 
discussed above in which an employee uses company equipment to operate a side business 
during work hours. Since the employee is not performing his work duties, the employer 
suffers a loss in productivity. If the low productivity continues, the employer might have to 
hire additional employees to compensate, which means more capital diverted to wages. If the 
employee’s business competes with the employer’s, then lost business could be an additional 
cost. Unauthorized use of equipment can also mean additional wear and tear, causing the 
equipment to break down sooner than it would have under normal business conditions. 
Additionally, when an employee “borrows” comp any property, there is no guarantee that he 
will bring it back. This is precisely how some theft schemes begin. Despite some opinions to 
the contrary, asset misuse is not always a harmless crime.  
 
 
Theft of Inventory and Other Assets 
While the misuse of company property might be a problem, the theft of company property is 
obviously of greater concern. Losses resulting from larceny of company assets can run into 
the millions of dollars. Most schemes where inventory and other non-cash assets are stolen 
fall into one of four categories: larceny schemes, asset requisition and transfer schemes, 
purchasing and receiving schemes, and false shipment schemes. 
 
Larceny Schemes  
The textbook definition of larceny is “Felonious stealing, taking and carrying, leading, riding, 
or driving away another’s personal property, with intent to convert it or to deprive owner 
thereof. The unlawful taking and carrying away of property of another with intent to 
appropriate it to use inconsistent with latter’s rights.” 1 This definition is so broad, it 
encompasses every kind of asset theft. In order to gain a more specific understanding of the 
methods used to steal inventory and other assets, the definition of larceny has been 
restricted. For the purposes of classifying asset misappropriations, the term larceny is meant 
to refer to the most basic type of inventory theft, the schemes in which an employee simply 
takes inventory from the company premises without attempting to conceal the theft in the 
books and records. (See “Non-cash Larceny” flowchart.) In other fraud schemes, employees 
may create false documentation to justify the shipment of merchandise or tamper with 
inventory records to conceal missing assets. La rceny schemes are more blunt. The culprit in 
these crimes takes company assets without trying to “justify” their absence.  
                                                          
1 Blacks, p. 792. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.603 
 
 
 
Most non-cash larceny schemes are not very complicated. They are typically committed by 
employees (warehouse personnel, inventory clerks, shipping clerks, etc.) with access to 
inventory or supplies. Many employees simply carry company assets away in open view of 
other employees. People tend to assume that their friends and acquaintances are acting 
honestly. When they see a trusted coworker taking something out of the workplace, most 
people assume that the culprit has a legitimate reason for doing so.  
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets Financial Transactions   
1.604                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A university faculty member was leaving his offic es to take a position at a new school. This 
person was permitted to take a small number of items to his new job, but certainly exceeded 
the intentions of the school when he loaded tw o trucks full of university lab equipment and 
computers worth several hundred thousand doll ars. The perpetrator simply packed up these 
stolen assets along with his personal items and drove away.  
 
Unfortunately, in all too many cases the coworkers of the perpetrator are fully aware that he 
is stealing company assets, yet they refrain from reporting the crime. There are several 
reasons that employees might ignore illegal conduct, such as a sense of duty to their friends, 
a “management vs. labor” mentality, poor channe ls of communication for whistleblowers, or 
intimidation of honest employees by the thief. When high-ranking personnel are stealing 
from their companies, employees often overlook the crime because they fear they will lose 
their jobs if they report it. In some cases, the coworkers may be assisting in the theft.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A school superintendent was not only pilfering school accounts but was also stealing school 
assets. A search of his residence revealed a cell ar filled with school property. A number of 
school employees knew or suspected the superintendent was involved in illegal dealings, but 
he was very powerful and people were afraid to report him for fear of retaliation. As a 
result, he was able to steal from  the school for several years.  
 
Ironically, employees who steal inventory are often highly trusted within their organizations. 
Because these employees are trusted, they may be given access to restricted areas, safes, 
supply rooms, or other areas where company assets are kept. This access makes it easy for 
these employees to steal.  
 
It can be unwise for an employee to physically carry inventory and other assets off the 
premises of his company. This practice carries with it the inherent risk and potential 
embarrassment of being caught red-handed with stolen goods on his person. Some 
employees avoid this problem by mailing company assets from the victim organization to a 
location where they can retrieve them without fear of being observed.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.605 
EXAMPLE 
A spare-parts custodian took several thousand dollars worth of computer chips and mailed 
them to a company that had no  business dealings with the custodian’s employer. He then 
reclaimed the merchandise as his own. By taking the step of mailing the stolen inventory, 
the fraudster allowed the postal service to  unwittingly do his dirty work for him. 
 
The False Sale 
In many cases, corrupt employees utilize outside accomplices to help steal inventory. The 
fake sale is one method that depends upon an accomplice. Like most inventory thefts, the 
fake sale is not complicated. The accomplice of the employee-fraudster pretends to buy 
merchandise, but the employee does not ring up the sale. The accomplice takes the 
merchandise without paying for it. To a casual observer, it will appear that the transaction is 
a normal sale. The employee bags the merchandise, and may act as though a transaction is 
being entered on the register, but in fact, the “sale” is not recorded. The accomplice may 
even pass a nominal amount of money to the employee to complete the illusion. A related 
scheme occurs when an employee sells merchandise to an accomplice at an unauthorized 
discount.  
 
Employees also sometimes enlist accomplices to return goods that the employee has already 
stolen. This is an easy way for the employee to convert the stolen inventory into cash. 
 
Asset Requisitions and Transfers 
Asset requisitions and other documents that allow non-cash assets to be moved from one 
location in a company to another can be used to facilitate the theft of those assets. 
Employees use internal transfer paperwork to gain access to merchandise that they otherwise 
might not be able to handle without raising suspicion. These documents do not account for 
missing merchandise the way false sales do, but they allow a person to move the assets from 
one location to another. In the process of this movement, the thief steals the merchandise. 
 
The most basic scheme occurs when an employee requisitions materials for some work-
 related project, then makes off with the materials. In some cases the employee simply 
overstates the amount of supplies or equipment it will take to complete his work and pilfers 
the excess. In more ambitious schemes the employee might invent a completely fictitious 
project that necessitates the use of certain assets he intends to steal.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets Financial Transactions   
1.606                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An employee of a telecommunications company used false project documents to request 
approximately $100,000 worth of computer chips, allegedly to upgrade company 
computers. Knowing that this type of requisiti on required verbal authorization from another 
source, the employee set up an elaborate phone scheme to get the “project” approved. The 
fraudster used his knowledge of the company’s phone system to forward calls from four 
different lines to his own desk. When the confirmation call was made, it was the 
perpetrator who answered the phone and authorized the project.  
 
Dishonest employees sometimes falsify asset transfer forms so they can remove inventory 
from a warehouse or stockroom. The false documents allow the employee to remove 
merchandise from the warehouse, but instead of using it for a work-related purpose, the 
perpetrator simply takes it home. The obvious problem with this type of scheme is that the 
person who orders the merchandise will usually be the primary suspect when it turns  
up missing.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager requested merchandise from the company warehouse to be displayed on a 
showroom floor. The pieces he re quested never made it to the showroom, because he loaded 
them into a pickup truck and took them home. In some instances he actually took the 
items in broad daylight and with the help of  another employee. This individual thought he 
was immune from detection because the merchandise was requested via computer using a 
management level security code. The code was not specific to any one manager, so there 
would be no way of knowing which manager had ordered the merchandise. Unfortunately 
for the thief, the company was able to record the computer terminal from which the request 
originated. The manager had used  his own computer to make the request, which led to his 
undoing. 
 
Purchasing and Receiving Schemes 
Dishonest employees can also manipulate the purchasing and receiving functions of a 
company to facilitate the theft of inventory and other assets. It might seem that any 
purchasing scheme should fall under the heading of false billings, which were discussed 
earlier. There is, however, a distinction between the purchasing schemes that are classified as 
false billings and those that are classified as non-cash misappropriations.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappro priation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.607 
If an employee causes his company to purchase merchandise that the company does not 
need, this is a false billing scheme. The harm to the company comes in paying for assets for 
which it has no use. On the other hand, if the assets were intentionally purchased by the 
company and later misappropriated by the perpetrator, this is classified as an inventory 
larceny scheme. Here the company loses both the value of the merchandise and the use of 
the merchandise.  
 
Falsifying Incoming Shipments 
One of the most common examples of an employee abusing the purchasing and receiving 
functions occurs when a person charged with receiving goods on behalf of the victim 
company—such as a warehouse supervisor or receiving clerk—falsifies the records of 
incoming shipments. If, for example, 1,000 units of a particular item are received, the 
perpetrator indicates that only 900 were received. By marking the shipment short, the 
perpetrator can steal the 100 units that are unaccounted for.  
 
The obvious problem with this kind of scheme is the fact that the receiving report does not 
match the vendor’s invoice, which will likely ca use a problem with payment. In the example 
above, if the vendor bills for 1,000 units but the accounts payable voucher only shows 
receipt of 900 units of merchandise, then someone will have to explain where the extra 100 
units went.  
 
Some employees avoid this problem by altering only one copy of the receiving report. The 
copy that is sent to accounts payable indicates receipt of a full shipment so the vendor will 
be paid without any questions. The copy used for inventory records indicates a short 
shipment so that the assets on hand will equal the assets in the perpetual inventory.  
 
Instead of marking shipments short, the perpetrator might reject portions of a shipment as 
not being up to quality specifications. The perpetrator then keeps the “substandard” 
merchandise rather than sending it back to the supplier. The result is the same as if the 
shipment had been marked short.  
 
False Shipments of Inventory and Other Assets 
To conceal thefts of inventory and other assets, employees sometimes create false shipping 
documents and false sales documents to make it appear that the inventory they take was sold 
rather than stolen. (See “False Shipments of Inventory and Other Assets” flowchart.) The 
document that tells the shipping department to release inventory for delivery is usually the 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Oth er Assets Financial Transactions   
1.608                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
packing slip. By creating a false packing slip, a corrupt employee can cause inventory to be 
fraudulently delivered to himself or an accomplice. The “sales” reflected in the packing slips 
are typically made to a fictitious person, a fictitious company, or an accomplice of the 
perpetrator.  
 
One benefit of using false shipping documents to misappropriate inventory or other assets is 
that the product is removed from the warehouse or storeroom by someone other than the 
perpetrator. The victim organization unknowingly delivers the targeted assets to the 
perpetrator of the scheme.  
 
False packing slips allow inventory to be shipped from the victim company to the 
perpetrator, but alone they do not conceal the fact that inventory has been misappropriated. 
In order to hide the theft, fraudsters may create a false sale on the books so it appears that 
the missing inventory was shipped to a customer. Depending on how the victim 
organization operates, the perpetrator may have to create a false purchase order from the 
“buyer,” a false sales order, and a false invoice along with the packing slip to create the 
illusion of a sale.  
 
The result is that a fake receivable account goes into the books for the price of the 
misappropriated inventory. Obviously, the “buyer” of the merchandise will never pay for it. 
How do employees deal with these fake receivables? In some cases, the employee simply lets 
the receivable age on his company’s books until it  is eventually written off as uncollectible. 
In other instances he might take affirmative steps to remove the sale—and the delinquent 
receivable that results—from the books.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee generated false invoices and delivered them to the company warehouse for 
shipping. The invoices were then marked “delivered” and sent to the sales office. The 
perpetrator removed all copies of the invoices fr om the files before they were billed to the 
fictitious customer. 
 
Another common way to get rid of delinquent receivables that result from theft schemes is 
to write off the receivables to accounts such as discounts and allowances, bad debt expense, or lost 
and stolen assets.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.609 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets Financial Transactions   
1.610                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Instead of creating completely fictitious sales, some employees understate legitimate sales so 
that an accomplice is billed for less than delivered. The result is that a portion of the 
merchandise is sold at no cost. In a typical scenario, a salesman fills out shipping tickets, 
which are forwarded to the warehouse. After the merchandise is shipped, the salesman 
instructs the warehouse employees to return the shipping tickets to him for “extra work” 
before they are sent to the invoicing department. The salesman then alters the shipping 
tickets, reducing either the quantity of merchandise sold or the price per unit sold. 
 
Write-offs are often used to conceal the theft of assets after they have been stolen. In some 
cases, however, assets are written off in order to make them available for theft. For instance, 
an employee with the authority to declare inventory obsolete can write off this inventory as 
“scrap.” Once assets are designated as scrap, it is often easier to misappropriate them. 
Fraudsters may be allowed to take the “useless” assets for themselves, buy them or sell them 
to an accomplice at a greatly reduced price, or simply give the assets away.  
 
Concealing Inventory Shrinkage 
When inventory is stolen, the key concealment issue for the perpetrator is shrinkage. Inventory 
shrinkage  is the unaccounted-for reduction in the company’s inventory that results from theft. 
For instance, assume a computer retailer has 1,000 computers in stock. After work one day, 
an employee loads 10 computers into a truck and takes them home. Now the company only 
has 990 computers, but since there is no record that the employee took 10 computers, the 
inventory records still show 1,000 units on hand. The company has experienced inventory 
shrinkage in the amount of 10 computers.  
 
Shrinkage is one of the red flags that signal fraud. The goal of the perpetrator is to proceed 
with his scheme undetected, so it is in his best interest to prevent anyone from looking for 
missing assets. This means concealing the shrinkage that occurs from asset theft. 
 
Inventory and other assets are typically tracked through a two-step process. The first step, 
the perpetual inventory, is a running count that records how much inventory should be on 
hand. When new shipments of merchandise are received, for instance, this merchandise is 
entered into the perpetual inventory. Similarly, when goods are sold they are removed from 
the perpetual inventory records. In this way a company tracks its inventory on a day-to-day 
basis.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.611 
Periodically, a physical count of assets on hand should be made. In this process, someone 
actually goes through the storeroom or warehouse and counts everything that the company 
has in stock. This total is then matched to the amount of assets reflected in the perpetual 
inventory. A variation between the physical inventory and the perpetual inventory totals is 
shrinkage. While a certain amount of shrinkage may be expected in any business, large 
shrinkage totals may indicate fraud.  
 
Altered Inventory Records 
One of the simplest methods for concealing shrinkage is to change the perpetual inventory 
record so that it will match the physical inventory count. This is also known as a forced 
reconciliation of the account. The perpetrator simply changes the numbers in the perpetual 
inventory to make them match the amount of inventory on hand. For example, the 
employee might credit the perpetual inventory and debit the cost of sales account to bring 
the perpetual inventory numbers into line with the actual inventory count. Instead of using 
correcting entries to adjust the perpetual inventory, some employees simply delete or cover 
up the correct totals and enter new numbers. 
 
There are two sides to the inventory equation: the perpetual inventory and the physical 
inventory. Instead of altering the perpetual inventory, a perpetrator who has access to the 
records from a physical inventory count can change those records to match the perpetual 
inventory. Returning to the computer store example, assume the company counts its 
inventory every month and matches it to the perpetual inventory. The physical count should 
come to 990 computers, since that is what is actually on hand. If the perpetrator is someone 
charged with counting inventory, he can simply write down that there are 1,000 units  
on hand. 
 
Fictitious Sales and Accounts Receivable 
When the perpetrator makes an adjusting entry to the perpetual inventory and cost of sales 
accounts as discussed above, there is no sales transaction on the books that corresponds to 
these entries. In order to fix this problem, a perpetrator might enter a debit to accounts 
receivable and a corresponding credit to the sales account so that it appears the missing 
goods have been sold.  
 
Of course, the problem of payment then arises, because no one is going to pay for the goods 
that were “sold” in this transaction. There are two routes that a fraudster might take in this 
circumstance. The first is to charge the sale to an existing account. In some cases, employees 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Oth er Assets Financial Transactions   
1.612                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
charge fake sales to existing receivables that are so large that the addition of the assets that 
the perpetrator has stolen will not be noticed. Other corrupt employees charge the “sales” to 
accounts that are already aging and will soon be written off. When these accounts are 
removed from the books, the perpetrator’s stolen  inventory effectively disappears. The other 
adjustment that is typically made is a write-off to discounts and allowances or bad debt expense.  
 
Write-off of Inventory and Other Assets 
Writing off inventory and other assets is a relatively common way for employees to remove 
assets from the books before or after they are stolen. This eliminates the problem of 
shrinkage that inherently exists in every case of non-cash asset misappropriation.  
 
Physical Padding 
Most methods of concealment deal with altering inventory records, either changing the 
perpetual inventory or miscounting during the physical inventory. In the alternative, some 
employees try to make it appear that there are more assets present in the warehouse or 
stockroom than there actually are. Empty boxes or boxes filled with bricks or other 
inexpensive materials, for example, may be stacked on shelves to create the illusion of extra 
inventory.  
 
Detection of Inventory Schemes 
Statistical Sampling 
Companies with inventory accounts typically have enormous populations of source 
documents. Statistical sampling allows the fraud examiner to inspect key attributes on a 
smaller portion (or sample) of those documents. For example, the examiner may select a 
statistically valid, random sample of purchase requisitions to determine that all requisitions in 
the sample selected were properly approved. Statistical sampling enables the examiner to 
predict the occurrence rate for the population and, therefore, determine with some accuracy 
the error rate or the potential for fraud. 
 
Other items that may be sampled on a statistical basis include the following: 
• Receiving reports 
• Perpetual inventory records 
• Raw materials requisitions 
• Shipping documents 
• Job cost sheets 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.613 
The attributes tested for on the above-mentioned documents might include a specific date, 
item, or location.  
 
Perpetual Inventory Records 
Unexplained entries in the perpetual records might reveal embezzlement losses.  
• Are all the reductions to the perpetual inventory records explained by source documents 
(such as sales invoices, approvals to remove to scrap inventory, or spoilage)?  
• Are all increases in perpetual records explained by source documents such as receiving 
reports? 
 
Shipping Documents  
Inventory theft may be uncovered by answers to questions such as:  
• Are all sales properly matched with a shipping document?  
• Are any shipping documents not associated with a sale?  
• Is inventory disappearing from storage? 
 
Physical Inventory Counts 
Physical inventory counts can sometimes give rise to inventory theft detection. However, 
because other explanations satisfy inventory shortages (such as shrinkage), historical analysis 
of inventory is usually necessary. Furthermore, if the only method used to detect inventory 
fraud is the year-end physical count, the perpetrators will have had all year to devise 
concealment methods to circumvent potential detection. 
 
Analytical Review 
By using an analytical review, inventory fraud may be detected because certain trends 
become immediately clear. For example, if the cost of goods sold increases by a 
disproportionate amount relative to sales, and no changes occur in the purchase prices, 
quantities purchased, or quality of products purchased, the cause of the disproportionate 
increase in cost of goods sold might be one of two things: (1) ending inventory has been 
depleted by theft, or (2) someone has been embezzling money through a false billing scheme 
(i.e., submitting invoices and collecting the payments for inventory that was never delivered). 
 
An analytical review of all the component parts of the cost of goods sold should indicate to 
the examiner where to direct further inquiries. For example, assuming that the type of 
inventory purchased is the same and there is no change in the manufacturing process or 
purchase price, if sales and cost of sales change from $5,650,987 and $2,542,944 to 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets Financial Transactions   
1.614                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
$6,166,085 and $2,981,880, respectively, what is the data telling the examiner? To begin, sales 
have increased by 9.12 percent whereas cost of sales increased by 17.26 percent. The profit 
margin has decreased by 3 percent (from 55 to 52 percent). Based on this data, the fraud 
examiner might want to look further at the components of inventory, such as beginning 
inventory, purchases, and ending inventory. If beginning inventory was $1,207,898, 
purchases were $2,606,518, and $2,604,972, respectively, and ending inventory was $894,564, 
then an inventory matrix would look like the following: 
 
 Year 1   Year 2  Percentage Change 
Beginning Inventory $1,207,898 $1,271,472  5.26% 
Purchases  2,606,518  2,604,972 <0.06%> 
Goods Available for Sale $3,814,416 $3,876,444  1.63% 
Ending Inventory <1,271,472>  < 894,564>  <29.64%> 
Cost of Sales $2,542,944 $2,981,880 17.26% 
 
Inventory purchases, as a percentage of sales, have declined from 46.13 to 42.25 percent. 
From this example, one can hypothesize that: (1) inventory purchases were purposely 
increased in year one only to be liquidated in year two, (2) the increased sales in year two 
were unexpected and the purchase of inventory did not keep pace with the sales, or (3) there 
might be some fraud scheme in inventory. If, by interview, the examiner is unable to 
ascertain a reasonable explanation such as (1) or (2) above, then further examination of the 
ending inventory may be warranted. 
 
The fraud examiner may next look at the differences in the physical inventory procedures, to 
see if that created a more (or less) accurate inventory count at the end of either year one or 
year two. If there is no other logical explanation, then further investigation into these and 
other inventory accounts may be necessary to explain the anomalies occurring in inventory. 
 
Computer-Generated Trend Analysis 
The computer can be used to facilitate obtaining lists of items with specified attributes. For 
example, in a lumberyard operation, the computer can be programmed to list all purchases 
of four by four cedar fence posts eight feet in length. Examine all the source documents that 
are represented by the listing. By examining the source documents for each of these 
purchases, the examiner can plot trends to determine the occurrence of the following (or 
other) patterns: 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappro priation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.615 
SEARCHES SCHEMES
 Purchases by vendor If the same vendor is receiving favorable treatment 
Inventory levels by types and dates If inventory is being purchased at its reorder point or if excess 
inventory is being ordered 
Inventory shipped by address If the vendor’s address matches either an employee address or 
the address of another vendor 
Cost per item  If discounts are properly credited to purchases 
Direct labor by item If there are excess labor hours being added to a particular job 
or item 
Direct materials by item If materials are properly charged to the job (too much or the 
wrong materials) 
Overhead per inventory item If overhead is being properly applied, and applied only once
 Disposals then reorders If usable inventory is being prematurely designated as scrap
 Shortages by inventory item If there is inventory theft or the reorder system is not 
functioning 
Returns and allowances If there is an unusually high incidence of returns and 
allowances  
Sales allowances If sales allowances are not properly credited to promotional 
allowances 
Buyer If the buyer is not acting within scope of authority 
 
Detailed Audit Program 
The following audit program will also be helpful in establishing inventory control: 
• Do adequate, detailed, written inventory instructions and procedures exist? Do inventory 
procedures give appropriate consideration to the location and arrangement of 
inventories? 
• Do inventory procedures give appropriate consideration to identification and description 
of inventories? 
• Is the method of determining inventory quantities specified (e.g., weight, count)? 
• Is the method used for recording items counted adequate (e.g., count sheets, 
prenumbered tags)? 
• Are inventory tags used? If yes: (1) Are they prenumbered? (2) Is accounting for 
inventory tags adequate and does it include control with respect to tags used, unused, 
and voided? 
• Are adequate procedures in place to identify inventory counted, ensure that all items 
have been counted, and prevent double counting? 
• Are obsolete, slow-moving, or damaged inventories properly identified and segregated? 
• Is the inventory reasonably identifiable for proper classification in the accounting 
records (e.g., description, stage of completion)? 
• Are inventory counts subject to (1) complete recounts by persons independent of the 
ones involved in the initial counts, (2) recounts only of merchandise having substantial 
value, or (3) spot checks by supervisory personnel? 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Oth er Assets Financial Transactions   
1.616                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Are counts performed by employees whose functions are independent of the physical 
custody of inventories and record-keeping functions?   
• Do proper accounting controls and procedures exist for the exclusion from inventory of 
merchandise on-hand that is not property of the client (e.g., customers’ merchandise, 
consignments in)? 
• Do proper accounting controls and procedures exist for the inclusion in inventory of 
merchandise not on-hand, but the property of the client (e.g., merchandise in 
warehouses, out on repair, consignments out)? 
• Will identical inventory items in various areas be accumulated to allow a tie in total 
counts to a summary listing subsequent to the observation? 
• Is the movement of inventory adequately controlled (e.g., shipping and receiving 
activities suspended) during the physical count to ensure a proper cut-off? 
• Are significant differences between physical counts and detailed inventory records 
investigated before the accounting and inventory records are adjusted to match the 
physical counts? 
• Will inventory at remote locations be counted? 
• Will special counting procedures or volume conversions be necessary (e.g., items 
weighed on scale)? 
• How will work-in-process inventory be identified? 
• How will the stage of completion of work-in-process inventory be identified? 
• Are there any other matters that should be noted for the inventory count? 2 
 
Prevention of Inventory Schemes 
There are four basic measures which, if properly installed and implemented, may help 
prevent inventory fraud. They are proper documentation, segregation of duties (including 
approvals), independent checks, and physical safeguards. 
 
Proper Documentation 
The following items should be prenumbered and controlled:  
• Requisitions 
• Receiving reports 
• Perpetual records 
  
                                                          
2 George Georgiades, Audit Procedures,  (New York: Harcourt Brace Professional Publishing, 1995). 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappro priation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.617 
• Raw materials requisitions 
• Shipping documents 
• Job cost sheets 
 
However, not all inventory requires the purchasing of raw materials. In these cases, the 
proper documentation might take the form of prenumbered and controlled tickets and 
receipts for sales. 
 
Segregation of Duties 
The following duties should be handled by different personnel: 
• Requisition of inventory 
• Receipt of inventory 
• Disbursement of inventory 
• Conversion of inventory to scrap 
• Receipt of proceeds from disposal of scrap 
 
Independent Checks 
Someone independent of the purchasing or warehousing functions should conduct physical 
observation of inventory. The personnel conducting the physical observations should also be 
knowledgeable about the inventory. 
 
Physical Safeguards 
All merchandise should be physically guarded and locked; access should be limited to 
authorized personnel only. For example, strategic placement of security guards may aide in 
the detection and deterrence of potential theft schemes. Electronic methods may also be 
used, such as cameras and surveillance devices. The effectiveness of any device will, 
however, depend on the employee’s knowledge that physical safeguard controls are adhered 
to and on the type of inventory available for misappropriation. 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.701 
BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION 
 
Bribery
Generally, bribery and corruption are off-book frauds that occur in the form of kickbacks, 
gifts, or gratuities to government employees from contractors or to private business 
employees from vendors. For a detailed discussion of the legal elements of bribery and 
corruption, please see the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
At its heart, a bribe is a business transaction, albeit an illegal or unethical one. A person 
“buys” something with the bribes he pays. What he buys is the influence of the recipient. 
Bribery schemes can be difficult and expensive. Though they are not nearly as common as 
other forms of occupational fraud such as asset misappropriations, bribery schemes tend to 
be much more costly.  
 
Bribery may be defined as the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting anything of value to 
influence an official act. The term official act means that traditional bribery statutes only 
proscribe payments made to influence the decisions of government agents or employees.  
 
Many occupational fraud schemes, however, involve commercial bribery, which is similar to the 
traditional definition of bribery except that something of value is offered to influence a 
business decision rather than an official act of government. Commercial bribery may or may 
not be a criminal offense. For example, in the United States there is no general federal law 
prohibiting commercial bribery in all instances. However, there are statutes prohibiting 
bribery of employees of financial institutions to influence a loan. Therefore, the law of your 
particular jurisdiction and the facts of the case will determine whether bribery in the private 
sector may be prosecuted criminally. Commercial bribery can often be pursued in the civil 
courts as breach of fiduciary duty or conflict of interest. See the Legal section for  
more information. 
 
According to Ernst & Young’s 11th global fraud survey, Driving Ethical Growth—New Markets, 
New Challenges, corruption is still a significant problem for businesses and executives, 
particularly due to the drive for company growth. Despite the multitude of anti-corruption 
legislation and increased enforcement efforts around the world, corruption is still prevalent.  
 
Bribery schemes generally fall into two broad categories: kickbacks  and bid-rigging schemes. 
Kickbacks are undisclosed payments made by vendors to employees of purchasing 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.702                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
companies. The purpose of a kickback is usually to enlist the corrupt employee in an 
overbilling scheme. Sometimes vendors pay kickbacks simply to get extra business from the 
purchasing company. Bid-rigging schemes occur when an employee fraudulently assists a 
vendor in winning a contract through the competitive bidding process.  
 
Kickback Schemes  
Kickbacks, in the commercial sense, are the giving or receiving anything of value to influence 
a business decision without the employer’s knowledge and consent. Kickback schemes are 
usually very similar to the billing schemes described in the Asset Misappropriation section. 
They involve the submission of invoices for goods and services that are either overpriced or 
completely fictitious. (See “Kickbacks” flowchart.) 
 
Kickbacks are classified as corruption schemes rather than asset misappropriations because 
they involve collusion between employees and vendors. In a common type of kickback 
scheme, a vendor submits a fraudulent or inflated invoice to the victim organization and an 
employee of that organization helps make sure that a payment is made on the false invoice. 
For his assistance, the employee-fraudster receives a payment from the vendor. This 
payment is the kickback.  
 
Kickback schemes almost always attack the purchasing function of the victim company, so it 
stands to reason that these frauds are often undertaken by employees with purchasing 
responsibilities. Purchasing employees often have direct contact with vendors and therefore 
have an opportunity to establish a collusive relationship.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A purchasing agent redirected a number of orders to a comp any owned by a supplier with 
whom he was conspiring. In return for the additional business, the supplier paid the 
purchasing agent over half the profits from the additional orders. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.703 
  
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.704                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Diverting Business to Vendors 
In some instances, an employee-fraudster receives a kickback simply for directing excess 
business to a vendor. There might be no overbilling involved in these cases; the vendor 
simply pays the kickbacks to ensure a steady stream of business from the purchasing 
company.  
 
If no overbilling is involved in a kickback scheme, one might wonder where the harm lies. 
Assuming the vendor simply wants to get the buyer’s business and does not increase his 
prices or bill for undelivered goods and services, how is the buyer harmed? The problem is 
that, having bought off an employee of the purchasing company, a vendor is no longer 
subject to the normal economic pressures of the marketplace. This vendor does not have to 
compete with other suppliers for the purchasing company’s business, and so has no 
incentive to provide a low price or quality merchandise. In these circumstances the 
purchasing company almost always ends up overpaying for goods or services. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A travel agency provided free travel and entertainment to the purchasing agent of a retail 
company. In return, the purchasing agent agr eed to book all corporate trips through the 
travel agent. The victim company estimated that it paid $10,000 more for airfare over a 
two-year period by booking through the corrupt travel agency than if it had used a different 
company.  
 
Once a vendor knows it has an exclusive purchasing arrangement, its incentive is to raise 
prices to cover the cost of the kickback. Most bribery schemes end up as overbilling 
schemes even if they do not start that way. This is one reason why most business codes of 
ethics prohibit employees from accepting undisclosed gifts from vendors. In the long run, 
the employee’s company is sure to pay for his unethical conduct.   
 
Overbilling Schemes 
EMPLOYEES WITH APPROVAL AUTHORITY 
In most instances, kickback schemes begin as overbilling schemes in which a vendor submits 
inflated invoices to the victim organization. The false invoices either overstate the cost of 
actual goods and services, or reflect fictitious sales. The vendor in a kickback scheme 
generally seeks to enlist the help of an employee with the authority to approve payment of 
the fraudulent invoices. This authority ensures payment of the false billings without  
undue hassles.  
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.705 
EXAMPLE 
A manager was authorized to purchase fixed assets for his company as part of a leasehold 
improvement. The materials he or dered were of a cheaper quality and lower price than what 
was specified, but the contract he negotiated did not reflect this. Therefore, the victim 
company paid for high-quality materials, but received low-quality materials. The difference 
in price between the true cost of the low-quality materials and what the company paid was 
diverted back to the manager as a kickback.  
  
The ability of the employee to authorize purchases (and thus to authorize fraudulent  
purchases) is usually a key to kickback schemes. If the fraudster can authorize payments 
himself, he does not have to submit purchase requisitions to an honest superior who might 
question the validity of the transaction. 
 
FRAUDSTERS LACKING APPROVAL AUTHORITY 
While the majority of kickback schemes involve persons with authority to approve 
purchases, this authority is not an absolute necessity. When an employee cannot approve 
fraudulent purchases himself, he can still orchestrate a kickback scheme if he can circumvent 
accounts payable controls. In some cases, all that is required is the filing of a false purchase 
requisition. If a trusted employee tells his superior that the company needs certain materials 
or services, this is sometimes sufficient to get a false invoice approved for payment. Such 
schemes are generally successful when the person with approval authority is inattentive or 
when he is forced to rely on his subordinate’s guidance in purchasing matters.  
 
Corrupt employees might also prepare false vouchers to make it appear that fraudulent 
invoices are legitimate. Where proper controls are in place, a completed voucher is required 
before accounts payable will pay an invoice. One key is for the fraudster to create a purchase 
order that corresponds to the vendor’s fraudulent invoice. The fraudster might forge the 
signature of an authorized party on the purchase order to show that the acquisition has been 
approved. Where the payables system is computerized, an employee with access to a 
restricted password can enter the system and authorize payments on fraudulent invoices.  
 
In less sophisticated schemes, a corrupt employee might simply take a fraudulent invoice 
from a vendor and slip it into a stack of prepared invoices before they are input into the 
accounts payable system. A more detailed description of how false invoices are processed 
can be found in the Billing Schemes section.  
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.706                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Kickback schemes can be very difficult to detect. In a sense, the victim company is being 
attacked from two directions. Externally, a corrupt vendor submits false invoices that induce 
the victim organization to unknowingly pay for goods or services that it does not receive. 
Internally, one or more of the victim company’s employees waits to corroborate the false 
information provided by the vendor.  
 
Other Kickback Schemes 
Bribes are not always paid to employees to process phony invoices. Some outsiders seek 
other fraudulent assistance from employees of the victim organization. For instance, 
inspectors are sometimes paid off to accept substandard materials, or to accept short 
shipments of goods.  
 
Representatives of companies wishing to purchase goods or services from the victim 
organization at unauthorized discounts sometimes bribe employees with billing authority. 
The corrupt employees make sales to their accomplices at greatly reduced rates?sometimes 
even selling items at a loss?and in return they receive a portion of the discount.  
 
Kickback Payments 
It should also be noted that every bribe is a two-sided transaction. In every case where a 
vendor bribes a purchaser, there is someone on the vendor’s side of the transaction who is 
making  an illicit payment. It is therefore just as likely that your employees are paying bribes as 
accepting them.  
 
In order to obtain the funds to make these payments, employees usually divert company 
money into a slush fund, a noncompany account from whic h bribes can be made. Assuming 
that bribes are not authorized by the briber’s company, he must find a way to generate the 
funds necessary to illegally influence someone in another organization. Therefore, the key to 
the crime from the briber’s perspective is the di version of money into the slush fund. This is 
a fraudulent disbursement of company funds, which is usually accomplished by the writing 
of company checks to a fictitious entity or the submitting of false invoices in the name of a 
false entity. Payments to a slush fund are commonly coded as “fees” for consulting or other 
services.  
 
It is common to charge fraudulent disbursements to nebulous accounts like “consulting 
fees.” The purchase of goods can be verified by a check of inventory, but there is no 
inventory for these kinds of services. It is therefore more difficult to prove that the 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.707 
payments are fraudulent. The discussion of exactly how fraudulent disbursements are made 
can be found in the sections on Check Tampering and Invoices.  
 
Bid-Rigging Schemes 
As we have said, when one person pays a bribe to another, he does so to gain the benefit of 
the recipient’s influence. The competitive bidding process, in which several suppliers or 
contractors are vying for contracts in what can be a very cutthroat environment, is tailor-made 
for bribery. Any advantage one vendor can gain over his competitors in this arena is 
extremely valuable. The benefit of “inside influence” can ensure that a vendor will win a 
sought-after contract. Many vendors are willing to pay for this influence.  
 
In the competitive bidding process, all bidders are legally supposed to be placed on the same 
plane of equality, bidding on the same terms and conditions. Each bidder competes for a 
contract based on the specifications set forth by the purchasing company. Vendors submit 
confidential bids stating the price at which they will complete a project in accordance with 
the purchaser’s specifications. 
 
The way competitive bidding is rigged depends largely upon the level of influence of the 
corrupt employee. The more power a person has over the bidding process, the more likely 
the person can influence the selection of a supplier. Therefore, employees involved in bid-
 rigging schemes, like those in kickback schemes, tend to have a good measure of influence 
or access to the competitive bidding process. Potential targets for accepting bribes include 
buyers, contracting officials, engineers and technical representatives, quality or product 
assurance representatives, subcontractor liaison employees, or anyone else with authority 
over the awarding of contracts. 
 
Bid-rigging schemes can be categorized based on the stage of bidding at which the fraudster 
exerts his influence. Bid-rigging schemes usually occur in the presolicitation phase, the 
solicitation phase, or the submission phase of the bidding process. (See “Bid-Rigging” 
flowchart.) 
 
The Presolicitation Phase 
In the presolicitation phase of the competitive bidding process—before bids are officially 
sought for a project—bribery schemes can be brok en down into two distinct types. The first 
is the need recognition scheme, where an employee of a purchasing company is paid to 
convince his company that a particular project is necessary. The second reason to bribe 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.708                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
someone in the presolicitation phase is to have the specifications of the contract tailored to 
the strengths of a particular supplier.  
 
NEED RECOGNITION SCHEMES 
The typical fraud in the need recognition phase of the contract negotiation is a conspiracy 
between the buyer and contractor where an employee of the buyer receives something of 
value and in return recognizes a “need” for a particular product or service. The result of 
such a scheme is that the victim organization purchases unnecessary goods or services from 
a supplier at the direction of the corrupt employee.  
 
There are several trends that may indicate a need recognition fraud. Unusually high 
requirements for stock and inventory levels may reveal a situation in which a corrupt 
employee is seeking to justify unnecessary purchase activity from a certain supplier. An 
employee might also justify unnecessary purchases of inventory by writing off large numbers 
of surplus items to scrap. As these items leave the inventory, they open up spaces to justify 
additional purchases. Another indicator of a need recognition scheme is the defining of a 
“need” that can only be met by a certain supplier or contractor. In addition, the failure to 
develop a satisfactory list of backup suppliers may reveal an unusually strong attachment to a 
primary supplier — an attachment that is explainable by the acceptance of bribes from that 
supplier.  
 
SPECIFICATIONS SCHEMES 
The other type of presolicitation fraud is a specifications scheme. The specifications of a 
contract are a list of the elements, materials, dimensions, and other relevant requirements for 
completion of the project. Specifications are prepared to assist vendors in the bidding 
process, telling them what they are required to do and providing a firm basis for making and 
accepting bids.  
 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.709 
 
 
  
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.710                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
One corruption scheme that occurs in this process is the fraudulent tailoring of 
specifications to a particular vendor. In these cases, the vendor pays off an employee of the 
buyer who is involved in preparing specifications for the contract. In return, the employee 
tailors the specifications to accommodate that vendor’s capabilities so that the contractor is 
effectively assured of winning the contract.  
 
The methods used to restrict competition in the bidding process may include the use of 
“prequalification” procedures that are known to eliminate certain competitors. For instance, 
the bid may require potential contractors to have a certain percentage of female or minority 
ownership. There is nothing illegal with such a requirement, but if it is placed in the 
specifications as a result of a bribe rather than as the result of other factors, then the 
employee has sold his influence to benefit a dishonest vendor, a clear case of corruption.  
 
Some employees distort the requirements of contracts by claiming the specifications called 
for a sole-source provider or noncompetitive procurement. This causes competitive bidding 
to be disregarded and the contract to be awarded to a particular supplier. The supplier 
typically charges a much higher price than the company could have obtained through 
bidding. Sole-source or noncompetitive procurement justifications may also be used to 
eliminate competition and steer contracts to a particular vendor.  
 
EXAMPLE  
A requisitioner distorted the requirements of a contract up for bid, claiming the 
specifications called for a sole-source provider. Based on the requisitioner’s information, 
competitive bidding was disregarded and the cont ract was awarded to a particular supplier. 
A review of other bids received at a later date showed that certain materials were available 
for up to $70,000 less than what the company paid in the sole-source arrangement. The 
employee had helped divert the job to the contractor in return for a promise of future 
employment. 
 
Another form of specifications fraud is bid splitting. Entities are often required to solicit 
bids on projects over a certain dollar amount. In order to avoid this requirement, employees 
might break a large project up into several small projects that fall below the mandatory 
bidding level. Once the contract is split, the employee can award some or all of the 
component parts to a contractor with whom he is conspiring.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.711 
A less egregious but nevertheless unfair form of bid-rigging occurs when a vendor pays an 
employee of the buyer for the right to see the specifications earlier than his competitors. The 
employee does not alter the specifications to suit the vendor, but instead simply gives him a 
head start on planning his bid and preparing for the job.  
 
The Solicitation Phase 
In the solicitation phase of the competitive bidding process, fraudsters attempt to influence 
the selection of a contractor by restricting the pool of competitors from whom bids are 
sought. In other words, a corrupt vendor pays an employee of the purchasing company to 
ensure that one or more of the vendor’s competitors do not get to bid on the contract. In 
this manner, the corrupt vendor is able to improve his chances of winning the job.  
 
One type of scheme involves the sales representative who deals on behalf of a number of 
potential bidders. The sales representative bribes a contracting official to rig the solicitation, 
ensuring that only those companies represented by him get to submit bids. It is not 
uncommon in some sectors for buyers to “require” bidders to be represented by certain sales 
or manufacturing representatives. These representatives pay a kickback to the buyer to 
protect their clients’ interests. The result of this transaction is that the purchasing company is 
deprived of the ability to get the best price on its contract. Typically, the group of 
“protected” vendors will not actually compete against each other for the purchaser’s 
contracts, but instead engage in “bid pooling.”   
 
BID POOLING 
Bid pooling is a process by which several bidders conspire to split contracts up and ensure 
that each gets a certain amount of work. Instead of submitting confidential bids, the vendors 
discuss what their bids will be so they can guarantee that each vendor will win a share of the 
purchasing company’s business. For example, if vendors A, B, and C are up for three 
separate jobs, they may agree that A’s bid will be the lowest on the first contract, B’s bid will 
be the lowest on the second contract, and C’s bid will be the lowest on the third contract. 
None of the vendors gets all three jobs, but on the other hand, they are all guaranteed to get 
at least one. Furthermore, since they plan their bids ahead of time, the vendors can conspire 
to raise their prices. Thus the purchasing company suffers as a result of the scheme.  
 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.712                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FICTITIOUS SUPPLIERS 
Another way to eliminate competition in the solicitation phase of the selection process is to 
solicit bids from fictitious suppliers. This gives the appearance of a competitive bidding 
situation, when in fact only one real supplier bids on the job. Furthermore, the real 
contractor can raise his prices, since the other bids are fraudulent and sure to be higher than 
his own. In effect, the bids from fictitious suppliers serve to validate the exaggerated quote 
from the real contractor. 
 
OTHER METHODS    
In some cases, competition for a contract can be limited by severely restricting the time for 
submitting bids. Certain suppliers are given advanced notice of contracts before bids are 
solicited. These suppliers are therefore able to begin preparing their bids ahead of time. With 
the short time frame for developing bid proposals, the supplier with advance knowledge of 
the contract will have a decided advantage over his competition.  
 
Bribed purchasing officials can also restrict competition for their coconspirators by soliciting 
bids in obscure publications where other vendors are unlikely to see them. Again, this is 
done to eliminate potential rivals and create an advantage for the corrupt suppliers. Some 
schemes have also involved the publication of bid solicitations during holiday periods when 
those suppliers not “in the know” are unlikely to be looking for potential contracts. In more 
blatant cases, the bids of outsiders are accepted but are “lost” or improperly disqualified by 
the corrupt employee of the purchaser.  
 
Frequently, when a vendor bribes an employee of the purchasing company to assist him in 
any kind of solicitation scheme, the cost of the bribe is included in the corrupt vendor’s bid. 
Therefore, the purchasing company ends up bearing the cost of the illicit payment in the 
form of a higher contract price.  
 
The Submission Phase 
In the actual submission phase of the process, where bids are proffered to the buyer, several 
schemes may be used to win a contract for a particular supplier. The principal offense tends 
to be abuse of the sealed bid process. Competitive bids are confidential; they are, of course, 
supposed to remain sealed until a specified date at which all bids are opened and reviewed by 
the purchasing company. The person or persons who have access to sealed bids are often 
the targets of unethical vendors seeking an advantage in the process.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.713 
EXAMPLE 
Gifts and cash payments were given to a majority owner of a company in exchange for 
preferential treatment during the bidding process. The supplier who paid the bribes was 
allowed to submit his bids last, knowing what prices his competitors had quoted, or in the 
alternative, he was allowed to actually see his competitors’ bids and adjust his own 
accordingly.  
 
Vendors also bribe employees of the purchaser for confidential information that will help 
them prepare their bid. Other reasons to bribe employees of the purchaser include ensuring 
receipt of a late bid or falsify the bid log, to extend the bid opening date, and to control bid 
openings.  
 
Economic Extortion 
Economic extortion cases are the “Pay up or else …” corruption schemes; basically the flip 
side of bribery schemes. Instead of a vendor offering a payment to influence a decision, an 
employee demands that a vendor pay him in order to make a decision in that vendor’s favor. 
If the vendor refuses to pay, he faces some harm such as a loss of business with the 
extorter’s company. In any situation where an employee might accept bribes to favor a 
particular company or person, the situation could be reversed to a point where the employee 
extorts money from a potential purchaser or supplier.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A plant manager for a utility company started his own business on the side. Vendors who 
wanted to do work for the utility company were  forced by the manager to divert some of 
their business to his own compan y. Those that did not “play ball” lost their business with 
the utility.  
 
Illegal Gratuities 
Illegal gratuities are similar to bribery schemes except there is not necessarily an intent to 
influence a particular business decision before the fact. In the typical illegal gratuities 
scenario, a decision is made that happens to benefit a certain person or company. The party 
who benefited from the decision then gives a gift to the person who made the decision. The 
gift could be anything of value. An illegal gratuity does not require proof of an intent  
to influence. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.714                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A city commissioner negotiated a land developm ent deal with a group of private investors. 
After the deal was approved, the commissioner and his wife were rewarded with a free 
international vacation, all expenses paid.  
 
At first glance, it may seem that illegal gratuities schemes are harmless as long as the business 
decisions in question are not influenced by the promise of payment. But most company 
ethics policies forbid employees from accepting unreported gifts from vendors. One reason 
is that illegal gratuities schemes can (and do) evolve into bribery schemes. Once an employee 
has been rewarded for an act such as directing business to a particular supplier, an 
understanding might be reached that future decisions beneficial to the supplier will also be 
rewarded. Additionally, even though an outright promise of payment has not been made, 
employees may direct business to certain companies in the hope that they will be rewarded 
with money or gifts. 
 
Methods of Making Illegal Payments 
Certain traditional methods of making illegal payments fall into the hierarchical pattern 
described below. 
 
Gifts, Travel, and Entertainment 
Most bribery (corruption) schemes begin with gifts and favors. Commonly encountered 
items include: 
• Wine and liquor (consumable) 
• Clothes and jewelry for the recipient or spouse 
• Sexual favors 
• Lavish entertainment 
• Paid vacations 
• Free transportation on corporate jets 
• Free use of resort facilities 
• Gifts of the briber’s inventory or services, such as construction of home improvements 
by a contractor 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.715 
Cash Payments 
The next step usually involves cash payments. However, cash is not practical when dealing 
with large sums, because large amounts are difficult to generate, and they draw attention 
when they are deposited or spent. The use of currency in major transactions might itself be 
incriminating. 
 
Checks and Other Financial Instruments 
As the scheme grows, illicit payments are often made by normal business check, cashier’s 
check, or wire transfer. Disguised payments on the payer’s books appear as some sort of 
legitimate business expense, often as consulting fees. Payments can be made directly or 
through an intermediary. 
 
Hidden Interests 
In the latter stages of sophisticated schemes, the payer might give a hidden interest in a joint 
venture or other profit-making enterprise. The recipient’s interest might be concealed 
through a straw nominee, hidden in a trust or other business entity, or merely included by an 
undocumented verbal agreement. Such arrangements are very difficult to detect, and even if 
identified, proof of corrupt intent might be difficult to demonstrate.  
 
Loans  
Three types of “loans” often turn up in fraud cases: 
• A prior outright payment falsely described as an innocent loan. 
• Payments on a legitimate loan guaranteed or actually made by someone else. 
• An actual loan made on favorable terms, such as interest-free. 
 
Payment of Credit Card Bills  
The recipient’s transportation, vacation, and en tertainment expenses might be paid with the 
payer’s credit card, or the recipient might forward his own credit card bills to the payer for 
payment. In some instances, the payer simply lets the recipient carry and use the payer’s card. 
 
Transfers at Other than Fair Market Value  
The corrupt payer might sell or lease property to the recipient at far less than its market 
value, or might agree to buy or rent property at inflated prices. The recipient might also 
“sell” an asset to the payer, but retain title or the use of the property. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.716                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Promises of Favorable Treatment  
Promises of favorable treatment commonly take the following forms: 
• A payer might promise a governmental official lucrative employment when the recipient 
leaves government service. 
• An executive leaving a private company for a related government position might be 
given favorable or inflated retirement and separation benefits. 
• The spouse or other relative of the intended recipient might also be employed by the 
payer company at an inflated salary or with little actual responsibility. 
 
 
Detection of Bribery Schemes 
 
Red Flags of Bribery Schemes 
Most bribery schemes are detected thr ough tips from honest and disgruntled coworkers or 
vendors. These allegations can be evaluated through analysis of the “red flags” associated 
with the suspect people or transactions.  
 
The Corrupt Recipient 
A person taking payoffs or embezzling funds often exhibits the following characteristics: 
• The Big Spender — This is the most common way to detect corrupt recipients. Some 
recipients spend their money less conspicuously by paying off debts or paying down 
mortgages.  
• The Gift Taker — An official or executive who regularly accepts inappropriate gifts is often 
one susceptible to larger payments. 
• The “Odd Couple” — Corrupt payers and recipients often  appear to have very friendly 
social relationships. Frequent outside contacts, particularly between parties who do not 
appear to have much in common, might be a sign of deeper and more troublesome ties 
between the parties. 
• The Rule Breaker — This is often the most significant characteristic. A person taking 
payoffs will often take action on his own, or direct a subordinate to bend, break, or 
ignore standard operating procedures or rules to benefit the payer. Particular attention 
should be directed toward those who insert themselves into areas in which they are 
normally not involved or attempt to assert authority or make decisions for which they 
are not responsible. 
• The Complainer — A corrupt recipient often makes excuses for deficiencies in the payer’s 
services, such as poor quality, late deliveries, or high prices. Look for higher prices, 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.717 
“extra” payments, or commissions approved by the suspect, because these might be the 
source of kickback fraud. 
• Genuine Need — Greed, rather than need, seems to be the motivating factor in most cases. 
Occasionally, however, legitimate pressures, such as illness of family members or drug 
addiction, can induce participation in an illegal scheme. 
 
The Corrupt Payer 
Like the recipients of bribery payments, the payer will also demonstrate certain identifiable 
characteristics: 
• The Gift Bearer — The businessperson who routinely offers inappropriate gifts, provides 
lavish business entertainment, or otherwise tries to ingratiate himself is often the one 
offering still more valuable inducements. 
• The Sleaze Factor — The corrupt payer is frequently a person known or suspected in the 
industry to be involved in payoffs or other fraudulent activities. 
• The Too-Successful Bidder — A supplier who is consistently awarded work, without any 
apparent competitive advantage, might be providing under-the-table incentives. 
• Poor Quality, Higher Prices — Particularly after the corrupt relationship has been sealed, the 
quality of product and service provided by the payer might deteriorate and prices 
increase. 
• The One-Person Operation — In certain industries, small, closely held companies that do not 
have the reporting and internal control requirements of their larger, publicly held 
competitors resort to payoffs as a means of marketing advantage. Be alert for 
independent sales representatives, consultants, or other middlemen, because they are 
favored conduits for funneling and concealing illegal payments. 
 
General Purchasing  
The following practices may indicate that single (sole) source vendors are being favored, or 
competitive bidding policies are not being followed:  
• Materials are not being ordered at the optimal reorder point.  
• Orders are consistently made from the same vendor. 
• Established bidding policies are not being followed. 
• The costs of materials are out of line. 
 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.718                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Presolicitation  
Restrictions in an organization’s solicitation documents that tend to restrict competition are 
a red flag. Examples of restrictive conditions include: 
• Specifications and statements of work that are tailored to fit the products or capabilities 
of a single contractor. 
• “Prequalification” procedures that restrict competition. 
• Unnecessary sole-source or noncompetitive procurement justifications: 
? Containing false statements 
? Signed by unauthorized officials 
? Bypassing necessary review procedures 
 
Other red flags in the presolicitation phase include:   
• A buyer who provides information or advice to a contractor on a preferential basis. 
• New vendors that are added to the “qualified” list for no apparent reason. 
• Statements of work, specifications, or sole-source justifications that are developed by, or 
in consultation with, a contractor who will be permitted to bid. 
• Consultants who assisted in the preparation of the statements of work, specifications, or 
design, and are later permitted to work on the contract as subcontractors or consultants. 
• Projects that are split into smaller contracts to avoid review. 
• Information that is released by firms participating in the design and engineering to 
contractors competing for the prime contract. 
• Requirements that are split up so contractors can each get a “fair share” and can rotate 
bids. 
• Specifications that are not consistent with similar procurements in the past. 
 
Bid Solicitation 
The following are examples of suspicious activity that might signal fraud in the bid 
solicitation phase:   
• The time for submitting bids is limited so that only those with advance information have 
adequate time to prepare bids or proposals. 
• One contractor receives confidential information that is not revealed to his competitors. 
• The conducting of a bidders’ conference, which permits improper communications 
between contractors, who then are in a position to rig bids. 
• The failure to ensure that a sufficient number of potential competitors are aware of the 
solicitation by: 
? Using obscure publications to publish bid solicitations. 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.719 
? Publishing bid solicitations during holiday periods. 
• Bid solicitations that are vague as to the time, place, or other requirements for submitting 
acceptable bids. 
• Inadequate internal controls over the number and destination of bid packages sent to 
interested bidders. 
• Improper communication between purchasers and contractors at trade or professional 
meetings. 
• Improper social contact between purchasers and contractor representatives. 
• A purchasing agent who has a financial interest in the business of a contractor. 
• A purchaser who discusses possible employment with a contractor. 
• The purchaser assisting a contractor in the preparation of his bid. 
• A contractor being referred to a specific subcontractor, expert, or source of supply by an 
employee of the purchasing organization. 
• The failure to amend a solicitation to include necessary changes or clarifications in the 
bid, such as telling one contractor of changes that can be made after the bid. 
• The falsification of documents or receipts so that a late bid is accepted. 
• Any indications of collusion between bidders. 
• The falsification of a contractor’s qualifications, work history, facilities, equipment,  
or personnel. 
 
Bid Submission or Contract Acceptance  
Red flags in the submission and post-submission phase of the bidding process include the 
following: 
• Procurement that has been restricted to exclude or hamper any qualified contractor. 
• The improper acceptance of a late bid. 
• A bidder who always bids last on contracts and consistently wins them. 
• The falsification of documents or receipts to get a late bid accepted. 
• Bids that are changed after other bidders’ pri ces are known. This is sometimes done by 
mistakes deliberately “planted” in a bid. 
• A low bidder who withdraws to become a subcontractor of a higher bidder who gets  
the contract. 
• Collusion between bidders. 
• Bidders who reveal their prices to one another. 
• Bids tend to be awarded in a geographic pattern or in a noticeable rotation. 
• Bids for a particular type of work are always awarded to a particular company. 
• False certifications by a contractor. 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.720                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The falsification of information concerning contractor qualifications, financial capability, 
facilities, ownership of equipment and supplies, qualifications of personnel, and 
successful performance of previous jobs, etc. 
 
Methods of Proving Corrupt Payments 
There are three basic ways to prove illegal payments: identify and trace them by audit steps, 
turn an inside witness, or secretly infiltrate or record ongoing transactions. An audit might 
focus on the point of suspected payment or receipt, or both. As a very general proposition, 
suspected on-book schemes are best approached from the point of payment, and off-book 
schemes are most easily identified at the suspected point of receipt, or through the use of an 
inside witness, or surveillance. 
 
The Business Profile — Analysis 
The business profile  begins the examination process. It identifies prospective witnesses and 
targets, as well as relevant documents and transactions, and should provide leads as to 
whether an on-book or off-book scheme is being used. 
 
Information of the suspect business should be obtained about the organization, personnel, 
money flow pattern (source of available funds, related expenditures, etc.), location of bank 
accounts, financial condition, and recordkeeping system. This information can be obtained 
through interviews of employees, customers, and competitors; business bank account and 
loan records; financial statements; tax returns; business reporting companies; and business 
public filings. 
 
HOW IS THE BUSINESS ORGANIZED, LEGALLY AND STRUCTURALLY? 
Knowing this information helps determine what records are available (corporate, 
partnership, etc.) and where to go to get them. 
 
WHO ARE THE KEY PERSONNEL ASSOCIATED WITH THE ENTERPRISE? 
This helps to identify potential witnesses and informants, as well as possible subjects. Key 
positions include the owners of the business; the people directly involved in the suspect 
transactions, including secretarial and clerical staff, present and former employees; the 
“number crunchers”; the bookkeeper, outside accountants, and tax preparers; outside 
consultants, sales representatives, and independent contractors (a popular conduit for 
payoffs); and competitors (often eager witnesses who can identify leads to sources of off-
 book funds such as customers and rebate practices). 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.721 
WHAT IS THE MONEY FLOW PATTERN INVOLVED IN THE SUSPECT TRANSACTION? 
Tracing the flow of funds in the suspect transactions is important. Where does the money 
come from and where does it go? Information about the source of funds can provide leads 
as to whether an on-book or off-book scheme is being employed, and the location of  
off-book accounts. Expenditures related to the suspect transactions might cover  
on-book payments. 
 
Determine all sources of funds with the following questions: 
• What goods or services does the business provide? 
• Who are its customers or clients? 
• What mode of payment is used: cash or check? 
• What other sources of funds are available, such as rebates from suppliers and shippers, 
or proceeds of insurance claims, liquidation sales, sale of assets, and loans? 
 
Identify all expenditures associated with the suspect transactions with the following: 
• What disbursements are made to third parties, such as commissioned sales agents, 
consultants, subcontractors, suppliers, and shippers? 
• Did the business have any extraordinary expenses during the suspect time period, such 
as extra commissions, advertising allowances (payments made by a manufacturer to the 
retail customer to assist the customer in meeting its advertising expenses), or inventory 
losses? 
• How are the expenses and disbursements paid: by cash, or by check? From which 
accounts? 
• Does the business maintain an account or fund used to pay miscellaneous expenses? If 
so, where is it located, who keeps the records, and who signs the checks or authorizes 
payments? 
• How are travel and entertainment expenses reimbursed? From which account? 
• What is the company’s policy toward business gifts? What gifts were given to the suspect 
and/or recipients? How were they paid for? Which records are maintained regarding 
them? 
 
WHERE ARE THE COMPANY’S BANK ACCOUNTS? 
Find out where the business deposits its receipts. This is quickly determined from the bank 
stamp on checks deposited from customers. Identify all company accounts by bank, account 
number, and authorized signature. 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.722                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
WHAT IS THE FINANCIAL CONDITION OF THE BUSINESS? 
This data might provide evidence of a motive for the fraud, or the fruits thereof. 
 
WHAT IS THE COMPANY’S RECORD-KEEPING SYSTEM? 
What kind of records does the company keep? For how long, and where are they kept? Who 
maintains them? 
 
Sources of Information for the Business Profile 
PRINCIPALS, EMPLOYEES, AND RECORDS OF SUSPECT BUSINESS 
People suspected of making illegal payments might submit to an interview, particularly if 
they are confident that the payments are well hidden. Interviews should also include other 
key employees (including the financial personnel) involved in the suspect transactions, 
particularly those who have since left the company. Use the Business Profile as a guide to 
questioning.  
 
CUSTOMERS AND COMPETITORS 
In a kickback case, the “customer” (agency) is the employer of the person taking payoffs, 
and is also the victim of the crime. Customers and competitors can provide valuable 
information about the payer’s business operation, particularly concerning the payer’s regular 
bank account, which can be identified through canceled checks. The customer might also 
have invoices and shipping documents that might lead to off-book funds. 
 
BANKS AND LENDING INSTITUTIONS 
The business’s banker might have credit applications, financial statements, loan files, and 
bank account information that might help the examiner. 
 
BUSINESS REPORTING COMPANIES 
Dun & Bradstreet and other commercial reporting companies disseminate basic information 
about the size, structure, sales, and employees of the business. Information about larger 
companies is found in Standard & Poors and other business directories. Other information 
on public record information is located in the “Sources of Information” chapter in the 
Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.723 
Proving On-Book Payments 
There are three basic methods for concealing on-book payments of bribes and/or kickbacks. 
They are fictitious payables, ghost employees, and overbilling. The following are the 
examination steps for identifying and tracing these payments.  
 
Fictitious Disbursement Schemes 
In order to examine on-book payments, obtain the following records from the entity 
suspected of making the illegal payments: 
 
BANK ACCOUNT INFORMATION 
• All records of payments, canceled checks, wire transfer receipts, receipts for the 
purchase of cashier’s checks and money orders, and withdrawal slips 
• Check registers 
• Account statements 
 
SALES BACKUP DOCUMENTATION 
• Purchase orders 
• Invoices 
• Documents showing receipt of goods ordered 
 
ACCOUNTING BOOKS AND RECORDS 
Examine the cash disbursement journals and ledgers. The most important of the above 
information (and often the only information needed) is the bank account information. Begin 
by examining the checks, check register, and/or the cash disbursement journal and paying 
particular attention to the following: 
• Payables and expenses charged to the account (cust omer) on which the illicit payments were made — If 
the examiner suspects that kickbacks were paid on sales to the ABC Corporation, for 
example, look at the payables and expenses charged to that account/customer. 
• Payments for services — Check payments for services such as sales commissions or 
consulting fees, which do not require the delivery of goods and need relatively little 
documentation to obtain payment. 
• Anomalous charges — For the business, an example of anomalous payments can be those 
for design fees paid by a company that is engaged in business that normally would not 
require such services.  
• The endorsement on the check — This might be by signature, or more commonly, by a stamp 
in the name of the business payee. Note the identity of the endorser. (Some corrupt 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.724                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
recipients have been known to endorse such checks in their own name.) 
• The location where the check was negotiated —If not obvious from the endorsement, identify 
the bank where the deposit was made by checking the depository bank’s stamp on the 
back of the check. The geographical location of the depository bank is an important lead 
that can connect the check to the suspected recipient. Determining the depository bank’s 
identity is critical to obtaining the recipient’s bank account information. 
• Checks with a second endorsement — A typical indication of a phony payable check is one paid 
to, and endorsed by, a business, which is then endorsed by an individual, thereby 
permitting it to be cashed or deposited in a personal account. In similar fashion, a check 
payable to a third party can be signed over to the issuer of the check. 
• Cashed (not deposited) checks payable to a business — Generally, a “For Deposit Only” stamp 
appears on the back of deposited checks, although this is not always the case. Most 
banks have a code stamp that indicates whether the check was cashed or not. These 
codes vary, and can be obtained from the bank where the check was negotiated. 
• Checks that fall into an unexplained pattern — An example of a suspicious payable scheme is 
one where checks are drawn once a month in an amount equal to some percentage of 
the sales against which they are charged, and are not otherwise explained. Such a pattern 
might indicate a kickback scheme. If an examination of the checks themselves does not 
yield any clear leads, compare the various records of payment with the backup 
documentation. Note particularly the following circumstances: 
• The absence of documentation — The absence of documentation to support a particular 
payment can include: 
? No invoice appearing in the files for a payment to a supplier or contractor. 
? No receipt to indicate that materials paid for were delivered. 
? No consultant’s work product to substantiate consulting fees paid. 
• Discrepancies — Discrepancies between payment information and backup documentation 
can include: 
? A check payable to a supplier in an amount different than his invoice. 
? A check payable to a person or entity different than that identified on the invoice. 
• Anomalies in support documents — Anomalies in the backup documentation can include 
invoices from several suppliers in different names that: 
? Have the same business address. 
? Are signed by the same person. 
? Returned to a post office box.  
• Unnumbered or sequentially numbered invoices — An example of an invoice scam uses invoices 
numbered 101, 102, and 103, which are dated 30 days apart. Of course, it is highly 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.725 
unlikely that a legitimate business would refrain from issuing invoices in the interim. 
• Alterations — Copies of originals can be made for concealing alterations of original 
documents. Examples can include alterations or photocopies of backup papers.  
• Location and other information on the invoices that tie it to the suspected recipient — If the above 
steps still do not yield any suspect payments, return to the check registers and cash 
disbursement journals to look for discrepancies between the entries and the checks or 
backup documentation, or their absence. The register and journals might also indicate 
the purpose of payments made by wire, cashier’s check, or cash. 
 
TRACING PROCEDURES  
When a suspect payment has been isolated, begin the tracing process. Remember that the 
phony payable might go directly to the recipient (deposited in a shell account), or through an 
intermediary account, person, or entity. It might even be converted to cash by the payer, and 
the cash given to the recipient. 
 
In instances where the identity of the individual recipient is not clear from the face of the 
check (as in checks payable to a business entity), do the following: 
• Examine the back of the check. Note where the check was deposited, and the account 
number, if available. If the check is not endorsed, the bank will still be able to locate the 
account to which it was deposited through its own internal records.  
• Obtain the records of the account where the check was deposited. The signature card 
and the monthly account statement will show the nominal account holder. In the case of 
business accounts, the bank should also have a copy of the corporate resolution or 
partnership agreement authorizing the account. 
• If the identity of the individual recipient is still not clear, check the public filings required 
of business entities to determine ownership. Corporate documents (articles of 
incorporation, annual reports, and some other basic documents) and limited partnerships 
might also be filed in some jurisdictions at the county level. The fictitious name index, 
business license files, telephone billing records, and even utility billing records can also 
lead to the identity of the principals.  
• If the original check is missing or has been destroyed, a microfilm copy can be obtained 
from the bank on which the check was drawn. (The bank where the check was deposited 
will also have a microfilm copy of the check. Unless the exact date of deposit and the 
identity of the depository bank are known, it will be very difficult to locate it.) 
• Payments by wire transfer or cashier’s check  can be traced to the recipient. A wire 
transfer from an account appears on that account statement as a debit memo (often 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.726                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
abbreviated as DM ). The Wire Transfer Request should show the name of the purchaser, 
the payee, and the bank and account number to which the funds were transferred. The 
sender receives a copy of this request, and the bank also maintains a copy, which is 
usually filed by date. 
• The bank’s retained copy of a cashier’s check will identify the payee. The bank also keeps 
the negotiated check when it is returned for payment. It will contain the endorsement 
and show where it was negotiated. Banks usually file cashier’s checks by number, making 
it necessary to know the approximate date they were issued to link them to the 
purchasers. Look for a cashier’s check or wire transfer on the dates of suspect cash 
withdrawals, checks to cash, or checks to the issuing bank. Remember that such 
instruments can be purchased for cash from any bank, not only from the bank where the 
payer’s account is located. 
• If the trail described above leads to an intermediary, the entire process must be repeated.  
 
Ghost Employee Schemes 
Illicit funds can be generated by funneling phony salary payments to fictitious or former 
employees, or by making extra payments to presently salaried employees who then either 
return them to the payer or pass them on to the recipient. This is in addition to ghost 
employee schemes used for embezzlement, described previously. To trace such payments, 
payroll and employee lists, personnel files, employment applications, tax withholding forms, 
and payroll checks should be obtained from the suspect payer company. 
 
Attempt to identify the ghost through the following steps: 
• Compare a list of all current and former employees from the personnel office to the 
payroll list. Note discrepancies. Determine whether any employees have failed to execute 
tax withholding forms, or have not elected to receive any health benefits or other 
optional withdrawals, such as enforced savings plans. The absence of such elections is 
often an indication that the employee does not exist. 
• A regular employee’s normal salary might also  be inflated, or, more commonly, travel 
and expense reimbursements might be padded to generate illicit funds. Look for unusual 
disbursements from the accounts in which such checks are deposited. 
 
Once a suspect paycheck has been identified, determine whether the check was cashed or 
deposited. Note the endorsement, the bank, and account where the check was deposited. 
Determine whether there are any second endorsements that might transfer the check to the 
ultimate recipient. 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.727 
Overbilling Schemes 
As described above, illicit funds might be added to legitimate payments for goods or services 
provided by actual suppliers, subcontractors, engineers, and agents, with the additional 
amounts being passed on by the supplier or returned to the payer (usually in cash) for 
distribution. 
 
Obtain the same records required for tracing phony payables—bank account information, 
backup documentation, and accounting records—from both the original payer and the 
intermediary. Note the following indicators of suspect payments to the intermediary: 
• Notations on invoices or other billing documents breaking out “extra” or “special” 
charges, particularly those that require no delivery of goods for payment. 
• Discrepancies between the purchase order or invoice amounts and the amount of 
payment. Particularly note invoices that appear to have been altered or copied. 
• Unusually large amounts appearing on particular bills, or bills that break a consistent 
pattern of amounts, schedule, or purpose. 
 
Disbursements from the intermediary might be covered in the same ways as in other on-
 book schemes, such as by means of phony payables, direct cash withdrawals, or 
disbursements charged to miscellaneous accounts, such as travel or entertainment. The 
tracing process is the same as in any on-book scheme. Remember that the overbilling entity 
will usually add its own fee for providing such services. Therefore, the disbursements 
coming from its account might not be in the same amount as the additional payments made 
to it. 
 
Proving Off-Book Payments 
Identifying and tracing off-book payments is usually more difficult than locating on-book 
schemes. Success generally depends upon identifying the source of the funds or accounts 
(from which payments can be traced out), using an inside witness, and focusing on the point 
of receipt. The source of off-book funds might be located by the following: 
 
Indirect Evidence of Unrecorded Sales on the Suspect Company’s Books and Records 
The suspect company’s books and records might reflect unusual costs and expenses not 
associated with the business’s known sales, such as rental payments for an undisclosed 
warehouse, shipping documents reflecting deliveries to an unlisted customer, and 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.728                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
commissions paid to sales agents in a region where sales are not reported. These indicate 
possible unrecorded sales. 
 
Unbalanced Ratios of Costs to Sales 
The cost of producing and selling a particular item usually bears some fixed relationship to 
the revenue it generates. A significant imbalance in such a ratio, such as in a situation where 
twice the supplies are ordered than are needed to produce the reported sales (and the extra is 
not located in inventory), indicates possible unrecorded transactions. This technique is used 
to identify unreported sales by bars and restaurants. 
 
Investigation in the Marketplace 
Customers of the suspect business whose payments might have been diverted to off-book 
accounts might have records, including canceled checks, which would reflect such sales, and 
the bank and account to which the funds were deposited. Customers might also reveal cash 
payments that could be used to create a slush fund. Additionally, competitors might be 
aware of other customers and transactions that could lead to evidence of off-book sales. 
 
Proving Payments in Cash  
The following techniques can be used to prove cash payments circumstantially, or to 
corroborate testimony of such payments by an inside witness: 
• Match evidence of cash withdrawals or disb ursements by the payer with corresponding 
deposits, expenditures, or visits to a safe deposit box by the recipient. 
• Look for the purchase of cashier’s checks, trav eler’s checks, or wire transfers payable to 
the recipient at, or shortly after, cash withdrawals or disbursements. Also look for a 
correlation between cash-generating transactions and money wires or courier services, 
which are sometimes used to send cash. 
• If the scheme is ongoing, consider the use of visual or electronic surveillance (if you’re a 
member of law enforcement), or try to introduce an undercover agent or implement a 
sting operation. 
• Unexplained or unusual cash disbursements or withdrawals, particularly from a business 
that does not normally deal in cash, might itself indicate illicit transactions, or 
corroborate such testimony. To be effective, the examiner must identify and rebut all 
legitimate explanations, which usually requires interviewing the payer. 
• Focus the investigation on the suspected recipient, as discussed below. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.729 
EXAMINATION FROM THE POINT OF RECEIPT 
Often, the only practical approach to identifying and tracing illegal payments is to focus on 
the suspected recipient, particularly if the person making the payments is unknown, one 
person is suspected of taking from many, the payments are in cash or from off-book funds, 
and so on. 
 
THE FINANCIAL/BEHAVIORAL PROFILE 
The Financial/Behavioral Profile is outlined in the “Tracing Illicit Transactions” chapter in 
the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. The Financial Profile will identify 
most illicit funds deposited to accounts or expended in significant amounts. It will not reveal 
relatively small currency transactions, particularly if they were for concealed activities, 
consumables, or unusual one-time expenses, such as medical bills. The Financial Profile 
might give inaccurate or false negative readings unless such activities are identified. This is 
done through preparation of the Behavioral Profile. During the interview be alert and review 
documents for signs that the target has: 
• A drug and/or alcohol addiction 
• A gambling habit 
• Loan shark or other private debts 
• A girlfriend (or boyfriend) supported by the target 
• Extraordinary medical expenses 
• Significant, regular cash expenses for entertainment and/or travel 
 
The Behavioral Profile might also provide evidence of a possible motive of the crime, such 
as large debts, as well as additional evidence of illicit funds. For example, if the suspect spent 
significant amounts of cash, and had no corresponding cash withdrawals from disclosed 
bank accounts or no admitted sources of cash income, there must be other, undisclosed 
sources of income. 
 
THE SUSPECT RECIPIENT 
An interview should almost always be requested with the target. Use the 
Financial/Behavioral Profile as a guide. Pin down the target’s income, assets, and accounts. 
If the witness claims to have legitimate sources of large sums of currency, determine the 
following: 
• What was the source of the cash? 
• What was the amount of cash on hand at the starting point of the investigation, at the 
end of each year thereafter, and on the date of the interview? 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.730                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Where was the cash kept? 
• Why was the cash not deposited in a financial institution or invested? 
• Who knew about the cash? 
• What records of the cash exist? 
• What were the denominations? 
• When and for what was any of the cash spent? 
• Will the subject consent to an inventory of the remaining cash during the interview? If 
not, why not? If so, the cash should be counted at least twice in the presence of another 
examiner. A list of serial and series numbers should also be made.  
 
If the witness testifies that suspect funds were legitimate loan proceeds, ask: 
• Who was the lender? 
• When was the loan made? 
• What was the amount of the loan? 
• What was the purpose of the loan? 
• Was the loan repaid? 
• How was the loan documented? 
 
Also attempt to interview the subject’s spouse separately. Although one spouse generally will 
not be required to testify against the other, spouses can be an important source of lead 
information—if handled carefully. 
 
THIRD-PARTY WITNESSES 
Potential third-party sources include business colleagues, personal associates, bankers, 
brokers, real estate agents, accountants and tax preparers, ex-spouses, and romantic interests 
(particularly former romantic interests). Subjects often boast to their close associates of their 
new wealth, or entertain them with the fruits thereof. Casual remarks by a subject to a 
colleague (and repeated to an examiner) have undone the suspect, even when intensive 
audits have failed. Follow the Financial/Behavioral Profile format to the extent feasible. Of 
course, no single third-party witness is likely to possess all this information, but a complete 
picture can be assembled from bits and pieces provided by a number of such sources. 
 
TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS 
Other techniques for tracing illicit payments can be found in the “Tracing Illicit 
Transactions” chapter in the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.731 
Conflicts of Interest 
Conflict of interest schemes generally constitute violations of the legal principle that a 
fiduciary, agent, or employee must act in good faith, with full disclosure, and in the best 
interest of the principal or employer. A conflict of interest occurs when an employee, 
manager, or executive has an undisclosed economic or personal interest in a transaction that 
adversely affects that person’s employer. As with other corruption frauds, conflict schemes 
involve the exertion of an employee’s influence to the detriment of his company. In bribery 
schemes, fraudsters are paid to exercise their influence on behalf of a third party. Conflict of 
interest cases instead involve self-dealing by an employee.  
 
If an employee engages in a transaction that involves a conflict of interest, then the 
employee might also have breached his fiduciary duty  to his employer. An agent (employee) 
owes a fiduciary duty (duty of loyalty) to the principal (employer). The agent must act solely in 
the best interest of the principal and cannot seek to advance personal interest to the 
detriment of the principal. 
 
Breach of fiduciary duty is a civil action that can be used to redress a wide variety of conduct 
that might also constitute fraud, commercial bribery, and conflicts of interest. The elements 
of proof of breach of fiduciary duty are considerably simpler than fraud, and do not require 
proof of wrongful intent. As in conflicts of interest, the wrongdoer must reimburse the 
principal for any losses and pay over profits earned, even if the principal suffered no loss. 
 
The vast majority of conflict of interest cases occur because the fraudster has an undisclosed 
economic interest in a transaction. But the fraudster’s hidden interest is not necessarily 
economic. In some scenarios an employee acts in a manner detrimental to his company in 
order to provide a benefit to a friend or relative, even though the fraudster receives no 
financial benefit from the transaction himself.  
 
In order to be classified as a conflict of interest scheme, the employee’s interest in the 
transaction must be undisclosed. The crux of a conflict case is that the fraudster takes 
advantage of his employer; the victim organization is unaware that its employee has divided 
loyalties. If an employer knows of the employee’s interest in a business deal or negotiation, 
there can be no conflict of interest, no matter how favorable the arrangement is for  
the employee.  
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.732                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Any bribery scheme we discussed in the previous section could occur as a conflict of 
interest. The only difference is the fraudster’s motive. For instance, if an employee approves 
payment on a fraudulent invoice submitted by a vendor in return for a kickback, this is 
bribery. If, on the other hand, an employee approves payment on invoices submitted by his 
own company (and if his ownership is undisclosed), this is a conflict of interest.  
 
The distinction between the two schemes is obvious. In the bribery case the fraudster 
approves the invoice in return for a kickback, while in a conflict case he approves the invoice 
because of his own hidden interest in the vendor. Aside from the employee’s motive for 
committing the crime, the mechanics of the two transactions are practically identical. The 
same duality can be found in bid-rigging cases, where an employee influences the selection 
of a company in which he has a hidden interest instead of influencing the selection of a 
vendor who has bribed him.  
 
Conflict schemes do not always simply mirror bribery schemes, though. There are a numbers 
of ways in which an employee can use his influence to benefit a company in which he has a 
hidden interest. This section will discuss some of the more common conflict schemes.  
 
Purchase Schemes 
Purchase schemes are very similar to the billing schemes discussed in the Asset 
Misappropriation section, so it will be helpful at  this point to discuss the distinction we have 
drawn between traditional billing schemes and purchasing schemes that are conflicts of 
interest.  
 
While it is true that any time an employee assists in the overbilling of his company there is 
probably some conflict of interest (the employee causes harm to his employer because of a 
hidden financial interest in the transaction), this does not necessarily mean that every false 
billing will be categorized as a conflict scheme. In order for the scheme to be classified as a 
conflict of interest, the employee (or a friend or relative of the employee) must have some 
kind of ownership or employment interest in the vendor that submits the invoice.  
 
This distinction is easy to understand if we look at the nature of the fraud. Why does the 
fraudster overbill his employer? If he engages in  the scheme only for the cash, the scheme is 
a fraudulent disbursement billing scheme. If, on the other hand, he seeks to better the 
financial condition of his business at the expense of his employer, this is a conflict of 
interest. In other words, the fraudster’s interests  lie with a company other than his employer. 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.733 
When an employee falsifies the invoices of a third-party vendor to whom he has no relation, 
this is not a conflict of interest scheme because the employee has no interest in that vendor. 
The sole purpose of the scheme is to generate a fraudulent disbursement.  
 
One might wonder, then, why shell company schemes are classified as fraudulent 
disbursements rather than conflicts of interest. After all, the fraudster in a shell company 
scheme owns the fictitious company and therefore must have an interest in it. Remember, 
though, that shell companies are created for the sole purpose of defrauding the employer. 
The company is not so much an entity in the mind of the fraudster as it is a tool. In fact, a 
shell company is usually little more than a post office box and a bank account. The fraudster 
has no interest in the shell company that would cause a division of loyalty; he simply uses the 
shell company to bilk his employer. Shell company schemes are therefore classified as false 
billing schemes. 
 
A short rule of thumb can be used to distinguish between overbilling schemes that are 
classified as asset misappropriations and those that are conflicts of interest: if the bill 
originates from a real company  in which the fraudster has an economic or personal interest, 
and if the fraudster’s interest in the company is  undisclosed to the victim company, then the 
scheme is a conflict of interest.  
 
Now that we know what kinds of billing schemes are classified as conflicts of interest, the 
question is, how do these schemes work? After  our lengthy discussion about distinguishing 
between conflicts and fraudulent disbursements, the answer is somewhat anticlimactic. The 
schemes work the same either way. The mechanics of a billing scheme, whether conflicts or 
fraudulent disbursement, do not change. (See “Conflicts of Interest” flowchart.) 
 
EXAMPLE 
A purchasing superintendent de frauded his employer by purc hasing items from a certain 
vendor at inflated prices. The vendor in this case was owned by the purchasing 
superintendent but established in his wife’s name and run by his brother. The perpetrator’s 
interest in the company was undisclosed. The vendor would buy items on the open market, 
then inflate the prices and resell the items to the victim company. The purchasing 
superintendent used his influence to ensure that his employer continued doing business with 
the vendor and paying the exorbitant prices.  
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.734                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Fraudsters also engage in bid-rigging on behalf of their own companies. The methods used 
to rig bids are discussed in detail in the Bribery section and will not be dealt with in depth 
here. Briefly stated, an employee of the purchasing company is in a perfect position to rig 
bids if he has access to the bids of his competitors. Since he can find out what prices other 
vendors have bid, the fraudster can easily tailor his own company’s bid to win the contract. 
Fraudsters also sometimes use bid waivers to avoid competitive bidding outright.  
 
EXAMPLE   
A manager processed several unsubstantiated bid waivers in order to direct purchases to a 
vendor in which one of his employees had an interest. The conflict was undisclosed and the 
scheme cost the victim company over $150,000.  
 
In other cases a fraudster might ignore his employer’s purchasing rotation and direct an 
inordinate number of purchases or contracts to his own company. Any way in which a 
fraudster exerts his influence to divert business to a company in which he has a hidden 
interest is a conflict of interest.  
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.735 
Unique Assets 
Not all conflict schemes occur in the traditional vendor-buyer relationship. Sometimes 
schemes involve employees negotiating for the purchase of some unique, typically large asset 
such as land or a building in which the employee had an undisclosed interest. It is in the 
process of these negotiations that the fraudster violates his duty of loyalty to his employer. 
Because he stands to profit from the sale of the asset, the employee does not negotiate in 
good faith to his employer; he does not attempt to get the best price possible. The fraudster 
will reap a greater financial benefit if the purchase price is high.  
 
For example, an employee in charge of negotiating mineral leases on land that he secretly 
owns is obviously in a position of compromise. There will be no financial motive for this 
employee to negotiate a favorable lease on behalf of his employer.  
 
Turnaround Sales  
A special kind of purchasing scheme sometimes used by fraudsters is called the turnaround 
sale or the flip. In this type of scheme an employee knows his employer is seeking to purchase 
a certain asset and takes advantage of the situation by purchasing the asset himself (usually in 
the name of an accomplice or shell company). The fraudster then turns around and resells 
the item to his employer at an inflated price.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A chief executive officer, conspiring with a former employee, sold an office building to the 
CEO’s company. What made the transaction suspicious was that the building had been 
purchased by the former employee on the same day that it was resold to the victim company, 
and for $1.2 million less than the price charged to the CEO’s company.  
 
Sales Schemes 
There are two principal types of conflict schemes associated with sales of goods or services 
by the victim company. The first and most harmful is the underselling of goods or services. 
Just as a corrupt employee can cause his employer to overpay  for goods or services sold by a 
company in which he has a hidden interest, so too can he cause the employer to undersell to a 
company in which he maintains a hidden interest. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.736                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Underbillings 
Many employees who have hidden interests in outside companies sell goods or services to 
these companies at below-market prices. This results in a diminished profit margin or even a 
loss for the victim organization, depending upon the size of the discount.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee disposed of his employer’s real esta te by selling it below fair market value to a 
company in which he had a hidden interest, causing a loss of approximately $500,000.  
 
Writing Off Sales 
The other type of sales scheme involves tampering with the books of the victim company to 
decrease or write off the amount owed by the company in which the employee has a hidden 
interest. For instance, after an employee’s company purchases goods or services from the 
victim organization, credit memos may be issued against the sale, causing it to be written off 
to contra accounts such as Discounts and Allowances. A large number of reversing entries to 
sales may be a sign that fraud is occurring in an organization.  
 
EXAMPLE  
A plant manager assisted favored clients by delaying billing on their purchases for up to 60 
days. When the receivable on these clients’ accounts became delinquent, the perpetrator 
issued credit memos against the sales to delete them. The plant manager issued new invoices 
on the sales after the “old” receivables were taken off the books. In this way, the receivables 
could be carried indefinitely on the books without ever becoming past due.  
  
Other Schemes  
In other cases, the perpetrator might not write off the scheme, but simply delay billing. This 
is sometimes done as a “favor” to a friendly client and is not an outright avoidance of the bill 
but rather a dilatory tactic. The victim organization eventually gets paid, but loses time value 
on the payment, which arrives later than it should.  
 
Business Diversions 
A number of employees end up starting their own businesses, which compete directly with 
their employers. While still employed by the victim organization, these employees might 
begin siphoning off clients for their own business. This activity clearly violates the 
employee’s duty of loyalty to the employer, and frequently violates the company’s internal 
policies. There is nothing unscrupulous about free competition, but while a person acts as a 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.737 
representative of his employer, it is certainly improper to try to undercut the employer and 
take his clients. Normal standards of business ethics require employees to act in the best 
interests of their employers.  
 
Resource Diversions 
Some employees divert the funds and other resources of their employers to the development 
of their own business. This kind of scheme involves elements of both conflicts of interest 
and fraudulent disbursements. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A vice president of a company authorized large expenditures to develop a unique type of 
new equipment used by a certain contractor. Another firm subsequently took over the 
contractor, as well as the new equipment. Shortly after that, the vice president retired and 
went to work for the firm that had bought out the contractor. The fraudster had managed 
to use his employer’s money to fund a company in which he eventually developed an interest.  
 
While these schemes are clearly corruption schemes, the funds are diverted through the use 
of a fraudulent disbursement. The money could be drained from the victim organization 
through a check tampering scheme, a billing scheme, a payroll scheme, or an expense 
reimbursement scheme. For a discussion of the methods used to generate fraudulent 
disbursements, please refer to the Asset Misappropriation section.  
 
Financial Interest in Companies Under Perpetrator's Supervision 
Sometimes an employee will have a direct or indirect financial interest in a company under 
his supervision. For example, accountants sometimes hold stock in a company they audit. 
These problems often occur in government. 
 
Financial Disclosure 
Management has an obligation to disclose to the shareholders significant fraud committed by 
officers, executives, and others in positions of trust. Management does not have the 
responsibility of disclosing uncharged criminal conduct of its officers and executives. 
However, if and when officers, executives, or other persons in trusted positions become 
subjects of a criminal indictment, disclosure is required. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.738                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The inadequate disclosure of conflicts of interest is among the most serious of frauds. 
Inadequate disclosure of related-party transactions is not limited to any specific industry; it 
transcends all business types and relationships. 
 
Appearance of Conflict of Interest 
A final type of conflict of interest is the appearance of such. Examples include ownership in a 
blind trust, in which the employee has no authority to make investment decisions, or an 
external auditor owning a minority interest in a company that is audited by the auditor’s firm. 
Such matters are rarely prosecuted as criminal offenses. 
 
Detection of Conflicts of Interest 
Conflicts of interest are probably one of the most difficult schemes to uncover. Therefore, 
no fast and easy detection methods exist for this type of fraud. Some of the more common 
methods that can be used are tips and complaints, comparisons of vendor addresses with 
employee addresses, review of vendor ownership files, review of exit interviews, 
comparisons of vendor addresses to addresses of subsequent employers, policies requiring 
certain employees to provide the names and employers of immediate family members, and 
interviews with purchasing personnel for favorable treatment of one or more vendors. 
 
Tips and Complaints 
If a particular vendor is being favored, then competing vendors may file complaints. 
Additionally, employee complaints about the service of a favored vendor may lead to the 
discovery of a conflict of interest. 
 
Comparison of Vendor Addresses with Employee Addresses 
If nominee or related parties are used as owners of vendors, then the business address of the 
vendor may match that of the employee. Also, look for post office box addresses for 
vendors. This detection method is similar to that used for locating phony vendors. 
 
Review of Vendor Ownership Files 
When a vendor is selected, a complete file of the ownership of that vendor should be kept. 
This is particularly important for closely held businesses. If the vendor is required to update 
the file annually then changes in ownership will also be disclosed. A computer comparison 
of the vendor ownership and the employee file may reveal conflicts of interest. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.739 
Review of Exit Interviews and Comparisons of Vendor Addresses to Addresses of Subsequent Employers 
If a review of an employee’s exit interview yields the name and address of the subsequent 
employer, then a simple comparison of that name and address with the vendor file may 
reveal conflicts of interest wherein the employee has obtained employment from  
a contractor. 
 
Interviews of Purchasing Personnel for Favorable Treatment of One or More Vendors 
Employees are generally the first to observe that a vendor is receiving favorable treatment. 
Therefore, by asking employees if any vendor is receiving favorable treatment, the examiner 
may discover conflicts of interest that would otherwise have gone unnoticed. Another 
question that may be asked of employees is whether any vendor’s service (or product) has 
recently become substandard.  
 
Policies Requiring Certain Employees to Provide the Names and Employers of Immediate Family Members 
Where acceptable by law, a productive audit test may be to require members of management, 
as well as members of the procurement department, to provide detailed information 
regarding the names and employers of all immediate family members and household 
members. Comparing the names and employers of family members to the current position 
of the employee may lead to information that would require further investigation to 
determine whether a conflict of interest exists. 
 
Prevention of Conflicts of Interest 
Organizations should establish policies clearly de fining what constitutes a conflict of interest, 
and prohibiting any such entanglements by officers, directors, employees, or other agents of 
the organization. A policy requiring employees to complete an annual disclosure statement is 
an excellent proactive approach to dealing with potential conflicts. Comparing the disclosed 
names and addresses with vendor and customer lists may reveal real conflicts of interest or 
the appearance of such. Furthermore, these statements will reinforce in employees the idea 
that engaging in conflicts of interests is unacceptable and will result in severe consequences.  
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.801 
THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
 
Futurist Alvin Toffler identified information as the highest value commodity for the new 
millennium. He speculated that multinational corporate security departments might evolve 
into private armies to protect their company’s assets where host countries cannot. 
 
The world has indeed become a more complex and competitive place. Individual corporate 
organizations have become more powerful than some entire nations and the balance of 
economic power has shifted to the corporation, within which ideas and information have 
become the most highly prized assets — indeed, with more value than a company’s products 
or physical assets.  
 
To a considerable degree, businesses, administrations, and society as a whole have come to 
depend on the efficiency and security of information technology, resulting in information 
acquiring a new and distinct value that cannot be protected in the same way as  
tangible objects.  
 
Information exists in many forms, and its security is achieved by implementing a process of 
risk assessment and commensurate controls to ensure the preservation of: 
• Confidentiality, ensuring that information is accessible only to those authorized to have 
access, and that they can only use it for specified purposes; 
• Integrity, safeguarding the accuracy and completeness of information and processing 
methods; and 
• A vailability, ensuring that authorized users have access to information and associated 
assets when required. 
 
Intellectual property is a catch-all phrase. It is used here to denote knowledge-based assets 
and capital, including information but extending to ideas, designs, and innovations 
howsoever expressed or recorded. 
 
This chapter addresses the broad issues relating to the vulnerability and criticality of 
information and other intangible property. It advocates a mix of procedural, logical, and 
physical protective measures to combat threats posed by opponents who make it their 
business to try to obtain an advantage by illegally or unethically abusing intellectual property 
belonging to another. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.802                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Competitive Intelligence (CI) Versus Espionage 
History is used to the practice of intelligence, or what the Duke of Wellington described as 
“knowing what was over the other side of the hill.” Intelligence and espionage transferred 
from the military to a civilian setting with the return of service personnel from World War II 
and integrated itself with the economic environment through management education, which 
was focused on strategy and external influences.  
 
This approach to intelligence was formalized by one of the early proponents of business 
intelligence, Dr Gerald Albaum, who realized that companies had a need for a “more 
organized and systematic method for gathering, processing, analyzing, and reporting 
information about competitors.” 
 
CI has been defined as the analytical process that transforms disaggregated competitor data 
into relevant, accurate, and usable knowledge about competitors’ positions, performance, 
capabilities, and intentions. Yet in today’s market this is not enough. Companies are faced 
with three influencing factors: customers, competitors, and change. These forces are 
modifying the face of corporate strategy, driving the company of today deeper into 
unfamiliar and frightening territory. To address these fears, companies are now adopting 
organized business intelligence systems to monitor the environment in which they do 
business. 
 
CI is a legitimate business function that sits comfortably alongside marketing and research 
and development, as well as general business strategy and the newer discipline of knowledge 
management. It helps businesses to anticipate a competitor’s research and development 
strategy, determine its operating costs, pricing policies and financial strength, as well as its 
capacity. Knowledge about competitors is one of the advantages that can enable companies 
to succeed and lead the field in their respective market place. 
 
CI has become a growth industry that is practiced by professionals trained to use 
information in the public domain or to otherwise utilize legally available resources to 
compile information. This information is then collated, processed, and disseminated into 
intelligence that is usable and has strategic value. Gathering intelligence is not espionage, if 
the collection effort is done without recourse to criminal methods or intent. CI practitioners 
mostly work within a code of ethics drawn up by the Society for Competitive Intelligence 
Professionals (SCIP). This strict code includes the requirement that members identify 
themselves during an inquiry and do not use deception in their quest for such information.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.803 
To the detriment of the reputation of fraud examiners and CI professionals, certain private 
investigators and information brokers access financial and criminal information and other 
protected data, and generally disregard the laws governing data protection. Conversely, there 
are firms that will use quite aggressive techniques to investigate a client organization’s 
opponent. While not conforming to the SCIP’s code of ethics, these techniques are not 
illegal and firms using these methods appear to be prepared to stand by their techniques in a 
court of law. They provide a valuable service to their top-tier clients, many of whom do not 
believe that all evidence of malpractice is reflected solely in books and records. 
 
There is, therefore, a world of difference between competitive intelligence and espionage. 
Espionage may be defined as “intelligence activity directed toward the acquisition of  
information through clandestine means and proscribed by the laws of the country against which it is  
committed.” It does not cover legitimate intelligence collection and analysis using legal means. 
 
Espionage can be further sub-divided into industrial espionage and economic espionage 
Industrial espionage refers to the clandestine collection of information by companies and 
individuals, such as information brokers, about competitors. Economic espionage refers to 
state sponsored or sanctioned collection, which is often associated with a nation’s foreign 
intelligence service. 
 
 
Open Sources of Information 
Open source information is information in the public domain, or data that is legally available 
to anyone. Spies do not have to penetrate corporate security measures to obtain this type of 
information; it is available to anyone who wants to collect it. The term “public,” however, 
does not necessarily mean free. Many sources have access charges that may be simple low-
 cost copying fees or rather substantial database expenses.  
 
The dividing line between open source information and other targets of corporate 
intelligence (such as trade secrets) is the right to access. A member of the public can obtain 
open source data openly, without fear of legal consequences, and the provider of the data 
desires or has no objection to its release into the marketplace. Trade secrets are the exact 
opposite: no one but the owner has the right of access, and the owner has no desire to cast 
the trade secret freely upon the marketplace’s waters. The taking of trade secrets, without the 
owner’s permission, violates both state and federal law. Known as economic, industrial, or 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.804                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
corporate espionage, theft of trade secrets is a form of business intelligence that goes far 
beyond open source research. 
 
Most of the information sought on any topic, according to intelligence professionals, is 
publicly available. Estimates go as high as 95 percent as to what is discoverable in the  
public sector.  
 
There is only so much that security professionals can do to limit the open source 
information that is available on an organization. Some forms of information, such as 
financial statements of publicly traded companies, are legally required to be published. Other 
pieces of information such as product descriptions or job listings are posted out of business 
necessity. Corporate security professionals do not operate in a vacuum; the need to protect 
an organization’s secrets must always be ba lanced against the need or duty to publish 
information. One of the first things security prof essionals must do is realize that they cannot 
protect everything.  
 
With a thorough understanding of how CI practitioners use open source information, 
however, security officers can limit their company’s vulnerability to the disclosure of secrets 
through accident or negligence. The knowledgeable security professional will identify key 
information assets, then review the open source information that is available on the 
company from a spy’s perspective to see if the safety of those assets could be endangered. 
The security professional will also be able to work with other departments to limit or edit the 
information that is available on the organization so that no inadvertent gifts are made to 
potential intruders. Finally, if a theft of information should occur, understanding how open 
sources are used may help a security officer track down the perpetrator.  
 
Why Do Companies Resort to Corporate Espionage? 
If so much lies “out there,” why do people pay for industrial and corporate spies? Why do 
they bother with illegal methods? Why do companies not stick to standard research to learn 
what they need about their competitors, and why do they use intelligence agents and analysts 
instead of routine researchers? The answer to these questions is twofold. 
 
First, even if the intelligence gatherer adheres strictly to using only open sources, mere facts 
do not constitute intelligence or knowledge. Collecting raw data brings one only to the 
threshold of the process. Data must then undergo analysis to be turned into a useful 
product. Analysis involves summarizing, comparing, and explaining the data. The craft of 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.805 
intelligence lies in the ability of the provider to distill mountains of facts from diverse 
sources into a concise product that is actionable by its consumer. 
 
The term “actionable” means the product must have the depth, character, and quality on 
which an executive may base sound decisions. Merely knowing what one’s competitors are 
up to falls short of the mark. Good intelligence identifies the actions an executive should 
take to seize an opportunity or to diminish or eliminate a threat. It is good to know what the 
problem is, but far better to know how the problem can be solved. Even though open 
sources are available to the general public, organizations still utilize intelligence professionals’ 
skills to create actionable intelligence from the mass of public information.  
 
The second reason organizations utilize intelligence professionals is that the remaining five 
percent of needed information is proprietary. This last segment often becomes critical to 
competitive survival, and organizations or individuals are sometimes willing to sidestep the 
law to obtain it. Intelligence professionals know the “tricks of the trade” for gathering 
sensitive proprietary information that can give their clients a competitive edge.  
 
While legal protections exist for trade secrets and other proprietary information, smart 
organizations do not passively rely on the threat of civil actions or criminal penalties to 
protect their information assets. Rather, they take affirmative steps to erect their own 
security barriers around their critical proprietary information. Such barriers dramatically 
increase the costs, never mind the legal liabilities, of obtaining protected information.  
 
If a company or foreign intelligence service must have the trade secrets of a target to 
complete the information picture they are formulating, they must be willing to invest. In 
many cases, this means employing the services of intelligence professionals. Utilizing 
experience and training, the intelligence professional conducts a campaign or mission using 
secure methods to protect the collection effort, preventing legal repercussions for the client. 
 
There is a cost factor involved in intelligence gathering, which tends to keep companies and 
corporate spies from rushing into covert proprietary intelligence activity. A wise intelligence 
campaign will utilize open sources, at least initially, as much as possible. Only when the 
effort can go no further, and business needs dictate acquiring additional information, does 
intelligence gathering enter the proprietary realm. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.806                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Bootstrap Effect 
With an understanding of the intelligence process, it becomes clear that open sources play 
two important roles. They may in some cases provide all the basic intelligence a company 
needs. A skilled intelligence analyst uses logic and the principles of inference to summarize, 
compare, and explain any missing pieces. In other words, the company never has to venture 
on the high seas of espionage; it satisfies itself  in the safe harbor of open sources. It learns 
what it needs to know at low cost and by legal means. 
 
But if penetrating the proprietary realm becomes necessary, open source information 
provides a bootstrap for the covert effort. The more one knows about a subject, the easier it 
is to discover additional information on that subject. Open sources serve as the homework a 
corporate spy does prior to conducting covert operations in hostile territory. 
 
As any filmmaker knows, the more time spent in pre-production (which is relatively 
inexpensive), the less time and money will have to be dedicated to production (which is very 
expensive). The professional filmmaker does his homework before shooting a foot of film. 
Likewise, the professional corporate spy does not  just show up at the target’s factory at 3 
a.m., armed with a crowbar, clumsily trying to break into the facility. 
 
Instead, the effective spy obtains plans on the layout of the targeted plant in advance, notes 
what type of alarm system is in place, learns about any security patrols, and then devises an 
appropriate penetration plan. But unlike a common thief, the effective spy sets that plan 
aside and first considers other options—less blatant means that may exist to ferret out the 
sought-after information. The spy understands that information is a unique commodity, and 
the theft of information can be accomplished in a number of unique ways. Often, 
information can be stolen without the target realizing it; copies or photographs can provide 
access to sensitive facts without requiring the source documents or files to ever be removed 
from their owner’s control. Burglary, something the police understand and take great interest 
in, is not always the best way to steal information. 
 
 
The Intelligence Pyramid 
Leonard Fuld, in his landmark book, Competitor Intelligence, argues that open sources exist at 
three levels, forming an Intelligence Pyramid. At the base of the pyramid are Fundamental 
Intelligence Techniques, the second level is composed of Basic Sources of Information, and 
the final level is Creative Sources. 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.807 
 
Fundamental Research Techniques 
The initial level of the Intelligence Pyramid is composed of Fundamental Research 
Techniques, which include researching articles in magazines, journals, or newspapers, and 
consulting industry guidebooks. These fundamental sources of information allow the spy to 
build a partial picture of the target, and, equally important, to develop checklists of the 
information needed to fill in the blank spaces. These checklists are very important, because 
no intelligence effort should proceed without precise goals. For a spy to be effective, he 
must know exactly what is sought. Vague expeditions for information will produce vague 
results, so a shopping list becomes an absolute must. A competitive intelligence (CI) 
professional may spend many hours meeting with a client discussing in exacting detail the 
specifics of the mission. If the client is not clear on the objective, clarifying that issue 
becomes the first order of business. 
 
Basic Sources 
After establishing clearly defined goals, the CI professional crafts a collection plan. In a well-
 organized intelligence-gathering plan, the CI professional moves up the pyramid, collecting 
additional information, while continuing to narrow the focus of his search. After exercising 
fundamental techniques, the second level of the pyramid involves accessing basic sources. 
These sources include some that are already familiar: 
• Government sources 
? SEC (from the EDGAR database, www.sec.gov/edgarhp.htm) 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.808                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? 10-K annual report 
? 10-Q quarterly report 
? Proxy statements 
? 13-D major stock acquisitions 
? 14-D tender offers 
? State corporate filings 
? Corporate registrations 
? UCC filings 
? Regulatory filings, professional licensing, etc. 
? Officer/Director (O/D) database 
• Industrial reports and studies 
• Industry analyst reports  
• State industrial directories 
• Trade and business magazines 
• Statistical sources (example: Standard Rate and Data Service [advertising])  
• Trade associations (from the Encyclopedia of Associations and Directories in Print 
provided by Gale Industries)  
• Databases with stories: 
? Thomson Research (http://research.thomsonib.com) — 3,500 research reports are 
added to this source daily. 
? DataTimes—full text newspapers 
 
Government Sources 
SEC FILINGS 
Publicly traded companies are required to make certain filings with the SEC. These 
documents can be extremely helpful to the spy seeking to build a financial profile on the 
target. Information such as annual and quarterly reports on publicly traded companies can be 
accessed for free through the SEC’s EDGAR system at www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml. 
 
Through this avenue, the spy can obtain the target’s Form 10-K, which contains the 
company’s income statement and balance sheet, information on its debt structure, foreign 
ownership, properties owned, subsidiaries, industry descriptions, depreciation, dilution, and 
other key business information. If the target company has filed for bankruptcy, been the 
target of a shareholder lawsuit, or been sued for patent infringement, this may also show up 
in the 10-K. Most publicly traded companies must also file 10-Qs, which are statements of 
quarterly income, earnings per share, etc. Ot her forms that are available from the SEC 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.809 
include proxy statements, which provide information on stockholder votes taken on key 
issues; and forms 13-D and 14-D, which indicate major movements in stock ownership that 
are pending. 
 
STATE CORPORATE FILINGS 
States require that companies that do business within their jurisdictions register each year 
with the state government, usually through the Secretary of State’s office. This requirement 
extends to all companies operating in the state, not just those that are publicly traded.  
 
Many Secretary of State websites have enhanced search capabilities for business 
organizations, including searching by entity name, and by name of the person listed as a 
registered agent, officer, or director of a corporation. This search capability allows an 
intelligence analyst to find all the companies within a state in which a person serves as an 
officer or as a director. A search can help the CI professional develop a family tree of the 
officer’s business interests. It becomes a useful tool for uncovering lesser-known or hidden 
connections between businesses. The financial strength of a targeted business often lies in its 
affiliates or subsidiaries, which rise to the surface in an officer/director search. 
 
INDUSTRIAL REPORTS AND STUDIES 
State and federal governments periodically issue industrial reports and studies on various 
industries ranging from appliance manufacturers to high technology companies. These 
studies provide statistical benchmarks useful to establish where a company stands in its 
industry. In addition, they help delineate the standards for evaluating successful companies 
in that industry. State industrial directories, special industry issues in magazines like Fortune 
and Forbes, and directories from trade associations serve the same function. 
 
Industry Analyst Reports 
There are a number of industry analyst reports that CI gatherers use to estimate unknown 
figures in a target’s balance sheet. The Standard Rate and Data Service, for instance, provides 
information on advertising rates that may help a spy benchmark the target’s expenditures on 
advertising, an indicator of the organization’s financial health. For practically any industry, a 
statistical source exists that serves as a powerful estimating tool for CI analysts. 
 
Industry analyst reports from investment firms, when properly researched and written, are 
akin to having a personal intelligence briefing about the target. Striving for a balanced 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.810                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
presentation, they aim to tell both the good and the bad about a company. They often 
contrast sharply with the company’s annual report.  
 
Electronic Sources 
Electronic sources of data are some of the most powerful research tools in the intelligence 
analyst’s arsenal. These resources, which include CD-ROMs and online databases, contain 
compilations of data on bankruptcies, new business filings, telephone directories, UCC 
filings, criminal records, corporate data, and many other types of information. If one 
includes the many local, regional, and national newspapers available electronically, the 
research capabilities of one intelligence analyst sitting at his computer are truly staggering. 
 
Large public or university libraries frequently provide free network access to newspaper, 
magazine, and other journalistic sources. More information about electronic sources is 
contained in the “Accessing Information Online”  chapter in the Investigation section of the 
Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
MULTIPLIER EFFECT  
Analytical software produces a multiplier effect when processing case information. They 
generate output greater than the individual inputs of information. Facts A, B, C, and D 
standing by themselves may offer minimal insight, but when combined and organized those 
facts can generate an understanding of what is really going on in an organization. The 
Analyst’s Notebook by i2, for example, is popular among police intelligence analysts, 
because it can track patterns and linkages from large databases. (Further information about 
these types of products is contained in the “Data Analysis and Reporting Tools” chapter in 
the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual .) 
 
The functions performed by analytical software programs can easily be translated to business 
intelligence needs, uncovering patterns related to corporate filings, O/D searches, patent and 
trademark applications, and other diverse compilations of data that, when pieced together, 
can indicate the potential direction in which a competitor is headed. For example, some 
software programs can be designed to cross check patent authors extracted from a patent 
database against an Officer/Director search to show the companies for which key scientists 
serve as directors. The software also generates visual displays of the relationships between 
the companies. All of this makes the corporate spy’s task of unearthing hidden relationships 
and confidential facts easier.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.811 
Creative Sources 
The final step in the open source intelligence pyramid is the use of creative sources. Leonard 
Fuld lists the following types of information as examples of creative sources: classified ads, 
environmental impact statements, close examination of UCC filings, proxies, and the 
building of financial statements.  
 
Classified Ads 
Employment advertisements, in particular, can provide valuable information about the job 
skills that a target company needs and the number of employees it is seeking to hire. This 
can help a spy infer what kinds of new projects are being developed within a company or 
where personnel resources are being devoted. Large-scale hiring could indicate that a 
competitor has signed or expects to sign a large contract. In some cases, employment ads 
also point out defections of key personnel.  
 
Employment ads also give a spy an indication of what the target company pays its 
employees. This could be valuable for the spy’s employer in recruiting battles for coveted 
personnel. It could also help the spy identify employees who may be susceptible to 
recruitment tactics because of low pay or a high rate of employee dissatisfaction (as 
evidenced by a high rate of turnover in a particular department).  
 
Environmental Impact Statements 
Environmental impact statements contain large amounts of historical, financial, and 
operational information. The company filing the statement not only has to supply this 
background data on itself, but it also has to explain its proposed project in detail. Those 
details on emissions, hazardous materials used, and possible accidents stemming from 
operations provide a wealth of facts for analysis by an expert. From such analysis a CI 
professional can develop an excellent picture on the size and operational capability of a plant 
or company. Very often, this kind of information can allow one’s competitors to establish 
the date operations will begin at a targeted plant. 
 
UCC Filings 
UCC filings, in addition to financial data previously discussed, provide operational details by 
describing equipment and materials that have been purchased or pledged for a loan. 
Sometimes previously unknown assets and ties to other businesses will be listed in the 
filings. UCC filings are made at the county level or with the Secretary of State, depending on 
the nature of the collateral provided as security in a financing agreement. Savvy intelligence 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.812                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
professionals review these documents with a fine-toothed comb for tidbits of information 
that can help them gain an understanding of a target’s business transactions. 
 
Proxies  
Developing proxies—people who work with the target on a day-to-day basis—helps CI 
professionals color in many necessary details. Suppliers in particular can be a rich source of 
inside information about a targeted business. Suppliers spend significant time and resources 
to learn about their customers. They know what a customer orders, when they place orders, 
how much they spend, how long they take to pay their bills, and what the business cycle of 
the customer’s industry is. Interviews with these persons can be an invaluable source of 
information for a corporate spy. 
 
Posing as a Customer 
If a spy cannot cultivate or bribe key employees of a supplier, he may pose as a customer 
himself. He can exploit the two fundamental axioms of corporate espionage: (1) all 
salespeople want to make a sale, and (2) all salespeople will do almost anything to make a 
sale, including talking their heads off about what they’ve done for other customers.  
 
In a prospective sales meeting, the spy, armed with business cards and even a brochure 
about his “company,” conveys that he works for a prosperous business. (He can even pick a 
legitimate business with a good D&B rating and pose as its employee.) During the course of 
the meeting, he can ask what the supplier has done for other customers. He will casually 
mention that he has a friend who works for the target company. How well has the supplier 
served that business? As an additional enticemen t, the spy can place on the table impressive-
 looking spreadsheets showing financial data and production run levels and ask if the target’s 
level of business matches these figures. The spy tells the salesperson that he just wants to see 
if the supplier has the experience necessary to handle his business. 
 
 
Building Financial Statements 
The one piece of information desired universally by consumers of intelligence is the financial 
statement. At times, the balance sheet becomes the Holy Grail, a magic key that opens all 
sorts of doors to understanding a business. Spies can, of course, steal balance sheets and 
other financial documents. But, often the theft is not worth the risk. Large publicly owned 
companies are required by law to publish their financial statements. This information is 
freely available on the SEC’s EDGAR database. Even large privately owned companies 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.813 
frequently leave enough of a paper trail in the public sector that figuring out their financial 
posture is not terribly difficult. More difficulty generally arises when the CI professional 
seeks to build a financial profile of private small- and medium-sized companies. The finances 
in these companies are usually held close to the vest. Getting in proximity to key financial 
documents may be risky given that a limited number of people in these companies have 
access. 
 
A much safer approach lies in estimating the balance sheet with research methods. Every 
good CI specialist knows how to perform this procedure. The technique forms a central tool 
in the intelligence professional’s arsenal. The process by which balance sheets are estimated 
affords an inside look at the open source process used by CI professionals. 
 
It is important to remember that the financial statements that the CI professional builds are 
nothing more than estimates of a target’s fi nancial status. Confirming those estimates by 
gathering further intelligence is an option, but the process begins as a refined, educated 
guess. While only a guess, a well-calculated estimate may provide all the information needed 
by the client, and this method involves a considerably lower degree of risk than outright 
theft of the sought-after information.  
 
The CI specialist must always be aware that financial statements tell only part of the story 
about a company. He knows to evaluate them in the light of other information such as the 
history of the business, the condition of its market, technological developments, and the 
condition of its suppliers. Quite frankly, estimating works best when done on manufacturing 
companies. The inputs and outputs of a manufacturing firm are easier to spot, track, and 
measure than with service companies. Service companies, however, can be compared to 
other similar businesses by size, location, and number of employees. If the financials of the 
similar company are known, then an educated inference can be made about the target’s 
financial statements. For the purposes of the discussion in this section, and in order to best 
illustrate the methods used by intelligence professionals, the hypothetical target will be a 
manufacturing company.  
 
How Income Statements Are Calculated 
To build the financials of a manufacturing firm, spies first calculate the income statement. 
They break down an income statement into three components: (1) revenue, (2) cost of goods 
sold, and (3) overhead.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.814                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Revenue Estimates 
Revenue estimates can come from state air pollution control permit applications, hazardous 
materials permit applications, articles in the local press about sales volumes, state industrial 
directories, or by indirect methods. One of the most common indirect methods for 
estimating revenue is to count truck activity at a site, both receiving and shipping, over a 
given period of time. Knowing the shipping dimensions and retail costs of the company’s 
products, a spy can estimate what each truck holds. The same goes for railcars and ships or 
barges. Talking to truck drivers, railroad personnel, and longshoremen can also fill in details 
on the size of outgoing loads and their frequency. In the service industry, revenue estimates 
are frequently made by conducting interviews with suppliers, customers, or employees of the 
target. Pretext calls and social engineering might also be used to trick employees into 
divulging key financial information.  
 
Costs of Goods Sold 
Labor costs can be derived by a spy from wages listed in newspaper classified ads and from 
wage surveys at the local chamber of commerce. The state workforce commission will also 
have wage surveys for certain occupations. The number of employees for the target can be 
gathered from OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration) records and by 
counting cars in the parking lot for each shift.  
 
Determining indirect labor costs can be accomplished in several ways. The best method is to 
consult statistical manuals for the target’s ind ustry, which give the respective percentages of 
direct and indirect labor costs. In addition, estimating the numbers of managerial and 
professional workers entering the plant will supply a guideline. Spies look for clues such as 
the types of cars that employees drive (a Saab or a pickup truck?), the clothing they wear (a 
suit or overalls?), and the items they carry to work (briefcases and laptops or lunchboxes?). 
The chamber of commerce may also be able to supply the numbers of salaried personnel at  
a plant.  
 
The types and amount of raw materials used at a plant may be available from the state air 
pollution control board or the local fire department’s hazardous materials unit. Surveillance 
of truck deliveries to the site is another source. The cost of materials is available from 
suppliers or their catalogs. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.815 
Overhead 
Overhead costs such as advertising derive from manuals discussed earlier such as the 
Standard Rate and Data Service. Calculating utility costs is as simple as calling the local 
electric, gas, or water company. While a utility company may not reveal what the target 
consumes directly, it will disclose what an average company of that size in that industry 
purchases annually. Newspaper ads and real estate brokers serve as sources on the costs of 
leased plant facilities. The local tax assessor can supply the value of property owned by the 
target. Mortgage information will be available from real estate records at the county clerk’s 
office. 
 
Debts of the targeted business emerge from researching UCC filings, bond rating manuals, 
state economic commission records (if the target is big enough), and from the state securities 
board file of privately placed prospectuses. 
 
How Balance Sheets Are Calculated 
From these various sources, a competitive intelligence analyst can compile a preliminary 
income statement. The elements of a balance sheet derive from the income statement with 
the help of financial tools, such as D&B’s Industry Norms and Key Business Ratios. The 
process of deriving the balance sheet begins by taking a known figure (for instance, sales) 
and looking up the ratio, for the target’s industry, between sales and net worth. The 
intelligence professional simply needs to do some simple algebra (divide the sales figure by 
the ratio) to derive the unknown, which is the net worth.  
 
A similar procedure works for other standard ratios. The rule of thumb is that if a person 
knows the annual sales, the line of business (LOB), the number of employees, and how long 
a company has been in business, then that person will be able to create a reasonable balance 
sheet estimate. An analyst will compare the estimate against known or published balance 
sheets of similar size companies in the same LOB to check accuracy. Consulting experts on 
the industry (bank loan officers, investment analysts) provides further confirmation. 
 
 
Nontraditional Sources 
A spy or intelligence analyst bolsters data developed from public records and estimated 
financial statements by accessing lesser-known sources. Historical archive centers like the 
Center for American History at the University of Texas at Austin have large collections of 
old telephone directories, industrial and corporate directories, and business reference works. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.816                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
These materials enable a researcher to trace the history of a business or a person’s 
association with that business. They also serve to track the growth of a business over time. 
Changes in Yellow Pages listings, in telephone numbers, and in statistics in state 
manufacturing directories can be charted to show long-term trends for the business. These 
archives also document where a person served as an officer, as a key employee, or ran their 
own business. 
 
Thomson Gale, a publisher of many fine reference books, has two works of primary interest 
to CI specialists. Directories in Print has over 16,000 entries for every kind of directory 
imaginable, including business and industrial directories, professional and scientific rosters, 
foreign directories, and other lists and guides. Any good CI specialist knows that a good 
trade directory saves valuable research time. In addition, most directories generally run ads 
from suppliers to the industry, so the industry directory serves as an informal reference book 
for locating suppliers. These directories are also a strong way to do background research on 
an industry, and to learn the buzzwords and key concepts governing that business. After 
reviewing the directory, a spy will be able to talk like an insider. 
 
Thomson Gale also produces the Encyclopedia of Associations in regional, national, and 
international editions. From these works a CI specialist can locate experts and resources in 
almost any business field or manufacturing line. Contacting experts for interviews by 
telephone is a fast, inexpensive way to confirm estimates and research findings from open 
sources. The Encyclopedia  also lists annual meetings of organizations and their key officers. It 
serves as a source to identify experts, their trade shows, and related seminars. Savvy CI 
professionals will touch base with professionals prior to an annual meeting or seminar. They 
strike up a professional relationship in advance so when they meet at the convention, they 
are in a position to comfortably chat with targeted professionals and draw out key 
information. Virtually every text on competitive  intelligence mentions attending trade shows, 
but few mention doing the necessary homework before attending. Good spies do their 
homework on whom to contact by using Thomson Gale or similar sources as a starting 
point. 
 
InfoTrac 
Spies also do their homework by using InfoTrac, a large family of databases from Gale 
Research. One thing about these databases that makes them especially attractive to spies is 
that most libraries have them available in-house (usually on a CD-ROM network) for use at 
no charge. Since they index, abstract, and provide full text on hundreds of publications, the 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.817 
competitive intelligence researcher essentially has a multitude of field agents working for 
them. Keeping in mind the estimate that 95 percent of needed information lies in the public 
domain, InfoTrac’s databases form a good middle tier source. The information that InfoTrac 
commonly provides includes: 
• Number of employees 
• Manufacturing capacity 
• Product lines 
• Levels of expertise within the company 
• Markets 
• Market position 
• Key products 
• Internet participation 
• Product details 
• Competitive advantages 
 
 
A Closer Look at Databases 
There are three tiers of electronic databases: (1) The Internet, (2) InfoTrac databases and 
reference works like the Million Dollar Directory on CD-ROM, and (3) commercial 
databases such as Dialog, Profound, LexisNexis, and D&B (Dun & Bradstreet). 
 
Electronic Databases
 First Tier 
Examples:   
• The Internet 
Advantages:  
Quick, easy to use, usually free. 
Disadvantages:   
Chaotically organized, information 
not always current or reliable. 
 
Second Tier 
Examples:   
• InfoTrac 
• Million Dollar Directory 
• ACL 
Advantages:  
Fairly easy to use, available at large 
public libraries, usually free access, 
information reasonably reliable. 
Disadvantages:   
Expensive subscription rates, so 
not always practical as an in-house 
source for security units. 
 
 
Third Tier 
Examples:   
• Dialog 
• LexisNexis 
• D&B 
• Profound 
Advantages:  
Most use powerful search engines 
or have vast databases. Capable of 
highly refined conceptual searches. 
Disadvantages:   
Can be very expensive for 
intelligence and security units. 
However, these databases 
represent an emerging tool for the 
future. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.818                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
First Tier Databases 
Competitive intelligence involves more than just “surfing the Net.” Of course any CI 
specialist will be well acquainted with Web search engines like Google, Yahoo, Lycos, 
AltaVista, MetaCrawler, and Northern Light.  These engines are useful for locating the 
highlights on the Internet. However, with URLs constantly changing, and the quality and 
depth of data on the Internet being highly variable, the Internet is just a first step for CI 
work.  
 
Second Tier Databases  
As indicated above, more in-depth, cleaner, and better organized data lies in middle tier 
databases such as Infotrac. While hypertext linking on the Web affords the user the ability to 
establish his own pathways through information, this mode of searching often leads to 
haphazard, lengthy, and even chaotic journeys. Middle tier databases provide well-organized, 
carefully indexed data that takes less time to search and carries a greater informational 
punch. Because intelligence frequently has a short half-life, time can be a very critical factor 
for intelligence specialists. The more quickly a search is completed, the more valuable is the 
information obtained.  
 
Third Tier Databases 
Competitive intelligence campaigns frequently operate under a short time frame; finding out 
if a competitor is about to expand production, for instance, may only be valuable if the spy 
learns in time for his employer to beat that rival to the punch. Because time is frequently a 
critical factor in an intelligence campaign, analysts tend to use the third tier of databases as a 
central tool. Those employing the most sophisticated search technologies include Dialog, 
ChoicePoint, D&B, and LexisNexis. These databases are generally able to provide more 
useful information in less time than lower tier alternatives.  
 
Newsgroups
Spies also utilize search engines specifically geared to scanning newsgroups on the Internet. 
These sites can contain immense amounts of intelligence information. When people start 
chatting on the Internet, they frequently reveal a great deal about what they are working on. 
Examples of this type of search engine include Google (www.google.com) and Supernews 
(www.supernews.com). 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.819 
D&B and LexisNexis 
D&B’s and LexisNexis’s business and marketing databases employ conventional search 
technologies that both fall in the upper tier due to their vastness. A starting point for 
researching almost any business is a D&B report.  If the report is lacking, there is probably 
not much out there on that company. With millions of records, these databases are useful in 
developing histories and backgrounds on companies and officers. LexisNexis has so many 
periodicals and transcripts on its database that it is one of the best commercial intelligence 
databases in the world.  
 
i2  
As previously mentioned, i2 also figures into the database equation. It can perform pattern 
development functions similar to other top-level databases. The trend of doing more with 
open sources and squeezing additional information out of them is growing rapidly in the CI 
community. The multiplier effect, discussed earlier, is clearly at work. Information organized 
and cross-referenced internally generates knowledge that can help a client make a decision or 
that can support and enhance further intelligence efforts. 
 
Competitive Intelligence Websites 
In addition to the tools discussed above, CI professionals can utilize a number of websites 
that provide free information about how to conduct business intelligence operations. Many 
of these sites will take a visitor step-by-step through intelligence techniques and strategies.  
 
 
A Corporate Spy Uses Open Sources: What of It? 
A corporate spy uses some or all of the following open sources of information: 
1. Public records (regulatory, civil, criminal) 
2. Annual reports 
3. Telephone directories (internal and external) 
4. Analyst reports 
5. News accounts 
6. Magazine articles 
7. Constructed balance sheets 
8. Reference books 
9. Biographical sources 
10. Visual sightings and surveillance 
  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.820                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
11. Electronic databases and CD-ROMs 
12. Internet/Web 
 
All of these materials blend together to develop actual, actionable intelligence. In the 
alternative, they act as a springboard for gaining additional data. The question is, if all this 
data is out there by default, what can a company do about it? 
 
Certainly a company can educate its employees to be careful about what they say in public, 
put into print, or place on the Internet. Security training may also teach them to recognize 
pretext telephone calls designed to obtain inside information. It may also be beneficial to 
train employees on how spies use open sources to gather competitive intelligence on a 
business. Employees can be taught not to divulge proprietary data and to think before they 
speak. 
 
The reality, however, is that companies must operate in an open society, not a police state. 
The free exchange of ideas and information will be absolutely essential to 21st century 
commerce. The first step in protecting sensitive corporate information is to realize that a 
security manager, a security investigator, or an internal auditor cannot protect everything. In 
the words of John Keegan, the noted military historian, “to defend everything is to  
defend nothing.” 
 
A security professional must identify the key pieces of intellectual property belonging to the 
company. Those items whose compromise could cause grave harm to the business require 
utmost protection. Knowing the tools and paths in the open source sector a spy could use to 
cut a swath to this critical data will be essential if the security professional is to effectively 
protect it. From a security perspective, an investigator should try to exploit the available 
open sources himself to see if an avenue of attack can be completed. If so, the security 
professional can institute countermeasures before a loss occurs. 
 
If an information loss does occur, a security investigator or auditor can attempt to 
reconstruct a trail back to a possible spy with a sound knowledge of open source techniques.  
 
 
Favorite Targets 
Some of the favorite targets of intelligence gatherers include research and development, 
marketing, manufacturing and production, and human resources. 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.821 
Research and Development 
One would think that research and development (R&D) would be the most heavily guarded 
department in a company, but access to R&D information is surprisingly easy. R&D 
personnel are almost always in the flow of information. The open exchange of information 
is part of the nature of their job. They participate in conferences, attend trade shows, and 
work with academic institutions; however, at each of these functions, they leave themselves 
open for intelligence spies to listen, mingle, and ask questions.  
 
Researchers who publish their findings in industry journals may inadvertently include details 
of a project on which they may be working. This is particularly true in the case of academic 
professionals who may be hired by a company to perform research or conduct a study. More 
than one company has been surprised to learn that the results of a supposedly confidential 
study were published in an academic journal. If an academician is hired to conduct research, 
make sure that he understands that the results are to be kept confidential. Also make sure 
that the use of teaching assistants or graduate students is kept to a minimum and that those 
individuals understand the confidentiality requirements.  
 
Marketing 
Insight into a company’s marketing plan is a valuable gift to a competitor. Being careless 
with vital information such as test marketing results, promotional strategies, and planned 
introduction dates can be disastrous. 
 
Manufacturing and Production 
Production managers are often good sources of information. Also, almost anyone answering 
the phone on the plant floor can unwittingly provide valuable information to a crafty caller 
from a competitor. 
 
Human Resources 
Intelligence professionals often pay close attention to help wanted ads, job postings, and job 
announcements. More ominously, they may use this information to arrange a job interview 
to get information about the firm and what the job will entail. 
 
Although the departments listed above are some of the favored targets of information 
thieves, other personnel in an organization can provide enormous amounts of useful 
information. For instance, salespeople like to talk and are an excellent source of information 
on pricing, product innovations, and market programs. Purchasing agents are helpful in 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.822                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
divulging suppliers, information about what is selling, and the costs of raw materials and 
services. 
 
 
How Information Is Lost 
Information thieves utilize a wide variety of methods—some legal, some not—to gain access 
to an organization’s business secrets. There are seven common ways for information to fall 
into the wrong hands. They are:   
• Accident  
• Poor information security procedures   
• Recruited spies  
• Deception techniques 
• Physical penetration of the company   
• Surveillance 
• Computer system penetrations  
 
Accident  
Accidental losses of information are fairly common and occur in a number of ways. 
Publications such as newsletters or reports to shareholders that are printed by a company 
can inadvertently provide valuable information to its competitors. Also, speeches or papers 
that are presented at conferences are a danger point. Organizations should implement a 
system of review whereby technical and/or security staff review in advance all works up for 
publication or presentation. Another common source of accidental leaks is the press. 
Executives eager to brag about their companies often reveal more than they should about 
research, new products, sales levels, and so on. 
 
A company’s website may also be a source of accidental leaks. Corporate spies frequently 
visit the websites of their targets to gather information that these companies have 
unknowingly assembled for them. Information such as employee telephone and e-mail 
directories, financial information, biographical data on key employees, product features and 
release dates, details on research and development, and job postings can all be found on 
many corporate websites. In some cases this information gives an information thief direct 
access to company secrets; in other instances it helps the spy build a profile of his target that 
will be the basis of an intelligence campaign. Businesses should pay attention to the 
information that is placed on their websites and in other marketing materials. As a general 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.823 
rule of thumb, anything that does not forward the marketing mission of an organization 
should be removed.  
 
Poor Information Security Procedures 
Companies that do not have a system in place for protecting and disposing of confidential 
information leave themselves wide open to attack by corporate spies. An information thief 
will generally attack one or more of the following areas: manual systems (hardcopy 
documents), computer-based systems (electronic files), or personnel (people employed by a 
company or associates of the business). Below are a number of techniques that companies 
should implement to protect manual and electronic information.  
 
On-Site Materials that Are Targeted 
Spies attempt to gather manual systems information by gaining surreptitious access to a 
target’s premises. Common methods include posing as a temporary employee, as a vendor, 
or as a visitor on a plant tour. Materials that these spies generally target include the 
following:   
• Archives (financial, sales data, marketing) 
? In print form 
? Stored on computer media 
• Draft documents, formal documents, and internal correspondence lying on desks 
• Scrap paper in wastepaper baskets and by copying machines 
• Minutes of meetings 
• Legal and regulatory filings 
• Computer printouts 
• Travel documents and receipts 
• Patent documents 
• Pending lawsuits 
• Papers pertaining to mergers and acquisitions 
• Licensing and franchise agreements 
• Special management reports 
• Audits of Internet access 
• Billings for database access 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.824                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ARCHIVES 
Archives provide a view of the target’s performance over time. They offer an excellent 
source for trend analysis. Even if a visitor on a plant tour is not able to handle documents, 
he can note their location and availability for a later penetration. 
 
DRAFT DOCUMENTS 
Draft documents, internal correspondence, and resulting formal documents may reveal the 
evolution of products, designs, and marketing plans within a company. 
 
SCRAP PAPER 
Paper thrown away often contains valuable information about preliminary plans and reports. 
Hackers “dumpster dive” for this sort of information all the time. Often in the form of 
manuals, technical specifications, and instructions, these discarded documents can provide a 
road map to penetrate computer systems. They can also provide insight into evolving 
products or business plans of a target.  
 
MINUTES OF MEETINGS 
Records of high-level meetings can provide key insight on corporate strategies, investment 
policies, product development plans, marketing plans, and other crucial information about a 
business’s direction. They can also help the spy identify key employees; possibly even those 
who are unhappy with the current direction of their own company or careers and who, 
therefore, might be potential recruits as spies.  
 
LEGAL DOCUMENTS AND REGULATORY FILINGS 
Legal documents range from trade secrets to pe nding litigation to summaries of regulatory 
problems the company faces. Pending lawsuits often detail problems with the company’s 
products, services, or operations. 
 
Papers pertaining to mergers and acquisitions have obvious commercial value. The same 
goes for licensing and franchise agreements. Special management reports document myriad 
challenges the target faces. For example, a report may examine what is wrong with the 
company’s inventory control system or that the base of parts suppliers is inadequate.  
 
AUDITS OF INTERNET ACCESS AND BILLINGS FOR DATABASE ACCESS 
Audit reports on Internet access, usually from a proxy server log, can tell a spy what topics 
and sites a company researches and which employees are doing it. Billings for database 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.825 
access of services like D&B, Dialog, or LexisN exis reveal companies the target is checking 
out and doing business with, plus topics they’re investigating. 
 
In addition, these audit reports often reveal if employees are stealing computer resources for 
their own personal ends. Undetected activity over a period of time indicates a lack of security 
oversight. These employees may be candidates for recruitment as inside spies. 
 
Guarding Manual Systems 
Manual systems are all human-readable files and documents. These include commonly 
overlooked items like rolodexes and calendars. Attacks on these systems range from pilfering 
trash to infiltrating a company in the guise of a cleaning crew or vendors to outright theft or 
burglary. Reasonable measures to protect documents include the following: 
1. Place sensitive documents in high - grade locked filing cabinets. It might also be 
advisable to lock sensitive documents in a safe when not in use and at the end of the day. 
Locks or safes should be able to withstand a physical attack of at least one to two hours. 
2. Use a shredder for sensitive documentary waste. In the alternative, organizations 
may opt to have sensitive trash disposed of by a bonded waste-disposal company. If so, 
the trash should be securely stored until it is collected by that company.  
3. Receive and send mail at a secure site. Options include mail drops, post office boxes, 
or locked mailboxes. The key is that the site remains secure. 
4. Provide reasonable perimeter security for offices. Use an alarm system, add secure 
locks to doors and windows, or employ both. 
5. Pay attention to securing auxiliary materials such as: 
? Calendars (they may note key events in a sensitive matter). 
? Specialized internal telephone directories. 
? Notebooks and expense logs from sensitive cases. 
? Works in progress such as reports, notes, and graphics on sensitive cases. 
? Mailing lists. All such lists that have proprietary value should have trapped names 
placed on them as a safeguard. A trapped name is a fictitious one with an address 
that the organization controls. If mail is ever delivered to the trapped name, it will be 
apparent that the list has been compromised. Furthermore, the nature of the mailing 
will probably indicate who bought the list, and may help the victim determine where 
the security breach occurred.  
? Index cards and Rolodexes (if they contain sensitive information.) 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.826                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Blackboards, as well as diagrams and charts on easel pads (If they cannot be easily 
locked up, take a Polaroid photo of them and then erase the original. Secure these 
photographs.) 
? Computer-paper carbons and writing tablets that have impressions from notes on 
sensitive topics. (Shred them every day.) 
? Computer printouts of sensitive data (Keep them locked up and use a shredder to 
dispose of them.) 
 
Organizations concerned about the possibility of corporate espionage should establish 
procedures for classifying and marking sensitive items and should have provisions for their 
short-term and long-term storage, as well as their disposal or destruction. Large offices 
should have a structured log-out procedure for sensitive files so it is always possible to 
determine who had what document, as well as where and when they had it.  
 
Guarding Information Stored in Electronic Format 
Electronic data presents security problems that do not exist with manual documents. A 
small, high-density 1.2 MB computer disk can hold the equivalent of more than two regular 
size novels; CDs, USB flash drives, and other electronic storage devices can hold even more. 
With a single CD, a spy can walk out of a building with thousands of sensitive files tucked 
into his shirt pocket. Furthermore, it is fairly quick and simple to copy even large files from a 
hard drive to a CD or thumb drive. Employees seeking to remove sensitive data can even e-
 mail it to an external address so that they never have to physically carry secret information 
out of the premises.  
 
Since, CDs, flash drives, and other electronic storage devices have extreme portability, 
organizations must take rigid measures to protect them and prevent unauthorized copying of 
sensitive files onto them. The following guidelines will help organizations maintain control 
over data stored on electronic media: 
• Write sensitive data files to portable disks.  Back them up with another disk. Lock up 
originals on-site and securely store backups off-site. Furthermore, secured storage areas 
should blend into their surroundings as much as possible in order to make the 
information thief’s job that much more difficult.  
• Label sensitive magnetic media.  This should include both an external label and an 
internal electronic label designating the file’s classification. (The Label command in the 
Properties Section of Windows can do this.) 
• Guard against accidental erasure. Files should be set so that accidental erasures 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.827 
cannot occur. This will also prohibit a technique used by some corporate spies whereby a 
sensitive disk is deleted, then the disk, which appears to be blank, is taken off-site. Once 
off-site, the targeted files are undeleted.  
• Employ password security on sensitive files.  Many word processors can place 
password protection on files. Combined with other security measures, this provides a 
fairly good perimeter of security for files. Software that encrypts entire files can also be 
purchased.  
• Have a consistent backup procedure for all files. Backup sensitive files onto disks 
designated and labeled for that purpose. 
• Do not leave disks containing sensitive files unattended or unsecured. In large 
offices, require authorized users of classified disks to sign them in and out from a 
designated librarian. 
• Scan outgoing disks to ensure they have no deleted but recoverable sensitive files. 
If a disk does contain such files, reformat the disk, and then write the non-sensitive files 
onto the disk. 
• Before disposing of disks, cut them up. For damaged disks containing highly 
sensitive files, it may be advisable to use a degausser on the disks first. A degausser 
removes all data from the disk so its contents cannot be retrieved, even by “undelete” 
programs.  
 
Organizations should also make sure that sensitive files are not kept on hard drives. In 
addition, employees should be trained to not leave computers unattended if they have 
sensitive information on them. Before employees go to lunch or on break, they should be 
required to place their computers in a secure state.  
 
To prevent spies from finding valuable information in the organization’s trash, sensitive 
computer printouts should be shredded and mixed with non-sensitive shredded documents 
before disposal. 
 
Access to sensitive information must be limited to a need-to-know basis. Organizations 
should maintain a system such as a supervised access log that enables security to track the 
information that each person has handled. If sensitive information is to be transmitted over 
a modem, the files should be encrypted, not just password-protected. Although employees 
might appreciate the convenience, they should not be allowed to dial into company 
computers that contain sensitive information from their homes. Any system containing 
sensitive information should be isolated.  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.828                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Basic Principles of Spying 
 
Recruited Spies 
In order to obtain inside information on a targeted company, a spy will frequently try to 
recruit an existing employee of that company to act as his agent on the inside. An employee 
recruited to spy against his employer is known as a mole. The mole agrees to betray the trust 
of his employer by handing over confidential information that belongs to his organization. 
The three most common recruiting methods are false flag recruitment, recruiting by 
justification, and trapping.  
 
False Flag Recruitment 
False flag recruitment is among the most common recruiting ploys. If a spy discovers that a 
subject has strong social or political feelings, he attempts to twist those feelings into an 
appeal to help the “cause.” The spy convinces the recruit that providing information will 
help save the environmental conditions in the Amazon, will further the interests of the 
recruit’s native country, or will provide some ot her worthwhile benefit. Of course, the actual 
intelligence product is used for corporate espionage, not to help the cause, but the recruit 
does not learn that until it’s too late. 
 
Another method that can be used to gain information from a recruit is romantic or sexual 
seduction. This is not as common as the use of social or political causes as a justification for 
misappropriating company secrets, but it does happen. The spy or an operative does not 
necessarily trade sexual favors for company secrets. Often all that is needed is for an 
operative of the opposite sex to show some interest in the subject. 
 
Recruiting by Justification 
If a spy understands basic psychology, he may be able to convince a recruit that spying is not 
amoral or immoral in his circumstance.  When recruiting by justification, the spy looks for a 
person who thinks of himself as a victim. An employee who is bitter at having been passed 
over for a promotion, for example, provides an excellent prospect for a recruit. Other typical 
targets include employees who feel they have been underpaid or unrecognized by their 
employer, and who harbor a great deal of resentment because of it. Under the right 
conditions, these employees may agree with a spy that the time is ripe for them to look after 
themselves.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.829 
Trapping Recruits 
In order to trap an employee of the target so that he is essentially forced to spy on his 
company, the recruiting spy will look for some sort of weakness in the potential recruit. 
Common examples include excessive gambling, drug or alcohol abuse, socially unacceptable 
sexual proclivities, past criminal convictions, and wild spending habits.  
 
Once a weakness has been identified in one of the target’s employees, the recruiting spy will 
do one of two things. If the recruit has some sort of chemical dependency or serious 
financial problem, the recruiting spy will typically finance the recruit’s weakness to the extent 
that the recruit becomes dependent on the spy’s favor. If the recruit has something 
embarrassing in his past such as a criminal record, the spy will more likely blackmail the 
recruit to force her to cooperate. In most situations, the recruiter starts as a friend, helping 
the target meet his needs, but later turns to blackmail to keep the recruit in line.  
 
Regardless of the method by which an employee is recruited, once that recruit has stolen or 
divulged a secret piece of information, the spy can easily keep that person in line and force 
them to continue spying. If the recruit tries to back out, the spy simply threatens to turn the 
recruit in to his employer or the police. The threat of losing his job, or possible criminal 
prosecution is usually sufficient to keep an otherwise hesitant recruit on a tight leash.  
 
Counter-Recruitment Training 
Compromising a person’s credibility and integrity requires a series of moves that are 
generally played out over a fairly extended period of time. The methods spies use to turn an 
employee can be very complex and can occur in a multitude of situations; no security officer 
can see far enough ahead to forestall every potential compromise. It is therefore imperative 
to train employees to report any suspected recruitment effort made against them as early as 
possible. The importance of this statement cannot be overestimated. Key employees should 
be made aware of the most common recruitment techniques, which were described above. 
In particular, they should be trained to be wary of people who:   
• Encourage and finance some vice of the employee. 
• Express a great deal of sympathy for a cause that is important to the employee. 
• Offer to help with a serious financial problem. 
• Attempt to seduce the employee. 
• Attempt to blackmail the employee.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.830                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Obviously, some of these techniques involve ve ry personal matters that the typical employee 
will not feel comfortable discussing with their company. That is precisely why spies use these 
avenues to attack recruits. No amount of training will convince every employee to bring their 
dark secrets out into the light, but by making employees aware of the ways in which spies 
operate, an organization may be able to help its employees resist their initial overtures. This 
sort of training prepares employees to recognize a recruitment campaign before it has 
advanced to the stage at which the employee can no longer back out.  
 
After Recruitment 
Once on board, the mole receives training on gathering intelligence safely and productively. 
This is not merely an afterthought; the success of the mission depends upon it. Recruits are 
taught what information they should target, how to collect data safely, how to follow security 
procedures, how to plant “bugs,” and other techniques that will help them effectively extract 
information from the target.  
 
Targeted Information 
Recruits are typically instructed to provide a specific piece or category of information, rather 
than being allowed to indiscriminately retrieve whatever secret information they happen to 
come in contact with. The reason is that most recruits lack the technical expertise to identify 
truly important intelligence data. Furthermore, most recruits are not sophisticated 
intelligence-gatherers, so the more information they attempt to retrieve, the more likely it is 
that they will be detected. Therefore, the control (the spy who recruited the mole and directs 
her activities) typically assigns the recruit a narrowly defined information goal. If the mole 
successfully completes this task, her objective might be expanded to include other items.  
 
Methods for Safely Collecting Data   
In order to reduce the likelihood of an intelligence campaign being compromised, a spy will 
generally provide the recruit with some training or instruction on how to safely collect 
information. For instance, when a spy targets sensitive documents, she generally does not 
steal those documents outright. It is more effective to copy the documents, if possible. The 
spy still gets the information she needs, and the victim does not know that its secrets have 
been compromised. If classified documents were to go missing, this could alert the victim to 
the presence of a spy and cause it to tighten its security controls.  
 
Most spies do not try to remove computer media with sensitive security labels from the site. 
Instead, they copy files from labeled media onto plain unmarked disks or small portable 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.831 
drives that will not attract attention from security personnel. Rather than carry sensitive 
information off the premises, they might opt to e-mail the files out to a neutral, relatively 
anonymous e-mail address. 
 
One of a spy’s main goals is to keep a low profile. There are a number of red flags that 
corporate security might look for if espionage is suspected, and an effective spy will try to 
avoid exhibiting any of these characteristics. For example, a person who consistently shows 
up at work early or stays late may make people suspicious, particularly if that individual has 
not, in the past, worked long hours. While it may seem like the best times to steal sensitive 
information are before or after hours, this activity might actually tip off the victim.  
 
In general, recruits are told not to stand out, and to avoid being labeled as a problem 
employee. If an investigation commences as a result of any security leaks, the recruit wants 
to be far down the list of potential suspects. Recruits are also instructed to keep their mouths 
shut. Obviously, they should not discuss their covert activities with anyone else. Finally, 
recruits are told to spend their extra income from spying gradually and in a low-key manner. 
The goal is to avoid attracting attention. 
 
Communications Between the Employee and the Control  
One of the major rules for an employee-spy is that she should not make direct contact with 
her control. Instead, the spy and control will typically communicate via a system of signals: a 
chalk mark in a public place, an innocuous e-mail to a secure address, an innocent note left 
on a bulletin board, graffiti on a wall, or a mundane newspaper ad. When e-mail is used to 
transfer documents, it is usually sent to untraceable addresses or employs intermediaries 
known as “cutouts.” 
 
When spies must make direct deliveries to their controls, they leave documents, computer 
media, or film and tapes at secure spy drops. These drop sites can be in parks, abandoned 
buildings, behind vending machines, or in other similar locations. The only requirements are 
accessibility, cover, security, and the imagination of the spy and his contact. Prearranged 
signals such as those described above are used to let the control know that an item has been 
left at the site. The control may leave the spy’s compensation at the same site. 
 
Security Measures for the Recruit 
Spies are instructed to not leave incriminating evidence at their home or at their company 
workspace. The goal is to eliminate any evidence trail that could lead back to them. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.832                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Furthermore, they do not want to give the target any indication that it is actually being 
infiltrated.  
 
Computer security measures for a spy can be of particular importance. Recruits are generally 
instructed not to save any documents — even for a short time — on a hard drive or external 
storage device without encryption. For added security, many corporate spies double-encrypt 
everything they steal with two different systems. The overriding goal is to leave no 
incriminating evidence of the intelligence campaign and to avoid detection at all costs. The 
longer the spy can continue his activities undetected, the more damage he can do.  
 
Planting Bugs 
Recruits are taught where listening devices should be planted in order to gather needed 
information and, at the same time, avoid detection. Bugs are usually placed in meeting 
rooms, offices of key employees, or other areas conducive to the discussion of secret 
information. Equally important is the decision of where to deploy taping equipment. The spy 
needs to place the equipment in a remote location where tapes can be safely retrieved. If 
taping is done on-site, the spy risks losing the tapes if the listening device is discovered. 
Finally, the spy must know when and how to service hidden listening devices, and how to 
safely remove them when the surveillance is finished.  
 
Deception Techniques
In many cases, spies are able to gather information from employees of a target without 
recruiting those employees in the surveillance campaign. Instead, the spy tricks the employee 
into revealing confidential information. Typical scams include using fake employment 
interviews, posing as a corporate headhunter, conducting bogus market research, soliciting 
contract bids on fictitious projects, and social engineering. Each of these scams is designed 
to get the employee to reveal sensitive information about his company’s business. 
 
Employment Advertisements 
Employment want-ads are a great way for intelligence thieves to get existing employees from 
a target company to turn over sensitive information. The bogus ads offer great job 
opportunities to people with qualifications that match those of a target’s key personnel.    
 
The employees who answer the ads think they are applying for a real job; they expect a 
technical interview on what they do. During the bogus interview, the spy will seek to obtain 
as much information as possible about what the employees do, the projects they work on, 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.833 
the equipment they utilize, etc. This is a very low-cost collection method. If the spy meets 
with the employee in a restaurant, for example, he is only out the cost of a meal and the cost 
of placing the advertisement. In a highly competitive job market, fake interviews serve as a 
powerful tool in corporate espionage.  
 
Headhunter Scams 
In a variation on the fake employment ad scheme, a spy calls a key employee of the target 
while posing as a headhunter with a client who is interested in that employee. The 
“headhunter” asks for a résumé and information about projects on which the employee is 
currently working. An in-depth interview by the “client” can provide additional details. This 
method allows the spy to target key employees more directly than simply running fake 
employment ads.  
 
Market Research Scams 
In a market research scam, the spy contacts companies by telephone posing as a 
representative of a well-known market research company. The spy uses a phony 
questionnaire designed to obtain background data to assist in further penetration of the 
company. The spy might, in some cases, attempt to obtain direct intelligence data during the 
telephone interview. The spy frequently offers the employee a bogus reward of some kind in 
return for responding to the questionnaire. These calls tend to aim at lower level workers 
who have operational knowledge of the business, but who are not likely to be as defensive as 
higher level managers.  
 
Phony Contract Bids 
Another indirect method for obtaining intelligence from human sources is the call for phony 
bids. For instance, a spy might send out an impressive-looking Request for Proposals (RFP) 
package on a construction or manufacturing project. The RFP states that certain operational 
and financial data must be submitted as part of the bid. This ruse works very well when 
assessing the ability of a company to manufacture a certain product. The bigger the bait, the 
more information the target company is likely to reveal. The return address on the RFP is a 
mail drop, which insulates the spy from detection. The deadline set forth in the phony bid 
requirements helps ensure that the spy gets the information he needs by the date he needs it. 
 
One advantage of the scams discussed above is that the victims remain unaware that they 
have turned over sensitive information to a spy, even after the leak has sprung. If there is no 
follow-up over a job interview, for example, the applicant simply thinks he did not get the 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.834                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
job. If there is no feedback on a bid proposal, the victim thinks it failed to get the bid. In 
general, no feedback is expected on marketing research other than receipt of the promised 
gift. 
 
 
Infiltration Techniques 
A corporate spy may choose to collect intelligence information himself rather than recruit an 
employee of the target. Factors that weigh in this decision include a tight time schedule, the 
lack of available recruits, or expense constraints. The spy might simply have specialized 
knowledge that makes him the best one to do the job. 
 
Posing as an Employee or Contract Laborer 
Penetrating a company can be very simple. As indicated earlier, one common technique is to 
obtain work as a security officer or a member of the janitorial crew for the victim 
organization. Anyone who saw the movie Wall Street might remember Charlie Sheen’s 
character putting on a janitor’s overalls to ga in access to sensitive information at a rival 
company. Even if the hiring company does a background check on all potential employees 
(usually nothing more than a cursory criminal history search) a good corporate spy will rarely 
have a serious criminal record. It is not likely that a spy will be screened out during a routine 
hiring process.  
 
Security professionals often comment that the best spies are people who have advanced 
technical knowledge; for example, Ph.D.s in electrical engineering or biotechnology. If a spy 
needs highly technical information on a competitor, he may have to use a person with an 
advanced technical background who knows how to identify and/or access the sought after 
materials.  
 
Individuals with high-level technical skills and high security privileges generally have to be 
recruited from within a targeted organization. However, in some intelligence campaigns a 
spy will plant a person with advanced technical credentials in a targeted company in a 
professional capacity. That person gains access to the target’s proprietary information and 
funnels it out to the spy. A person who penetrates a company in this manner is known as a 
“sleeper,” an infiltrator who works on a long-term basis with an acceptable cover. Sleepers 
will be discussed in more detail later in this section.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.835 
Stealing Badges 
Stealing or counterfeiting employee badges is one fairly common infiltration method utilized 
by corporate spies. If badges are in use at the target’s site, the spy can generally fake a copy 
using a desktop publishing program. Contractor badge patterns can be viewed on workers 
eating lunch at local restaurants. Even if the badges have magnetic strips, the spy may still be 
able to enter the plant at a highly traveled entry point where a guard only makes a quick 
visual inspection of security badges as people enter the site, allowing anyone displaying a 
badge to enter. Even if the only method of entry is by an electronic badge scan, a spy can 
still piggyback in on another person’s badge. If the spy displays a badge, an employee of the 
target can be talked into letting him into the facility.  
 
Stealing badges is also an option. At bars and nightclubs, women might leave their purses 
and handbags lying about with security badges protruding in open view. Men do the same 
thing with jackets hung over bar stools. A badge purloined on Friday night will probably not 
be missed until Monday. Once a spy has the badge, he just pastes his picture on the front 
and he’s ready to go. More sophisticated techniques include having someone lift a badge 
from an employee’s purse or jacket. The card is  passed on to a colleague who runs it through 
a magnetic card reader. This can be done quickly, in the car in a parking lot, for example. 
The badge is then returned to the employee before anyone notices it is missing. Later, the 
magnetic image that was scanned from the stolen card is transferred onto blank ID card 
stock containing a magnetic strip. With the addition of an appropriate picture and printing, 
the spy now has a badge that will get him into the facility, and no one knows that security 
has been compromised.  
 
Moles and Sleepers  
If a client has a very long-range interest in monitoring a company, he may place a spy in that 
company as a permanent employee. This employee, known as a sleeper, keeps a low profile 
and reports to his control on a regular basis about the operations of the company. This kind 
of spy, especially if well schooled in tradecraft, will be extremely difficult to detect. With all 
the electronic spydrops available through e-mail, the sleeper never even has to risk exposure 
by meeting directly with his control.  
 
One way to help prevent the introduction of sleepers is to perform thorough background 
checks (where permitted by law) on all applicants. This may help detect operatives who have 
padded their résumés to make sure they get hired.  Of course, a clever spy will make sure that 
there is a convincing reference for every piece of information on an operative’s résumé. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.836                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A mole functions in the same manner as a sleeper. The difference between the two is that a 
sleeper is a person who is deliberately planted as an employee in a company to extract 
information. A mole, by contrast, is usually an existing employee of the targeted organization 
who is somehow compromised, agreeing to turn over her company’s secrets to the business 
intelligence professional. When recruiting moles, intelligence specialists look for employees 
who are stable enough in their professional and personal life to function as spies on a long-
 term basis. As discussed earlier, there are a number of ways to recruit a mole, but the prime 
motivation is usually greed.  
 
Places Where Spies Snoop 
When spies do infiltrate a company’s premises, they rarely have to break into  file cabinets or 
desk drawers to get the information they need. Due to laziness, ignorance, or just poor 
organizational skills, employees often fail to lock up sensitive documents each night. Messy 
desks are the rule, not the exception. Messy desks are easier for a spy to rifle through than 
neatly organized workstations. If documents are removed from a sloppy desktop, they may 
not be missed for quite some time.  
 
Messiness is not confined to documents. Computers often have mounds of disks, CDs, and 
other media lying unprotected around them. Notes on the sides of terminals and screens or 
in unlocked desk drawers frequently broadcast passwords and user IDs to anyone who cares 
to look. User manuals lying about often have similar information scribbled inside. All this 
clutter is created by employees who place convenience before security. Companies that do 
not enforce clean desk policies and do not require sensitive materials to be locked up are 
asking for trouble. Employees should be trained to report signs that their offices have been 
searched (for example, papers have been moved, disks seem to have been shuffled, files are 
out of order), even when no information is actually missing. 
 
Mailroom 
The mailroom is one of the corporate spy’s favorite places to snoop. A great deal of 
information can be obtained from the mailroom by making a simple phone call. The spy can 
learn where to ship and receive packages, how the target’s internal billing system works, 
where to locate employees of the target company, and even the company’s Federal Express 
account number. A spy can also walk into most mailrooms and, simply by acting like he is 
supposed to be there, walk away with cost center account numbers, telephone directories, 
copies of internal communications, and in some cases even correspondence and packages. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.837 
Loading Docks 
Despite the fact that many companies maintain video cameras and security guard patrols at 
their loading docks, these can still be great places to gather intelligence and to slip sensitive 
information out the door. The security personnel at the loading docks are frequently 
contract workers with minimal training on how to spot a sophisticated infiltrator. 
Furthermore, contract security personnel may not be familiar with managers and employees 
from other departments. A spy can sometimes don a badge and a clipboard and move about 
the loading docks with impunity, unquestioned by the security officers who assume he is 
supposed to be there. Meanwhile, the spy is copying down purchase order numbers, address 
label data, and types of merchandise being shipped and received.  
 
Security guards may be trained to prevent the removal of manuals, documents, or software 
that are labeled or color-coded as “confidential.” However, spies can easily change labels and 
covers to a different color. Security officers generally do not have the training to look for 
other indicators of sensitive materials that are being removed. 
 
Storage Areas 
Spies frequently target storage areas for information because they are generally low traffic 
areas, thus the risk of being detected is minimal. If someone does come into the area while 
the spy is there, he will have a cover story handy; for example, he may say he is doing 
research or performing an audit. A prop like a clipboard will usually make the  
story convincing. 
 
For manual documents, the spy will check: 
• Unlocked file cabinets. 
• Unlocked closets and storage rooms. 
• Areas containing archived microfiche records and computer printouts. 
• Off-site, rented storage lockers. 
 
For computer media, he will be on the lookout for: 
• Unlocked storage areas for computer media (such as disks, tapes, and external drives). 
• Unsecured media libraries. 
 
For the open storage of critical equipment, parts, or raw materials, the spy will note amount, 
type, and transit information found on the merchandise. If the materials are kept in a secure 
area, the spy will try to obtain the access code by observing an employee as he enters the 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.838                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
area. It is also possible to spray entry keypads with an ultraviolet solution that remains 
invisible to the naked eye. The user unknowingly wipes the solution off the keys that he 
presses when entering the code. The spy can determine the keys the user punched by 
viewing the keypad with a portable ultraviolet lamp.  
 
Hotels
Hotel rooms are remarkably easy to bug and to search. Whenever a key corporate player 
travels, there is a chance that spies will be listening at her heels. By using transactional 
intelligence, spies determine which hotels an executive frequents. Once that piece of 
information is determined, the spy can set up surveillance of the target’s room. For example, 
spies frequently bribe hotel staff to allow them to enter hotel rooms and plant 
eavesdropping devices. 
 
Knowing where an executive is staying also makes it easier to set up fixed surveillance of the 
comings and goings of visitors to the hotel rooms or meeting rooms. For example, the spy 
can spot the target’s vehicle and rig it with satellite tracking to follow his movements during 
a business trip.  
 
Electronic and visual surveillance are not the only spy activities conducive to the hotel 
environment. If a spy can gain access to an executive’s room, whether by bribery or simply 
by finding the door left open by a maid, he can copy sensitive files from a laptop left in the 
room. There may also be sensitive documents in the room that the spy can photograph. 
Trash in the room’s waste paper baskets is also a potential source of information.  
 
If sensitive documents are being delivered by a service such as UPS or Federal Express, they 
can be intercepted after they are delivered to the hotel but before the target has received 
them. The spy opens the envelope and copies or photographs the contents. The documents 
are then resealed in a new delivery envelope. The invoice is removed from the plastic holder 
on the original envelope and placed in the new envelope. The spy affixes a shipping label, 
which is easy to generate on a desktop program, and no one suspects that the message has 
been intercepted.  
 
Spies can view materials delivered in a conventional paper envelope without even opening it. 
There are special solvents called Mail Inspectors that can be sprayed on the outside of an 
envelope that allow the spy to see through the envelope and view the contents inside. After a 
few minutes, the solution dries and the envelope becomes opaque again. With considerably 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.839 
less sophistication, the spy can simply resort to steaming open envelopes and then resealing 
them after she has read their contents. It is generally not difficult for a spy to bribe hotel 
employees in order to gain to access the target’s correspondence. The same is true of 
employees of message and delivery services.  
 
Warning Signs of Infiltrations 
If a spy does his job properly, it will be very difficult to detect an infiltration. Generally, 
organizations have a better chance of preventing infiltrations by establishing appropriate 
security measures such as accompanying all vendors while on-site, and requiring security 
badges for access to sensitive areas. Detection can be difficult, but there are some signs that 
organizations can look for that might indicate there is a spy in their midst:  
• Employees who are most likely to be recruited as spies are those who exhibit some sort 
of bitterness or resentment toward their employer. Be alert for abnormal activities by 
employees who seem to feel that they are under-appreciated, under-utilized, or are 
treated unfairly.  
• Employees who express some sort of political or moral opposition to an organization’s 
operations may be susceptible to a false flag recruitment. 
• Employees who are undergoing a personal financial problem (frequently associated with 
drug addiction, gambling addiction, high medical expenses, or some other personal 
crisis) may also be vulnerable to recruitment. 
• Employees who suddenly undergo a major lifestyle change, buying luxury items, taking 
exotic vacations, etc., with no apparent increase in income should be watched. This is a 
common red flag of fraud schemes, but may also indicate an employee who is being paid 
for divulging trade secrets. 
• Employees who frequently work late or come to work early may be trying to get access 
to confidential materials. This behavior is particularly suspicious when the employee in 
question works unusual hours as compared to others in his department.  
• In some cases, moles will actually discuss their covert activity with their coworkers. 
Employees should be trained to report this, as well as other suspicious behavior.  
• Employees who seem to spend a lot of time in areas not necessary to their work 
functions, particularly areas where sensitive materials are stored, may be attempting to 
misappropriate company secrets. This should be investigated, particularly if the employee 
is found in these areas after hours.  
• Similarly, employees who attempt to access sensitive computer files that are either above 
their authorization level or outside the scope of their work duties might warrant 
investigation. Organizations should maintain an automated journal that records events 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.840                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
such as attempted access of restricted files.  
• If employees have sensitive files saved on their hard drives or disks, this may be a sign 
that they are misdirecting that information. This is especially true when the employee in 
question is not working on, or should not have access to, the file in question. If records 
reveal that this employee has e-mailed the proprietary information to an off-site location, 
this is another indicator of information theft. 
• Vendors should be escorted at all times when  on the organization’s premises. Any time a 
vendor is seen loitering unescorted around file rooms, offices, mail rooms, shipping 
docks, computer media storage areas, or other sensitive zones, the incident should be 
reported as a security violation and potential intrusion attempt. The same is true for 
janitorial personnel, security guards, trash collectors, and other non-employees. 
• Spies may come disguised as repairpersons, janitors, deliverymen, etc. Incidents in  
which service technicians show up without having been called may indicate an  
attempted infiltration.  
• Employee reports of lost security badges, access cards, passwords, etc. could be a sign 
that a spy has stolen these items in order to infiltrate a site. 
• Obviously, if files or computer disks that contain sensitive information are missing, this 
is a clear sign of a theft or misappropriation of information. In general, spies will copy—
 rather than steal—proprietary information, but sometimes sensitive documents are 
actually pilfered. 
• Employee desks or offices that have been tampered with are a common sign of 
intrusion. Reports of stolen materials clearly point to an infiltration, but more frequently 
intruders will only rifle through files, desks, or computer disks, choosing to copy 
sensitive information rather than steal it. Employees should be trained to report 
incidents where their offices or desks appear to have been “messed up,” even when no 
materials have been stolen.  
• Security personnel should log reports of persons who try to enter a facility without 
proper identification or authorization. Similarly, attempts to piggyback into a facility by 
following a person with authorization could be a sign of an attempted intrusion.  
• Reports of trespassing or other criminal activity near a secure facility may also indicate a 
surveillance campaign. In particular, instances where strangers are seen loitering around 
the outside of the facility or digging through trash bins could be signs of corporate 
spying. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.841 
Countermeasures  
While security officers cannot turn their organizations into impenetrable fortresses, they can 
implement specific countermeasures to thwart a spy’s attempts at infiltrating their company: 
• Materials bearing proprietary data should not be stored in areas visible to the public. If 
no other option exists, the organization should only use unlettered, color-coded 
containers as opposed to labeling a particular file drawer “Confidential.” This will make 
it more difficult for spies to tell where sensitive information can be found.  
• Organizations should ask about their bank’s  confidentiality policy and make sure the 
bank doesn’t permit tellers to access information on major accounts without a manager’s 
permission. If the company has sensitive financial accounts, it should find a bank with 
computer systems that use mandatory access controls. Such controls prevent bank 
employees without proper level of privilege from accessing large accounts. Information 
on large commercial accounts should be maintained on a need-to-know basis. 
• Security should establish a procedure for tracking and locking up sensitive data.  
• Cleaning personnel should be properly bonded and identified, and their access to the 
facility should be controlled. 
• Vendors should have verified credentials and must be escorted by a company 
representative during their visit.  
• Any proprietary lists must be password protected and trapped. 
• Other general countermeasures include educating employees to properly store sensitive 
data and to question the credentials of anyone visiting the site. Employees should also be 
instructed as to what information they may disclose over the telephone. 
• Employees should sign nondisclosure agreements. In addition, the legal department 
should be consulted about integrating vendor and supplier nondisclosure agreements 
into standard contracts. 
 
 
Transactional Intelligence 
Just about any mundane business transaction can offer a potential information payoff to a 
spy. Frequent flyer miles document where an executive has traveled. Credit card receipts 
record a trip’s itinerary and goods or services purchased. Even videos purchased or rented at 
a video store are useful for documenting a targeted employee’s tastes and proclivities. Any 
one piece of information by itself has minimal value. Properly compiled, however, this 
information can provide an extensive profile on a target. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.842                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Informants 
The serious corporate spy will develop a network of paid informants who can get this 
monitoring intelligence for him. These informants come from a wide range of businesses: 
• Travel agents. 
• Airline reservation personnel. 
• Major credit card companies. 
• Staff at major Internet providers.  
• Employees at video, music, and other entertainment outlets.  
• Staff of adult entertainment providers that the target frequents. 
• Telephone company employees with access to telephone records. 
• Employees of commercial database providers such as Dialog and D&B who have access 
to transaction records. 
 
While the purpose of these informants is not to act as regular spies, they will, for a fee, 
provide transactional intelligence on a subject. That transactional information can have a 
critical impact. It can tell a corporate spy about: 
• A person’s vices. 
• Details of business travel. 
• Hotels where the target stayed and where she is likely to stay again in the future (this can 
be useful for setting up surveillance).  
• Whom the target has called. 
• Interests and hobbies (another way to edge into the target’s confidence). 
• Companies or subjects the target has researched. 
 
This type of intelligence is really a hybrid of documentary source intelligence (combining 
purely open sources and gray sources) and HUMINT. An inside contact is needed to obtain 
the information, but once the contact sells it to a corporate spy, the spy can analyze it 
without need of additional assistance. 
 
Monitoring intelligence is very helpful in the collection of human intelligence. If a spy knows 
a subject’s hobbies, she can see to it that she “m eets” the target at a restaurant, convention, 
etc., striking up a conversation or possibly a friendship. A targeted employee in this scenario 
becomes an unwitting source of information.  
 
The spy does not necessarily have to direct these efforts at an employee of the targeted 
organization. For instance, if the organization uses a contractor to microfilm its records, the 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.843 
spy might attempt to compromise an employee of the contractor or penetrate its security 
rather than attacking the target organization directly.  
 
A spy can also become his own inside source of transactional intelligence. For example, if a 
spy wants to develop a telephone history on a subject, he can send the subject a free phone 
card for 60 minutes of calling time. There are companies that will mail the phone cards to 
the subject and then track all their calls for a small fee (less than $50.00). This kind of service 
can be a powerful intelligence-gathering device. Employees should be trained to be wary of 
this kind of scam.  
 
Decoy Websites 
The Internet offers additional avenues for collecting information. One tactic used by spies is 
to set up a website to collect résumés for particular technical specialties. Included on the 
website is a questionnaire that visitors are instructed to fill out “to aid in placing you.” The 
site can also require visitors to register for “free” research services. The information that the 
applicants provide makes it possible to keep a log of the links that they access.  
 
It is not difficult to create a site that targets will visit; it is  simply a matter of doing some 
research on hot topics in a particular field. The spy creates a site that has the necessary 
metatags for search engines to pick up the title. She fills the site with relevant links and 
builds logging software into the site to track the links that users access. This can create a 
profile of the user and help the spy determine what he is interested in. The spy can even call 
users as a follow-up. The user is impressed because someone from the site took an interest 
in him, and this gives the spy a natural lead-in to pump the subject for information. 
 
A decoy website might also enable the spy to gain access to the target’s computer system. 
For instance, people frequently use the same user ID and password for a number of 
different applications because it is easier to remember than having several different 
passwords. The spy’s website might require visitors to enter a user ID and password for the 
“research services” or to view bogus job postings. This information is stored by the website 
and later used to try to gain access to the target’s computer system. Decoy websites can also 
be set up so that visitors unwittingly download viruses or other malicious software. This may 
not necessarily help a spy gain information, but it can help sabotage a company’s computer 
system.  
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.844                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Telling Good Lies 
Rather than infiltrate a company to extract needed information, a spy might mislead 
employees of the target so that they are induced to divulge sensitive information. Given the 
nature of the data required, it may be simpler and safer to develop a cover story and simply 
coax the target’s employees into revealing information, rather than using an operative to steal 
the necessary data. This approach can be a powerful one, especially when the spy has a 
specialized knowledge or background. For example, if the spy has training as an electronic 
engineer, approaching people in the circuit design department of a high-tech company would 
have a natural flow or quality. The key to this type of attack is for the spy to be able to 
mislead the target about his intentions; in other words, the spy has to be able to tell  
good lies.  
 
Regardless of the spy’s background, the lie that he tells must contain a large measure of 
truth. Lies not built on a foundation of truth falter quickly under skeptical questioning. He 
must be familiar with the background of his story. Hence, he has to do his homework in 
advance. If he does not have a firm knowledge of electronic engineering, he has to learn 
enough about it to carry on a conversation well enough to convince others he knows what 
he is talking about. This does not mean the spy has to be able to solve complex electrical 
engineering equations. He just needs to know enough about the subject to keep a 
conversation going and to steer clear of areas of which he is obviously ignorant. 
 
Suppose the spy is after specifics on the design of a microprocessor. He poses as a sales 
engineer in a field office. In this position, he would not be expected to know all the details of 
microprocessor design. Nevertheless, he has a good pretext for contacting someone who is 
familiar with the design. He could claim, for example, that he is under a time constraint from 
a customer and he needs some details to help close a sale. To give the call a greater air of 
authenticity, he can have the “salesman” he’s supporting on the line too. He can also tie in 
the call to current events, dropping the name of a customer who has been written up in the 
trade press. In other words he creates an internally consistent lie that the employee in the 
design department can accept and believe. 
 
If the spy has to meet with the employee in person, rather than over the phone, he would 
bring the necessary props. These include: 
• Fake ID 
• Bogus business cards 
• Product displays 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.845 
• Associates she can call on the telephone during the meeting to back up his story 
 
The important factor is to make the target comfortable. In advance of the conversation, he 
prepares by studying technical details about the product and personal details about other 
people in the company or the industry. These facts are peppered into the conversation with 
the target, the goal being to get the target to let his guard down and divulge the sought after 
information. 
 
 
Visual Surveillance Against People 
 
Pre-Recruitment Surveillance 
In developing human sources, spies know that they should never underestimate the 
importance of doing pre-recruitment surveillance on targets. There are a number of goals for 
this kind of surveillance. They include: 
• To discover: 
? Who they are 
? Where they live 
? What they do in their spare time 
? What they want to keep secret  
? Who their friends are 
? Who their enemies are 
• To look for: 
? Cars 
? Homes 
? Recreational activities 
? Levels of income and debts 
? The subject’s importance to the organization 
• To uncover what they throw in the trash. For example: 
? Financial papers 
? Medical problems 
? Family problems 
• To learn about their enemies, such as:  
? Ex-lovers 
? Fired employees 
? Political opponents 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.846                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Competitors 
? People owed money 
• To make contact with the target:  
? By finding out what he thinks about his job, family, or life in general 
? By determining the degree to which the target will confide in others 
 
Briefing Files on the Subject 
Beyond the fundamentals of doing pre-recruitment surveillance, the corporate spy also must 
master regular techniques to monitor ongoing operations. These techniques begin with a 
briefing file on the intended subject. If a spy were to follow a key executive for the company, 
the following would be essential starting details: 
• Name of the subject 
• Photos of the subject 
• Detailed description 
• Known associates 
• Frequent hangouts 
• Routine activities and schedule 
• Vehicles used (with tag numbers) 
• Type of neighborhood where subject lives 
• Street or location layout 
 
Moving Surveillance 
The spy has to be flexible and imaginative in conducting a moving surveillance. For example, 
placing a reflective stripe on the back of the subject’s car makes it more distinctive at night. 
Laying a cheap wristwatch under the rear tire  of the subject’s car will establish when he 
leaves; the broken face will stop the watch at the time they depart. If a subject goes into a 
bar or restaurant, the spy knows to order food or drink and pay for it immediately so that he 
can blend in and to be ready to leave at a moment’s notice. 
 
Fixed Surveillance 
Fixed surveillance, while it has many advantages over moving surveillance, has one great 
vulnerability. The base from which the surveillance is conducted (for example, a van parked 
across the street from the subject) might be spotted by the target, as well as neighbors and 
curious passersby. In order to camouflage a fixed surveillance campaign, the spy must be 
familiar with the surroundings and choose a cover that will blend in.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.847 
E-Mail 
E-mail is frequently dense with data on company problems, personnel issues, status on 
projects, travel plans, and merger activity. It is also the most vulnerable form of computer 
information. The vulnerability arises from the fact that almost anyone in the company has 
access to the service. Literally, everybody fr om temps to the CEO has an e-mail address. 
This wide-open access creates an immense exposure that is compounded by the desire for 
convenience. Employees in many companies are able to check their e-mail from home. 
Direct access from off-site via modem can permit compromises of the e-mail server.  
 
Once a penetration of an e-mail server occurs, whether by hacking through search engines or 
by using a legitimate account, a spy is in position to do great harm. He can forge an e-mail 
address for his account and send messages about the company requesting information. 
People will respond thinking he is from auditing, for example, when he may be just a temp 
working in customer service.  
 
An internal spy can arrange to intercept sensitive e-mail by inserting e-mail addresses into 
internal mailing lists. When proprietary or sensitive information is distributed (for example, 
to the “management” mailing list) the spy receives a copy at either an internal or an external 
e-mail site. With an external e-mail address embedded into a sensitive mailing list, it is quite 
possible that an internal spy can monitor electronic mail long after ceasing to work for the 
targeted company.  
 
E-mail security programs can detect unauthorized addresses planted into lists, so long-term 
implants are not always an effective strategy. However, when a spy knows intensive activity 
is afoot, (for example, on a merger or acquisition) short-term “taps” into e-mail lists can be 
very productive.  
 
 
Social Engineering 
In a social engineering scheme, the information thief manipulates people into handing over 
secret information through use of trickery, persuasion, threats, or cajolery. The social 
engineer usually, though not always, operates by phone or e-mail. In some cases, the social 
engineer obtains direct information from her victim about a company’s business operations, 
contracts, customer lists, or so on. In other cases, a hacker uses social engineering to obtain 
passwords or otherwise gain access to a computer system. Social engineering is thought to 
play at least some part in most computer system penetrations.  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.848                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There are a wide variety of social engineering techniques; the only common denominator 
being that the spy attempts to extract confidential information from an employee of the 
target company through some form of trickery or deceit. Some of the more common 
schemes are described in the following sections.  
 
The Neophyte
In one of the most common social engineering schemes, the spy calls the help desk of a 
target company and claims to be a new employee on his first day at work. The spy complains 
that he has not yet been given a password and so he has been unable to start his computer 
and begin working. The help desk employee gives the spy a password, thereby enabling him 
to enter the company’s system. Typically, the spy does not call the help desk directly in this 
type of scheme. Instead, he calls another department and asks to be transferred to the help 
desk so the call appears to be internal.  
 
The Power Broker 
In another common scheme, the attacker contacts the help desk and claims to be a high-
 ranking company official, an influential client, or some other imposing figure. Background 
searches of securities filings, government filings, company websites, or annual reports are 
used to choose the fake identity the spy will use. The spy uses his false credentials to bully 
the help desk into handing out passwords, remote-access software, or even some key piece 
of business information.  
 
The Systems Administrator  
In this scheme, an information thief contacts a computer user in an organization and claims 
to be an IT employee of the company. He tells the user that a “network problem” has been 
identified with the user’s computer. The spy asks for the password the user logged on with 
so he can fix the problem. Most employees are willing to give their password out to a 
systems administrator when requested, making this technique very effective. In a similar 
scheme, the spy will pass out a memo on customer letterhead asking users to verify their log-
 on information for “security reasons.”   
 
Fraudulent Surveys 
Fake surveys are another common social engineering scheme. Posing as survey takers, either 
in person or over the Internet, spies gather information from people about their names, 
nicknames, ages, birth dates, names and birthdays of spouses or children, pets, favorite 
hobbies, favorite song, favorite movie, and dozens of other personal preferences and 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.849 
attributes. The theory is that most people choose a password that has some level of personal 
importance. The spies take the responses from their “surveys” and try them as passwords 
when they attempt to break into a system.  
 
Fake Prizes 
Finally, fake gift certificates or sweepstakes can be used to get access to a person’s password. 
For instance, an employee of a target company is sent an e-mail gift certificate from a fake 
vendor the spy has set up. The employee might be told the gift certificate is a prize, or that it 
was purchased for them by a “secret admirer.” In any event, the employee only has to access 
the vendor’s website in order to select the me rchandise he wants to buy with his gift 
certificate. Of course, in order to make the purc hase he has to log onto a special area of the 
website, which requires a user ID and password. The spy in this scheme is betting that the 
employee will use the same user ID and password that he uses at work.  
 
Reverse Social Engineering 
Reverse social engineering creates the impression in the target’s mind that the spy is 
someone who can help them. It is actually a form of false flag recruitment. The scam can be 
perpetrated by telephone, e-mail, or regular mail. In a typical scheme, the spy poses as a 
representative of some software company. He sends a message to the target indicating that a 
software product (Product X) that the target owns has a possible defect. The target is 
instructed to call the software company (the spy) with his user ID and password in order to 
receive the fix. When the target calls, the spy obtains his access codes and then pronounces 
that his edition of the product is okay. Now the spy has access to that software product (for 
instance, a sensitive database) to use at will. 
 
Countering Social Engineering 
There are a number of security measures organizations can adopt to counteract social 
engineering schemes. While a few technical solutions may help, the majority of controls for 
this type of attack involve training employees to be aware of how social engineering works, 
the data that spies will seek, and the information that employees are allowed to disseminate.  
 
Help desk employees should be trained to ask specific, identifying questions before giving 
out any information over the phone. The organization should clearly explain the minimum 
identification requirements that callers must meet before information can be distributed. A 
two-factor authentication rule should be mandatory. If a caller fails to identify himself 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.850                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
according to the authentication rule, the person taking the call should report this incident to 
the security group as an unauthorized intrusion attempt.  
 
When information is given out, it should be harmless, boilerplate information. Passwords or 
personal identification numbers should never be distributed over the phone without 
concrete proof of the caller’s identity. References to key administrative, technical, and billing 
contacts for the corporate Internet domain should also be as anonymous as possible. If a 
company does not list its domain administrator by title, then a spy may not know exactly 
whom to impersonate when he calls the help desk. Techniques already discussed such as 
properly disposing of confidential trash will also help prevent dumpster divers from coming 
up with contact information that they can use to trick employees. 
 
Employee awareness is another key to fighting social engineering. Employees may be told 
what information to give out and what authentication factors to require, but it is another 
thing to get them to follow these procedures. One of the most effective ways to promote 
compliance with security policies is to make people aware of threats and actual instances of 
social engineering attacks. Some organizations maintain internal websites or distribute 
employee newsletters with stories about security breaches, along with prevention tips and 
information.  
 
An even more effective awareness method is to selectively test employees’ security readiness. 
For instance, security personnel should call their own organization’s help desk to see what 
information they can obtain without identifying themselves. It is also a good idea to run the 
“systems administrator” scam on employees six months after they have started, to see if they 
remember not to give out their passwords to random MIS calls. If employees give up 
information without following procedures, they should get a stern warning about their 
security responsibilities. This type of reminder will be remembered far longer than a  
training session.  
 
 
Cloaking and Misdirection 
While honesty is essential in business dealings with associates and investors, it cannot always 
be a security team’s primary strategy. In so me circumstances, misdirecting the opponent is 
essential. Rather than remaining passively behind the static defenses of security officers, 
perimeter fences, locks, and access controls, a security manager may need to create an active 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.851 
counterattack program. Such a program ensures that information thieves are as misinformed 
as possible. A misinformed opponent is a defeated one.  
 
Intelligence Needs 
Good intelligence gathering is a prelude to any successful counteroffensive against industrial 
espionage agents. If a manager does not know the opponents and their methods of attack, 
effective cloaking and misdirection will not be possible. 
 
An effective intelligence-gathering network need not employ an army of spies. Basic 
intelligence can be gathered from a variety of sources, which include print media, 
commercial databases, networking with other security managers, existing staff within the 
company, and regular security surveys of the business. This type of ongoing, low-level 
intelligence program helps identify potential and emerging security problems. Increasing the 
activity during periods of heightened threat to the business is not difficult. Because a 
preliminary intelligence system will already be in place, bringing on additional personnel and 
resources will not be overwhelming. 
 
Print Media 
Print sources should not consist of an unread mountain of journals on the manager’s desk. It 
is far more productive to subscribe to just a few professional publications that are read and 
indexed. Security Management, the National Asso ciation of Legal Investigators’ The Legal 
Investigator, and the Journal of Security Administration offer insight on the latest security 
and investigative trends. 
 
Local newspapers can provide an overview of general criminal activity relevant to the 
business, and area business journals are good sources for accounts of industrial espionage. 
The security team should also read employment ads for phony job interview schemes. 
 
Database Searches 
Computer databases are an excellent intelligence resource. Most security managers do not 
have the time to regularly read all the major national newspapers and business or technical 
magazines relevant to their client company. However, a security professional can go to the 
public library for a few hours once a month and scan magazine databases like InfoTrac for 
company references. A more efficient method is to subscribe to a clipping service, which will 
scan hundreds of articles from a variety of sources each month and provide articles 
containing any keywords (such as a company or employee name) that have been specified.  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.852                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Managers may want to explore the cost/benef it trade-off of buying a modem and PC for 
their office that provides immediate access to the growing number of online resources, 
including ASISNet from the American Society for Industrial Security (www.asisonline.org) 
and a host of news databases. In scanning such databases, the security manager can run 
searches on any references to the company’s na me, officers, or products, as well as on the 
following key case topics: 
• Industrial espionage 
• Business intelligence  
• Competitor intelligence 
 
The researcher should read all online abstracts and save any articles if further details are 
required. A picture will emerge of what is available in the public domain about the company. 
The security team should then evaluate how this information could work to an information 
thief’s advantage. 
 
More and more local newspapers are becoming electronically available via the Internet or 
through libraries. The astute security manager should use this resource to check for local 
criminal trends, locate mentions of the company and its officers, and perform background 
investigations on security risks. 
 
Networking 
Networking with other security professionals should not be difficult. Local chapters of ASIS, 
fellow CFEs, investigative organizations, and former law enforcement officers’ societies 
deserve full participation. Meetings of technical societies that are relevant to the business 
may also be worthwhile. Even though these meetings may not directly address security 
issues, they provide useful intelligence about the business. For example, if a company 
manufactures chemicals, the security manager could attend the state chemical society 
meeting to learn what is being publicly discussed about her company and the industry in 
general. 
 
Existing Staffing 
An organization’s employees are often its most  neglected intelligence tool. Proper training of 
all company employees fosters the passage of vital intelligence to the security manager or 
investigator. For example, security officers can report patrol observations such as attempts 
by outsiders to search the company’s trash bins. Sales staff can identify incidents when 
strangers have tried to pump them for information at a trade show. Technical personnel 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.853 
might report overly friendly members of the opposite sex who ask too many business-related 
questions at the local watering hole. 
 
Communication with senior management is also essential. If the development of a new 
product line creates new security risks or problems, the security manager, investigator, or 
internal monitor needs to know. Efforts to protect a product prior to market release require 
the coordination of various company departments.  
 
Security Surveys  
Frequent security surveys help reveal potential weaknesses and new threats to any 
organization. They offer insight on where and how attacks might happen, and if a company 
suspects that it has already been infiltrated by a spy, a security survey can help determine 
how that infiltration could have occurred and help focus the investigation on the most 
probable techniques. These surveys provide the security professional with a chance to see 
the business through the eyes of an information thief. A perceptive security manager 
analyzes the company’s business in a creative way, looking through a spy’s eyes for pathways 
to information that might otherwise have been overlooked. If a manager wishes to deceive 
potential information thieves, security surveys can tell where the pickings for a thief are best 
and where to leave the bait.  
 
TESTING THE PERIMETER 
A security survey should begin at the perimeter of the organization. The security 
professional needs to visualize himself as a determined attacker. Do the alarm and video 
camera systems deter from entering the premises without authorization? How easy is it to 
bypass the access control systems? Can badges be obtained without much trouble through 
deception or theft? Are basic defenses (fences, lo cks, barriers, and security patrols) in place 
and in good repair? 
 
PENETRATION TECHNIQUES 
The person performing the security survey should use penetration techniques at various 
times of the day to determine when the company has the greatest degree of vulnerability. Are 
they able to easily walk into the plant on the third shift? Are vendors allowed to wander 
about the facility unescorted? Can a visitor or employee walk unchallenged out of the facility 
past guard stations carrying sensitive documents, computer disks, or a portable computer? 
Are cleaning personnel properly supervised when on-site? 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.854                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CHECKING FOR UNSECURED WORK AREAS 
Security personnel should also study the way employees’ work areas are maintained. Are 
sensitive documents locked up at night? Are the copy machines electronically locked down 
so a special access card is needed to use them? Do sensitive areas such as research labs and 
computer media libraries have their own separate alarm systems and access controls? Are 
filing cabinets locked at night? Does security do random patrols of the office areas and the 
plant at night? Are all persons in sensit ive areas challenged for proper credentials? 
 
PRETEXT CALLS 
Security officers can determine their organizations’ vulnerabilities to certain external threats 
by calling their own employees at work. It is important to determine what an outsider could 
learn by making pretext calls. Do employees accept what they are told over the phone at face 
value, or do they verify to whom they are talking before giving out sensitive information?   
 
TESTING PROPRIETARY LISTS AND DIRECTORIES 
It is important to make sure that proprietary lists are trapped. Audits of e-mail lists should be 
periodically conducted to ensure that no one plants unauthorized addresses. Are internal 
directories and telephone lists distributed in a secure manner? Is sensitive waste (paper and 
computer media) shredded and disposed of securely? 
 
SECURITY STAFF AWARENESS AND LINES OF COMMUNICATION 
The organization’s security force should have training in protecting proprietary information. 
If something out of the ordinary happens, do they have a means of communicating those 
incidents to management? Is an intelligence collection strategy in place? Will patrol officers 
lock up sensitive documents they find unsecured and make out a report detailing the security 
oversight? Do they know how to check for spy drops? Are they taught to observe suspicious 
activity such as an employee who always works late? 
 
EMPLOYEE SECURITY TRAINING  
It should be the goal of every corporate security office to make sure that employees are 
aware of the importance of security and are trained to protect sensitive information. What 
kind of proprietary information safeguards do employees learn? How regularly do they 
receive training? Are they encouraged to report suspicious activity? 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.855 
MULTIPLE LAYERS OF SECURITY 
There should be multiple layers of security protecting the most sensitive information. The 
layers should become progressively harder to penetrate as one gets closer to the most 
sensitive information. Does the organization have more than one layer of protection for its 
information, and is each layer effective? Or is perimeter security the only real impediment? If 
multiple layers exist, do they offer real impediments to spies, or are they minor hurdles?   
 
Cloaking Operations   
With good intelligence to identify probable channels for information thieves, a security 
manager can commence the cloaking of sensitive operations. Fluctuations in traffic offer 
industrial spies the best indirect insight into a business. Changes in the rates, deliveries, 
shipments, emissions, and the types and amounts of trash can reveal a great deal. 
 
The cost to mask these fluctuations may be significant at times. Appropriate guidance from 
senior management must be a factor in computing the cost-benefit trade-off. If the risks to a 
product line outweigh the security costs, the security staff should begin a cloaking program.  
 
Trash and Waste Disposal 
Trash and waste disposal are excellent places to start. Adding a consistent amount of 
shredded, non-sensitive paper to sensitive document waste greatly diminishes the chance of 
traffic analysis. Non-documentary waste should be secured in a locked holding area. From 
there, it can be sorted into uniform shipment modules before release to the waste disposal 
vendor. When the contents of waste shipments are fairly uniform, deciphering plant 
operations from them becomes much more difficult. 
 
Deliveries and Shipments 
Deliveries and shipments should be made on as uniform a schedule as possible. Ideally, 
organizations should avoid scheduling major deliveries just before a product manufacturing 
run. This is just the sort of tip-off corporate spies are looking for. Maintaining adequate 
inventory levels can go a long way toward eliminating this problem. 
 
If the manufacturing process dictates tight parts delivery schedules, the use of a common 
carrier will at least mask the identity of the supplier to external surveillance. Utilizing a mix 
of common carriers and company trucks helps cloak shipments. Company drivers should be 
trained to vary their schedules and delivery routes. They should also be instructed to report 
any suspicions of intelligence gathering operations. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.856                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Hours of Operation and Power Consumption 
During highly sensitive manufacturing, testing, or research operations, the hours of 
operation and levels of power consumption should be kept as uniform as possible. Lights 
can be left on continuously, and some kind of around-the-clock activity can be maintained to 
mask sensitive operations.  
 
Emissions 
If the heightened activity during a crisis period will result in additional smoke or steam 
emissions, the change should be made as gradually as possible. The key is to avoid creating 
an unusual pattern of activity. Management should ease the company into any critical period 
of operations to avoid drawing the attention of the outside world. Similarly, it should ease 
out of the critical period when it is over. 
 
Food Deliveries 
If significant numbers of employees need to work unusual hours in a crisis period, the 
company should provide food service for them from the company’s cafeteria. Increased 
food deliveries to the site can indicate that something out of the ordinary is going on.  
 
Computer Emanations 
If increased computer use creates unusual traffic in emanations, the company can start 
masking it early with a buildup of non-sensitive processing. In addition, appropriate 
shielding will cut down on emanations whenever feasible. 
 
Travel Plans 
Travel by key executives and technical staff offers useful intelligence information to a spy. 
During periods of intense financial activity such as a possible acquisition or merger, meetings 
can be scheduled at neutral locations with short notice to any outside parties, such as hotels, 
travel agents, and rental car agencies. 
 
Use the names of low-profile employees or businesses when booking rooms and travel 
arrangements. Group travel by key executives should be minimized, and the company should 
be sure to stagger the arrival and departure of senior managers at the neutral site. Executives 
should be briefed not to discuss sensitive matters in their hotel rooms or on the telephones 
in those rooms. When feasible, security should be present in the executive’s room when the 
executive is out. If not feasible, the executives should be trained not to leave sensitive 
information unattended in their rooms.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.857 
Technical staff members traveling to research centers or facilities for fact-finding purposes 
should mix in some non-sensitive stops on their itinerary. The additional destinations will 
confuse onlookers in case of possible surveillance. Stops at technical or research libraries to 
do some non-sensitive personal research can leave a spy unsure about which facility on the 
trip was actually important. 
 
Misdirection   
Attempts to compromise employees or information controls demand an immediate 
response. The question is whether to simply shore up security or use the situation to 
misdirect the opposition. Misdirection involves feeding information thieves false facts in 
order to neutralize their intelligence efforts. 
 
Careful guidance from senior management will be necessary. If misdirection is determined to 
be the best way to protect the organization, the false facts that are released must not come 
back to hurt the company, its officers, its stockholders, or its investors. 
 
Assuming that a misdirection policy is approved and carefully crafted, it might work as 
follows. Suppose security has detected an employment advertisement that appears designed 
to lure technical staff to phony interviews so they can be pumped for information. Security 
can go on the offensive to counter this threat by sending technical staff members with 
business intelligence training as decoys. Their goal is to give an impressive technical 
interview that sends the opponent following dead end leads. At the same time, the decoy is 
able to gather intelligence on what the industrial spies are after. This type of information 
strengthens defenses at the target company. 
 
At trade fairs, conventions, and technical meetings, employees should have a prepared story 
to tell industrial spies. When confronted with camouflaged questioning about an industrial 
process, employees can relate information that sounds convincing but that actually leads the 
opposition astray. Again, such misinformation must be sufficiently technical in nature so its 
general release to the public would not damage the company.  
 
Spotting False Suitors 
A tactic sometimes utilized by business intelligence professionals is to initiate false 
negotiations for the purchase of services, product lines, or portions of the target company. 
During the course of the negotiations, the spy attempts to gain valuable information about 
the target, its cost structure, production schedule, manufacturing processes, etc. Other 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.858                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
similar tactics that have already been discussed include spies posing as headhunters, 
conducting false employment interviews to gather information, and posing as a potential 
customer through the use of bogus requests for proposal.  
 
Management and employees should be trained to spot these schemes. False inquiries by 
purchasers can be terminated quickly if organizations require interested parties to 
demonstrate financial qualifications before commencing with any high-level negotiations. 
Financial statements of the suitor should be verified. Similarly, before replying to any RFP, it 
goes without saying that an organization should verify the existence and interest of the 
company seeking proposals. This can be easily accomplished by simply looking up the 
company in the phone book or traveling to its physical address to verify that the company 
exists. A search of state and county records can also be conducted to determine if the 
company is legally registered. Another simple technique is to contact others in the relevant 
industry to see if they have heard of the suitor company. In cases where a spy is posing as a 
representative of an existing company, a phone call to this company to verify the 
information in the RFP will help ensure that the request is legitimate. If evidence suggests 
that the party or company is a false front, security can again take the opportunity to provide 
misleading information to the potential information thieves.  
 
If employees are approached by companies interested in hiring them, similar steps should be 
taken to ensure that these suitors are not actually corporate spies fishing for information. 
Employees should be trained to report suspicious offers by outsiders. Of course, it is 
unrealistic to expect employees to report every job offer they receive or every employment 
interview they take. What organizations can do is train their employees—particularly those in 
possession of key information—to be wary of the deception tactics spies use. It is a good 
idea to explain to key personnel how these schemes are generally initiated, and what 
information the spy will be trying to obtain. Hopefully, this will help employees spot phony 
suitors and report them before any meetings or bogus interviews are conducted. In the 
alternative, employees may at least be wary of suspicious questions during bogus interviews 
and know enough not to divulge sensitive information.  
 
In addition to training key employees to spot deception techniques, it may be advantageous 
to train these employees in some of the simple methods they can use to determine if a suitor 
is legitimate, such as verifying its phone number or address, contacting others in the 
industry, or simply calling the company’s number in the phone book (if one is listed) to 
verify the time of an interview. These are steps that employees can take without having to 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.859 
tell their employer about outside job offers, and which might uncover a corporate espionage 
campaign.  
 
Vendors and Suppliers 
Secondary interviewing of suppliers and vendors by corporate spies poses a problem. A 
company rarely has direct control over what its suppliers and vendors tell third parties. So 
suppliers and vendors should be given information on a need-to-know basis only. 
 
Proper training of purchasing agents is also helpful. Suppliers of highly critical components 
or services need to be signatories to nondisclosure agreements. If intelligence reveals a 
supplier to be a major leak, the short-term answer may be sending misinformation through 
that supplier. The long-term solution would be termination, legal action, or both. 
 
Technical Articles and Publications  
Articles published by technical staff can create cavernous holes in an information security 
program. Staff may unintentionally leak sensitive information as part of an innocent 
academic exchange. The same is true for public speaking engagements. A policy of pre-
 publication review by security personnel and technical management is an absolute must.  
 
While pre-publication reviews of articles and speeches are certainly appropriate, 
organizations should not use technical articles and speeches as a method for disseminating 
misinformation. There are other means for conducting a counterespionage campaign that 
trammel less on issues such as freedom of expression, the right to academic inquiry, and the 
right to be fairly informed.  
 
Consultants 
Consultants can be a source of leaks, and their access to confidential or sensitive information 
should therefore be kept on a need-to-know status. Their activities should be 
compartmentalized as much as possible. As with vendors and suppliers, consultants can be 
fed misinformation if they are suspected of leaking data to a competitor.  
 
If highly sensitive information must be discussed with a consultant, it may be advisable to 
place the discussions in a context that limits the consultant’s knowledge of inside 
information. For example, an expert can tell you what the melting point of a semiconductor 
material is, but they do not necessarily need to know why you need to know that 
information. Obviously, the need to pro tect information must be weighed against the 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.860                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
business need of consultants to have access to information and a free flow of ideas in order 
to be able to perform their work effectively.  
 
Dealing with Employees Who Are Leaving 
Technical employees who give notice that they are leaving their jobs while working on highly 
sensitive projects should be transferred to non-sensitive projects until their termination date. 
All employees (as well as vendors, contractors, consultants, temporary help, etc.) should be 
required to sign nondisclosure agreements at the time of their hiring. When employees are 
leaving an organization, they should be reminded of their obligation to protect the 
organization’s secrets, even after their employment  ends. It is a good idea to have employees 
sign a statement at their exit interviews in which they affirm that they understand and will 
comply with the terms of the nondisclosure agreements they have signed.  
 
If reliable intelligence reveals that an employee intends to sell the organization’s proprietary 
information, placing misleading information in his hands may dilute some of the impact. 
Planting technical gossip in the company lunchroom, for example, may be an effective 
method for misinforming an employee.  
 
Hackers
If hackers or information thieves penetrate the computer system, security should give them 
something to munch on. The idea is to place worthless, highly technical sounding files on 
the company’s system. If someone signs on from an off-site location and starts to download 
one of these files, security is notified and an investigation begins. 
 
The same tactic applies to PCs. Sensitive data should be placed on disks and locked in a safe 
when not in use. Bogus files containing misinformation can be left on the hard drive for 
prying eyes. If a security manager really wants spies to take the bait, she can add password 
protection to the system to protect the bogus files. The fact that the files are protected helps 
convince potential thieves that they contain valuable information. The same idea works for a 
computer sent out for repair. Placing bogus data on the hard drive prevents service 
technicians from stealing and selling actual company trade secrets. 
 
Another twist on the same theme is to place documents and computer auxiliary items 
containing bogus data in the trash. Auxiliary items include old disks and CDs, old magnetic 
tapes, used computer paper, and other media. This technique is an excellent method for 
managing information thieves who like to go dumpster diving.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.861 
If an employee is suspected of stealing computer files, that individual should be assigned a 
computer with a honey pot of bogus technical information. If the information shows up in 
the public sector, security will know who is leaking the information. 
 
 
Technical Surveillance 
The popular image of the spy, at least as portrayed on television and in the movies, is very 
often associated with all sorts of high-tech gadgets: everything from miniature cameras to 
exotic listening devices to radio wristwatches and telephones hidden in shoes. Obviously, 
many of these devices are fanciful and, while they may provide interesting entertainment, 
they are far removed from the real world of corporate espionage. 
 
Corporate spies do, however, employ various forms of technological surveillance equipment, 
the tools varying according to the needs of the job at hand. In general, corporate spies only 
resort to using high-tech equipment when simpler means are not available to accomplish the 
task. In some cases a miniature camera might be called for to copy sensitive documents, but 
not when a nearby copy machine can be used to achieve the same result. In other instances a 
wiretap may be needed, but only when there is no other means to monitor a subject’s 
communications. Sometimes satellite tracking of motor vehicles becomes necessary, but not 
when simple visual surveillance will tell the spy where the subject has traveled. In other 
words, corporate spies that know what they are doing do not employ technology for the sake 
of using fancy gadgets.  
 
When spies do resort to the use of technical surveillance equipment, it is usually to gather 
nondocumentary evidence, or information that cannot be found through open sources or in 
the target’s files. The methods that spies employ to gather nondocumentary information 
include: (1) taking photographs, (2) conducting surveillance and visual sightings, (3) listening 
to conversations, (4) monitoring computers and computer communications, (5) analyzing 
traffic at a plant, and (6) monitoring emanations from computers and telecommunications 
equipment. 
 
Nondocumentary information has certain advantages. It captures changes over time 
(photographs taken at different times) or processes as they occur (videotaping). Electronic 
surveillance can provide the spy with information that would take many hours of 
documentary analysis to acquire. Aerial photography provides a broad perspective on the 
manufacturing physical plant that is not ordinarily possible with documents alone. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.862                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Intercepting computer communications and emanations can provide an inside look at the 
supply, purchasing, manufacturing, and marketing channels of a target that cannot be 
replicated by another source.  
 
The fact that a technical activity is possible does not mean that it is advisable. Most types of 
electronic surveillance carry potentially serious repercussions. In many cases they are clearly 
illegal. Any prudent spy will employ technical intelligence methods with restraint. Only 
amateurs will rush into a surveillance operation by “bugging” this line and that junction box. 
These novices ignore the fact that the more one bugs, the greater the chances of having the 
surveillance campaign discovered. In addition, a corporate spy with any seasoning will realize 
that indiscriminate bugging produces too much signal traffic to analyze.  
 
Experienced corporate spies know what they are looking for and devise carefully protected 
collection plans before initiating their surveillance campaigns. They know that the more time 
spent planning, the more likely it is that their electronic surveillance will go undetected and 
the greater the intelligence yield will be. The rules most BI professionals use for protected 
electronic surveillance include the following: 
 
If devices (such as microphones or video cameras) are to be left on-site, those devices must 
not be traceable back to the spy or the client. The markings on the equipment must not 
establish a trail on which to build an investigation. Experienced spies use generic equipment 
available from multiple sources. 
 
Wire taps and their associated devices must blend into their surroundings so nothing appears 
out of the ordinary to the layperson. Smart spies do not use contraptions that can easily be 
identified as bugs.   
 
Radio transmitters must not send signals in those parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that 
are in common commercial use. Professionals avoid using cellular telephone bands, CB 
channels, or AM or FM radio channels for covert transmissions. They also find out if the 
target site uses commercial two-way radio frequencies and avoid using those bands. 
 
A competent spy does not leave a hard wire connection between the wiretap and the place 
where he conducts listening. If someone located the tap, all that person would have to do is 
trace the hard wire line to locate the spy.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.863 
If the spy conducts off-site reception of computer emanations and signals, the reception 
vehicle or site should have sufficient camouflage or should be adequately disguised to avoid 
any notice or detection. 
 
A good spy never reveals anything about an intelligence campaign to anyone except her 
client, even after the job is finished. 
 
Once a job is finished and a report has been written and delivered to the client, a spy 
destroys all documentary evidence of the campaign. 
 
Aerial Photography
Though its origins lie in the military sector, aerial photography has emerged as a valuable 
tool in business intelligence. Google Earth, a free, online tool that enables users to obtain an 
aerial photo of properties by satellite, has made gathering this type of intelligence quite easy. 
Additionally, there are private aerial photography firms that have fairly complete negatives 
for land in their service area. These firms also accept special assignments to photograph 
specific ground areas on a schedule specified by the client. Aerial photography is used by 
spies to gather information on a competitor’s construction or expansion products, to 
measure the size of its shipments, or to determine the number of employees that the 
company has working, among other things. 
 
Bugging and Wiretapping 
Hidden microphones, wiretaps, and other forms of electronic surveillance equipment have 
become extremely common ways for intelligence professionals to keep tabs on their 
competition. The spy has two primary considerations in a wiretapping campaign: where to 
insert the surveillance equipment and which of the various technologies to employ. 
 
The Insertion Point 
In identifying the insertion point, the spy not only has to choose an area where proprietary 
information is likely to be discussed or displayed on computer screens, but also where 
background noise and electronic interference remain minimal. Spies frequently choose areas 
with proximity to computers and telecommunications equipment carrying proprietary data as 
an insertion point.  
 
Spies may also target areas conducive to employee conversations. This can include any place, 
inside or outside the targeted company, where key personnel gather and chat. Examples 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.864                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
include smoking areas; recreational areas such as bars, lounges, and coffeehouses; employee 
cafeterias; relaxation areas; exercise rooms; and meeting rooms. To target particular 
operations such as information services, spies might wire the offices of key managers, which 
are likely to provide access to a large portion of human information flow. 
 
The Technology 
In determining which technologies to employ, the spy must factor in environmental 
conditions such as lighting (if video surveillance is employed), noise levels, and distance from 
the source. Other factors include the risk of  the sensing device being discovered, power 
supply problems, and access to the device for servicing after installation.  
 
Common electronic eavesdropping devices include: 
• Drop-in telephone bugs  
• Carbon microphones 
• Magnetic or dynamic microphones 
• Electret microphone 
• Spike microphones 
• Cavity microphones 
• Low power consumption transmitters 
• Infinity transmitters  
• Shotgun or parabolic microphones  
• Cellular telephone receivers 
• Video cameras and transmitters 
• Satellite tracking of vehicles 
 
It is not difficult at all for spies to purchase electronic listening equipment. The Internet, for 
example, has a number of sites that advertise vast inventories of equipment ranging from 
audio devices to miniature video cameras to satellite tracking systems. Most of these sites 
urge their customers to use their merchandise only in a legally appropriate manner and 
advertise the equipment for purposes like checking for intruders or ensuring one’s own 
privacy. In truth, however, these devices can and are used by corporate spies to pilfer the 
proprietary secrets of their targets.  
 
Some of the more common forms of surveillance equipment are discussed in the following 
sections.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.865 
SATELLITE TRACKING SYSTEMS 
In most satellite tracking systems, a small transmitter is surreptitiously attached to the 
subject’s vehicle. Common hiding areas include the trunk, inside fenders, or under the rear 
bumper. The transmitter communicates with global positioning satellites (GPS) and converts 
the coordinates of the vehicle onto a map. The spy only needs access to the Internet and a 
password to enter a special, private home page where he can view maps that show the 
vehicle’s location and path. These systems are capable of generating event lists and plain-text 
histories of where the vehicle has traveled. A variation on this tracking design is that in some 
satellite tracking software the system creates a trail of electronic breadcrumbs on the map 
display. The map can be a powerful tool in tracking the movements of executives and key 
company employees.  
 
DROP-IN TELEPHONE BUGS 
Spies frequently use drop-in telephone bugs, which have the advantage of blending in with 
everyday existing telephone equipment. Drop-in bugs are simply inserted into the handset 
device on a normal telephone. The target’s conv ersations are transmitted to a remote 
receiver where they are recorded.  
 
Drop-in bugs are rarely detected because most people never bother to unscrew the plastic 
covers on the handset and perform a detailed check of the internal components. Thus, a 
drop-in telephone bug offers minimal risk of exposure to the spy. When a spy has access to 
the physical premises of a target and wants to be able to listen to conversations on a 
particular telephone line, this device is usually the chosen method of surveillance.  
 
CARBON MICROPHONES 
Carbon microphones, while larger than most spy audio devices, provide good pick-up if 
properly hidden and located. They offer excellent coverage of fixed locations: smoke rooms, 
employee lounges, and other gathering spots. As with other forms of listening equipment, 
these microphones are usually equipped with a transmitter that relays intercepted 
conversations off-site to a recorder. This is much safer, from the spy’s perspective, than 
maintaining a recorder on-site. With a remote transmitter, even if the microphone is 
detected, the recorded material cannot be located or recovered by the target. 
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.866                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
MAGNETIC AND ELECTRET MICROPHONES 
Magnetic or dynamic microphones can be very  small. They are useful when a microphone 
needs to be close to the speakers and hidden inside something small. Electret microphones 
also provide good close range coverage. Both types of microphones are smaller than the 
standard carbon microphone, though they tend to offer a lower range of coverage. 
 
SPIKE AND CAVITY MICROPHONES 
Spike and cavity microphones work best when the spy has access to an adjoining area and 
needs to penetrate his surveillance into the next room. For example, if a spy has free range in 
a utility room next door or in an adjacent hotel or motel room, a spike microphone can be 
inserted through the adjoining wall to monitor conversations in the target’s room. This type 
of microphone is so small at its insertion point that it is virtually undetectable to the casual 
observer. 
 
INFINITY TRANSMITTERS 
Infinity transmitters are a special kind of device that can be activated from a remote location. 
Once an infinity transmitter has been inserted  in a phone, a spy can call that telephone from 
anywhere in the world and turn it into a listening device. Unknown to the parties present, 
the telephone becomes a hidden microphone. 
 
SHOTGUN OR PARABOLIC MICROPHONES 
For listening to conversations at a long distance, shotgun microphones, parabolic 
microphone devices, and laser audio detection equipment can overhear even quiet 
discussions, provided background noise is not too high. The spy has to be mindful of having 
adequate cover to protect the listening post.  
 
WIRETAPS 
Wiretapping involves splicing a listening or recording device into a wire (such as a telephone 
wire, a PBX cable, an alarm system, or a local area network cable) that is used for 
communication by the target. Standard phone systems, in particular, are very vulnerable to 
wiretapping. Taps are usually placed at the telephone box in the basements of buildings, on 
lines outside buildings, or on telephone pole junction boxes near the target’s offices. The 
different types of wiretaps that can be utilized include: hardwired wiretap, soft wiretap, 
record wiretap, and transmit wiretap. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.867 
Warning Signs of Bugging  
Covert eavesdropping may be difficult to detect, particularly because most people do not 
know what signs to look for. James M. Atki nson of the Granite Island Group, one of the 
leading technical surveillance countermeasures firms in the U.S., has compiled a list of 27 
warning signs that might indicate that an organization is the target of an electronic 
eavesdropping campaign.1 Those red flags are listed below:   
• Others seem to know your confidential business or trade secrets. This is the most 
common indicator of a bugging campaign.  
• Information discussed in secret meetings or contained in secret bids does not remain 
secret. Confidential meetings are among the most popular targets of corporate spies.  
• People seem to know about your organization’s activities when they should not.  
• Strange sounds or volume changes are detected on your phone lines. This is a common 
byproduct of wiretaps or activation of a similar listening device. 
• You notice unusual static, popping, or scra tching on phone lines. This is another 
common sign of a wiretap or bug. 
• You can hear sounds coming from your phone handset when it is hung up. This is 
typically caused by a device called a “hook switch bypass,” which turns a telephone 
receiver into an eavesdropping microphone and speaker and allows a spy to monitor 
conversations near the phone (usually within 20 feet).  
• Your phone rings and nobody is on the other end of the line, but you hear a very faint 
tone, or a high-pitched squeal and beep. This is an indicator of a slave device, or line 
extender being used on your phone line. This is also a key indicator of a harmonica bug 
or infinity transmitter being used. 
• You hear a tone on your line when your phone is off the hook (by using an external 
amplifier). 
• An office radio suddenly develops strange interference. This could be caused by 
eavesdropping devices that use frequencies within or just outside the FM radio band. 
These signals tend drift and will quiet FM radios  in the vicinity of the bug. To check for 
bugs, look for transmissions at the far ends of the FM radio band, and at any quiet area 
along the FM band. If the radio begins to squeal, slowly move it around the room until 
the sound becomes very high pitched. The radio should be set to the “mono” function 
rather than “stereo,” as this will increase its level of sensitivity.  
• A car radio suddenly starts “getting weird.” Keep in mind that the antenna used by a car 
                                                          
1 This list is provided courtesy of James M. Atkinson and The Granite Island Group, 127 Eastern Avenue, 
#291, Gloucester, MA 01930, (978) 546-3803. (www.tscm.com). e-mail:  jmatk@tscm.com 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.868                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
may be (and often is) exploited by an eavesdropper and that such usage might interfere 
with radio transmission. 
• An office television suddenly develops interference. Eavesdropping devices can tend to 
interfere with television reception.  
• Your office appears to have been burglarized, but nothing was taken. Someone could 
have entered the premises in order to plant a listening device. 
• Electrical wall plates (covering outlets, switches, smoke alarms, and lighting fixtures) 
appear to have been moved slightly. These are among the most popular locations for 
hiding listening devices, which requires that the plates be removed. Watch for slight 
variations in the color or appearance of the power outlets or light switches as these are 
often swamped out by an eavesdropper.  
• A dime-sized discoloration appears on an office wall or ceiling. This is a sign that a 
pinhole microphone or video camera has been installed.  
• One of your vendors gives you an electronic device such as a desk radio, alarm clock, 
CD player, or small television. These gifts frequently contain secret eavesdropping 
devices.  
• A small bump or deformation has appeared on the baseboard by the floor. This is a 
strong indicator that someone may have concealed covert wiring or a microphone 
imbedded into the adhesive that holds the molding to the floor. 
• A smoke detector, clock, lamp or exit sign in your office or home looks slightly crooked, 
has a small hole in the surface, has a quasi reflective surface, or otherwise appears to 
have been tampered with. These items are also common places for concealing bugs.  
• Certain items just appear in your office without anyone knowing how they got there. 
Typical items to watch for and beware of are: clocks, exit signs, sprinkler heads, radios, 
picture frames, and lamps. They may contain listening equipment and could have been 
placed in your offices by a spy. 
• Drywall dust or debris is found on the floor next to a wall. This could be a sign that a 
pinhole microphone or video camera has been installed nearby.  
• Small pieces of ceiling tile or grit are found on the floor or on a desk. Also, a cracked, 
chipped or gouged ceiling tile, sagging ceiling tiles, or ceiling tiles not properly set into 
track may be observed. This indicates that a ceiling tile has been moved, possibly because 
someone has installed a technical surveillance device above your ceiling. 
• Phone company trucks and utilities workers seem to be spending a lot of time near your 
home or office. These workers could actually be corporate spies in disguise. 
• Telephone, cable, plumbing, or air conditioning repair people show up to work when no 
one called them. This is a very common method for an eavesdropper to plant a bug.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.869 
• Service or delivery trucks are often parked nearby with nobody in them. These vehicles 
may be listening posts for spies. In particular, look for vehicles that have ladders or pipe 
racks on the roof, have tinted windows, and are large enough to conceal a person in  
the back.  
• Your door locks suddenly do not “feel right,” they become “sticky,” or they fail 
altogether. This is evidence that the lock has been picked, manipulated, or bypassed by 
an intruder.  
• Furniture appears to have been moved slightly and no one knows why. Eavesdropping 
devices are commonly hidden behind or inside furniture.  
• Things seem to have been rummaged through, but nothing is missing. This could be a 
sign that someone has been looking through your papers, perhaps even copying them 
before returning them to your work area. The most common “rummaging” targets are 
the backs of desk drawers, the bottom of file cabinets, closets, and dresser drawers. 
• An eavesdropper sends you a copy of your private conversations. As simple as it seems 
this is the strongest indicator, and solid proof of eavesdropping. An eavesdropper will 
sometimes send a victim a copy of a private conversation they intercepted in an attempt 
at blackmail, or in an attempt to terrorize or just stalk the victim. This is commonly seen 
in civil lawsuits, criminal court cases, marital problems, shareholder disputes, custody 
battles, and other situations where one side has a position of weakness and is 
psychologically trying to undermine their opponent. 
 
Preliminary Search Procedures 
If an organization suspects that wiretapping has occurred, there are a number of preliminary 
search procedures that the layperson can perform. This section is not designed to make the 
reader an expert at counter-surveillance techniques; professionals who offer those services 
can easily be located. However, it is quite feasible for an ordinary person to conduct a basic 
search for wiretapping equipment. When conducting an inspection for electronic 
surveillance equipment, be mindful of safety concerns. Never reach into electrical boxes or 
outlets unless you are sure the power is off, and do not grasp bare wires unless you know 
they are not live. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.870                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
KNOW YOUR DEVICES 
Wiretapping devices, for the most part, look like hobbyist electronic circuit boards. The 
major difference is that they are much smaller than the circuit boards of the past. Satellite 
tracking equipment is usually housed in small metal boxes about the size of a paperback 
book. They require small antennae that have to face toward the sky.  
 
INSPECTING TELEPHONES 
If the mouthpieces or earpieces on telephone handsets have screw-off plastic covers, remove 
them and make sure no transmitters or unusual looking components are attached to the 
microphone condensers. Also examine the markings on the condenser unit. Do they match a 
condenser from a similar telephone kept in a secure area? If the markings are significantly 
different, have them checked by a representative from the telephone manufacturer. 
 
If the cover on the handset is one solid piece of plastic, look at the two screws that hold the 
plastic plate on. If the screws have scratches on them (e.g., from a screwdriver) remove the 
screws and take the plate off. Examine the condensers for signs of tampering or for 
miniature transmitters.  
 
Examine the back or underside of the telephones. Look for unusual components taped or 
held by a magnet to the back metal plate. Also look for unusual wires protruding from the 
phone. (This means any wires other than the regular plastic sheathed cord that is found on 
all telephones.) If these examinations are negative, then the telephone is probably secure.  
 
If you still suspect the presence of a listening device, do not attempt to disassemble the main 
part of the telephone. You may damage the unit. Instead, look at the screws holding down 
the main body of the phone to the metal plate. If those screws show signs of tampering, 
have someone from the manufacturer examine the unit. 
 
It is also a good idea to inspect the wall box where the telephone attaches to the wall. 
Carefully remove the cover and check for any electronic components inside. In a normal 
wall box, you should only see wires and screw points where the wires are tied together. 
Extraneous components could be electronic listening devices. If you are not sure whether 
the item you have identified is actually a transmitter or microphone, contact a qualified 
                                                          
2 The Granite Island Group, a technical surveillance countermeasures firm, provides photographs of some 
electronic surveillance equipment on its website. (www.tscm.com/whatistscm.html) 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.871 
countermeasures expert, the phone company, or a representative from the phone 
manufacturer.  
 
INTERFACE BOX 
The interface box is a gray box typically located on the side of the building. If a business 
operates in a multiple occupancy structure, the interface box may be located in a utility closet 
close to the company’s offices. In order to ex amine the interface box, unscrew the side of 
the box that is designed for customer access. Look inside with a flashlight. All wiring in the 
box should look the same, using the colors red, blue, green, yellow, and black. You might see 
some striped wires, but that is fine. There should also be a line coming into the side of the 
box from the telephone company. What you should be looking for is a transmitter or some 
form of unusual wiring that does not appear to come from the telephone company and does 
not lead into your building or office. This could indicate a wiretap. 
 
ABOVE THE CEILING 
If an open space exists above the ceiling in your offices, access that area and look around 
with a flashlight. Be on the lookout for everything from sophisticated transmitters to tape 
recorders that are crudely hooked into telephone lines. If listening devices have been placed 
in an attic or in a crawl space above the ceiling, they probably have not been elaborately 
camouflaged. It should not be exceedingly difficult to spot surveillance equipment in these 
areas.  
 
It is a good idea to have the lights turned on in the room below while you search overhead. 
If someone has drilled holes in the ceiling to insert a microphone, the light should shine 
through the ceiling and you will be able to detect the holes. Surveillance personnel frequently 
drill multiple holes before selecting just one as a listening spot or inserting a miniature video 
camera.  
 
OTHER PLACES TO SEARCH 
Use a flashlight to look through the grill panels covering all air conditioning ducts for 
transmitters or listening devices. Carefully inspect all electrical outlets by removing the cover 
plates and looking inside with a flashlight. Examine any central utility closets for unusual 
wiring and electronic devices. Look for signs of  debris on the floor under outlets or light 
switches; this might indicate that someone has removed the wall plates to insert a listening 
device. Any time ducts, outlet plates, light fixtures, or similar items have been searched and 
replaced, their orientation and screw-head positions can be designated with ultra-violet 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.872                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
markers. By shining an ultra-violet light on the screws, it is easy to tell if the panels have 
been removed. This technique makes it much easier to determine if someone has tampered 
with those items since the last search.  
 
Look under desks and tables in all office spaces  for electronic devices or wires that seem out 
of place. Do not tear your office apart while conducting your search; feel your way around 
and explore with your hands. Look under and behind couches and sofas. It is especially 
important to closely examine furniture in areas where people are likely to sit and chat. The 
tables and credenzas in meeting rooms should be checked on a regular basis.  
 
Check any television sets, radios, lamps, telephones, computers, clocks, smoke detectors, or 
sprinkler heads in the room. If any areas are served by cable TV, be sure to check out the 
cable lines, converter box, line splitters, and connectors for anything that seems out of place. 
Any electronic items and wiring that are not essential should be removed, as unused wiring 
can be used for eavesdropping. 
 
COMPUTERS 
Always check the back of computers for monitoring devices taped to the back panel. 
Examine all connections between the computer and the outside world: lines to printers, 
network cables, lines to peripheral devices, or lines to monitors. Pay attention to any 
connectors that have been placed between the computer and its external lines. These 
connectors may look like they perform a legitimate function, but if the external line could 
have been plugged directly into the computer, find out why the interface was inserted and 
who put it there. 
 
The area immediately around the computer should be checked for unusual wiring, electronic 
boxes, or devices. Any closets or rooms dedicated to housing network equipment such as 
hubs, routers, cabling rigs, or network monitoring gear needs close examination by a 
qualified network technician to make sure no alien electronic devices are present.  
 
Video Surveillance 
The role that video cameras play in the corporate espionage campaigns has several 
dimensions. Microcameras placed in a room of computer screens can focus on individual 
screens and result in the taping of: passwords, logins, user manuals, text specifics, error 
messages, contents of documents, and keyboard overlays during many hours of transactions. 
Cameras can be used to monitor activity on receiving and shipping docks. Planted 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.873 
microcameras can track activity on production lines or presentations in meeting rooms. They 
can also capture executives or key employees at embarrassing moments. Such 
documentation can later be used for blackmail. 
 
Video cameras with a time and date stamp on the footage offer a means of determining the 
security activity in the company. Times of security patrols, access to special areas like labs, 
the emptying of security wastebaskets, and other activities can all be tracked. This 
information can aid a spy in penetrating restricted or sensitive areas. 
 
Photographic Cameras 
Almost as ubiquitous as the bug, the miniature camera plays a lead role in the canon of 
spycraft. Many a motion picture has shown the spy, whether af ter military or industrial 
secrets, bent over documents quickly snapping the shutter. With the tiny cameras available 
today, industrial spies can sneak out of a company’s premises with numerous secrets tucked 
away in a purse or shirt pocket.  
 
Minicameras 
With the advent of copy machines in almost every American business, the need to employ 
the minicamera to capture information from documents dramatically declined. Because 
many sensitive documents are stored in electronic format, computer media such as disks, 
CDs, USB flash drives, and other storage devices have also eroded the need for film 
cameras. Some applications do, however, still exist for the minicamera. Documents such as 
maps, schematics, diagrams, and engineering drawings frequently cannot be easily copied due 
to their size. The minicamera is a viable option for capturing the information on these items.  
 
Concealed stationary cameras with large rolls of film have largely been replaced by video 
cameras. Film is difficult to replace at hidden, sensitive sites. It is also expensive to process. 
Videotape is cheap, needs no processing, and ca n be recorded off-site, far from the video 
camera/transmitter. Thus, even if the target company discovers the hidden video camera, 
the footage will remain safely in the spy’s control.  

Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.874                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Infrared Film 
Infrared film has value when surveillance is done under very low light or when the spy needs 
to examine damaged or erased documents. Even the contents of burned documents can be 
detected under the right conditions with infrared film.  
 
Digital Cameras 
As digital cameras become smaller in both cost and size, they may become a more 
formidable tool in the corporate spy’s arsenal. Digital images are captured on a small disk 
whose contents can be loaded into a computer. The image can be enhanced and manipulated 
using various software programs, thereby offering excellent resolution. The disk carrying the 
stolen image can be carried off and on premises with little chance of detection. 

For any good spy, a good digital camera is the mainstay in his surveillance arsenal. Even if 
extensive aerial photographs are taken, observation of the target site at ground level is 
essential. From the ground view many features like signs, lettering on the side of vehicles, 
the configuration of buildings and streets, license plates, and other important details become 
visible. Photographs of key employees of the target can also be valuable information in many 
intelligence campaigns. 
 
To avoid attracting attention, the intelligence specialist generally uses telescopic or reflective 
lenses to zoom in on details from a safe distance. In building a visual file on a plant site, a 
spy will take ground level photographs from around the entire circumference of the targeted 
area. He will even photograph CRT and computer screens that are visible through windows.  
 
To aid in analyzing photographs at a later date, the specialist will catalogue all photographs 
as to: 
• Subject matter 
• Date/time of day 
• Direction of shot 
• Number in a sequence of shots 
• Important features in shot 
 
This data can be stored in a database like Microsoft Access ®. Photographs themselves can 
be incorporated into the database by scanning them into the computer from a flat glass 
scanner or by loading them from a digital camera. Photographic images, excerpts from 
videotape surveillance, aerial photographs, and relevant diagrams, document images, or 
drawings can be also integrated into one database for extensive analysis. Analytical 
investigative databases like i2 allow for the organization of visual data. A database generates 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.875 
various narrative reports, charts, diagrams, and chronologies. The opportunities for an 
information multiplier effect are tremendous. 
 
Cellular Telephones 
Anyone who conducts a sensitive or confidential conversation on a cellular telephone is 
either highly naive or plain foolish. These transmissions are transparent to the secret services 
of all governments. Any amateur with a receiver can also pick up cellular communications. 
Most corporate spies will, as a matter of course, scan cellular frequencies around a targeted 
plant. They will also focus in on cellular telephone calls by executives and key employees. By 
simple physical surveillance, a spy can observe an executive pull out his cellular telephone in 
the car, in a restaurant, or in the grocery store. This will alert the spy to begin monitoring the 
target’s cellular frequency. Employees should always keep in mind that someone could be 
listening to their conversations. Sensitive information should not be conveyed by cellular 
phone. As with other surveillance equipment, the tools necessary to monitor cellular 
telephone conversations are easy to come by. 
 
Monitoring Computer Emanations  
Digital computers process information with a series of 0s and 1s. These two digits do not 
translate to “on” and “off” states, but rather to high and low currents. These currents cause 
pixels on a computer screen to fire, producing high voltage pulses that emanate into the 
surrounding environment. Computer emanations form a detectable and decodable pattern. A 
detector or receiver, known as a Van Eck unit, can reproduce keyboard entries on a 
computer screen even from a considerable distance. 
 
A Van Eck unit consists of a directional antenna, logic circuits, and two adjustable oscillators 
(one for the vertical and one for the horizontal). With proper adjustments, a van parked 
across the street, equipped with a Van Eck receiver, can decode the emanations from a 
keyboard operator inside a neighboring building. Devices like CPUs, taped drives, disk 
drives, and communications devices all generate electromagnetic radiation, which Van Eck 
receivers can detect. 
 
To prevent competitors from monitoring computer emanations, organizations can shield 
their computer equipment and transmission lines: a process known as Tempesting. While this 
process is used extensively in the military and by certain defense contractors, the costs 
involved prevent many private sector businesses from employing Tempest procedures.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.876                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Tape Recorders 
The best place for a spy to place a tape recorder is off-site, far away from the microphone. A 
transmitter located with the microphone sends a signal to an off-site receiver that is 
connected to the tape recorder. This precaution ensures that a compromise of the 
microphone will not result in capture of the tape. Recorders can also be hooked up directly 
to telephones in order to record tapped phone conversations.  
 
All that is necessary to create a crude wireless phone tap is a capacitor (to block the DC 
voltage from the telephone line) wired in series with a small AM or FM transmitter across 
the telephone wire pair. An AM or FM radio plug ged into a tape recorder picks up the signal 
by taking the output from the radio’s audio ja ck. A professional would not use this kind of 
tap, but a security investigator has to be on the lookout for the amateur spy too. Some 
employees want to get inside information to gain an advantage over their coworkers. 
Bugging the boss’s telephone is a good way to do it. 
 
Computer System Penetrations
In some cases, information thieves will attempt to extract information by penetrating a 
company’s computer defenses. This can be part of an organized intelligence campaign, or in 
some cases it is simply a random attack by a hacker bent on mischief. For more information 
on how outsiders attempt to penetrate computer systems, see the “Computer and Internet 
Fraud” chapter in the Financial Transactions section of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
 
Investigating an Information Theft Case 
Most corporate espionage cases begin with the discovery of the offense. Something is 
missing, or information is out in the public sector. The critical first step is finding out how 
the sensitive information was compromised. K nowing how the data went out the door often 
reveals who stole the secret. For example, if a trapped list becomes compromised, the 
organization will know the list has been compromised because it receives a mailing. From 
the mailing envelope and its contents, the organization will be able to determine who bought 
the list. By checking the company’s internal records, it will be possible to determine who had 
access to the list within the company. So simply by knowing how the leak occurred and that 
someone bought the list, two avenues of inquiry are already established. The company that 
mailed the list should be contacted, and an internal investigation of people who had an 
opportunity to compromise the list should be commenced.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.877 
The first step in any corporate espionage investigation is to determine the means of the 
compromise. Investigators should attempt to rule out accidental and procedural causes first. 
In response to a compromise, the security investigator or auditor will need to do a survey to 
see if inadequate measures are the causative factor. Once the company’s negligence is ruled 
out, the investigation can focus on potential suspects.  
 
Most investigations should begin with the pe rsons closest to the sensitive information and 
then work outwards. For example, if a marketing list were stolen, it would make the most 
sense to first look for suspects among the group that manages the list. Background 
investigations on these employees should be run. Check to see if any of those employees 
have risk factors that would make them likely recruits for corporate spies. Risk factors 
include recent financial or lifestyle changes that appear out of the ordinary. Red flags that 
particularly stand out are employees who suddenly seem to spend a lot more money or work 
a lot of extra hours that do not seem particularly necessary, given the employee’s job. 
 
If the members of the closest circle pass muster, the investigation moves outward to 
consider other employees, vendors, customers, and visitors. For example, a security officer 
might examine visitor logs to see who has visited the marketing group recently. General 
service personnel like the cleaning crew, the copier or computer repairperson, or a delivery 
person who has regular access to the area should also be considered suspects. It is a good 
idea to look for records or observations of suspicious activity, such as people coming in at 
unusual hours, being in places not necessary for their work, pumping employees for 
information, or accessing computer files.  
 
If the investigation fails to develop any leads on employees, vendors, or visitors, then look to 
deception techniques. Re-interview employees in the affected areas to find out if they 
received any suspicious telephone calls, e-mails, or redirecting mail processes at or near the 
time of the loss. Also, be sure to ask employees if anyone has approached them for 
information at trade shows or in social situations. 
 
If deception does not appear to have been the avenue of attack, the next consideration 
should be physical penetration of the site. Review surveillance videotapes of recent traffic in 
and out of the affected area for intruders pretending to be employees. Again, interviewing 
employees may uncover memories of persons who appeared suspicious.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.878                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Obviously, an investigator would also check internal records for any incidents of criminal 
activity onsite at or near the time of the loss. Such activity could include a burglary or theft 
that appeared unrelated to information security at the time. It could be a trespassing charge 
or disorderly conduct on company property. Do not overlook intelligence or incident 
reports of security personnel on activities such as people trying to get into the trash 
dumpster and loitering about the parking lot. Conducting a security survey at this stage is 
also a good idea. It will help the investigator detect weaknesses in the organization’s physical 
security and may help point out how an intruder could have entered the site. 
 
After exhausting all other options, consider the possibility of surveillance against the site. If 
sensitive details are going out the door, electronic eavesdropping, Van Eck monitoring, or 
computer system penetrations could be to blame. The response to electronic eavesdropping 
should be a physical inspection of the affected areas and perhaps the engagement of a TSCM 
sweep as outlined later in this section. At the same time, research all records regarding work 
orders or vendor access to the affected areas. This documentation may help identify who 
planted the devices.  
 
 
Program for Safeguarding Proprietary Information (SPI) 
Companies should develop a program for safeguarding proprietary information  (SPI). Businesses 
should seek out a corporate information officer (CIO) to develop and manage an SPI 
program. An alternative is to hire a security management consultant to develop a program 
and then maintain it on a yearly basis. In either case, the CIO should have information 
management skills and be knowledgeable about trade secret protection.  
 
Task Force 
To coordinate a companywide SPI program, a task force should be assembled. The task 
force should include managers and staff from departments that deal with proprietary 
information such as research and development, and production. The team should also 
include representatives from corporate security, human resources, records management, data 
processing, and legal. 
 
The process should begin by determining what information should be protected. The task 
force should identify those areas that give the company its competitive edge, such as quality 
of the product, service, price, manufacturing technology, marketing, and distribution. One 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.879 
way of accomplishing this is to ask the team, “If you were our competitor, what information 
would you like to know?”  
 
Once these sensitive areas have been identified, the primary focus should be on the 
information security procedures for each department. They should identify where 
proprietary information is kept and survey the risk if such information is lost to  
a competitor. 
 
Employee Awareness 
An effective program must educate employees about security awareness. Employees should 
understand that their professional growth and well-being depends on the success of the 
company. It should be made clear that the success of the company is directly tied to the 
protection of information and data. Employees should be taught how to respond to 
telephone information requests. A procedure should be set out whereby information 
requests are sent to public relations or some other department. 
 
Nondocumentary communications should also be protected. Employees need to know that 
they are accountable for what they say, whether it be over the phone or at a social gathering. 
Employees should never discuss confidential business information at airports, restaurants, or 
any place they could be overheard. They should also be instructed about using a laptop 
computer wherever there may be a chance it could be read in public by someone “shoulder 
surfing.” 
 
Regular reminders of the importance of information security should be published regularly 
in company newsletters, on bulletin boards, or in memos. 
 
Nondisclosure Agreements 
All employees should sign a nondisclosure agreement. Everyone involved with the company 
should sign such an agreement, including subcontractors and their employees, clerical staff, 
consultants, and temporaries. Besides the legal value, a comprehensive nondisclosure 
agreement sends a signal to employees that the company has a tough attitude toward 
preventing leaks. It might also be necessary to have suppliers and distributors sign 
nondisclosure agreements. Although suppliers and distributors have to receive information 
about certain aspects of a business, employees dealing with them should be made aware of the 
potential for misuse of the information and should be instructed to provide them with only 
the information that is essential for them to do their jobs. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.880                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Document Classification 
Document classification is also an important area in a protection plan. Working closely with 
each department, proprietary documents should be classified according to the level of 
security that best meets the company’s need s. For instance, documents may be labeled 
“private” for personnel matters and move up to “restricted” for pricing or marketing 
information. Trade secrets or highly sensitive information might be labeled “authorized 
access only.” Notes and drafts of documents should also be safeguarded or destroyed when 
the final document is completed. 
 
Visitors
Visitor access should be closely monitored. Visitors should be required to sign in and out in 
a logbook, and they must be escorted by their host at all times and should not be allowed 
into areas where there might be sensitive information. 
 
Offices 
Engineering and executive offices should always be locked to discourage browsing, theft, or 
the planting of an eavesdropping device. Keys to office doors should be kept secure. 
Keeping proprietary information and computer disks in locked cabinets greatly reduces the 
risk of theft. 
 
Maintenance Workers 
Management should designate security personnel or someone to monitor maintenance work 
done in areas in which there might be sensitive information. We have all seen scenes in 
movies where the hero, or villain, gains access to confidential information by walking into a 
building or office posing as a maintenance worker.  
 
Meeting Rooms 
Paging systems, background music speakers, and unused wiring can be used for eaves-
 dropping. Any electronic items and wiring that are not essential should be removed. A 
mirror and a light affixed to a flexible handle can be used to search for recording and 
transmitting devices in air ducts. After the search, when the duct grills are replaced, their 
orientation and screw-head positions can be designated with ultra-violet markers. By shining 
an ultra-violet light on the screws, it is easy to tell if the panels have been removed. Meeting 
rooms should be locked when not in use. If blackboards or flip charts are used, they should 
not face the windows, or the blinds should be closed to prevent observation from telescopes 
or binoculars. 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.881 
Quiet Rooms 
A “quiet room” may cost anywhere from $15,000 to $200,000, but the cost may be justified 
depending on the risk involved. A quiet room is acoustically shielded and radio-frequency 
shielded. The room can also be equipped with intrusion monitoring sensors and closed-circuit 
television cameras. 
 
Communications Equipment 
Cellular or cordless telephones must not be used to discuss sensitive business matters. These 
devices are radio transmitters and are frequently monitored by both hobbyists and 
professional information brokers. 
 
Electronic Mail and Voicemail 
For knowledgeable hackers, e-mail and voicemail systems are easy targets. 
 
Confidential information should not be left on a voicemail system. Likewise, it should never 
be left on a home answering machine. Hotels often offer voicemail for their guests. These 
systems require no passwords to gain access to and should never be used for sensitive 
information. Author Michael Stedman reports that when he wanted to interview Robert 
Gates, the former director of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), he called the hotel 
where Gates was staying and was given a room number. Stedman said he was astonished 
when he punched the room number into the phone and suddenly found himself listening to 
Gate’s messages that had been left on the hotel’s voicemail service. 
 
To prevent this kind of espionage, instruct staff, family, and friends to never leave anything 
but routine messages on voicemail. Tell them to only leave return numbers, or better yet, use 
a beeper or pager. Make sure voicemail is cleaned out daily. 
 
Computer Systems 
Passwords are the most common defense against computer intrusion, but to be effective, 
they must be used along with good control procedures. Passwords should be as complex as 
the user can memorize, but never less than six random alphanumeric characters. The 
company must change passwords regularly and close them out as soon as an employee leaves 
the organization. Management should train em ployees to log off terminals before leaving 
them unattended. The company can also install an automatic log-off program whereby a 
terminal that is not in use for a certain number of minutes will be automatically logged off. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.882                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A secure encryption device can be employed to protect confidential files, especially when 
transmitting them by modem. Encryption techniques found in popular software packages 
available at a local computer store are probably not secure enough. These programs are in 
wide use and are usually no match for a sophisticated hacker. If files are not encrypted, they 
may be vulnerable to anyone with access to your computer.  
 
A company should also consider the use of virus scanning software. One of the best 
safeguards against viruses or any other kind of data loss is to have a secure backup 
procedure.  
 
Many companies have not yet figured out what to do with the electronic data stored in their 
systems. While some form of paperwork filing or shredding system may be in place, often 
electronic information is organized according to each user’s personal system and deleted 
only when the individual chooses to do so. Even when files are deleted, savvy computer 
experts can often re-create the erased material. This means that everything sent through the 
computer from a birthday greeting to a “smoking gun” document is being preserved. 
 
This is potentially crippling in the event of a lawsuit. Lawyers are becoming aware of the 
storage of data and are requesting electronic evidence in many cases. Lawyers, pouring 
through backups of documents long ago thought deleted, find incriminating memos such as 
“I know this may be illegal, but do it anyway,” or “Please destroy this evidence.” Often such 
documents result in the case being settled for more than it may really be worth because the 
company does not want to run the risk that such documents will inflame the jury into 
awarding large punitive damages. 
 
Companies should institute procedures for deciding what should be kept and what 
shouldn’t. Also, backup files should be kept under lock and key. One 8mm tape can hold as 
much as 1,500 boxes of information. Anyone can grab such a tape and easily sneak it out of 
the building. 
 
Faxing Documents 
Sensitive documents should not be sent through the fax machine unless both machines are 
equipped with a high-level encryption device. Some fax machines are equipped with a 
storage and retrieval system similar to that of voicemail systems. From a remote number, 
you enter a PIN number and stored faxes can be sent to another machine. This allows a 
competitor to be able to retrieve those faxes as well. 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.883 
Video Encryption 
Teleconferencing is growing in popularity. Unfortunately, satellite teleconferencing signals 
can be received by millions of home satellite dish owners, some of whom have deliberately 
tuned in to find out things they shouldn’t. Teleconferencing should only be used when there 
is an encryption system in place that will fully scramble both the video and audio signals. 
 
Corporate Telephone Exchanges 
Private branch exchanges (PBXs) are located in a company’s tel ephone closet where wires, 
mounted neatly and predictably upon row after row, lead to corporate executives’ offices and 
other areas of interest to competitors. These rooms should be, but seldom are, locked and 
physically secured. People with tool belts go in and out with little notice from anyone. 
Keeping the eavesdropper out is easier than trying to detect his handiwork.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In one case, a surveillance team found that an executive’s phone line had been tampered 
with. They installed a motion detector in the telephone closet. The alarm sent report-only 
signals to an alarm central station. After two weeks, the central station’s records revealed a 
pattern of early morning visits to the closet  on Mondays and Thursdays. Surveillance was 
set up and the eavesdropper was caught. 
 
Another good idea is to have an escort for anyone entering the area. The identity of the 
worker should also be verified. 
 
Computer-driven PBXs or switches present numerous opportunities for eavesdropping. 
Using an on-site or off-site control terminal, the information thief can hide invisible wiretaps 
among millions of software instruction codes. The hidden codes, for example, could cause a 
second phone line to connect to a target phone line and terminate into a hidden tape 
recorder. 
 
An appropriately trained investigator should regularly print out the user configuration 
instructions. Paying particular attention to those extensions that are likely to be of interest to 
eavesdroppers, the investigator can look for modified instruction codes.  
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.884                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Trade Shows and Public Events 
Sales materials, trade show exhibits, and the text of speeches should be carefully reviewed 
for information that a competitor might find useful. Employees should be instructed not to 
say anything to anyone that they would not say directly to a competitor. During shows, 
employees should not leave demonstration materials or sensitive documents unattended. 
New design models have been stolen during their transportation in or out of a show. 
 
Foreign Travel 
Corporate executives traveling out of the country should be especially cautious. Many 
foreign governments are unleashing huge and sophisticated intelligence gathering operations. 
Executives should use encryption systems on all voice, fax, or modem transmissions. They 
should also assume that their rooms are bugged and act accordingly. 
 
 
Technical Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM) Survey 
If an organization has a reasonable suspicion that it has been bugged, it may be advisable to 
engage an expert to conduct a Technical Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM) Survey. 
Commonly referred to as “debugging,” TSCM is designed to help the organization achieve 
two goals: (1) to detect the presence and lo cation of technical surveillance equipment, and 
(2) to identify existing and potential security weaknesses.  
 
TSCM professionals should never be contacted from the area where suspected bugging has 
taken place, as this could alert the spy to the fact that his operation has been discovered. 
Instead, it is recommended that organizations contact TSCM professionals from a secure 
phone, fax or computer that is located far away from the targeted area. Heavily used public 
telephones are probably the most secure method for making contact. Messages should not 
be sent from the home phones or computers of company employees, because they might 
also be under surveillance. In no event should an organization discuss suspicions of 
wiretapping or technical surveillance on a cellular phone.  
 
In choosing TSCM professionals, a company should make sure that the professionals are 
competent in electronics, and have extensive knowledge of design, engineering, and 
maintenance. They must also be trained in eavesdropping techniques, practiced in RF (radio 
frequency) allocation and propagation, and knowledgeable about all techniques of 
modulation, electrical wiring, and installation principles.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.885 
Before conducting an actual TSCM survey, experts start with a pre-inspection survey and 
vulnerability sweep of the targeted premises. The TSCM team usually requires a full set of 
facility blueprints as well as a visual inspection of the premises so that they can obtain a 
complete understanding of the information that spies might target, where the organization is 
vulnerable, and how spies might attempt to penetrate the information security system. This 
phase of the project can take several days, as the TSCM specialists test for weaknesses in the 
facility’s perimeter security, network and communications systems, alarm systems, video 
surveillance systems, and other security components.  
 
Once a vulnerability analysis has been completed and the organization’s risks have been 
assessed, the TSCM search can proceed. A TSCM survey or sweep is a comprehensive 
examination of a facility, designed to make sure that the facility is free of any form of 
technical surveillance equipment. This includes electronic, visual, and physical examination 
of the site. Typically, the sweep begins with an RF examination, in which all radio 
emanations are analyzed to determine their source. An electronically enhanced search will 
then be conducted to locate items or devices that were not detected from the RF search. A 
physical examination will be performed to locate clandestine devices such as recorders, 
microphones, and transmitters. The team will also examine the phones and the phone lines 
to detect bugs. TSCM searches are not only conducted on business premises, but may also 
include the vehicles, cellular phones, computer equipment, and residences of key employees.  
 
TSCM sweeps are sensitive operations that should be conducted with as much secrecy as 
possible. It is best to limit the number of persons within the organization that are notified of 
the operation, because it is always possible that there is a mole within the company. Once 
again, the company does not want to tip off the spy to the operation. TSCM operatives 
normally operate under a cover story to explain their presence at the facility. When possible, 
sweeps are scheduled after hours to limit the number of personnel who encounter the team. 
As with other contractors, TSCM experts shou ld be accompanied at all times during  
their sweep.  
 
Although TSCM surveys can be expensive, if a company believes that it is the victim of 
corporate espionage, it may be the only way to help track down the source of the leak  
of information. 
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.886                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Preventing Employee Theft of Proprietary Information 
A company can spend years developing a competitive advantage over its competitors. That 
advantage can be eliminated in an instant by employees walking out the door. 
 
When employees leave a company, there is usually little if any attention paid to where they 
go afterwards. However, if a company begins to notice that a rival is suddenly taking away its 
business, it should sit up and take notice. Often employees leave one company for another, 
and take with them the knowledge of how that particular company operates, its pricing 
policies, its manufacturing methods, its customers, and so on. When employees share what 
they have learned with a competitor, the competitive edge is lost. 
 
Today’s work force is extremely mobile. Employees rarely start with one company and stay 
until retirement. On top of that, companies are continually downsizing and laying off 
employees. In most cases, experienced employees have little choice but to go to work for a 
competitor or begin consulting in their field. Cutbacks and firings do little to foster an 
attitude of loyalty among employees. 
 
Employee Awareness 
Employees must be educated as to what information is proprietary. It is hard to protect 
something if no one knows what needs protecting. A secret formula may be easy to identify, 
but employees are often not aware that subjects they may be discussing over lunch in a 
crowded restaurant are also trade secrets that would prove invaluable to a competitor. It 
does not help that the courts and legal scholars cannot decide on what constitutes 
proprietary information. Definitions of what is a trade secret depend on the organization and 
the industry. Examples of trade secrets include everything from notes in the margin of an 
employee manual to a procedure for tying a fishing lure. In addition, different jurisdictions 
have different laws defining what can or cannot potentially be a trade secret.  
 
Generally, to establish a trade secret, a company has to show that the information is not 
known in the industry, that the company has made efforts to keep it confidential, and that 
the information gives the company some sort of competitive edge. Just because information 
is confidential, does not make it a trade secret under the law. However, even though 
information may not be a “trade secret” as that term is defined under the statutes, it should 
be protected by employees. Again, the best test for deciding what is confidential information is 
to ask yourself if the information would provide an advantage to the competition.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.887 
Nondisclosure and Noncompetition Agreements 
A nondisclosure agreement is a written agreement that employees should sign as soon as 
they start work. It usually provides that all proprietary, confidential, or trade secret 
information the employees learn must be kept confidential and must not be disclosed to 
anyone. A noncompetition agreement is an agreement whereby the employees agree not to 
work for competing companies within a certain period of time after leaving.  
 
General Motors Corporation began requiring its senior-level executives to sign these 
agreements shortly after a well-publicized case against one of the company’s former 
purchasing executives. GM accused the executive  of taking millions of dollars worth of 
proprietary information to his new employer, Volkswagen. GM accused him of pushing up 
strategy meetings before he left so that he could gather even more data. The employee 
denied the charges. GM concluded after this happened that the use of noncompetition 
agreements could help prevent a similar occurrence. 
 
However, the use of nondisclosure and noncompetition agreements is not an overall 
solution. There are several legal problems with using these agreements. As mentioned earlier, 
there is no clear definition of what constitutes a trade secret. In some instances it can be 
extremely difficult to determine what belongs to the company and what belongs to the 
employee. 
 
Noncompetition agreements also have a variety of problems. First, courts in some 
jurisdictions have held that such agreements are against “public policy” because they limit 
the future employment of a person; theref ore, in these jurisdictions noncompetition 
agreements are unenforceable. Others uphold the agreements, but only if they are part of an 
otherwise valid employment agreement. In these cases, the employment agreement and the 
noncompetition agreement must be signed at the same time or the noncompetition 
agreement is unenforceable. In addition, if the employee is an “at will” employee who is not 
covered by an employment agreement, any noncompetition signed by such an employee 
would be unenforceable. 
 
Although nondisclosure and noncompetition agreements can be excellent tools for 
preventing the loss of confidential information to competitors, their use is limited, and legal 
counsel familiar with employment laws for the specific jurisdiction should be consulted. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.888                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
However, many professionals say that the real value of such agreements is not their legal 
power, but their ability to create the right image. This includes making certain that 
employees and outsiders clearly understand that the company is serious about preventing the 
loss of proprietary information and will do everything they can to pursue those individuals 
who are stealing information. 
 
Make Sure Employees Know When Not to Speak 
Often, employees are willing to abide by nondisclosure agreements, but they do not 
understand that the information they are communicating may be confidential. For instance, a 
software company employee who worked on product updates attended a trade association 
meeting and entertained the other attendees with war stories about the development process 
and what things worked and what didn’t. The employee was later reprimanded, and seemed 
genuinely unaware that the information he had provided was proprietary information of 
great value to the company’s competitors. 
 
Exit Interviews
One of the most effective ways to protect a company’s trade secrets and confidential 
business information is to conduct an exit interview. During the exit interview, the departing 
employee should be specifically advised about the company’s trade secrets and confidential 
business information and the obligation not to disclose or use such information for her own 
benefit or the benefit of others without the express written consent of the company. The 
employee should be given a form to sign stating that during the exit interview the employee 
was once again informed that any proprietary information should not be disclosed and that 
the employee agrees not to disclose any such information without the consent of the 
company.  
 
 
Protecting the Trade Secrets of Others 
In the rush to protect its trade secrets from competitors, many companies forget the other 
half of the equation?preventing their employees from appropriating the proprietary 
information of competitors. 
 
If a company hires an employee from a competitor, it should realize that it may be opening 
itself up to a lawsuit for theft of proprietary information. Such claims are expensive to 
defend, and the losses can be substantial even before the jury verdict. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.889 
EXAMPLE 
Diametrics Medical, Inc., a U.S.-based medical equipment provider, was forced to abort a 
$30 million initial public offering after PPG Indu stries, Inc. filed a lawsuit alleging theft of 
trade secrets and patent infringement. Diametrics denied the charges, but the accusations 
were enough to prevent the public  offering from going through. 
 
A company does not have to be actually aware that the employee is using proprietary 
information. There may be liability for willful blindness” that is, company executives had 
reason to suspect that an employee could be using confidential information, but did nothing 
to investigate or prevent it. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Novopharm, Inc. was found guilty by a court in Vancouver, British Columbia, of stealing 
trade secrets from its rival Apotex, Inc. Court documents state that a biochemist left 
Apotex and “secretly joined” Novopharm bringing with him valuable trade secrets. Under 
the verdict, Novopharm must pay damages of  more than $3.7 million. The judge found 
that the chief executive officer, Leslie Dan, “closed his eyes to what was going on around 
him.” Dan denied the judge’s characterization. 
 
Human resources personnel should ask potential employees whether they are subject to any 
agreements that bar them from competing with any current or former employer. If the 
employee is subject to any such agreement, a copy of the agreement should be forwarded to 
the legal department before any hiring decision is made. 
 
If companies seek to use confidential information from former employees of competitors, 
then it may run a greater risk of losing its information to competitors in the long run. As 
discussed above, the most important element of any confidential information protection 
program is the cooperation of the employees. If the employees of a company see that 
management has a policy of pumping new hires for knowledge about competitors, it is 
unlikely that the employees will take pride or interest in protecting the company’s trade 
secrets. 
 
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.890                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Legal Issues Related to Theft of Intellectual Property  
The Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (Title 18, U.S. Code, §§1831-1839)  makes the theft of 
trade secrets a federal criminal offense. Under this statute, the Department of Justice has 
sweeping authority to prosecute trade secret theft whether it is in the United States, via the 
Internet, or outside the United States. This statute is discussed in more detail in the chapter 
on “Law Related to Fraud” in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.901 
External fraud schemes are those committed by outside organizations, typically by individuals or 
groups of individuals against organizations. Fraud schemes committed by outsiders usually 
occur in industry. Therefore, the rest of this section is organized by type of industry, starting 
with financial institution frauds. Because some schemes are committed by collusion between 
an organizational insider and an outsider, some frauds can be classified as both internal and 
external schemes. 
 
 
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD 
 
Financial institutions include banks, savings and loans, credit unions, and other federally 
insured repositories. Financial institution fraud is also known by the more generic term of 
bank fraud. Check fraud and credit card fraud as it applies to both merchants and financial 
institutions is discussed in a separate chapter. 
 
A bank is defined as an organization engaged in any or all of many financial functions, such 
as receiving, collecting, transferring, paying, lending, investing, dealing, exchanging, and 
servicing (via safe deposit, custodianship, agency, or trusteeship) money and claims to 
money, both domestically and internationally. This broad concept applies to institutions such 
as central banks for cooperatives, export-import banks, federal intermediate credit banks, 
federal land banks, investment banks, and mortgage lenders.  
 
 
Embezzlement Schemes 
Embezzlement  is defined as the wrongful taking or conversion of the property of another for 
the wrongdoer’s benefit. Misapplication often accompanies embezzlement, but is a separate 
and distinct offense. Misapplication is the  wrongful taking or conversion of another’s 
property for the benefit of someone else. 
 
Types of Embezzlement Schemes 
There are various embezzlement schemes that have been utilized over time. The following 
examples are not an exhaustive list, but are rather a summary of the more commonly 
employed schemes. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.902                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
False Accounting Entries 
Employees debit the general ledger to credit their own accounts or cover up customer 
account thefts. 
 
Unauthorized Withdrawals 
Employees make unauthorized withdrawals from customer accounts. 
 
Unauthorized Disbursement of Funds to Outsiders 
Employees cash stolen/counterfeit items for outside accomplices. 
 
Paying Personal Expenses from Bank Funds  
An officer or employee causes the bank to pay personal bills, then causes amounts to be 
charged to bank expense accounts. 
 
Theft of Physical Property 
Employees or contractors remove office equipment, building materials, and furnishings from 
bank premises. 
 
Moving Money from Customers’ Dormant or Inactive Accounts 
Persons with apparent authority create journal entries or transfer orders not initiated by 
customers to move money among accounts. Dormant or inactive accounts are those that show 
little or no activity. Often contact with the account holder by confirmation, letter, or 
telephone contact is not possible. Such accounts are to be transferred to dual control and 
recorded in an inactive accounts ledger. State statutes usually provide for escheat or 
forfeiture to the state after a period of years. 
 
Unauthorized, Unrecorded Cash Payments 
A director, officer, or employee causes cash to be disbursed directly to self or accomplices 
and does not record the disbursements. 
 
Theft and Other Unauthorized Use of Collateral 
Custodians steal, sell, or use collateral or repossessed property for themselves or 
accomplices. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.903 
Detection Methods 
There are several methods by which embezzlement can be detected. Generally, if the dollar 
amount of the embezzlement scheme is small enough such that the financial statements will 
not be materially affected, embezzlement fraud can be most effectively detected through the 
review of source documents.  
 
If the scheme is so large that the financial statements of the institution are affected, then a 
review of the source documents will serve to confirm or refute an allegation that an 
embezzlement scheme has occurred, or is occurring. Generally, for large embezzlements, the 
most efficient method of detection is an analysis of the financial statements (which is also a 
review of documents).  
 
 
Loan Fraud 
Loan fraud is a multifaceted activity that includ es several types of criminal activities. Larger 
loan fraud schemes often involve real estate lending and collusion between insiders and 
outsiders. Loan fraud represents the highest risk  area for financial institutions. Although the 
number of occurrences might be small, the dollar amount per occurrence tends to be large. 
 
Financial Institution Failures as a Result of Real Estate Loan Fraud 
Losses reported by financial institutions across the globe are in the billions of dollars. Most 
financial institutions invest heavily in real estate transactions; a substantial portion of these 
losses relate to real estate loans. 
 
Common Loan Fraud Schemes 
Loans to Nonexistent Borrowers 
False applications, perhaps with inaccurate financial statements, are knowingly or 
unknowingly accepted by loan officers as the basis for loans. These types of loan fraud can 
be perpetrated by people either external to the lending institution (“external fraud”) or by 
officers, directors, or employees of the victim institution (“internal fraud”). 
 
Sham Loans with Kickbacks and Diversion 
Loan officers will sometimes make loans to acco mplices who then share all or part of the 
proceeds with the lending officer. In some instances, the loans are charged off as bad debts; 
in other instances, the bogus loans are paid off with the proceeds of new fraudulent loans. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.904                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Double-Pledging Collateral 
Borrowers pledge the same collateral with different lenders before liens are recorded and 
without telling the lenders. 
 
Reciprocal Loan Arrangements  
Insiders in different banks cause their banks to lend funds to the others, or sell loans to 
other banks with agreements to buy their loans—all for the purpose of concealing loans  
and sales. 
 
Swapping Bad Loans—Daisy Chains 
In a daisy chain, a bank buys, sells, and swaps its bad loans for the bad loans of another 
bank, creating new documentation in the process. Its purpose is to mask or hide bad loans 
by making them look like they are recent and good. 
 
Linked Financing 
Large deposits are offered to a bank (usually br okered deposits) on the condition that loans 
are made to particular persons affiliated with the deposit broker. High returns are promised, 
but the loans are longer term than the deposits (hot money). Sometimes kickbacks are paid 
to the broker or banker. 
 
False Applications with False Credit Information 
Sometimes loan applicants provide false information about their credit situation, and/or 
overstate their assets.  
 
Single-Family Housing Loan Fraud 
In this scheme, unqualified borrowers misrepresent personal creditworthiness, overstate 
ability to pay, and misrepresent characteristics of the housing unit. Such acts may include 
reporting inflated income, moving debt into a dependent’s name, reporting inflated square 
footage of the collateral, or even bribing an appraiser to value the home at a higher amount 
than the market value. 
 
Construction Loans 
Construction lending has different vulnerabilities than other permanent or interim lending. 
More risks are associated with constructi on projects than with already-built projects. 
Construction fraud schemes are numerous; the more common are related to estimates of 
costs to complete, developer overhead, draw requests, and retainage schemes. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.905 
ESTIMATES OF COSTS TO COMPLETE 
When borrowers approach a lending institution for construction financing they typically 
have a development plan, complete with an engineering report, appraisal, and budget for 
construction costs. The construction cost budget is, by definition, an estimate. As the project 
is built out, the budget will be revised to reflect actual expenses. Budgets are delineated by 
specific line item, such as slab, exterior glass, grading, landscaping, and tenant 
improvements. As the project proceeds, certain over- and underbudget costs are incurred. 
These costs should be represented by a change order. 
 
If the loan agreement has been properly documented and enforced, no material 
differentiation from the budget should occur without the lender’s knowledge and consent. 
However, the developer/borrower might misrepresent the true nature of the under- or 
overbudget amount to mislead the lender. The architect/engineer and the lender’s inspector 
should examine all budget changes. The impact of change orders might result in the loan 
becoming out of balance (cost to complete exceeds available loan and equity funds). 
Generally, developers hide or conceal their overbudget construction costs in two common 
places. The first place is contingency and the second is to remove allocations from tenant 
improvements and apply them to shell construction. 
 
Most budgets contain a contingency line item in  the event actual costs exceed the budgeted 
amounts. Unfortunately, many developers and lenders do not monitor the total impact on 
removing allocations from the contingency budget. In addition, savings are not allocated to 
the contingency line item when underbudget costs are realized. It is also common to rob one 
account to make up for a shortfall in another account. Generally, tenant finish is estimated at 
a particular dollar amount per square foot. This allows the developer considerable latitude in 
negotiating with tenants. 
 
However, before the entire space has been leased, and the construction costs have been 
incurred, the amount allocated to tenant improvements remains budgetary. If the developer 
is allowed to reallocate amounts from this budget line to shell construction, then when it 
comes time to negotiate leases and finish out the space, the developer might be short of 
available funds. If the tenant finish is treated as a hold-back and not to be reallocated or 
disbursed except for its intended purpose, then there is a greater chance of the loan not 
becoming over-disbursed (cost to complete exceeding the available financing). 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.906                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
DEVELOPER OVERHEAD 
It is not uncommon in construction financing to have a budget line item for developer 
overhead (also called general conditions ). This is a ripe area for abuse. The purpose of developer 
overhead is to supply the developer with operating capital while the project is under 
construction. This overhead allocation should not include a profit percentage, as the 
developer realizes profit upon completion. 
 
In essence, the overhead budget is as if the lender is making two types of loans: a real estate 
loan and a working capital loan for the overhead. Unfortunately, there is seldom, if ever, any 
separate underwriting for the overhead portion. The overhead is merely added as a 
construction cost, whose ultimate collateral is the property and not some other short-term 
collateral. Historically, troubled construction loans or foreclosures due to fraud have been 
totally disbursed in the developer overhead category.  
 
DRAW REQUESTS 
Construction loan advances are generally supported by draw requests. A draw request is the 
documentation substantiating that a developer has incurred the appropriate construction 
expenses and is now seeking reimbursement or direct payment. A typical fraud scheme in 
this area involves requesting advances on the loan for inappropriate costs, such as personal 
expenses and/or construction costs for an unrelated project. Draw requests provide the 
greatest opportunity for a developer to commit fraud against the lender because the lender 
relies upon the developer’s documentation. 
 
Generally, a draw request or pay application is made once a month and is submitted on a 
standard form such as the one promulgated by the American Institute of Architects (AIA). 
The request should be accompanied by the following documents: 
• Paid invoices for raw materials 
• Lien releases from each subcontractor 
• Inspection reports 
• Canceled checks from previous draw requests 
• Bank reconciliation for construction draw account for previous month 
• Loan balancing form, demonstrating that the loan remains in balance 
• Change orders, if applicable 
• Wiring instructions, if applicable 
• Proof of developer contribution, if applicable 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.907 
The documentation required as support for each draw request will vary depending on the 
payment method (such as direct, dual payment, disbursing agent, wire transfer, or 
reimbursement). Any missing or altered documentation is a red flag that something is amiss 
with the draw request. All advances on the loan should be adequately documented. 
 
Some or all of the following steps should be performed before advancing funds on a 
construction loan. These steps are not represented as being all-inclusive, but rather the 
preliminary disbursement questions that the disbursing party should address. 
• Examine the draw and determine if sufficient supporting documentation has been 
submitted. 
• Reconcile the amounts requested with the approved budget. Account for any 
differences. 
• Determine that the amounts requested have been properly inspected and approved. 
• Determine if the proper lien releases have been submitted for work performed. 
• Reconcile any change orders with the approved budget. Determine if the change orders 
have been approved. 
• Prove the clerical accuracy of the documentation submitted. 
• Ensure that work completed has been inspected by the lender’s architect/engineer. 
• Determine if there are any requests for soft (nonconstruction) costs and whether they 
are appropriate. 
• Determine if there are any budget changes. If so, what are they for? Have they been 
approved? 
• Prepare a cost to complete estimate to determine that the loan remains in balance. 
• If tenant improvement funds have been requested, establish that there is a signed lease 
on file. Is the request appropriate for the terms and conditions of the lease? Has the 
lease been approved? 
• If homeowner option funds have been requested, establish that there is a signed 
purchase contract on file. Is the request appropriate for the terms and conditions of the 
contract? Has the contract/purchaser been approved? 
• Examine payment requests and determine if there are new or previously undisclosed 
subcontractors. If so, determine why. 
• Ensure that the title update has been received. 
 
RETAINAGE 
The final area of major concern in construction lending is retainage. Retainage is the amount 
withheld from each draw request until such time as the construction is complete and the lien 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.908                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
period has expired. There are at least two reasons why construction loans contain a retainage 
provision. The first reason is to keep the contractor’s interest in the project until all the work 
has been completed and accepted by the owner. The amount of the retainage represents 
part, if not all, of the contractor’s profit. Therefore, if the profit is not paid until the project 
has been completed, then presumably the contractor will complete the assignment on time 
and on budget. 
 
The second reason for the retainage is to ensure that the work of subcontractors is 
completed and that the general contractor pays the subcontractor so that no liens are filed. If 
the general contractor fails to pay the subcontractor then the subcontractor will probably file 
a lien on the project. If the retainage will not be released until such time as the lien period 
has expired, then there are at least some funds available to defray the cost of fighting the lien 
or making a duplicate payment because the general contractor might have embezzled the 
first payment without paying the subcontractor. 
 
Red Flags of Loan Fraud 
There are several red flags of loan fraud. Many times the sch emes are perpetrated in tandem 
with other schemes, so what appears to be a red flag for one scheme, might in fact lead the 
fraud examiner to one or more schemes. 
 
Nonperforming Loans 
Although this information might not be available to all, a nonperforming loan is not 
performing for some reason. One of those reasons might be that a fraud scheme has or is 
occurring.  
 
Fraud schemes resulting in a nonperforming loan include: 
• Fraudulent appraisals — The cash flow cannot support an inflated loan and, therefore, debt 
amount. 
• False statements — The loan was made on false or fraudulently presented assumptions. 
• Equity skimming — There was never any intention to make the underlying loan payments. 
• Construction overbudget items — The overbudget amount might be a concealment method for 
other schemes such as embezzlement, misappropriation, or false statements. 
• Bribery — The loan was made because the lender received a bribe or a kickback from the 
borrower. 
• Land flips — The purpose of the loan was to finance the seller out of a property that has 
an artificially inflated value.  
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.909 
• Disguised transactions — Transactions that are sham transactions, without substance, made 
to conceal other ills. 
 
High Turnover in Developer’s Personnel 
One of the first signs to look for, particularly  in construction lending, is whether or not the 
real estate developer is experiencing a higher-than-normal employee turnover. Typically, 
when a developer experiences a high degree of turnover, something is wrong with the 
internal operation. This is often a preamble for other problems to come. 
 
High Turnover in Tenant Mix 
If the tenant mix in a commercial project (such as a retail center or an office building) is 
suddenly undergoing a major change, there might be some problem with the management of 
the project or with the method of allocating the pass-through expenses, such as utilities or 
maintenance. In addition, a decline in the tenant mix might be an indication that the deferred 
maintenance for the project is not being properly attended to. 
 
Increased Change Orders 
An increase in the number of change orders or amounts on change orders might be an 
indication that construction changes have taken place that would alter the originally planned 
project to such an extent as to render the underwriting inappropriate. Change orders can 
have the same impact on a project as altering the original documents. As with anything that 
is contracted for on a bid basis, change orders could also be an indication of collusive 
bidding. Change orders might be an indication that the original project was not feasible and 
short cuts are shoring up other problem areas. Change orders should be approved by the 
architect and engineer on the project in addition to the lender’s inspector.  
 
Missing Documentation 
Missing or altered documentation is a red flag for any type of fraud scheme. Because 
concealment is a key fraud element, missing documents are a definite giveaway. Missing 
documents are of particular concern in construction lending. Experience has shown that 
seldom is a complete draw request submitted without some missing document. 
 
LOAN FILE 
Missing documents in the loan file are another indication that things might be amiss. It is 
important to determine if missing documents have been misplaced or were never received. A 
waiver of certain documents is one common way for lenders to conceal fraud schemes. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.910                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Documentation for real estate loans is fairly standard. Listed below are some of the more 
important documents that should be present in the loan files. 
• Appraisal 
• Architect’s or engineer’s report 
• Assignment of leases and rents 
• Assignment of limited partnership notes 
• Assignment of take-out commitment 
• Attorney opinion letter 
• Availability of utilities (water, sewer, gas, and electric) 
• Budget 
• Completion schedule 
• Copies of leases (existing or if project is preleased, commitment letters) 
• Disburser’s notice, if required 
• Easements 
• Environmental impact study 
• Ingress and egress 
• Inspection report (lender’s inspector) 
• Insurance binder (lender should be loss payee) 
• Letters of credit, if applicable 
• List of general and subcontractors 
• Loan agreement 
• Plans and specifications 
• Promissory notes from limited partners to partnership, if applicable 
• Road dedications 
• Soils report 
• Subscription agreements, similar to limited partnership notes, if applicable 
• Survey 
• Take-out commitment, if applicable 
• Title policy, including instruction letter from closing 
• Zoning 
 
DISBURSEMENT FILE 
• Copies of all checks issued at closing 
• Lien releases issued at closing (architect, engineers, etc.) 
• Loan closing statement 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.911 
DRAW REQUESTS 
• Draw request form (AIA Form or its equivalent). 
• Bank reconciliation (general contractor disbursement account). 
• Canceled checks (if general contractor pays subcontractors, copies of the canceled 
checks should be included in the following draw). 
• Inspection report (lender’s inspector). 
• Lien releases for each subcontractor for the previous draw 
• Loan balancing form (the lender should prepare some form of reconciliation to ensure 
that with each draw the loan remains in balance. Items of particular concern are interest, 
tenant finish, and retainage.) 
• Receipts (for all items submitted on the draw request form). 
• Title updates from the title company. 
• Wire transfer instructions (from the lender to the general contractor’s disbursement 
account. 
 
In addition to the normal loan files, the lender should require a continuing report from the 
borrower. For example, the borrower could be required to report annual financial condition 
coupled with a tax return. Missing documents in  these follow-up files might indicate that the 
project or the borrower is having difficulty that might be the result of a fraud scheme. 
 
Loan Increases or Extensions, Replacement Loans 
A loan being continually extended and loan increases being made simultaneously might 
indicate that the real estate project cannot support the debt service. Typically, the loan 
increases are to pay for the interest and extension fee. This red flag might also indicate that 
the loan was made to a related-party or made as a loan to hasten a sale or other transaction. 
In other words, the loan was not properly underwritten. 
If the loan is increased and extended several times, it might indicate that higher appraisals are 
being obtained on a “made-as-instructed” basis. Loan increases and extensions might be the 
method used by the lender to conceal a nonperforming loan. 
 
However, according to William T. Thornhill, CFE, a consultant in the field of financial 
institution fraud, fraud perpetrators tend to write a new loan or credit facility to replace  an 
existing or old loan because they are aware of the fact that a rewrite may attract loan review, 
loan administration, or internal audit attention. Accordingly, replacement loans are now 
increasingly used rather than a simple rewrite of a loan. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.912                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Cash Flow Deficiencies 
The actual cash flow of a commercial project is a very telling red flag. If the project is 
experiencing an unexplained cash flow deficiency, then an internal fraud scheme might be 
the cause. The project cash flow might reflect any of the above schemes. 
 
Change in Ownership Makeup 
A change in the ownership makeup, commonly referred to as business divorce, might 
indicate fraudulent activity. It is not uncommon to have a working partner and an equity 
(money) partner. When the two partners become disenchanted with their relationship and 
seek a “separation,” it might suggest things have gone sour. 
 
Disguised Transactions 
Transactions disguised to conceal their true nature often involve the lender and either an 
existing customer or new customer. Banking personnel will sometimes engage in fraudulent 
schemes to forego the requirement to record additional loan loss reserves. One method 
employed is to “sell” OREO (Other Real Estate  Owned) property to an existing customer or 
a new customer in exchange for making a new loan on another unrelated project. In other 
words, the bank is tying one transaction to another, quid pro quo. 
 
Another method of concealing the true nature of a transaction is to conduct the transaction 
through nominees. For example, the bank might be required to recognize an additional loan 
loss reserve due to the lack of performance on a particular loan. The borrower might or 
might not be a good customer of the bank. Regardless of the status of the customer, the 
bank might request that the project (underlying collateral) be sold to another party, the 
financing to be arranged by the bank. The borrower can form a new entity (nominee or shell 
company) to purchase the property; a new (generally higher) appraisal is obtained and the 
property is sold. In this illustration, the avoidance of loss required the participation of the 
bank personnel, the borrower, and the appraiser. 
 
 
Real Estate Fraud 
Generally defined, real estate fraud is any false representation, coupled with intent to 
deceive, made in connection with a real estate transaction. There are several real estate fraud 
schemes, including the real estate loan fraud schemes discussed previously. In addition, there 
has been a recent growth of mortgage fraud–related incidences due to the rise of subprime 
lending and the mortgage crisis. This section will further detail those real estate loan fraud 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.913 
schemes and will examine several other real estate fraud schemes, including those stemming 
from subprime lending and the mortgage crisis. The schemes examined include:  
• Loan falsifications 
• Forged documents 
• Appraisal fraud 
• Straw buyers 
• Mortgage-backed security fraud 
• Equity skimming 
• Property flipping 
• Identity theft perpetrated in conjunction with a real estate transaction 
• Builder-bailout schemes 
• Seller assistance scams 
• Short-sale schemes 
• Chunking or shot gunning 
• Foreclosure rescue scams 
 
Most real estate transactions require more money than any single individual or entity can 
internally finance. Therefore, most of these transactions are financed to some extent. 
Because these transactions require borrowed money, experts are needed. These experts 
include appraisers, lenders, and auditors. 
 
Loan Falsifications 
It is illegal to provide false documents to verify income or assets, to make misrepresentations 
in a loan application, and to knowingly process a false loan application. Common types of 
loan falsifications include altered bank statements, altered or fraudulent earnings 
documentation, fraudulent letters of credit, fabricated letters of gift, misrepresentation of 
employment, misrepresentation of loan purpose, altered credit scores, false Social Security 
numbers, failure to fully disclose borrower’s de bts or assets, and brokers using the identities 
of prior customers to obtain loans for customers unable to qualify.  
 
According to the Mortgage Asset Research Institute’s (MARI) Ninth Periodic Case Report 
to the Mortgage Bankers Association, false statements made in loan applications are the 
most common aspect of mortgage fraud schemes. In fact, false statements in the loan 
application are the most reported suspicious activity related to mortgage fraud, according to 
the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN). This is because most perpetrators 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.914                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
could not execute mortgage fraud schemes without falsifying loan applications and 
supporting documentation. 
 
Identity fraud, which is the misrepresentation of data underpinning one’s identity (such as 
using one’s Social Security number), is a common mortgage fraud scheme involving the 
improper use of identifying data. In fact, FinCEN reported in 2009 that identity fraud 
occurred in three percent of the sampled mortgage fraud reports. 
 
The individuals in the best position to use a person’s identifying information for purposes of 
committing mortgage fraud are industry insiders. Identity fraud schemes may be perpetrated 
by mortgage brokers in possession of personal identifying information provided by a 
legitimate borrower and unbeknownst to him used over and over again. 
 
Identity fraud schemes are also perpetrated by “investment club” organizers who collect 
personal information from members and then use it without their knowledge to purchase 
properties. 
 
In other cases, real estate agents, mortgage brokers, criminals, and/or other industry insiders 
provide a stolen Social Security number of an individual with good credit to an individual 
with bad credit who wishes to purchase a home and helps create a credit history under the 
bad credit borrower’s name. 
 
Finally, straw borrowers are often provided with stolen or falsified Social Security numbers 
and driver’s licenses to use in originating loans. This scenario involves a high-level of 
collusion between all parties to defraud the lender. 
 
The following red flags may identify mortgages containing false or misleading information: 
• An item other than cash is used for the down payment (i.e., gift, rent credit, sale of 
personal property, repayment of loan, etc.) 
• Borrower purchasing property from employer or landlord. 
• Borrower has a non-purchasing spouse. 
• Borrower purchasing investment property does not own current residence. 
• New home is too small for proposed occupants. 
• The only listing of employer’s address is a Post office box. 
• Borrower, purchasing private residence property, has an unreasonable commute from 
subject property to his employment. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.915 
• Borrower’s level of education is inconsistent with employment. 
• Borrower’s age is inconsistent with the sta ted employment or the number of years 
employed. 
• Borrower is self-employed or his office phone number is the same as their work number. 
• When compared, borrower’s assets and liabilities are inconsistent.  
• Buyer is downgrading.  
• Loan application is handwritten or incomplete. 
 
Forged Documents 
Since W-2 forms, bank statements, title commitments, leases, tax returns, and similar 
documents other than the loan application are used to verify income and asset information, 
such documents are routinely falsified, altered, or forged to perpetuate mortgage fraud 
schemes. In 2009, forged documents were the most reported mortgage fraud scheme 
according to FinCEN. 
 
Appraisal Fraud 
The Role of the Appraiser 
The appraiser performs an independent property valuation for the new (or old) owner. 
Appraisers should be licensed. They should also be certified by an independent professional 
association. There are several professional associations for real estate appraisers. A list of 
these organizations can be found at the end of this section. It is important, particularly in 
regard to complex commercial property, that the appraisers’ experience and credentials be 
carefully scrutinized. 
 
Fundamentals of Real Estate Appraisals 
Real estate transactions assume a willing buyer and willing seller. Fraud can occur when the 
transaction breaks down or the expert assistance is not at arm’s length. Many fraud schemes 
have a false appraisal report as a condition precedent. Several different kinds of reports are 
used by appraisers. They are summarized below. 
 
LETTER FORM REPORT 
The letter form report is used when a client is familiar with the area, and supporting data, 
therefore, is not necessary. The report consists of a brief description of the property, the 
type of value sought, the purpose served by the appraisal, the date of value, the value 
conclusion, and the signature of the appraiser. This form generally is not used by financial 
institutions for credit decisions. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.916                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SHORT FORM REPORT 
The short form report is used by financial institutions, usually for residential real estate loans 
(sometimes referred to as consumer loans). The report varies from one to four pages and 
consists of check sheets or spaces to be filled in by the appraiser about pertinent property 
data. 
 
NARRATIVE REPORT 
The narrative form includes all pertinent information about the area and the subject property 
as well as the rationale for the estimated value. It includes maps, photographs, charts, and 
plot plans. Financial institutions use narrative reports to support real estate lending and 
investment decisions on large commercial real estate transactions. Any other type of 
appraisal report (i.e., letter form or short form) on these complex transactions would likely 
be considered inadequate.  
 
Determining “Value”  
Value is comprised of four elements: utility, scarcity, demand, and transferability. Real estate 
appraisals assign three types of values to property. They are: 
 
FAIR MARKET VALUE 
This is the price the property would bring if freely offered on the open market with both a 
willing seller and a willing buyer. (Estimated) 
 
SALES PRICE 
Sales price is the price paid for the property. It might be higher or lower than fair market 
value. (Actual) 
 
LOAN VALUE 
Loan value is the percentage of a property’s va lue (fair market value or sales price) a lender 
can or might loan a borrower.  
 
Valuation Methods 
SALES COMPARISON APPROACH 
The sales comparison approach lends itself to the appraisal of land, residences, and other 
types of improvements that exhibit a high degree of similarity, and where a ready market 
exists. Compared to the other approaches, this method has great influence on residential 
portfolio valuations. This method is the least complicated to understand and apply. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.917 
Subject property is compared with similar property that is either offered for sale or has 
recently sold. Items evaluated include time of sale, location of sale (or offer for sale), physical 
characteristics, and improvements. Adjustments are made to the value of comparable 
properties (either plus or minus) on the basis of differences between them and the subject 
property. Relevant items might be an oversized lot, a view, a busy street, or access. 
 
THE COST APPROACH 
The cost approach generally does not exert much influence on the appraiser’s final value 
estimate. It serves as a “benchmark” against which the sales comparison and income 
approaches are measured. The cost approach is more accurate for new properties. It views 
the value of a parcel as the combination of the land value if vacant and the cost to construct 
a new building on the given date, less the accrued depreciation the existing building would 
suffer in comparison with the new building. 
 
The cost approach has five steps: 
• Estimate the land value as though vacant and available for development to its highest 
and best use. (Use the sales comparison approach.) 
• Estimate the replacement or reproduction cost of the existing improvements as of the 
appraisal date. 
• Estimate the accrued depreciation amount suffered by the improvements from all causes 
(physical deterioration and/or functional or external obsolescence). 
• Deduct the accrued depreciation from the replacement cost to find the estimate of value 
of the depreciated improvements. 
• Add the improvements’ depreciated value to the land value to arrive at the value of the 
property. 
 
The above is the most frequently used cost approach method. It involves the cost associated 
with rebuilding with modern methods, design, and materials that would most exactly replace 
the existing building. Reproduction cost is a cost-approach used to estimate the cost to 
reconstruct a replica of the building. It generally is used only when dealing with unique 
construction or for testimony in court. 
 
THE INCOME CAPITALIZATION APPROACH 
Under this approach, the property value is based on its capacity to continue producing 
income. This method is particularly valuable for the valuation of complex commercial 
properties. The net income the property produces is an important consideration. Net income 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.918                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
is the amount of money over the remaining life of the property and its improvements that a 
fully informed person, using good management, is warranted in receiving. 
 
Income capitalization is the mathematical process of estimating the present value of income 
property based on the anticipated annual net income it will produce. Key to the application 
of this approach is the capitalization rate that is used. There are three types of capitalization 
rates: interest rate, recapture rate,  and overall capitalization rate.  Interest rate is the rate of return 
earned on investment capital. Recapture rate is the rate of return originally invested funds 
provided the owner. Overall capitalization rate is a combination of the interest and recapture 
rates. 
 
Fraudulent Appraisals 
Fraudulent appraisals result from any number of situations, some of which are: 
• Intentional use of an incompetent appraiser 
•  “Stacking the deck” by giving the appraiser improper or false assumptions to use in 
arriving at the value such as: 
? Assume zoning will be changed for a higher and better use when in fact zoning will 
not be changed. 
? Assume unrealistically high vacancy and low expense rates. 
? Assume unrealistically high income, selling prices, or absorption—the rate at which 
vacant space will become rented. 
? Otherwise influencing the appraiser, e.g., paying above-market fee or promising 
future business. 
? Direct collusion with the appraiser to commit fraud. 
 
Uses for Fraudulent Appraisals 
• To obtain approval on marginal or substandard loans to attain or exceed goals in order 
to be promoted or receive commission, bonus, or raises. 
• To justify extending or renewing a “bad” loan  to avoid recognition of a loss that might 
defer commission, promotion, bonus, or raises. 
• To avoid adverse publicity and regulatory, management, and shareholder disapproval 
because of excessive losses. 
• To avoid recognition of a loss on real estate owned, and to permit additional capital 
infusions. 
• To criminally gain money. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.919 
Red Flags of “Made-as-Instructed” Appraisals 
• The appraiser used never has been used before, is not on an approved list, has no 
professional credentials, or those offered are of questionable credibility. 
• Appraisal fee is unusually high. 
• Invalid comparables are used.  
• Supporting information is missing, insufficient, or contradictory. 
• Market data does not support the price and absorption figures used to arrive at value. 
 
Detecting Fraudulent Appraisals 
To detect unrealistic or bogus appraisals, the fraud examiner should address the following: 
(1) Read the appraisal, does it match the documents in the file? 
? Leases 
? Comparables 
? Absorption rates 
? Residual values 
? Capitalization rate 
? Legal description 
 
(2) Is there sufficient demand for the project to ensure absorption of the property into the 
marketplace? 
 
(3) Are there unique characteristics of the project that will ensure a competitive advantage 
over other projects? 
 
(4) Is the project sensitive to changes in local economic conditions? 
 
 
Mortgage Fraud 
Fraud has always been a constant presence in the mortgage industry, and it appears to be on 
the rise. There are a number of likely factors contributing to this apparent increase, including 
a rapid decline in the rate of home price appreciation, an increase in unemployment, and an 
increase in aggressive lending practices. All of these factors either reduced incentives or 
made it more difficult for borrowers to meet their mortgage obligations, which ultimately led 
to an increase in loan defaults.  
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.920                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The recent mortgage crisis has led to an increase in fraud for several reasons. One reason is 
that the declining housing market affects many in the mortgage industry (especially those 
paid by commission). During such declines, individuals are more likely to commit fraudulent 
acts to maintain their current standard of living. In addition, the declining market provides 
an ideal environment for perpetrators to employ numerous schemes that fit perfectly with 
down market (i.e., an increasing number of foreclosures, declining housing prices, and 
decreasing demand). Such down market characteristics place pressure on home builders, 
sellers, and lenders, which fraud perpetrators will attempt to exploit.  
 
The Growth of Subprime Lending Paved the Way for Fraud 
Subprime lending  refers to a variety of credit instruments lenders provide to people who do not 
qualify for the best market interest rate, usually due to weakened credit histories. There are 
many types of subprime mortgages, including: 
• Interest-only mortgages 
• Pick-a-payment loans 
• 2/28 adjustable-rate mortgage 
• Option-adjustable-rate mortgage 
 
Over the past decade, the subprime market grew dramatically, flourishing as the vehicle by 
which lenders funded loans to borrowers who would generally not qualify for traditional 
loans. According to industry newsletter Inside Mortgage Finance, Wall Street generated $1.8 
trillion in subprime loans from 2000 to 2007. In 2006, analysts estimated that 25 percent of 
all mortgages originated in the United States were subprime, and by 2007, 14 percent of all 
outstanding mortgage indebtedness in the United States was subprime in nature. By 2010, 
with the passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and 
the announcement of Wells Fargo to discontinue its subprime lending division, the 
percentage of subprime mortgages in the United States is expected to decline significantly. 
As Wells Fargo was the largest lender in the United States, it is possible that the percentage 
of subprime mortgages will fall to nearly 0. 
 
Corresponding with the growth of the subprime lending industry was a substantial increase 
in the number of mortgage fraud cases. The rise in fraudulent activity is the result of several 
factors, including the growth of automated loan processing and the growth of mortgage 
broker originated loans. These conditions, coupled with very lucrative possibilities, create an 
industry that that is very attractive to untrustworthy individuals or in other words, fraudsters.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.921 
Automated Loan Processing 
The growth of automated loan processing contributed to the increase in mortgage fraud 
because the nature of such transactions is faceless. The use of the Internet to receive and 
process loan applications has grown, and, in such cases, the lenders never meet the 
borrowers. This process creates an environment susceptible to fraudulent activity.  
 
Mortgage Broker Originated Loans 
The increasing number of mortgage broker originated loans has also played a part in the 
rising number of subprime fraud cases. Historically, mortgage loans were originated by the 
loan officer at the bank. Mortgage lenders, however, started relying on third-party originators 
(TPOs) to broker their loan products. Brokers could be paid a commission rather than a 
salary, an option that worked well for minimally capitalized mortgage lenders.  
As a result, the industry has seen the evolution of mortgage brokers.  
 
As markets for mortgages became more competitive, banks with their own retail loan 
officers also started employing these third-party wholesale originators. Today, mortgage 
brokers are the largest distributors of mortgage products for mortgage lenders and banks. It 
is estimated that two-thirds of all originations are from wholesale TPO mortgage brokers 
rather than retail loan officers. 
 
Mortgage broker-originated loans are vulnerable to fraud primarily because, until recently, 
there were no national standards for the licensing and oversight of mortgage brokers. 
However, on July 30, 2008, President Bush signed into law the Secure and Fair Enforcement 
for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (SAFE Act), which is part of the Housing and 
Economic Recovery Act of 2008. Designed to provide uniform licensing standards 
nationwide, the SAFE Act required all states to have in place a system of licensure meeting 
minimum standards for mortgage loan originators (i.e., anyone who takes a residential 
mortgage loan application or who offers or negotiates terms of a residential mortgage loan 
application for compensation or gain) beginning July 31, 2009.  
 
Mortgage Fraud Schemes 
Straw Buyers  
Straw buyers  are loan applicants who mortgage fraud perpetrators use to obtain home loans 
but who have no intention to occupy the properties they are buying or to pay back the loan. 
Perpetrators often use straw buyers to hide the identity of the true borrower that did not 
qualify for the mortgage.  
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.922                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The following red flags may occur in a straw borrower transaction:  
• At closing, discovering that the check is from someone other than the party to the 
contract.  
• Borrower resides in different state than purchasing property, which is described as a 
primary residence. 
• Quit claim deed is used very close to loan closing. 
• Investment property represented as owner-occupied. 
• A third-party signed on the borrower’s behalf. 
• Names added to purchase contract. 
• Parties to the transaction are related. 
• There is no sales agent involved. 
• There are indications that the property seller defaulted. 
• Existence of a high FICO score. 
• Gift used for down payment despite the presence of good assets. 
 
Equity Skimming 
Equity skimming is a scheme whereby an individual, entity, or group of individuals purchases 
one or several single-family homes. Typically, the financing is for a percentage of the 
purchase price (e.g., 80–90 percent) and the owner invests the balance of the purchase price 
as equity. The home(s) is/are then rented. 
 
The owners collect the rent from the tenants but fail to make the mortgage payment(s). 
When owners have withheld mortgage payments that equal the amount of the invested 
equity, they can then either resume payments or allow the mortgage to be foreclosed. 
Although the mortgage might eventually be foreclosed, the owners have recouped their 
original investment plus any rental payments not applied to the mortgage. In addition, the 
owners received state and federal tax benefits during the holding period. This scheme is 
most successful with non-recourse mortgages. 
 
Although equity skimming eventually collapses and the purchasers risk being sued for 
deficiencies (if the loans were recourse), the scheme continues to be practiced. It has become 
an increasing problem as many residential homes are auctioned and bulk purchases are 
encouraged. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.923 
Property Flipping 
Property flipping has been around for a long time. It is well known in the real estate industry 
as a way to make a profit by buying low and selling high, and it is not necessarily illegal. 
Flipping is perfectly fine when all representations of the property condition and value are 
true and accurate. However, flipping can also be a fraud for profit scheme that may lead to 
substantial losses and other devastating consequences.  
 
Property flipping is the process by which an investor purchases a home and then resells it at a 
higher price shortly thereafter. For example, an investor buys a house in need of work for 
$250,000 in July, renovates the kitchen and the bathrooms and landscapes the yard at a cost 
of $50,000, and then resells the house two months later (the time it takes to make the 
renovations) for a price that is reflective of the market for a house in its updated condition. 
This is a legitimate business transaction, and there are numerous individuals and groups in 
the real estate market who make an honest living flipping properties.  
 
However, property flipping becomes illegal and fraudulent when a home is purchased and 
resold within a short period of time at an artificially inflated value. The key in determining 
whether a flip is illegal is to watch for a significant increase in value over a short period of 
time that cannot be justified. A property that sells twice in the same day at an increase of 
$100,000 is hard to justify. 
 
An illegal property flip is usually dependent on an appraisal report that has artificially inflated 
the value of the property. The borrower may review the appraisal without inspecting the 
property, completely unaware of the market values in that property’s neighborhood. The 
borrower may also be a straw borrower or an accomplice. 
 
Nominee or Strawman Loans 
Loans made in the name of a straw borrower  or agent having no substance, while the 
identity of the real borrower is undisclosed to the lender. 
 
Mortgage Pulling 
For the purpose of disguising loans exceeding a bank’s legal limits, loans are made to a 
partnership’s members who by prearrangement then invest in a single risky venture in a total 
amount exceeding the lending limit. In reality, the single borrower is the partnership, and the 
collateral is the partnership’s property. Mort gage-pulling might involve fraudulent loan 
applications and payoffs to the individual partners for participating. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.924                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Identity Theft 
An identity theft scheme is defined as the assumption of someone else’s identity for fraudulent 
purposes. Identity theft is recognized as one of the fastest growing crimes in the U.S. Recent 
identity theft reports from credit reporting companies, corporate databases, and commercial 
data brokers indicate a substantial rise in cases of identity theft in conjunction with mortgage 
loan fraud.  
 
Two examples of identity theft schemes involving mortgage fraud include the fraudulent 
acquisition of a person’s home and the fraudulent origination of a loan on a property 
belonging to another person. 
 
PHANTOM SALE 
Phantom sale  scams are particularly harmful because they involve the fraudulent acquisition of 
a homeowner’s property by filing a fraudulent deed. This scam does not happen at the 
origination of the loan, but rather it may occur without the homeowner’s knowledge, 
decades after the property was originally sold.  
 
The perpetrator identifies a property — typically belonging to an estate or an out-of-state 
owner — that is owned free and clear. He then  creates a fictitious quit claim deed which 
purports to grant all rights and title on the property to the fraudster. The true owner’s 
signature is forged on the deed, and the scammer files it in the real property records. Once 
the deed is filed, he applies for and executes a loan on the property (using a straw borrower). 
Often the value is inflated. He pockets 100 percent of the loan proceeds and disappears. 
 
PHANTOM SECOND LIEN 
In a variation of the phantom sale scheme, a person assumes a homeowner’s identity and 
takes out an additional loan or a second mortgage in the homeowner’s name. If there is not 
enough equity in the home to warrant a second loan, an inflated appraisal is obtained. This 
scheme involves a high level of collusion between a loan officer, an appraiser, and a  
title agent. 
 
Some red flags to help identify identity theft arising during the mortgage lending process 
include:  
• A change of address notice is filed immediately. 
• The appraised value is inflated. 
• There is no prior lien payoff reflected on the HUD-1 settlement statement. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.925 
• Documents are forged or there are discrepancies between the borrower’s document 
signatures.  
• The recorded owner lives abroad or is deceased. 
• Mail or e-mail sent to the borrower is returned as undeliverable even though  
transactions continue. 
 
Builder-Bailout Schemes 
A builder bailout scheme usually occurs when a builder has sold the majority of homes in a 
tract, but is left with a few that are unsold. The builder may be suffering from financial 
difficulties with these lingering homes and may need to sell them quickly in order to pay off 
delinquent debts. To dispose of the remaining properties, the builder may undertake a 
variety of schemes that may include, but are not limited to, the use of hidden seller financing 
or inflated property values.  
 
Some builders also include lavish incentives in the transaction to lure buyers. Such incentives 
usually involve a form of down payment assistance so that a borrower can purchase a home 
without any equity contribution.  
 
Other concessions or incentives that might be offered to potential buyers include managing 
the properties as income-generating investment properties, absorbing any negative cash flow 
for the first 12 to 36 months, guaranteeing mortgage payments for the first 12 to 36 months, 
or other turnkey services and guarantees, even though the properties may remain vacant. 
Builders may also agree to pay the buyer a substantial rebate that is not disclosed to  
the lender.  
 
Getting concessions from the seller is not new and it is not necessarily fraudulent. The 
simple test to determine whether or not the transaction is illegal is to ask: Are these 
concessions disclosed and have they been approved by the lender? 
 
A SCHEME INVOLVING A LEGITIMATE BUYER 
Some builders engaging in builder bailout schemes find marginal, legitimate buyers whose 
intent is to occupy the property and make the payments. The following is an example of this 
type of scheme: 
• The market value for a builder’s n ew construction home is $200,000. 
• A borrower wants to buy the house but does not have the necessary down payment (10 
percent, or $20,000). 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.926                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The builder offers to sell the house for $220,000 and provide silent seller financing. 
There is a verbal or undisclosed agreement that the silent second will be forgiven after 
closing. 
• The builder obtains an inflated appraisal for $220,000. This inflation is typically below 
fraud thresholds and just enough to create equity for the borrower. 
• The buyer is steered to a participating broker and title company. 
• The buyer qualifies for a 90-percent LTV ($200 ,000) which actually represents the true 
purchase or sale price. The buyer in these scenarios is often qualified for the loan based 
on material misrepresentations. 
• The buyer closes on a loan for $200,000. 
• The seller gets his original asking price of $200,000 and forgives the seller financing. 
• The lender now has a 100-percent LTV loan. 
• If the property goes into default, the lender has no equity, especially if the market 
continues to decline. 
 
A SCHEME INVOLVING A STRAW BORROWER 
Other builders seek straw borrowers who are often induced with no-risk investment 
property ownership. Sometimes, the straw borrower is affiliated with the builder. In another 
variation of this scheme, the builder fails to complete construction but obtains a straw 
borrower and an inflated appraisal to originate a loan. 
 
A builder bailout scheme involving a straw borrower may play out as follows: 
• The builder recruits a straw borrower to purchase the property for no money down and 
cash back at closing. 
• The builder obtains an inflated appraisal that is used as a basis for the loan amount. This 
inflated loan amount will allow the builder to recoup his expenses, pay a fee to the straw, 
and keep the loan current for two to four years. This might appear on the HUD-1 
statement as a disproportionate commission to a real estate agent (30 percent) who, in 
turn, splits it with the builder. 
• The borrower is steered to a participating broker and title company and is qualified 
based on material misrepresentations. 
• The builder offers to manage the property for the borrower with the promise of four 
years with no mortgage payments. 
• The property may remain vacant and the neighborhood may be deteriorating. 
• The loan remains current for a period of time but then goes into delinquency. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.927 
Seller-Assistance Scams 
Seller-assistance schemes are more likely to occur when homes sales have declined and 
sellers are motivated to sell. These schemes are based on inflated appraisals. After the buyer 
obtains an inflated mortgage and purchases a home at the inflated value, the seller gives the 
buyer a rebate. However, the rebate is not disclosed to the lender, and as a result, the lender 
loaned more money than the property used to secure the loan was worth. If the buyer 
defaults, which generally happens, the lender cannot sell the property and recover the loaned 
money.  
 
In addition to the red flags associated with appraisal fraud noted above, the following 
triggers may indicate the existence of seller assistance scams:  
• The seller is desperate to sell the property. 
• The contract appears to be for substantially more than it is worth. 
• The buyer has already selected the appraiser. 
• The buyer insists on using a specific appraiser. 
• The sale price reflects property appreciation in an area where property values are 
declining. 
 
Deceptive Short Sales 
Short sales —which are a viable means to avoid forecl osure—occur when the lender agrees to 
accept a lesser amount than the balance on the loan. Most lenders will entertain the idea of a 
short sale because, for the lender, the foreclosure process is time-consuming and expensive. 
They would rather avoid the costs associated with a foreclosure so that the bank does not 
have to take the property in as a non-performing asset and try to sell it. Borrowers are 
receptive to short sales because they keep foreclosures off their credit reports. However, 
because short sales usually involve properties that that are sold for extremely low prices, they 
also provide fraudsters with opportunities to obtain cheap property to use in the 
advancement of other schemes.  
 
With the recent rise in foreclosures, the inventory for potential short sales will increase, as 
will the opportunities for scammers to obtain cheap property to use in the advancement of 
other schemes. The short sale scenario used by fraudsters allows them to obtain these 
properties inexpensively under false pretense. This is generally accomplished by acquiring an 
under-valued appraisal. 
 
The following are red flags suggesting the existence of a short-sale scheme: 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.928                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The fraud occurs well after the loan origination, in the lender’s workout/servicing 
department. 
• The property is facing foreclosure. 
• The house is staged to obtain an undervalued appraisal. 
• The seller will only sign the sales contract at the day of closing.  
• No official letter or document exists to provide proof that the short sale has  
been approved.  
• There are multiple sales contracts. 
• The property is immediately or concurrently resold at a price that is higher than the 
discounted value. 
• Multiple HUD settlement statements exist that do not mirror the economic basis of  
the transaction. 
• Payments made to the sellers are not disclosed on the HUD settlement statement.  
• After the property is in default or foreclosure, there are changes in ownership, but there 
is neither a new mortgage nor the dismissal of the foreclosure suit. 
• Communications with the short-sale lender are restricted. 
 
Chunking and Shot Gunning 
CHUNKING 
Chunking schemes typically involve an unsophisticated borrower who is recruited to purchase 
a property and who deals exclusively with a recruiter. The recruiter colludes with a mortgage 
broker who gathers the completed loan applications and submits them to multiple lenders 
for approval. The borrower may not even be aware that the recruiter and loan officer have 
submitted the application to multiple lenders. Multiple approvals are provided, all for the 
same property and all without knowing that other loans are being closed and funded 
simultaneously on the same property. 
 
The assistance of an appraiser and a title agent are usually required for a chunking scheme to 
be successful. The recruiter often acts as the borrower’s power of attorney (POA) in 
attending the multiple closings, and often is the one who pockets the loan proceeds over and 
above what is due to the legitimate property seller. The borrower is left with numerous loans 
from various lenders. Further, the lenders are not sufficiently collateralized, as there are 
multiple claims as first lien holder creditors. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.929 
SHOT GUNNING 
Shot-gunning  is a fraud scheme in which a mortgage broker sends multiple home equity line of 
credit (HELOC) loans on the same property to different lenders at the same time. The 
borrower’s good credit, the use of stated in come products offered on many HELOCs, and 
the lender’s determination of the property’s value based on the equity in the home rather 
than on an appraisal all facilitate a fast closing process to ensure that all applications will be 
processed during the same timeframe. Due to the delay between the dates the loans are 
closed and the dates the liens are filed in the courthouse, lenders are not aware of the other 
liens when making their underwriting decisions. Each lender believes it is first in line with  
its lien. 
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF SHOT-GUNNING OR CHUNKING 
• They may involve one title company that willingly closes each loan.  
• The mortgage broker may have power of attorney for the borrower. 
• They may involve forgery of the borrower’s signature on multiple closing packages, 
unbeknownst to the borrower. 
• There may be multiple lender inquiries on a credit report in a short period of time. 
 
Foreclosure Rescue Scams 
Unfortunately, as more homeowners struggle with potential foreclosure, more will fall prey 
to foreclosure rescue scams. There are some legitimate foreclosure assistance programs in 
which the homeowner is offered short-term financing that pays off the delinquent debt. This 
allows homeowners to stay in their homes as tenants until they can repair their credit and 
obtain long-term financing. However, there are also many fraudulent programs. 
 
Foreclosure rescue scams come in two primary variations: phantom-help scams and bailout, 
or rescue, scams. 
 
PHANTOM-HELP SCAMS 
In a phantom-help scam, the scammer promises to save the homeowner’s credit or get him low 
monthly payments. Instead, the homeowner pays thousands of dollars in fees, and the 
scammer either does nothing or files bankruptcy on behalf of the borrower and absconds 
with the fees. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.930                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
BAILOUT OR RESCUE SCAMS 
In a bailout scam  (also called a rescue scam), the homeowner is tricked into conveying the deed 
to his house to the fraudster and ultimately loses both the house and any equity. A bailout 
scam unfolds when a homeowner is solicited with an offer of private, non-qualifying, short-
 term financing that will pay off a delinquent debt and allow the homeowner to stay in his 
home while his credit is repaired. As part of the agreement, which is usually verbal, the 
homeowner is convinced by the “investor” that, to qualify for the short-term financing, the 
homeowner will need to convey title to the property as collateral. Once the fraudster obtains 
the title, he sells the property at fair market value, pays off the debt, and skims the equity 
that was owed to the homeowner.  
 
Some other characteristics of bailout scams include the following: 
• The rescuer relies on a lender’s funds to accomplish the scam.  
• The rescuer recruits other borrowers to purchase the “rescued” properties once he has 
obtained their titles. The borrower may think that he is buying a legitimate investment 
property, or the borrower could be a straw who is paid to purchase turnkey investment 
properties. 
• The borrower is steered to a mortgage broker (or perhaps the rescuer himself is a 
mortgage broker) and qualifies for a mortgage to purchase the property at the fair market 
value (not the amount that is due on the outstanding loan). Unbeknownst to him, the 
borrower is qualified based on misrepresentation. In other cases, the straw is 
compensated for his participation in the scheme. 
• Collusion with a title company is critical. The homeowner is instructed by the rescuer to 
go to a particular title company, or the rescuer convinces the homeowner to execute a 
power of attorney (POA) giving the rescuer authorization to close the transaction, or 
papers are closed at the homeowner’s house  in a kitchen closing. Either way, the 
homeowner is in essence deeding his property to the rescuer’s borrower. Generally, in 
these cases the homeowner does not understand what is being signed, the proceeds pay 
off the defaulted loan, and the equity goes to the rescuer.  
• The straw walks away from the transaction, while the legitimate new owner (borrower) 
discovers that the tenant can’t keep up with  the rent payments and has depleted his cash 
reserves to keep the loan current. The title company fails to pay off the old debt and the 
original lender starts foreclosure procedures immediately. 
 
Many states are aggressively passing legislation to protect homeowners in foreclosure from 
these scams.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.931 
Homeowners fall for foreclosure rescue schemes because: 
• The market is saturated with rescue services that are fraught with lies, deception, 
exaggeration, and pressure. 
• The homeowner is often trusting and doesn’t believe that someone would lie to him. 
• The homeowner is kept in the dark about the foreclosure process, perhaps because he is 
told to cease all contact with the lender’s foreclosure department. 
• The homeowner may be desperate to save his home and believes there is little time to 
act. 
• The homeowner may lack financial sophistication. 
 
FORECLOSURE RESCUE SCAM RED FLAGS 
Red flags associated with foreclosure rescue scams include:  
• These scams often prey on elderly or long-time residents with large amounts of equity. 
• The borrower (either a straw or legitimate borrower) receives a remodeling allowance 
from a recruiter outside of closing. 
• The underwriter has noted on the closing instructions that a copy of the purchase 
contract must be provided at closing, so, unbeknownst to him, the seller signs a purchase 
contract at closing or the seller’s name is forged in order to meet that condition. 
• The seller on the transaction is delinquent or in foreclosure. 
• The HUD-1 settlement statement indicates that most of the seller’s equity outside of the 
mortgage payoff is going to a third-party. 
 
 
New Account Fraud Schemes 
Fraud is much more likely to occur in new accounts than in established accounts. Special 
efforts must be taken to properly identify the potential new customer. Screening criteria 
should be established and enforced by everyone handling new accounts. Prompt, decisive 
action is necessary to manage and/or close apparent problem accounts. 
 
False Identification 
New account criminals are actors. They use false identification to open new accounts and 
steal money before funds are collected by the bank. False identification is easily purchased. 
 
Business Accounts Using Stolen Checks 
Some bank customers defraud business institutions by opening a new business account using 
checks stolen from another business. The fraudsters then withdraw the funds and close the 
account. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.932                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Personal Accounts Using Fraudulent Checks 
A similar scheme is to open a new personal account with two checks drawn by other people. 
The checks are either forged or stolen. The fraudster then deposits one, and takes cash for 
the other. Shortly thereafter, the fraudster writes checks to overdraw the deposited amount. 
 
Prevention 
A relationship with a financial institution should never be established until the identity of a 
potential customer is satisfactorily established. If the identity cannot be established, the 
relationship should not be established.   
 
Personal Accounts 
No account should be opened without satisfactory identification, such as: 
• A locally issued driver’s license with a photograph  
• A passport or alien registration card, together with: 
? A college photo identification card 
? A major credit card (verify the current status) 
? An employer identification card 
? An out-of-area driver’s license 
? A current utility bill from the customer’s place of residence (e.g., gas, electricity, 
telephone) 
 
Consider the customer’s residence or place of busi ness. If it is not in the area served by the 
bank or branch, ask why the customer is opening an account at that location. 
 
Follow up with calls to the customer’s residence or place of employment, thanking the 
customer for opening the account. Disconnected phone service or no record of employment 
warrant further investigation.  
 
Consider the source of funds used to open the account. Large cash deposits should  
be questioned. 
 
For large accounts, ask the customer for a prior bank reference and write a letter to the bank 
asking about the customer. 
 
Check with service bureaus for indications that the customer has been involved in 
questionable activities such as kiting incidents and NSF situations. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.933 
The identity of a customer can be established through an existing relationship with the 
institution, such as some type of loan or other account relationship. 
  
Business Accounts 
Business principals should provide evidence of legal status (e.g., sole proprietorship, 
partnership, or incorporation or association) when opening a business account. 
 
Check the name of a commercial enterprise with a reporting agency and check prior bank 
references. 
 
Follow up with calls to the customer’s business thanking the customer for opening the 
account. Disconnected phone service warrants further investigation. 
 
When circumstances allow, perform a visual check of the business to verify the actual 
existence of the business and that the business has the capability of providing the services 
described. 
 
Consider the source of funds used to open the account. Large cash deposits should be 
questioned. 
 
Since tellers are oftentimes the front-line defense in preventing check fraud, it is important 
that they receive training that will allow them to identify fraudulent checks.  
 
Tellers should: 
• Be aware of magnetic routing numbers. 
• Look for checks with numbers lower than 200. 
• Be aware of the date that the account was opened. 
• Have easy access to the signature card. 
• Look for perforated edges on the checks. 
• Be aware of what is acceptable identification. 
• Recognize forged/altered identification. 
• Recognize forged negotiable instruments. 
• Be familiar with patterns of behavior related to potential culprits:  
? Overly polite 
? Nervous 
? Aggressive and hurried 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.934                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Detection 
Some of the more common red flags of potential new account schemes are: 
• Customer residence outside the bank’s trade area. 
• Dress and/or actions inconsistent or inappropriate for the customer’s stated age, 
occupation, or income level. 
• New account requesting immediate cash withdrawal upon deposit. 
• Request for large quantity of temporary checks. 
• No order for printed checks. 
 
 
Money Transfer (Wire) Fraud Schemes 1  
Wire transfers of funds are nothing new—they began in the 1940s. However, with today’s 
growing emphasis on a cashless society, the number of wire transfers increases each year. 
 
Typically, fraudsters who commit this type of crime are knowledgeable about wire transfer 
activity, have at least one contact within the target company, and are aggressive in carrying 
out the theft. 
 
Instantaneous Transfer 
Wire transfer services electronically move funds worldwide from a financial institution to a 
beneficiary account at any banking point according to a customer’s instructions. (A banking 
point is any institution or business capable of receiving electronic transactions such as banks, 
savings and loans, credit unions, brokerage firms, and insurance companies.) On any day, $2 
trillion to $3 trillion moves among financial institutions. The transactions are primarily for 
completing interbank purchases and sales of federal funds; purchasing, selling, and financing 
securities transactions; disbursing loan proceeds or repaying loans; and conducting real estate 
business.  
 
Although these technologies enhance operations and increase the efficiency of the financial 
institutions, they also provide a tremendous opportunity for criminals who learn to 
manipulate the electronic environment for their personal gain. Wire transfer fraud is a 
particularly dangerous risk to a business’s solvency—one major wire fraud can destroy any 
                                                          
1 The editors wish to thank James Incaprera, CFSSP, CP P, and Joyce C. Lambert, Ph.D., CIA, CPA, for their 
assistance in preparing this section. Mr. Incaprera is the Louisiana investigations manager for Bank One in New 
Orleans, LA, and Dr. Lambert is a professor of accounting at the University of New Orleans. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.935 
firm. According to the Multi-State Sharing and Analysis Center, single losses average 
$100,000 to $200,000.  
 
Common Schemes 
Dishonest Bank Employees 
People who have access to correct account identification information can transfer money 
improperly—insiders wire funds to themselves and/or related parties. 
 
Misrepresentation of Identity 
People pose as customers, having used pretext calls to obtain correct account information 
from the bank. People posing as wire room employees in another bank or a branch office 
order transfers to dummy accounts in another bank. 
 
System Password Security Compromised 
People having legitimate access to sensitive account and daily code information for a limited 
time (for example, computer consultants) effect improper transfers through unauthorized 
access. 
 
Forged Authorizations 
Bank officers’ and customers’ authorization, oral or written, is improperly obtained or 
forged. People forge orders to transfer money to their own accounts when the recipient 
account is actually in the name of someone else. 
 
Unauthorized Entry and Interception 
Unauthorized personnel gain access to the wire room and its equipment, or the actual 
transmission is intercepted and altered. 
 
Preventing and Detecting Wire Transfer Fraud 
Fraud examiners and auditors need to advise management on ways to prevent and detect 
wire transfer fraud. 
  
Business Audits and Other Controls 
Every firm, of course, must have written policies and procedures for wire transactions. In 
addition, fraud examiners or auditors should conduct unannounced audits of those 
transactions. Following are other examples of wire transfer controls. 
• Make sure the person authorizing the wire transfer isn’t the individual who orders it. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.936                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Require those ordering transfers to have secure passwords. 
• Maintain and keep a current list of those ordering wire transfers, and a log of  
all transfers. 
• Require vacations of persons who handle wire transfers. 
• Require that reconciliations of accounts affected by wire transfers be performed by 
persons not involved with the wire transfer process. 
• Keep all confidential information about firms’ accounts and wire transfers in safe rooms 
secured with locks. Give computer key cards to these rooms to authorized personnel 
only. Shred trash. 
 
Businesses frequently perform vendor audits, but often neglect to audit their bank’s wire 
transfer controls. A fraud examiner should evaluate these areas. 
• Pick a sample of transactions and review the log of the calls made back to the banking 
points to verify their authenticity (You may listen to the tape recording of the actual 
authorization to ensure compliance with call-back rules.) 
• Review documentation of past wire transfer activity from bank statements or bank 
online transaction history for a daily debit and credit match of each transaction. 
• Obtain written confirmations of transactions  from the wire transfer provider to 
determine the timeliness of their receipt by your firm. 
• Promptly reconcile problems caused by the usual custom of ending all wire transfers for 
a day in the mid-afternoon. (Some customers believe they should receive credit and 
interest on funds received at the end of a day. However, wire transfers made after the 
afternoon closing time aren’t credi ted until the next business day.) 
 
Bank Audits 
Financial institutions should ensure the following safeguards when transferring funds: 
• Provide customers with unique codes that are required to authorize or order wire 
transfers. 
• Maintain and update lists of employees authorized to perform wire transfer transactions. 
• Compile audit trails of incoming and outgoing wire transactions, as well as the employee 
responsible for each portion of the transaction. 
• Review all wire transfer transactions at the end of each day to ensure that the original 
transfer instructions were executed correctly. 
• Make sure the businesses to which the funds are transferred are contacted to ensure 
authenticity of fund transfer requests. If the businesses are contacted by phone, the 
phone numbers used should be the original numbers given by the customers when the 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.937 
accounts were opened and not the phone numbers provided by the callers who 
requested the transfers.  
• Don’t execute wire transfers solely from faxed instructions. Again, verify authenticity by 
phoning the original numbers given by the customers when the accounts were opened 
and not the numbers provided by the callers who requested the transfers.  
• Require that all accounts affected by wire transfers be reconciled by bank employees not 
involved with the wire process. 
• Ensure the in-house wire operations manual is available only to authorized personnel 
and secured when not in use — especially after hours. Cleaning crew employees could 
help themselves to client pass codes and other confidential information. 
• Record all incoming and outgoing calls for wire transfer instructions.  
• Carefully screen wire transfer personnel applicants. 
• Reassign to other departments wire transfer employees who have given notice that they 
are resigning but still have some time left with the company.  
• Require all employees involved in the transfer of funds to take at least five consecutive 
days of vacation each year; assign their duti es only to other transfer department staff 
members during their absence. 
• Make sure bank employees never disclose sensitive information over the telephone  
until the caller’s identity and authorizati on have been verified to the customer 
information file.  
• Separate duties among wire employees who transmit or receive requests for funds. These 
employees shouldn’t also verify the accuracy of the transactions. 
• Train employees on proper internal controls, fraud awareness, and the importance  
of protecting information. Share alerts issued by government agencies and  
professional groups.  
 
 
Automated Teller Machine (ATM) Fraud 
An ATM is a dispensing facility from which the holder of a debit card can draw cash. The 
facility can also perform other services such as depositing funds and checking account 
balances, but the most popular use has been to dispense funds. Fraud schemes have been 
perpetrated involving the unauthorized use of ATM facilities. Schemes include: 
• Theft of card and/or unauthorized access to PIN numbers and account codes for ATM 
transactions by unauthorized persons 
• Employee manipulation 
• Counterfeit ATM cards 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.938                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Counterfeit ATM machines 
 
EXAMPLE 
A former Citibank employee was sentenced to 41 months in  prison for masterminding a 
scheme to steal $200,000 in cash from several of the bank’s ATMs. The computer expert 
was the No. 2 official in Citibank’s ATM security department, and programmed the 
bank’s money machines to issue money and not leave any record of the transactions. This 
was done by remotely accessing  the company’s mainframe comput er and instructing it to put 
particular machines in “test mode.”  
 
Detection 
When investigating ATM schemes, look for a lack of segregation of duties between the card 
issuing function and the personal identification (PIN) issuance. 
 
 
Advanced Fee Fraud  
Banks find deals that seem “too good to be true” to gain access to large amounts of money 
(deposits) at below-market interest rates. The catch is that the bank must pay an up-front 
finder’s fee to a person claiming to have access to the money. In some cases, desperate 
institutions are offered access to illegal money, and they typically do not report the loss of 
the advance fee when the deal falls through. More information on advance fee swindles can 
be found in the “Consumer Fraud” chapter. 
 
EXAMPLE 
The bank is contacted by an agent (such as a broker, advisor, consultant, promoter, lawyer, 
or bank customer) offering to provide money at a below-market interest rate for a long 
period of time (e.g., 10–20 years). The agent asks for a large fee to close the deal. The 
agent takes the fee and disappears. The deposits might or might not exist; and if they do, 
they seldom equate to the agent’s representations. 
 
Red Flags 
• Agent requests documents on bank stationery or signatures of officers. 
• Bank is asked to give nondisclosure agreements to protect agents or other parties. 
• There are several complex layers of agents, brokers, and other middlemen. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.939 
Brokered Loans 
A variation of the advanced fee scheme is the brokered loan. Loan brokering applies to either 
packages of individual residential (consumer) loans or single commercial loans. A variation 
of a brokered loan is the loan participation, where the purchaser participates in the loan but 
does not purchase the entire loan. The fraud schemes associated with brokered or 
participated loans generally involve selling phony loans (packages) or selling participations in 
loans that have not been properly underwritten. Generally, a large fee is charged for these 
brokered loans. 
 
With residential loan packages, the broker sells the package, takes the money and disappears. 
Brokered loans are generally not sold with any recourse to the broker. Therefore, the 
purchaser must look to the borrower and the underlying collateral for debt satisfaction. With 
loan participations, the lead bank generally performs the underwriting. However, this does 
not relieve the participating bank from its obligation to perform its own due diligence. If the 
participating bank does not independently examine the documentation and perform its own 
due diligence, then fraud schemes on the part of the selling institution are possible. 
 
 
Letter-of-Credit Fraud 
Most letter-of-credit fraud arises from foreig n trade and contracting. Letter-of-credit fraud 
can be perpetrated by beneficiaries using forged or fraudulent documents presented to the 
issuing bank with a demand for payment. The documents, however, must conform to the 
terms of the letter-of-credit agreement. 
 
EXAMPLE 
An American exporter might offer to sell goods to an overseas importer. When terms are 
arranged, a letter of credit is obtained in the exporter’s favor, confirmed by a bank near the 
exporter’s location. (The actual export never occurs, and the request for payment is bogus.) 
 
 
Inside/Outside Frauds 
Outside/inside frauds is an area where fraud is increasing, in which the employee (insider) 
might be co-opted through a bribe or a threat of violence against the insider or a family 
member. Sometimes the insider is a bank teller who agrees to cash certain items as long as 
the items look reasonable and are below a cashing limit. Other times the insider is a proof 
operator or sorter operator who inserts documents directly into the computer system to 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.940                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
affect fraudulent deposits. Or, the insider is selling copies of documents to individuals who 
use computer techniques to make fraudulent items. 
 
Account Information Frauds 
Information is sold to organized rings or insiders who use the information themselves. As 
financial institutions make more services available to customers and strive to make them 
more usable, information about customer account relationships reside in many forms, such 
as 24-hour customer operators, online systems, printed documents that are innocently put in 
the trash only to be retrieved, or credit card information on high line cards. 
 
Trading Activities 
Trading activities can be compromised to defraud banks. Usually perpetrated with the 
assistance of an internal employee or by an employee acting alone, trading can include 
foreign exchange, securities trading, loan sales, and securitization. Often when this type of 
problem is suspected, the investigator must turn to traders themselves as the only source to 
gather information. 
 
Prevention 
Financial institutions, like other organizations, should have standard internal control 
measures to assist in the detection and deterrence of fraud. In addition to normal 
procedures, such as segregation of duties and budget and actual comparisons, listed below 
are some specific control measures that might enhance the detection and deterrence  
of fraud. 
 
Loan Origination, Underwriting, Closing, Disbursement, and Servicing Segregation 
By separating all of the functions relating to loans, a lending institution reduces the 
opportunity for an individual (insider) to perpetrate loan fraud. Additionally, the segregation 
provides for at least one, if not several, levels of independent review to reduce its external 
loan fraud exposure. 
 
Committee Approval of All Large or Unusual Transactions 
If a loan committee or a board-of-directors committee is responsible for approving loans 
and other large or unusual transactions, then insiders will have a more difficult time 
perpetrating large fraud and the transactions submitted by external fraudsters will be subject 
to another layer of independent review. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.941 
Transfer Journal Entries and Orders Review 
Regularly review all transfer journal entries and orders. As with an expense review, if a 
routine but unscheduled review occurs from time to time, then the fraudster loses the 
vehicle for concealment. 
 
Independent Review of Loans 
An independent review of loans provides a nonpartisan approach to all loan transactions. 
Either the internal or external auditors (or other consultants) can perform this independent 
review that allows for a “second opinion” on loan transactions. The reviews should be 
consistent and performed on a regular basis to help establish loan loss reserves. Typically, 
this loan review is established for loans for more than a certain dollar amount, such as 
$25,000 or $100,000. 
 
Management Review of Write-Offs 
Excessive write-offs are a form of concealment for phantom loans, conflicts of interest, and 
embezzlement. Therefore, if all write-offs are subject to management review before they are 
written off, then management reduces the potential environment for fraud.  
 
Routine Examination of Officers’ Accounts 
Routine examination of officers’ accounts might prevent fraud schemes such as wire transfer 
fraud, embezzlement, withdrawals from dormant accounts, conflicts of interest, and so on. 
This review can be performed when the officer is on mandatory vacation.  
 
Proper Lending Policies 
Employees should be trained in the proper (and regulated) lending policies of the institution. 
Any deviations from the policies will be red flags and will help to prevent loan fraud from 
both internal and external perpetrators. 
 
Document Requirements for Standard Transactions 
Deviations from normal or proscribed documentation should be an automatic red flag. Who 
better to recognize a potential fraud than the employees routinely handling the 
documentation? Therefore, employees should be well-educated in proper documentation for 
the transactions they are handling. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.942                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Information Verification (For Example, Loan Applications) 
Fraud potential could be eliminated or at the very least detected before companies suffer 
damages if the employee knows how to verify information. For example, if the loan officer 
advises a potential borrower that the information submitted on financial statements will be 
verified, the borrower will be less likely to submit false or fraudulent financial statements. 
Additionally, if a teller advises a depositor that the deposit will be verified before cash is paid 
out, then the incidence of split deposits can be reduced.  
 
Employee Training 
Fellow employees are generally the first people to recognize unusual transactions or behavior 
changes of other employees. These might be early indicators that a fraud has or will soon 
begin. Employees and managers should be properly trained to recognize these symptoms. 
For example, bank tellers should be adequately schooled in split deposit schemes; new 
account officers in new account schemes and so on. 
 
Standardized Procedures 
An institution can provide a low fraud environment by standardizing procedures in sensitive 
areas, as detailed below: 
• Loan application processing 
• Information required for loan approval 
• Credit report requests 
• Appraisals accepted from pre-approved list of vendors 
• Inspection reports on construction draw loans 
• Conflict of interest disclosure statements 
• Routine confirmation calls for 
? Wire transfers 
? Construction vendors 
• Confirmation of registered securities with registrar or transfer agent 
• Periodic physical inventory of securities 
 
 
Suspicious Activity Reports 
Effective April 1, 1996, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) requires 
national banks to submit a Suspicious Activity Report (SAR) under certain circumstances (12 
C.F.R. § 21.11, as amended). SARs are required in each of the following instances: 
• There is a known or suspected criminal violation involving the bank and the bank has a 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.943 
substantial basis for identifying responsible bank personnel. 
• There is a known or suspected criminal violation involving the bank, the amount 
involved is $5,000 or more, and the bank has a substantial basis for identifying a possible 
suspect. 
• There is a known or suspected criminal violation involving the bank and the amount 
involved is $25,000 or more (if the amount in volved is $25,000 or more, even if the bank 
does not have a substantial basis for identifying a suspect). 
• Any transaction aggregating $5,000 or more that was conducted or attempted to be 
conducted through the bank when the bank has reason to suspect that the funds involve 
potential money laundering, are designed to evade any regulations under the Bank 
Secrecy Act, or involve computer intrusions.  
• Any transaction aggregating $5,000 or more that was conducted or attempted to be 
conducted through the bank when the bank knows that the customer is operating as an 
unlicensed money services business. 
 
In most cases, the SAR must be filed within 30 days of the date of detection. Other financial 
institutions have similar reporting requirements, including: 
• Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) - 12 C.F.R. § 353 
• Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) - 12 C.F.R. § 563.180 
• National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) - 12 C.F.R. § 748  
• Federal Reserve Board (FRB) - Form 2230 
 
More information about the Bank Secrecy Act and other reporting requirements can be 
found in the “Money Laundering” section. 
 
 
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act 
In the summer of 2010, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act 
became law, adding new regulations for companies that extend credit to consumers, 
exempting small public companies from Sarbanes-Oxley section 404(b), making auditors of 
broker-dealers subject to PCAOB regulation, and changing registration requirements for 
investment bankers.   
 
New regulations for companies that extend credit to consumers include: 
• Mortgage lenders must make a reasonable effort to ensure the ability to repay before 
issuing a loan to consumers. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.944                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Non-bank entities will be regulated by the Federal Reserve if they believe that the 
entities would have a negative effect on the financial system if the company failed or 
its activities would pose a risk to the financial stability of the US  
• Prohibits the financial incentives for subprime loans that encourage lenders to steer 
borrowers into more costly loans, including the bonuses known as "yield spread 
premiums" that lenders pay to brokers to inflate the cost of loans. Prohibits pre-
 payment penalties that trapped so many borrowers into unaffordable loans.  
• Allows consumers free access to their credit score if their score negatively affects 
them in a financial transaction or a hiring decision. Gives consumers access to credit 
score disclosures as part of an adverse action and risk-based pricing notice.  
 
Additionally, the Act, created the Financial Stability Oversight Council to regulate risk in the 
financial institution industry. It is chaired by the Treasury secretary and includes the Federal 
Reserve chairman, FDIC, and SEC as members of the Council. The Council will have 
authority to break up large firms or veto rules created by another new regulator called the 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The Bureau consolidates most federal regulation of 
financial services offered to consumers and sits on the FDIC board. 
 
 
Applicable Federal Statutes 
There are many federal statutes related to fraud and false statements involving financial 
institutions. The following are some common federal statutes employed in the prosecution 
of bank fraud.  
 
Bank Fraud, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 1344 
Section 1344 is the broadest of all bank fraud statutes. It punishes those obtaining assets 
owned or controlled by a bank by false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises. 
It covers both insiders and all other persons, even if not affiliated with the bank 
It also applies to check kiting and to off-shore frauds (extraterritorial reach). Bank fraud is a 
predicate offense under RICO (Racketeer Influenced Corrupt Organization Statute). 
Penalties for bank fraud include a fine up to $1 million and/or imprisonment of up to 30 
years. 
 
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act (FIRREA), Title 12, 
U.S. Code, § 1811, et seq. 
This legislation greatly strengthens the prosecutorial arm against insiders and outsiders. The 
law’s provisions are applicable to any institution-affiliated party, which includes (but is not 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.945 
limited to) directors, officers, employees, and controlling shareholders. Institution-affiliated 
parties can include attorneys, accountants, and appraisers. 
 
FIRREA provides for enhanced civil and criminal penalties for convictions of several bank-related 
statutes. The civil penalties can be $1  million per day, or a total of $5 million for 
continuing violations, or the amount of wrongful gain or loss. The maximum criminal 
penalty is either a fine of $1 million or 30 years imprisonment, or both. 
 
Crime Control Act of 1990, Title 12, U.S. Code, § 1821(d)(17)-(19) 
This Act defines a host of crimes and increases the maximum penalties on other offenses. 
For example, the maximum prison term for financial crimes was increased from 5 years to 
20 years. These penalties, however, do not become effective for offenses committed prior to 
the effective date of this law. Thus far, no court decisions have been made regarding these 
increased penalties. This statute amended the Racketeer Influenced Corrupt Organization 
law (RICO), making bank fraud a predicate offense under RICO. 
 
Financial Institution Anti-Fraud Enforcement Act of 1990, Title 12, U.S. Code, § 4 201, et seq. 
This statute sets out procedures for rewarding private parties for reporting violations and 
providing information concerning the recovery of assets. The statute also allows for the 
hiring of private counsel to investigate and prosecute civil claims. 
 
Continuing Financial Crime Enterprise Statute, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 225 
Also known as the “S&L Kingpin” sta tute, the law provides for fines of up to $20 million 
for organizational defendants and fines of up to $10 million and up to life imprisonment for 
individual defendants receiving $5 million or more during a 24-month period from a criminal 
enterprise. A criminal enterprise  is defined as a series of enumerated crimes related to  
financial institutions. 
 
Embezzlement, Misapplication, and False Entries 
Title 18, U.S. Code, §§ 656 and 657 
These Sections cover theft, embezzlement, or misapplication by a bank officer or employee. 
Violations are punishable by up to 30 years in prison and/or fined up to $1 million. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.946                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Title 18, U.S. Code, §§ 1001, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1008, 1014 
These statutes include all provisions that punish false or fraudulent statements orally or in 
writing to various federal agencies and federally insured financial institutions. Usually these 
result from efforts to conceal embezzlements and misapplications. 
 
Title 18, U.S. Code, § 1032, Concealment of Assets 
This statute prohibits any person from corruptly attempting to conceal assets or impede 
their recovery. Violations are punishable by  up to five years in prison plus fines. 
 
Participation in the Affairs of a Financial Institution by a Convicted Felon, Title 12, 
U.S. Code, § 1829 
This statute bars people with banking crime convictions from participating in the conduct of 
the affairs of a financial institution, with certain exceptions. A knowing violation might result 
in fines of up to $1 million per day and imprisonment of up to five years. 
 
Offer of Loan or Gratuity to a Bank Examiner, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 212 
Bank officers, directors, and employees are prohibited from giving a loan or gratuity to a 
bank examiner or assistant. Section 213 forbids an examiner or assistant from accepting a 
loan or gratuity. Both offenses are punishable by a fine of up to $5,000 or the amount loaned 
or given and up to a year’s imprisonment. 
 
Receipt of Commissions or Gifts for Procuring Loans, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 215  
The corrupt giving or receiving of anything of value to influence an officer, director, 
employee, agent, or attorney of a financial institution is punishable by fines of the greater of 
three times the value of the thing given or no more than $1 million and/or up to 30  
years imprisonment. 
 
Other Federal Statutes 
The following statutes can also be used in connection with the prosecution of fraud 
involving financial institutions. Each of these statutes is covered in more detail in the Law 
section. 
• Bribery of Public Officials and Witn esses, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 201 
• Disqualification of Former Officers and Employees, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 207 
• Fraudulent Use of Credit Cards, Title 15, U.S. Code, § 1644 
• Fraud and Related Activity in Connection with Access Devices, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 
1029 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.947 
• Computer Fraud, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 1030 
• Mail Fraud, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 1341 
• Wire Fraud, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 1343 
• Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO), Title 18, U.S. Code, § 1961, et 
seq. 
• The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA), Title 15, U.S. Code, §§ 78m, 78a(b), 78dd-1, 
78ff 
• Tax Evasion, Title 26, U.S. Code, § 7201  
• Filing False Tax Return, Title 26, U.S. Code, § 7206(1) 
• False Claims Act, Title 31, U.S. Code, § 3729 et seq.  
• Anti-Kickback Act of 1986, Title 41, U.S. Code, §§ 51-58 
 
Red Flag Rules 
In 2007, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) issued final rules and guidelines (Red Flag 
Rules) implementing sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act 
(FACTA). The Red Flag Rules require financial institutions and certain creditors to develop 
and implement a formal written program to identify, detect, and respond to red flags of 
possible identity theft. 
 
Although the Red Flag Rules apply primarily to financial institutions, they also apply to any 
creditor with covered accounts. The definition of creditor  includes any entity that “regularly 
extends, renews, or continues credit” or that “regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, 
or continuation of credit,” including banking in stitutions, mortgage lenders, retailers, utility 
companies, car dealers, and debt collectors. A covered account  is an account primarily used for 
personal, family, or household purposes and that involves multiple payments or transactions, 
including credit card accounts, mortgage loans, car loans, cell phone accounts, utility 
accounts, and savings accounts. Therefore, even if a business is not a financial services 
entity, management should determine whether the entity is a creditor under the Red Flag 
Rules.  
 
To comply with the Red Flag Rules, financial institutions and creditors with covered 
accounts must implement written identity theft prevention programs that are tailored to each 
entity’s size, complexity, and nature. These organizations must also adopt “reasonable 
policies and procedures” that:  
• Identify relevant red flags for covered accounts and incorporate them into the 
prevention program. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.948                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the prevention program. 
• Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity 
theft. 
• Ensure the prevention program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to 
customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from 
identity theft. 
 
The Red Flag Rules also provides 26 examples of possible red flags that financial institutions 
and creditors should consider when implementing their programs. The examples are listed 
below:   
1. A fraud alert  
2. Notice of a credit freeze  
3. Notice of an address discrepancy. 
4. Unusual credit activity 
5. Identification documents appear altered or forged. 
6. ID photograph and customer appearance appear inconsistent 
7. Information presented by customer and information on ID are inconsistent 
8. Information on ID is inconsistent with information on file 
9. Application appears forged or altered 
10. Personal information on ID is inconsistent with external information sources  
11. Lack of correlation between Social Security number range and date of birth. 
12. Personal identifying information is associated with known fraud activity. 
13. Suspicious addresses supplied 
14. Provided Social Security number matches number submitted by another person  
15. Address or phone number matches that supplied by other customers 
16. In response to notice that application is incomplete, customer is unable to supply 
identifying information  
17. Personal information inconsistent with information already on file  
18. Customer unable to answer challenge questions 
19. Shortly after change of address, creditor receives request for the addition of authorized 
account users 
20. Most of available credit used for cash advances, jewelry, or electronics, or customer fails 
to make first payment 
21. Inconsistent activity patterns 
22. Previously inactive accounts suddenly becoming active 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.949 
23. Mail sent to customer repeatedly returned as undeliverable even though transactions 
continue on active account 
24. Notice that customer is not receiving paper account statements 
25. Notice of unauthorized charges or transactions on customer's account 
26. Notice of opening a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft 
  
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1001 
CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD 
 
Check Fraud 
Check fraud is one of the fastest-growing problems affecting the nation’s financial system,  
producing estimated yearly losses of up to $20 billion. Not only is the dollar amount 
involved in check fraud increasing yearly, the complexity of fraud tools is growing as well. 
With increased sophistication in laser printers, more accurate color copiers and desktop 
publishing capabilities, duplicating and forging checks has become more accurate and thus 
more difficult to detect.  
 
Due to demands of law enforcement, prosecutors fail to pursue 75 percent of bank check 
fraud cases. According to the U.S. Government Accountability Office, in large cities where a 
majority of resources are used to prosecute violent crime the percentage rises to 90 percent. 
Law enforcement officials may neglect reports of check fraud, feeling that businesses ought 
to be more vigilant in detecting bad checks. Many merchants have tried to use the police and 
prosecutors as check collection agencies; therefore, law enforcement and prosecutors are 
often not eager to pursue these cases. Many bad-check-passers are constantly on the move, 
as well, making prosecution even more difficult. 
 
The best solution for financial institutions and merchants, then, is to educate employees to 
recognize forged and fraudulent checks and the schemes behind them. Merchants and 
financial institutions should have a strict check acceptance policy with which all employees 
are familiar. When accepting checks, employees should always ask for identification and 
make sure it is valid. Many check passers mollify store personnel by showing them a small 
laminated rectangular document with a picture. After looking at several hundred of these, 
most employees tend not to scrutinize them. Check passers count on this. It is important for 
employees to examine each piece of identification closely every time they are presented 
 with one. 
 
Employers must also watch for behavior among employees that could be red flags of inside 
check fraud. Dissatisfaction with job, pay rate, or home life; a lack of recognition or lavish 
lifestyle; or a problem with gambling, alcohol, or drugs are indications that an employee may 
be committing internal fraud. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1002                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Counterfeiting Checks 
An effective check counterfeiting operation can turn a simple $5,000 investment into a 
$1,000,000 windfall within a 30-day timeframe. This can be done without high levels of 
computer expertise or programming. Simple check printing software can be purchased in 
almost any office supply store along with blank paper stock and magnetic ink cartridges. The 
overall initial investment consists of a quality computer, color inkjet printer, check format 
and MICR font software, magnetic ink cartridges, and paper stock. After making the initial 
investment, the printers only have to concern themselves with purchasing additional ink  
and paper. 
 
Signs of Counterfeit and Forged Checks 
A counterfeiter will go to great lengths to make his check appear to be the genuine article. 
However, there are a few giveaways that a check is counterfeit. If the printing on the check 
does not seem uniform in texture and color, or slants up or down, the check is not good. 
Also, the transit number in the top right corner must match the electronically encoded 
number at the bottom of the check. These numbers normally do not coincide on altered 
checks. The first three of the electronically encoded numbers indicate the state and district 
office of the issuer. Again, on forged checks, these numbers do not always match properly. 
The check number itself should be found in the encoded serial number at the bottom.  
 
Knowing that many merchants regard checks with low check numbers as suspect, forgers 
often attempt to add a digit. Here again, they may have difficulty matching the ink used to 
produce the check. A simple and effective method of detecting bad checks is to fan a group 
of checks. Counterfeit checks will sometimes stand out as a slightly different color. 
 
Check Fraud Vulnerabilities 
A particular institution may be targeted for check frauds because of its location, inadequate 
internal controls, or marketing strategies that present opportunities to savvy check fraud 
artists. Some mutual funds companies, for example, regularly allow customers to open 
accounts by mail, a form of communication with many security vulnerabilities. A significant 
number of check fraud complaints from a particular geographic area may indicate the 
presence of an active, organized group, which warrants law enforcement attention. 
 
Investigators assigned to a region or institution should keep regular contact with businesses 
and regulators. Specific inquiries aim to identify weaknesses, develop controls, and prevent 
future losses. Analyzing the complaints filed by other victims of check fraud — including 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1003 
retail operations, check cashing establishments and food stores—may reveal common 
elements of schemes that might not otherwise seem related. 
 
Check Theft 
Three types of check theft are:  using stolen canceled checks to obtain new checks, check 
washing, and stealing blank check stock. 
• Stolen canceled checks and statements — Although a stolen canceled check can’t be negotiated, 
it does have fraud implications. Using a stolen canceled check, a check thief can order 
checks from a mail-order check printer and have them sent to a mail drop address. 
Checks can then be written on the new stock and cashed once false identifications are 
acquired. 
• Check washing — Check washing takes place to the tu ne of $815 million every year in the 
U.S., and it is increasing at an alarming rate. Checks are stolen from mailrooms and 
mailboxes, and then the check is inserted into a solution of chemicals that can be 
purchased at a hardware store. Once the check is dried, the fraudster can write in any 
amount and the checks are usually cashed without question. Most check washers alter 
checks for relatively small amounts. 
• Stolen check stock — Professional thieves using sophisticated methods steal blank check 
stock already encoded with customer account information, which makes passing the 
check even easier. Corporate checks are the most likely target since they are easily cashed 
and deposited. 
 
Check Fraud Schemes 
Paperhangers 
Paperhangers are the experts of phony check passing. They frequently pick a particular 
establishment or store and observe its security methods. Any store that scrutinizes check 
writers’ identification is not a good target for a paperhanger. However, they will observe and 
select the least experienced or most lackadaisical of store employees to whom to pass the 
check. The paperhanger will then ask the clerk for cash back from the transaction and make 
the check out for an amount greater than the price of the purchase. In some cases, the 
checks being written are counterfeit; however, in other cases the checks are purposefully 
being written on a closed account. A variation of this scam is making a fraudulent deposit at 
a bank and asking for cash back.  
 
These experts will go to great lengths to blend in with the clientele. Standing out in a crowd 
is not to their advantage. Women are often quite good as paperhangers. A mother with 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1004                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
crying children paying with a check is usually not the profile one expects for a bad- 
check-passer.  
 
Stop Payment Orders 
This scheme is quite simple. A “customer” purc hases an expensive item with a check, and 
then notifies his bank to stop payment. Savvy check passers may even contact the merchant, 
saying the item was defective, and that they should expect to hear from the customer’s 
attorney. Meanwhile, the check passer sells the item for a tidy profit.  
 
Another scenario is that, after purchasing the item and notifying the bank to stop payment, 
the fraudster goes back to the store, wishing to return the item and receive a full refund. The 
merchant refunds the amount in cash and the scheme is successful. 
 
Check Kiting 
Check kiting is one of the original white-collar crimes. It continues to survive even with a 
financial institution’s ability to detect kiting. In a kiting scheme, multiple bank accounts are 
opened and money is “deposited” from acco unt to account, although the money  
never exists.  
 
Floating makes check kiting possible. Floating is the additional value of funds generated in 
the process of collection and arises because the current holder of funds has been given credit 
for the funds before it clears the financial institution upon which it is drawn. Businesses are 
most susceptible to check kiting, if they have employees who are authorized to write checks 
or make deposits in more than one bank account. Today, check kiting is more difficult 
because electronic technologies are making the float smaller all the time. In many cases, 
electronic debiting to an account occurs simultaneously with the transaction. Unless 
detected, this process can continue indefinitely, covering one check written against 
insufficient funds with another check. 
 
Demand Drafts 
Demand drafts can also be used to commit check fraud. This practice involves the misuse of 
account information to obtain funds from a person’s bank account without that person’s 
signature on a negotiable instrument. Other terms for demand drafts are “preauthorized 
drafts” and “telephone drafts.” While there are many legitimate business uses for demand 
drafts, such as quick-turnaround telephone transactions initiated by airlines and car rental 
companies, demand drafts have been used by deceptive telemarketers who obtain bank 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1005 
account information and withdraw unauthorized funds from consumers’ bank accounts, 
without their realizing that such withdrawals are occurring. 
 
Third-Party Bill Paying Services 
The checks produced by these third-party bill paying service providers do not include the 
payor signature. Instead, the signature line reflects something such as “signature on file.” 
Unauthorized checks produced by third-party payment services are not usually detected until 
the customer reviews the monthly bank statement. By the time the customer identifies the 
unauthorized check, it is often too late to recover the funds, since the “24-hour window” 
(actually until midnight of the next banking day) for the timely return of checks has long 
since passed. These checks usually sail right through the check sorting operation, since they 
include good account information and sometimes even include good serial numbers. Too 
often, both business and individual account holders seem unaware of how their account 
information, given too freely to a requesting party, can be used for fraudulent purposes. 
 
Traveler’s Checks 
The use of traveler’s checks is declining signif icantly and will likely eventually be replaced by 
electronic options. In fact, an increasing number of vendors in locations throughout 
Europe—and in other parts of the world—no long er accept traveler’s checks as a valid form 
of payment. However, for many travelers, traveler’s checks continue to provide a convenient 
payment method while abroad. 
 
Anyone familiar with traveler’s checks knows that $100 checks are quite common. Some 
check rings specialize in the production and distribution of this type of check. Commonly, 
check passers of this type make small purchases using a fake $100 traveler’s check, and 
receive the bulk of the amount back in cash. Naturally, this scheme works well in areas that 
have a lot of tourist business. Rings often pull this scam several times in one area in rapid 
succession.  
 
Traveler’s checks have several distinguishing features. Watermarks and holograms are 
common, as well as microprinting and ultraviolet ink. There are basically two methods of 
counterfeiting traveler’s checks: color copyin g and offset lithography/printing. Color copied 
checks lack the raised ink texture that the intaglio printing press gives most traveler’s checks. 
Instead of a textured feel, a phony check will appear slick and flat. Offset lithographic 
reproductions of actual checks are of higher quality than color-copied checks. However, 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1006                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
neither will have the texture, watermarks, microprinting, or holograms that the genuine 
articles have.  
 
Payroll Check Fraud 
Check procurers employed by payroll check processing companies print duplicate payroll 
checks that are sold to third parties or are cashed by members of the procurer’s organization. 
To avoid the security employed by financial institutions, the checks are cashed at grocery 
stores and check-cashing operations with loose controls. The checks are usually written for 
amounts of $300 or less to avoid suspicion. Of course, check procurers have access to 
personal information on the legitimate recipients of the payroll checks and make use of it in 
the future. 
 
Dumpster Diving 
Often, check fraud can be as simple as retrieving bank materials from a trash receptacle. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Thirty people were charged in a $10 millio n fraud scheme that involved counterfeiting 
checks, bank statements, and credit card receipts pulled out of the trash. The defendants, 
who defrauded people in 17 states, used checks, bank statements, credit card receipts, and 
other documents from garbage bins to create counterfeit checks, false driver’s licenses, and 
false credit reports, officials said. Counterfeit  blank checks, printed on high-quality color 
printers, allegedly were used to  defraud banks of $2 million. 
 
Obviously, this type of fraud is easily preventable through proper disposal by banks, 
merchants, and individuals of sensitive and confidential materials.  
 
Scanning 
Scanning requires a scanner and a legitimate check. Scanners can be purchased for less than 
$200 and checks are readily available without having to actually steal the check. Checks can 
then be manufactured by scanning a corporate logo from a business card onto a simple 
business-sized check. 
 
System Password Security Compromised 
People having legitimate access to sensitive account and daily code information for a limited 
time (for example, computer consultants) effect improper transfers through unauthorized 
access. 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1007 
Check Fraud Rings 
Since the late 1980s, foreign crime rings have been the cause of the majority of check fraud 
in the U.S. Most major financial institutions attribute more than 50 percent of all check fraud 
to organized crime rings. In 2007, an international task force monitored the mail in Africa, 
Europe, and North America and intercepted billions of dollars worth (face-value) of 
counterfeit checks.  
 
The perpetrators of organized check fraud activity are often based in Nigeria, Russia, 
Vietnam, and Mexico. Most of the Vietnamese and Mexican rings operate in California, 
notably San Francisco, Orange County, and Sa cramento. The Russian and Nigerian rings, 
centered in the Northeast, spread their criminal activities over a wide area and can be found 
passing through any part of the U.S. at any time. While most of these gangs are involved in 
drug trafficking and violent crimes, check and credit card fraud are considered “safe” crimes. 
The chances of being arrested and prosecuted are relatively low and the penalties are not 
very harsh. 
 
The equipment essential to a check fraud ring are a laser scanner, laser printer and a personal 
computer, easily obtainable items, the total cost of which is about $1,500. These rings use 
digital scanners and offset printing to counterfeit checks. The checks are cashed by members 
of the ring or sold to third parties. 
 
Most rings specialize in payroll or other institutional checks, written for amounts less than 
$300. But some groups infiltrate financial institutions, collecting corporate payroll checks, 
money orders, and master original bank checks, cashing the duplicates for between $2,000 
and $5,000. 
 
In recent years, members of Nigerian and Vi etnamese rings have infiltrated or obtained 
accomplices in financial institutions. There they gather personal information on customers, 
passing the information to counterfeiters who produce falsified identification (driver’s 
licenses, credit cards, etc.), which is used to open accounts, establish lines of credit, and 
secure loans. An organized group may include a counterfeiter or printer, a distributor, one or 
more providers of false identification, and several “smurfs,” who open false bank accounts 
or visit check-cashing establishments to negotiate fraudulent checks.  
 
Foreign crime rings that practice check fraud are ethnically homogenous and usually not 
rigidly structured. It is common for only the leaders of these rings to know the extent of the 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1008                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
participation of their subordinates. The leaders of such groups are usually quite intelligent 
and educated. Often, they have an extensive criminal or business background and direct the 
group’s activities. Gangs have been known to share members and cooperate with one 
another in the past. 
 
Check Fraud Detection 
FBI Profile of Check Fraud Activity 
According to an analysis by FBI investigators in the New York City area, fraudulent check 
passers use the following common techniques: 
• Customer attempts to open an account with a corporate check or other third- 
party check. 
• Customer tries to flatter, hurry, or confuse the teller to draw attention away from  
the transaction. 
• Customer delays endorsing a check or producing identification during peak hours to 
frustrate the teller and hurry the transaction. 
• Customer presents for cash a low-numbered check drawn on a new account. 
• Customer offers foreign documentation (birth certificate, passport, visa) or non-photo 
identification (Social Security card, credit card) in lieu of photo identification to open an 
account or cash a check. 
• Customer offers altered or damaged identification to open an account or cash a check. 
• Customer attempts to cash or convert several small checks into wire transfer, gold, or 
other tender. 
• Customer requests an exception to established rules to force the transaction. 
 
Detection Techniques 
The cashier or teller is the front-line defense in preventing check fraud. It is important that 
they receive the training necessary to identify fraudulent checks. They should: 
• Be aware of magnetic routing numbers. 
• Use extra care in examining a check drawn from a non-local bank and require  
positive identification. 
• Examine the date on the check for accuracy of day, month, and year. Do not accept the 
check if it is not dated, if it is postdated, or if it is more than 30 days old. 
• Look for checks with a check number less than 400 on personal checks or below 1,500 
on business checks (90 percent of bad checks are written on accounts less than one 
year old). 
• Be aware of fonts used to print the customer’s  name that are visibly different from the 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1009 
font used to print the address. 
• Be aware that the magnetic ink (MICR) used for routing codes should appear non-
 reflective and dull. 
• Look for MICR coding that does not match the bank district and the routing symbol in 
the upper right-hand corner of the check. 
• Be aware of the date that the account was opened. 
• Be aware of stains or discolorations on the check possibly caused by erasures or 
alterations. 
• Have easy access to the signature card. 
• Look for perforated edges of the checks. 
• Be aware that a color copy might reflect odd colors at times due to a failure of the toner 
to mix satisfactorily. 
• Notice absence of any design in the background of the check paper. 
• Notice absence of bank logo and the printing of the bank name in the regular lettering. 
• Notice absence of the address of the bank on the check. 
• Be cautious of information that is typed or stamped. 
• Do not accept a check that is not legibly written. It should be written and signed in ink 
and must not have any erasures or written-over amounts.  
• Be aware of what is acceptable identification. 
• Recognize forged/altered information. 
• Recognize forged negotiable instruments. 
• Tellers should telephone the business or account officer for approval on suspicious 
requests. 
• Be familiar with patterns of behavior related to potential culprits: 
? Overly polite 
? Nervous 
? Aggressive and hurried 
 
Check Fraud Prevention and Investigation 
Since the Federal Reserve’s Regulation CC was implemented, mandating accelerated 
availability of customers’ funds, check fraud at banks has increased. Most bank customers’ 
funds are available for withdrawal a day after deposit, leaving the bank little time to verify 
the validity of the transaction. Regulation CC, however, allows banks two days to make 
funds available. Most banks provide next-day withdrawal in order to stay competitive. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1010                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Additionally, special security printing techniques have been developed to make 
counterfeiting blank checks more difficult. One of the features is the use of a pattern of 
colors that is difficult to separate even with special cameras, filters, and film. Another 
technique used is scrambled indicia printing, which is a seemingly random pattern of tiny 
colored dots printed on the paper. Using a colored filter to view the check will make a word 
or pattern develop.  
 
Still another technique, which is also used by credit card issuers, is to print a “micro-line” on 
the check, which appears as a solid line when viewed normally. But using a magnifying glass 
will show that the line is actually very small words or letters, which are very difficult to 
recreate with the normal printing process. Other security measures include using a three 
dimensional hologram, which is easily identifiable by the human eye, but is impossible to 
reproduce via ordinary copying or printing. Some checks have a security seal on the back of 
the check that is visible when held up to a light. Reproductions, even good ones, will not 
have a seal.  
 
Check Fraud Investigations 
During a check fraud investigation, look for the following: 
• Frequent deposits and checks: 
? In the same amounts. 
? In round numbers. 
? With checks written on the same (other) bank. 
• Frequent ATM account balance inquiries. 
• Many large deposits made on Thursday or Friday to take advantage of the weekend. 
• Large periodic balances in individual  accounts with no apparent business. 
• Low average balance compared to high level of deposits. 
• Many checks made payable to other banks. 
• Bank willingness to pay against uncollected funds. 
• Deposits not made daily or intact. 
• Entity uses receipts that do not indicate mode of payment. 
• One or more personal checks in the cash drawer by the fund custodian. 
• Deposit timing lags. 
• Irregular check endorsements. 
• Amount of deposit does not agree with daily activity report. 
• Inappropriate access to signature plate. 
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1011 
• Check numbers, payee name, date, and amount don’t agree with entries in the  
check register. 
• Voided checks are not retained. 
• Checks are issued to individuals for large, even dollar amounts. 
• Supporting documentation for checks is not available or has been prematurely destroyed. 
• Cash withdrawal with deposit checks drawn on another bank. 
 
There are several tips for businesses to use when cashing business and payroll checks: 
• Examine all checks. Insist that the check be signed in front of the clerk. Compare the 
signature written on the check with the signature on the driver’s license or state 
identification. 
• Be particularly careful with large-dollar checks presented by noncustomers.  
• Examine all checks for signs of counterfeiting, such as a glossy, “crayonish” appearance 
and any lack of detail and sharpness. 
• Look for signs of alterations or erasures, es pecially in the signature or numerical and 
written amounts.  
• Compare the bank identification and routing numbers for a match. 
• The texture of the check should appear smooth; a rough document might signal 
erasures. 
• Be cautious of information that is typed or stamped. 
• All checks, except government issue, should have at least one perforated edge. 
• The magnetic ink used for routing codes should appear nonreflective and dull. 
• Look for faded colored paper, which can indicate that the check has been chemically 
bleached. 
• A color copy might reflect odd colors at times due to a failure of the toner to mix 
satisfactorily. 
• Black lettering might have a slightly greenish cast when examined under a magnifying 
glass. 
• A light colored or delicate background might fade out when copied. 
• Absence of any design in background of check paper. 
• Absence of bank logo and the printing of the bank name in regular lettering. 
• Absence of the address of the bank on the check. 
• Overall appearance of poor quality of printing and paper. 
• A payroll check will usually be for an odd amount and will appear neat, clean, and  
usually unfolded. 
  
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1012                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Tellers should telephone the business or account officer for approval on suspicious 
requests. 
 
Check Fraud Prevention Tools 
CHECK WRITING PENS 
When a check is written, a special pen designed to prevent check washing should be used. 
These pens are called “check writing” pens and can be found at just about any office supply 
store. These pens have special ink that will prevent criminals from using solvents to remove 
ink from the check. When someone tries to wash a check written from these pens, it will 
either not work, thereby leaving the check intact, or smear the ink and make it apparent that 
a check has been washed. 
 
Individuals with business accounts are a much greater risk when it comes to check washing. 
Businesses have much stricter requirements in terms of what the company must do to 
protect their checks. If the business doesn’t follow a strict plan to protect their checks, it’s 
likely that if any money is stolen from their accounts, the bank will not return their money. If 
an individual has a business account, they should make sure that the checks are locked 
securely when not in use. Make sure not to leave blank computer-printed checks in the 
printer or the business will be equally liable for the money that could potentially be stolen.  
 
FINGERPRINT IDENTIFIERS 
A biometric fingerprint identifier  requires the check writer to match fingerprints with the account 
holder’s, which are on file. Banks reported reductions in check fraud of 40 percent after the 
machine was introduced in the mid-1990s. 
 
Non-account holders who want checks cashed at banks that have implemented this system 
are required to put an inkless fingerprint on their check. If the check does prove false, law 
enforcement will already have evidence regarding the fraudster’s identity. The cost to a bank 
of implementing the inkless fingerprint system could be redeemed by preventing a single 
instance of check fraud. Banks throughout the nation now use this technique to cut  
fraud losses. 
 
FORENSIC DOCUMENT EXAMINATION 
Through handwriting, an individual can be positively identified, as is the case with DNA or 
fingerprinting. When investigating check fraud, a forensic document examiner focuses on 
the signature and the handwriting itself.  
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1013 
SIGNATURE 
If the examiner were investigating a forged signature, he would compare the suspicious 
signature to a sample of the actual one, noting discrepancies between the two. While one’s 
signature may change over time, it would be close to impossible for a forger to duplicate a 
signature with one hundred percent accuracy;  minute identifying characteristics mark 
people’s writing and are not reproducible. 
 
The eBank ™ Discovery System, developed by ASV Technologies, employs signature 
verification software. Using “multiple feat ure set extraction” technology drawn from 
forensic science, the state and quality of a signature’s two-dimensional characteristics are 
analyzed and verified against samples. The program identifies flourishes, arcs, distances 
between letters, and up to 100 other features. Rejected signatures, along with the reason for 
rejection and signature samples, are forwarded to a human for visual verification. ASV 
Technologies claim its results match those of the most highly trained and accurate signature 
verifier. 
 
HANDWRITING 
Like fingerprints, handwriting is unique to an individual. Consequently, if the narrative 
portion of the check is handwritten, it offers a document examiner a greater opportunity to 
identify a forgery. 
 
VIDEO SPECTRAL COMPARATOR 
Forensic examiners use this tool to test questionable documents. The document is examined 
for photocopying and liquid paper under a controlled light source. Lettering added to a 
document can be detected with this device. 
 
ELECTROSTATIC DETECTION APPARATUS 
This tool allows examiners to detect indented writing from the top page of a pad of paper up 
to five pages below the original. The Electrostatic Detection Apparatus uses photocopier 
toner to develop the areas of indentation after a document has been covered with an 
electrically charged plastic film. In the best of cases, when the document is processed with 
the electrostatic device and the toner image is developed, the writing impressions are clearly 
defined and highly contrasted. If the developed writing is to be used in an investigation or to 
demonstrate results for the courts, the examiner must turn to electronic image processing 
technology for further enhancement. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1014                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Credit Card Fraud 
Credit card fraud is the misuse of a credit card to make purchases without authorization, or 
counterfeiting a credit card. The use of credit cards as a form of payment has grown 
dramatically over the past decades, with more than 80 percent of U.S. households having at 
least one credit card. As the industry continues to expand and offer credit to more and more 
consumers, fraud will also grow. 
 
Credit card fraud is successful because the chances of being caught are small and 
prosecution is not assured. Retail stores have identified credit card thieves and contacted law 
enforcement only to be turned down for action. 
 
Credit Card Schemes 
There are many different types of credit card schemes including selling the cards to thieves, 
family members using the credit cards without authorization, and fraudulently obtaining a 
card. Statutes relating to the misuse of credit cards generally prohibit the obtaining of 
property or services through the use of a credit card if the use of the card is for any reason 
unauthorized. The federal statute prohibiting the use of fraudulent credit cards is found at 15 
U.S.C. § 1664. This statute prohibits using a fraudulently obtained credit card to obtain 
anything of value aggregating $1,000 or more, and it prohibits receiving anything of value 
purchased with an illegal credit card. A violator may be fined up to $10,000 and/or 
imprisoned for up to 10 years.  
  
Unauthorized Use of a Lost or Stolen Card 
Fraudulent activity normally occurs within hours of the loss or theft, before most victims 
have called to report the loss. Increasingly, victims aren’t even aware that their credit cards 
are being fraudulently used until they receive their monthly statement. It is extremely 
important that victims report the loss or theft of their card within 60 days of receiving the 
statement with the fraudulent charges, as they will not be held responsible for any charges 
(beyond $50) that occur during that time frame.  If the credit card company is not notified of 
the theft and the card is used, the customer will be liable. 
 
Organized Crime Rings 
Nigerian rings are especially notorious for stealing credit card and bank information from 
the mail. These articles are used to generate false identification documents, such as driver’s 
licenses and Social Security cards. The credit cards themselves are duplicated and distributed 
to members of the rings. The false IDs are then displayed during purchases made with the 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1015 
stolen cards. Members of the ring go on spending sprees, ending only when the credit has 
dried up or the legitimate owner reports their card as stolen. Often, counterfeit and stolen 
cards are express-mailed to members of the ring in other parts of the country. 
 
Advance Payments
Consumer regulations require credit card issuers to credit customers’ accounts immediately 
upon receipt of payment. This means deducting from the balance of the account before the 
check or other payment instrument has actually cleared the bank. A loophole such as this is 
easily exploited by experienced fraud rings. 
 
Using a forged or counterfeit check, an advance or overpayment is made on a stolen credit 
card. Since the issuer must credit the payment at the time it is made, there is no time to 
verify the authenticity of the check. Consequently, cash advances and purchases can be made 
immediately. This scheme can be extremely lucrative to the perpetrators.  
 
Stolen Card Numbers 
The Internet has become a breeding ground for individuals to obtain stolen credit card 
information. The thieves who steal this information find credit cards or lists of credit card 
holders and the corresponding numbers to their accounts. They then make the numbers 
available to a larger group, which uses the information to obtain goods and services in the 
name of the cardholder. Wrongfully obtained information may be posted on websites that 
originate in foreign countries. The international nature of the fraud makes it arduous to deter 
or punish. One report involved a Romanian website that displayed stolen credit card 
numbers of more than 450 individuals, most from the United States. The list contained 
identifying information of cardholders and was available for several weeks before being shut 
down.  
 
Shave and Paste 
Any number of alphanumeric characters is sliced from the card surface and other characters 
are attached, utilizing fast drying epoxy-type glues. This might be done to put an entirely 
different but valid account number on the card or to change the name.  
 
De-Emboss/Re-Emboss 
In this scheme, the credit card is exposed to heat, usually from a household iron, a candle, or 
hot water in the microwave. Plastic cards, primarily composed of polyvinylchloride, become 
more elastic when heated, and the embossed alphanumeric characters are removed. An 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1016                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
embosser puts new numbers and names on the cards. This process will generally create a 
“ghost image.” 
 
Counterfeit Cards 
Another type of bankcard fraud involves the illegal counterfeiting of credit cards. Known as 
“white plastic” cards, this scheme utilizes credit-card-sized plastic with embossed account 
numbers and names. This scheme works in conjunction with a corrupt and collusive 
merchant or a merchant’s employee. Other counterfeit cards are manufactured from scratch 
using high speed printing facilities and used in association with organized crime groups. 
Manufacturing facilities have been traced to the Far East. 
 
Counterfeiting operations are centered in Taiwan, China, and Hong Kong, where the 
specialty is producing the holograms and magnetic strips that appear on many cards. Forged 
holograms are smuggled into the U.S. and Canada by ring members from Asia and 
distributed throughout both countries. A substantial amount of them end up in California, 
where most of the Asian counterfeiting operations in the U.S. are located. Not surprisingly, 
California, notably Orange County, experiences more credit card fraud than any area in  
the country.  
 
The actual counterfeiting process has been immeasurably eased by technology that allows for 
more accurate duplication. Duplicating legitimate cards is still an intricate operation, 
however. Magnetic strips, numbers, holograms, and logos must all appear authentic. 
Desktop computers, embossers, tipping foil, and laminators are common tools in the 
reproduction process. Perhaps most difficult of all to accurately reproduce, however, is the 
hologram. Most phony holograms can be sold for between $5 and $15. True holograms use 
a “lenticular refraction” process; counterfeits are generally only reflected materials, usually a 
foil with an image stamped on it. These decals are attached to the surface of the card, rather 
than fixed into the plastic, as is the case with legitimate cards. Some holograms do not 
change colors, as legitimate ones do, when viewed from various angles. Counterfeit credit 
cards are the most damaging scheme of those mentioned here. However, with the increasing 
use of chips inside the cards and the addition of a PIN (Personal Identification Number), 
counterfeiting cards has decreased significantly as a method of bank card fraud in the U.S., 
U.K., and other countries implementing this technology. 
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1017 
Telephone/Mail Order Fraud 
The fraudster might offer a free trip or other nice prize, with the only catch being that the 
winner must have a credit card. Once the thief has the number, he can order merchandise or 
have money wired to himself. 
 
A great deal of credit card fraud is childishly simple to complete. Many crooks have great 
success by simply selecting a name from the phone book, calling, and pretending to be a 
Visa/MasterCard representative. The victim is told that his card number may have been 
obtained and used illegally by criminals. Or, a representative of a travel agency may call, 
claiming the victim has won a discount travel package. In any case, the victim is asked to 
read the card number off for verification or inclusion in the discount deal. A surprisingly 
large amount of people fall for this scheme and give out their credit card information. 
Purchases through catalogues and mail order are then made using the victim’s card number. 
They may select an unoccupied address to which their merchandise can be delivered, 
perhaps leaving a note asking the delivery service to simply put the package by the  
back door. 
 
Mail Theft  
A thief may steal credit cards already applied for by a bank’s customer and issued by the 
bank. The thief will then attempt to use the card by posing as the intended recipient. 
 
False Applications 
Perpetrators might apply for a new card using information stolen from a wallet, purse, or the 
trash, or by stealing a pre-approved credit card application out of the mail or trash. Also 
“take-one” applications that are prominent in stores offering credit cards to the public are 
ripe for fraud. 
 
Credit “Doctors” 
Credit doctor is the term used for fraudsters who sell stolen credit card account numbers via 
newspaper ads to people unable to get credit cards. 
 
True Name Fraud 
New credit card accounts can be opened by individuals possessing a victim’s true name 
identification such as a driver’s license or Social Security number. The true identification was 
either obtained as a secondary objective in the commission of a more aggressive offense 
such as robbery or as the primary target of a lesser crime such as pick pocketing. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1018                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Non-Receipt Fraud 
A form of credit card fraud in which the perpetrator intercepts credit cards that are in transit 
between the credit issuer and the authorized account holder. Losses attributable to mail theft 
have declined significantly as a result of “c ard activation” programs, where the cardholder 
must call their financial institution and confirm their identity before the card is activated. 
 
Key-Enter Counterfeiting 
When banks began using the CVV (for Visa) and CVC (for MasterCard) security system, 
fraudsters came up with this clever ruse in response. The CVV system uses a three-digit 
number embedded in the magnetic strip of a credit card, identifying it as a legitimately issued 
credit instrument. Credit card counterfeiters figured out a way to beat the system, however. 
By leaving the magnetic strip uncoded or making it unreadable, fraudsters force merchants 
handling the transaction to enter the credit card number manually. This means the 
transaction never falls under the scope of the CVV system.  
 
Clever bank and credit card officials very quickly found a patch for this scheme though. The 
CVV2 and CVC2 systems use a three-digit security code that is printed on the backs of 
cards. It is designed to validate that a genuine card is being used during a transaction. When 
a point-of-sale (POS) terminal reads a card’s ma gnetic stripe, Visa’s card Verification Value 
(CVV) or MasterCard’s Card Validation Code (CVC) can be verified during the 
authorization. Merchants using CVV2/CVC2 can expect to reduce their chargebacks by as 
much as 26 percent. The number appears in reverse italic at the top of the signature panel at 
the end. The CVV2 and CVC2 programs can also be used to reduce fraud in card-not-
 present transactions.  
 
Creditmaster 
This software program, downloadable from the Internet, allows the user to produce valid 
credit card numbers. Counterfeiters can then put these numbers to use in phony cards.  
 
Probing
The fraudster sets up a computer program that lets him run stolen numbers through various 
financial institutions in the hopes that one of them will still honor the number. Numbers 
that clear are often sold en masse to counterfeiters.  
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1019 
Skimming 
This scheme requires a device known as a wedge, which stores up to 200 credit card 
numbers. Credit card skimming is more frequent in businesses where an employee must 
leave the customer’s presence in order to ru n the transaction. A restaurant patron, for 
example, hands his credit card to a waiter who swipes the card into a wedge while 
conducting the legitimate transaction. Once the waiter has collected enough numbers, he can 
either sell them to a counterfeiter or simply produce his own fake cards using the stolen 
information. It may be months before the customer notices phony transactions on his 
statement, making the point of loss very difficult to determine. It follows that the guilty 
waiter is, therefore, unlikely to get caught. Skimming can also occur by tapping into a line 
used to transport credit card data.  
 
Pretext Calling 
Some fraudulent actors will call unsuspecting customers and pose as bank or credit card 
agents. The actor will request account information or other identifying information from the 
victim and use the information to apply for additional credit cards or to use the credit cards 
to purchase goods or services. 
 
Account Takeover 
The fake actor may take over a victim’s acco unt by requesting a change of address on the 
account and then calling to report the card lost or stolen. The issuing bank will then send the 
replacement card to the new address. 
 
Institutional Identity Theft and “Spoof” Sites  
Fraudulent actors may create false Internet sites, pretending to sell goods to buyers who 
must enter their credit card information and other personal information in order to make 
purchases. The “seller” then uses the information to make fraudulent purchases in the name 
of the buyer. More recently, fraudulent actors have begun creating “affiliate” sites of actual 
sellers or other creditors, such as banks. The perpetrator of the fraud then sends e-mails to 
existing customers of the actual seller or creator. These e-mails inform the unsuspecting 
customer that there is a problem with his account and asks the customer to log on to the site 
of the company that the wrongdoer has copied and to re-enter their personal and credit card 
information. The fraudulent actor then uses the information to make purchases. 
 
Information on how to commit credit card fraud is readily available to anyone willing to 
make the effort to look. Postings on the Internet give step-by-step instructions on how to 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1020                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
obtain carbon paper receipts and call credit-reporting agencies using merchant numbers. The 
latter is done in order to verify that the card is valid and to obtain the amount of credit 
available. The fraudster usually watches a store employee dial the number of the agency, 
noting the numbers as they are dialed. They then listen to the employee give the merchant 
number. This number can often be found next to registers and can be copied down if in 
plain sight. The fraudster now has an excellent avenue to test stolen cards. 
 
The Law Concerning Credit Card Fraud 
Federal law deals with legal principles surrounding losses from the fraudulent use of credit 
cards. Unlike check fraud, which is primarily governed by state law, credit card fraud is 
governed by federal law. Even so, the federal laws and regulations governing credit cards, 
however, pertain only to the relationship between the card issuer and the cardholder. Thus, 
contract law and the contractual agreement between the merchant and the merchant’s bank, 
as well as the merchant’s bank and the issuing bank, are typically what regulates the outcome 
of fraudulent credit card usage.  
 
The most important legal principles concerning the allocation of losses between credit card 
issuers and credit card holders come from Regulation Z of the Federal Reserve System, 
which was promulgated pursuant to the federal Truth-In-Lending Act (TILA).  
 
Congress designed TILA to protect consumers; therefore, its provisions generally do not 
apply to creditors that extend credit primarily for business, agricultural, or commercial 
purposes. TILA, however, defers to any state la w that gives greater protection and benefit to 
consumers, so state law that provides consumer cardholders more rights than federal law will 
prevail where there is a conflict.  
 
The provisions of Regulation Z that are most re levant to credit card fraud place limitations 
on a cardholder’s liability for unauthorized use. Under TILA, the term “cardholder” includes 
any person or organization to which a card is issued for any purpose—including a business, 
agricultural, or commercial purpose. This constitutes an exception to the general rule that 
most TILA provisions do not apply to credit card transactions for business, agricultural, or 
commercial purposes. 
 
The basic liability rule provides that the cardholder is not liable for unauthorized use of the 
card. The card issuer can shift from unauthorized use back to the cardholder only if: 
• The card is an “accepted” credit card (i.e., one that the cardholder has requested and 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1021 
signed, used, or has authorized another person to use). 
• The cardholder’s liability is not more than $50. 
• The card issuer has given notice to the cardholder of the potential liability. 
• The card issuer has provided the cardholder with a description of the means by which 
the card issuer may be notified of loss or theft of the card, either on the periodic 
statement that the issuer sends to the consumer or on a separate notice that accompanies 
that statement. 
• The unauthorized use occurs before the card issuer has been notified that an 
unauthorized use of the credit card. 
• The card issuer has provided a method by which the user of the card can be identified as 
the person authorized to use it. 
 
The Federal Reserve Board staff has interpreted Regulation Z to impose the $50 limit to a 
“series of unauthorized uses.” Assume, for instance, that a thief steals a credit card and, 
within a relatively short period of time, uses the credit card to make separate $100 purchases 
at three different stores. The consumer may maintain that, under the Federal Reserve Board 
staff interpretation, the card issuer may only impose one $50 charge because the transactions 
were all part of the same series. 
 
Guidance for Cardholders  
It is in the interest of both the issuing bank and the cardholder to minimize credit card fraud. 
Although the cardholder’s monetary liability for unauthorized use of a credit card cannot 
exceed $50, and many issuing banks do not ev en impose that charge on their customers, 
cardholders may have to spend significant time and money, sometimes including legal 
expenses, to refute allegations that they opened credit card accounts, used cards in particular 
ways, or otherwise authorized transactions about which they have no knowledge and with 
which they have no connection. Although cardholders may be aware of the pervasiveness of 
identity of theft, they may be unaware of the consequences or of ways to prevent it or 
minimize its effects. Since issuing banks will not often bear the losses related to identity theft 
that involves credit cards, banks should inform cardholders of ways to protect both physical 
cards and the risk of identity theft. 
 
Banks should send cardholders occasional reminders of steps that can be taken to safeguard 
their credit card identities, including the following: 
• Always carry the least amount of credit cards with you as necessary. 
• Sign credit slips and new credit cards as soon as you receive them. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1022                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Do not supply credit card information to unauthorized people. 
• Do not leave credit card unattended with merchants. 
• Make it a habit to review credit card  statements and immediately report any 
unrecognizable charges. 
• Immediately report the loss or theft of any credit card to the card issuer. 
• Obtain credit reports annually in order to detect any suspicious activity in which credit 
cards or other extensions of credit have been granted or applied for without  
your consent. 
• Never reveal account numbers or other credit card account information to persons 
attempting to gain your information on the telephone after they represent themselves as 
agents of a bank. 
• If you are aware of suspicious activity, immediately inform the relevant credit reporting 
agencies and have a “Fraud Alert” placed  on your account. This will prevent any 
potential new creditor from granting new credit without first contacting you personally. 
The major credit reporting agencies and their telephone numbers are Experian (888-397-
 3742), Equifax (888-766-0008), and the TransUnion (800-860-7289). 
• Always keep credit card receipts in a safe place, and destroy them after you have received 
the billing statement that reflects the charges. 
• If you receive a credit card you didn’t apply for, call the issuer and determine why they 
sent the card. Someone may have applied in your name and missed the opportunity to 
steal the card from your mailbox when it arrived. 
• Void incorrect receipts and destroy carbons of credit card slips.  
• Keep a record of account numbers, expi ration dates and phone numbers and addresses 
of each card issuer so that you can contact them in the event of the loss or theft of your 
credit card. 
• Do not lend your card to another person. 
• Do not write your account number on a postcard or the outside of an envelope. 
 
Merchant Scams 
Collusion occurs between the sales people and the credit card fraudster to process valid 
credit card numbers on white plastic cards. They might also make several imprints on sales 
tickets and fill them in later on.  
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1023 
Magnetic Stripe Diagram  
 
 
As shown in the above Magnetic Stripe Diagram above, two tracks appear on the credit 
card’s magnetic stripe. Track two is the most widely read. It is 40 characters in length, is 
strictly numeric containing the account number, expiration date, a security code, and 
discretionary bank data. Track one is 79 characters in length, is alpha numeric, and contains 
the above information plus the cardholder’s name. 
 
Magnetic stripe compromise is a more sophisticated method of obtaining account 
information for fraudulent purposes. It requires the transfer, or encoding, of legitimate 
account information, along with a security code, from the legitimate magnetic stripe to a 
counterfeited card with a magnetic stripe. The full, unaltered, legitimate magnetic stripe must 
be obtained to accomplish fraud by this method.  
 
Skimmers are becoming prevalent in credit card and ATM/debit card frauds. A skimmer is a 
card-reading device similar to the swipe machine used by cashiers to validate credit cards. It 
can be purchased at electronic stores and used by credit card thieves to read data imprinted 
on information tracks within the magnetic strip located on the card. In addition, criminals 
are using the device to swipe credit information from one credit card and put it on another.  
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1024                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Nowadays, criminals have gotten even more sophisticated by placing pinhole cameras on the 
ATMs to capture the card number as well to watch as the victim enter his PIN into the 
keypad. 
 
Company Credit Cards 
Company credit cards are provided to employees for convenience in conduction of company 
business. No personal expenses may be charged on the company credit card except as 
specifically authorized by company procedures. The employee must pay any charged 
personal expenses promptly. Company credit cards should not be used to avoid preparing 
documentation for direct payment to vendors. Where allowed by local law, charges on 
company credit cards for which a properly approved expense report has not been received at 
the time of an employee’s termination of employment may be deducted from the employee’s 
last paycheck. The company will pursue repayment by the employee of any amounts it has to 
pay on the employee’s behalf. 
 
 
Prevention and Detection of Credit Card Fraud 
The essential part of any detection program is the education of the tellers and merchants 
who are responsible for handling the transactions. In a study by Money Magazine, it was 
found that 95 percent of store clerks and cashiers did not check credit card signatures.  
 
While any of the following can occur in a perfectly legitimate transaction, these 
characteristics are frequently present during fraudulent transactions. Tellers and merchants 
should be advised to be alert for the customer who: 
• Takes a card from a pocket instead of a wallet or purse.  
• Purchases an unusual number of expensive items. 
• Makes random purchases, selecting items with  little regard to size, quality, or value. 
• Makes several small purchases to stay under the floor limit, or asks what the floor  
limit is. 
• Does not ask questions on major purchases. 
• Signs the sales draft slowly or awkwardly. 
• Charges expensive items on a newly valid credit card. 
• Cannot provide photo identification when asked. 
• Rushes the merchant or teller. 
• Purchases a large item, such as a television console, and insists on taking it at the time, 
even when delivery is included in the price. 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1025 
• Makes purchases and leaves the store but then returns to make more purchases. 
• Becomes argumentative with the teller or merchant while waiting for the transaction to 
be completed. 
• Makes large purchases just after the store’s opening or as the store is closing. 
 
Merchants should also be aware of potential signs of fraud in card-not-present transactions: 
• Larger than normal orders. 
• Orders that include several of the same item. 
• Orders made up of big-ticket items. 
• Rush or overnight shipping. 
• Shipping to an international address. 
• Transactions with similar account numbers. 
• Shipping to a single address, but transactions placed on multiple cards. 
• Multiple transactions on one card over a very short period of time. 
• Multiple transactions on one card or a similar card with a single billing. 
• In online transactions, multiple cards used from a single IP (Internet protocol) address. 
• Orders from Internet addresses that make use of a free e-mail service. 
 
Tellers and merchants should be aware of the common signs of forged credit cards: 
• Holograms crudely stamped or badly faked with tiny bits of aluminum foil 
• Misspelled words on the card 
• Altered signature panel 
• Discolored 
• Glued 
• Painted 
• Covered with white tape 
• Cards that appear to have been flattened and restamped 
 
At the consumer level, the credit card user should remember the following: 
• Know where your card is at all times. 
• Never leave your card unattended at work—the re are more credit card thefts in the 
workplace than in any other single situation. 
• Don’t leave the store or ATM without all of the copies and carbons. 
• Don’t leave your card in plain sight where others can get the number. 
• Don’t leave receipts in a public trash can, hotel, or shopping bag. 
• Review monthly statements for accuracy and any items that you might not have charged. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1026                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Review your statements via electronic means rather than waiting for paper statements. If 
possible, cancel paper statements altogether since most fraudsters still practice 
“dumpster diving” and will riffle through your trash for old receipts and credit card 
statements. 
• Sign the back of a new card as soon as you get it and destroy old cards that are outdated 
or no longer used. 
• Make a list of all of your cards and their numbers. This key information is helpful when 
reporting lost or stolen cards. Store this list in a highly secured area. 
• Be wary of offers that come through the mail. 
• Never reveal your card number over the phone to anyone who has offered you a prize 
• Report missing cards immediately. 
• Don’t reveal personal information such as your address and telephone number. 
• Don’t allow a salesperson to record your credit card number on your check. 
• Keep your card out of the view of others in a store or at a public telephone so they 
cannot read the name and account number. 
• Use a tiered, see-through container in your wallet for credit cards, so it will be easier to 
notice missing cards. 
• Always check your card when returned to you after a purchase. Make sure it is your card. 
 
If you become suspicious of a telephone call offer or mail solicitations, report the activity 
using the National Consumers League’s Fraud Center Online Fraud Report Form at 
https://secure.nclforms.org/nficweb/nfic.htm.  
 
Prevention 
Prevention is the key to reducing credit card losses. Several programs can and are in place to 
reduce losses. Some of them are: 
 
Education Programs 
Tellers and merchants should be trained to be familiar with the security features of the credit 
card. Although the majority of counterfeit cards contain some of the security features, they 
are usually not complete and offer indicators that the card is not legitimate. Credit card 
issuers should take measures to inform their customers about credit card fraud, what the 
financial institution is doing about fraud, and how the consumer can help. 
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1027 
Liaison with Law Enforcement 
Companies should develop strong liaison with law enforcement. When a company receives 
intelligence of hot frauds, law enforcement should be notified immediately.  
 
Credit Card Company Security Initiatives 
Both Visa and MasterCard have initiated security measures to help combat online theft. The 
Verified by Visa program protects merchants from fraud-related chargebacks on all Visa 
personal debit and credit card transactions, even when processing transactions from non-
 participating issuers. Verified by Visa also protects consumers by requiring a password in the 
Verified by Visa window during purchases with participating online stores, helping ensure 
that no one else can use their Visa card onlin e. At online stores not yet participating in 
Verified by Visa, the Visa credit card will continue to work the same as usual. Additionally, 
Visa works alongside financial institutions and merchants to continually monitor consumer’s 
accounts to detect suspicious or unusual activity. By taking these steps, Visa is able to work 
proactively to reduce fraudulent transactions. 
 
Here are some of the red flags that may indicate fraudulent activity:  
• Shipping address is different from the billing address, or the shipping address has 
suddenly changed.  
• Unusually large purchase compared to normal purchase patterns for the account in 
question.  
• Change in name on the account.  
• Change in date of birth or Social Security number.  
 
MasterCard’s SecureCode allows credit card holders to register and set up their own private 
SecureCode number. Users of SecureCode will be automatically prompted by their financial 
institution at checkout to provide their SecureCode each time they make a purchase with a 
participating online merchant. The SecureCode is quickly confirmed by the financial 
institution and then the purchase is completed. The SecureCode will never be shared with 
the merchant. It’s just like entering a PIN at an ATM. MasterCard has also initiated the 
PayPass system in which cardholders can make purchases with a simple tap, rather than 
swiping or dipping their card. This adds a level of security since the card or PayPass device 
never leaves the cardholder’s hand. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1028                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Physical Security Features 
In response to the counterfeiting problems, credit card companies are mastering the 
possibilities of making credit card fraud more difficult. Some of their programs are  
discussed below. 
 
VISA CARD FEATURES 
• The Visa logo should have micro-printing around the border. The fine print is barely 
readable without magnification. 
• The flying dove hologram should appear to be three-dimensional and appear to move 
when the card is tilted back and forth. 
• Visa’s embossed account numbers begin with a 4 and contain 16 digits. All digits must 
be clean, even and the same size and shape. If a card has been re-embossed, the numbers 
may appear to be fuzzy. As a general rule of thumb always check the hologram. It is 
easier to spot a re-embossed number there. 
• A flying “V” is an embossed security character  beside the “Good Thru” date. If the “V” 
is not italicized or it is missing, the card is counterfeit. However, this is not a required 
security feature and may or may not be present on the card. 
• If there are “ghost images” of the numbers behind the embossing on either the front or 
back of the card, it has been re-embossed. If the card has been re-embossed the 
hologram might be damaged. 
• A four-digit number must be printed below the embossed account number. This four-
 digit number must match exactly with the first four digits of the account number. Both 
must begin with 4. 
• The Visa brand mark appears in blue and gold on a white background. It must appear in 
either the bottom right, top left, or top right corner. 
• An ultraviolet sensitive dove is visible on the face of the card when the card is placed 
under an ultraviolet light. 
• If someone has tried to erase the signature panel, the word “VOID” will be displayed. 
• Card Verification Value 2 (CVV2) is a three-digit code that appears on the back of the 
card in the signature panel. Typically the signature panel will have a series of numbers 
but only the last three digits make up the CVV2 code. CVV2 is used primarily in card-
 not-present transactions to verify that the customer is in possession of a valid Visa card 
at the time of the sale. Merchants will request the CVV2 from the cardholder at 
checkout, and the information is sent electronically to the card-issuing bank to verify its 
validity. Within seconds the CVV2 results are returned with authorization. If it’s returned 
as invalid, merchants have the right to stop the transaction. For added protection, 
merchants are prohibited from keeping or storing the CVV2 number after the 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1029 
transaction has been completed.  
• Check the valid dates for evidence of tampering. Do not accept an expired card. 
 
For more information about Visa’s security features, visit their website at: 
http://www.visa.ca/en/merchant/fraudprevention/cardfeatures.cfm.  
 
MASTERCARD CARD FEATURES 
• A large “MC” is visible under ultraviol et light for MasterCard. The “MC” security 
character is no longer permitted on newly issued cards (effective June 1, 2006), but may 
continue to appear on cards through June 2010. 
• All cards must include the full-color MasterCard Brand Mark. This mark may be below 
or above the Global Hologram. Merchants should be aware that the MasterCard card 
design and the MasterCard Brand Mark may be oriented vertically. 
• The hologram (whether on global or debit cards) can be located on the front or back of 
the card based on the design/type unless HoloMag tape is used. 
• MasterCard’s embossed account numbers begin with a 5 and contain 16 digits. The 
number must be clear and uniform in size and spacing and must appear on one line. 
• The first four numbers of the account number must be the same digits as those printed 
directly below (pre-printed BIN). 
• The front of the card must include a valid expiration date. 
• The signature panel located on the back of the card must include the word “MasterCard” 
printed in multicolors at a 45 degree angle. The last four digits of the account number 
must be printed in reverse italics in the upper right corner of the signature panel (this is 
required as of June 1, 2006, prior to this the reverse italics could be found at the upper 
center of the signature panel). 
• Magnetic tape must be present and appear smooth and straight with no signs of 
tampering. HoloMag tape may be used in place of the traditional magnetic tape. 
• The HoloMag tape or MasterCard hologram must  be included on the back of the card if 
it cannot be found on the front. 
• CVC2 number (three-digit validation number) must be printed in reverse italics to the 
right of the last four digits of the account number. As of June 1, 2006, the CVC2 
number was required to be printed in reverse italics in an adjacent white box to the right 
of the signature panel. 
 
For more information about MasterCard’s security features, visit their website at: 
http://www.mastercard.com/us/merchant/security/what_can_do/card_features.html.  
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1030                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
AMERICAN EXPRESS FEATURES 
• Ultraviolet inks are used such that when a genuine card is examined with a black light, 
the letters AMEX, as well as phosphorescence in the portrait of the Centurion are 
visible.  
• The portrait of the Centurion is printed with a high degree of clarity and detail such as 
the portraits on U.S. currency. 
• Erasure or tampering with the signature panel will cause the waved print background to 
appear white or smudged. 
• The card member account number is 15 digits beginning with 37. The embossing should 
be clear and uniform in size and spacing. 
• A duplicate account number is on the reverse of the card to ensure the card number 
appearing on the front of the card has not been altered. 
• The pre-printed (non-embossed) Card Identification Number (CID), which is a four-
 digit number printed on the front of the card that is used to ensure that the individual 
using the card is actually the owner of the card, should always appear above  the account 
number, on either the right or the left edge of the card. 
• The card number or cardmember name should be printed in the same typeface as the 
American Express typeface.  
• All American Express cards, including Network, Optima and Corporate, will bear the 
same security features outlined here. 
 
For more information on American Express’s security features, visit their website at: 
https://www209.americanexpress.com/merchant/singlevoice/USEng/FrontServlet?request
 _type=n avigate&page=cardSecurityFeatures.  
 
Technological Deterrents 
Banks can take advantage of technological developments to deter credit card fraud. These 
developments can make both the counterfeiting of cards and use of valid cards more 
difficult. Some of these developments require very little technology. For instance, most 
credit cards now include verification codes on the back to help merchants match cards used 
in purchase transactions with authorized cardholders. Card networks also maintain address 
and zip code verification services so that merchants, especially those involved in Internet or 
telephone transactions, can determine whether the supposed cardholder lives at the address 
given by the person placing the order.  
 
  
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1031 
Photographs 
Photographs of the legitimate cardholder will deter counterfeiting to a degree, though they 
have become increasingly easy for counterfeiters to purchase. Photographs can be altered, 
but technological advancements permit digital encoding of the cardholder’s image on the 
magnetic strip of the credit card. Use of this technology would require specialized processing 
terminals that would add to the cost of fraud detection. 
 
Holograms  
Holograms have been used by issuers as security devices since the early 1980s. Not long after 
implementation of this feature, however, it was found that a very accurate counterfeiting 
industry was emerging in Asia. If one assesses the average credit limit of fraudulent cards at a 
conservative $2,000, it takes few in circulation to  add up to considerable losses to the issuer.  
 
Signature Panel 
Signature panels usually contain images of the issuer’s logo. Blank or damaged signature 
panels are red flags of forged credit cards. Signatures on the panel and the sales receipt 
should always be compared for consistency. While it may be most merchants’ policy that 
employees compare these signatures, it is often ignored.  
 
Activation of Cards 
In an effort to curb credit card fraud perpetrated using the mail, companies sending new 
cards in the mail do not activate them until the customer contacts the credit card company. 
Upon contact, the credit card issuer then asks the caller for personal information such as 
their mother’s maiden name and birth date, or other information that the ordinary thief 
probably would not have. Once the information has been satisfactorily answered, the card is 
activated for use. 
 
Advanced Authorization 
Visa recently unveiled technology for analyzing card transactions both individually and 
collectively across its network in order to detect emerging fraud patterns. When a credit card 
is swiped, Advanced Authorization provides an instantaneous rating of the transaction’s 
potential for fraud to the card-issuing financial institution, including whether the card 
number was among those lost or stolen in a data-security incident. The system is designed to 
spot situations where multiple accounts are associated with fraudulent testing or some other 
type of coordinated attack involving multiple accounts.  
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1032                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CyberSource Advanced Fraud Screen 
CyberSource Advanced Fraud Screen enhanced by Visa is the first e-commerce fraud 
detection system enabled with current worldwide fraud trends and global payment-card 
usage patterns that provides a comprehensive transaction risk assessment of activity. 
Combining this with CyberSource’s hybrid  system (neural network and rules-based 
technology) and merchant-activity data provides e-commerce merchants with targeted fraud 
detection ability. CyberSource Advanced Fraud Screen operates around the clock, 7 days a 
week, 24 hours a day. It effectively screens shoppers located anywhere in the world and 
works with all payment cards. 
 
The CyberSource Advanced Fraud Screen’s risk-management tool uses frequently updated 
intelligence about global payment-card usage patterns, including online and offline 
purchasing profiles, to provide an accurate fraud detection service. This advantage can help 
merchants lower fraud-related costs by identifying risky transactions, and increase consumer 
goodwill by eliminating unintentional “insults” that may occur from incorrectly declined 
orders. 
 
Computer Edits 
Computer edits are built into some credit cards such that if the card is usually used five times 
per month, and it is used 25 times in one day, the system will prohibit authorization of 
further purchases. 
 
Card Scrutiny at Point of Sale 
How often do merchants scrutinize your card? In many stores, they never get the chance. 
Consumers use the credit/debit card machines at the sales counter and the cards never leave 
their possession. While this makes things more convenient for the consumer, it often means 
that the merchant is left holding the bag when a transaction is returned. If one of the key 
authorization components is missing (signature, expiration date, authorization number, card 
imprint) the merchant has to swallow the loss.  
 
Internet/Telephone Orders 
With these transactions, vendors never have the opportunity to see the customer’s credit 
card. The only fail-safe, self-protective measure open to them is to postpone delivery until 
the transaction has cleared the customer’s account. In our next-day-delivery society, 
however, this is may be detrimental to business for some vendors. There are a couple of 
other options open to merchants: 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1033 
• Beware of orders with different “bill to” and “ship to” addresses unless the item is 
intended as a gift.  
• Setting up free e-mail accounts with companies like Hotmail or Yahoo is very simple and 
allows the user anonymity. Orders received from free e-mail accounts should be treated 
with extra scrutiny.  
 
Potential signs of card-not-present fraud: 
• First-time shopper — Criminals are always looking for new victims. 
• Larger-than-normal orders — Because stolen cards or account numbers have a limited life 
span, crooks need to maximize the size of their purchase. 
• Orders that include several of the same item—Having multiples of the same item 
increases a criminal’s profits. 
• Orders made up of big-ticket item — These items have maximum resale value and 
therefore maximum profit potential. 
• “Rush” or “overnight” shipping — Fraudsters want these fraudulently obtained items as 
soon as possible for the quickest possible resale, and aren’t concerned about extra 
delivery charges. 
• Shipping to an international address — A significant number of fraudulent transactions 
are shipped to fraudulent cardholders outside of the U.S. 
• Transactions with similar account numbers — Particularly useful if the account numbers 
used have been generated using software available on the Internet (such as 
CreditMaster). 
• Shipping to a single address, but transactions placed on multiple cards—Could involve 
an account number generated using special software or the use of several of stolen cards. 
• Multiple transactions on one card over a very short period of time—Could be an attempt 
to “run a card” until the account is closed. 
• Multiple transactions on one card or a similar card with a single IP (Internet Protocol) 
address — More than one or two cards could indicate a fraud scheme. 
• Orders from Internet addresses that make  use of free e-mail services—These e-mail 
services involve no billing relationships, and therefore provide neither an audit trail nor 
verification that a legitimate cardholder has opened the account. 
 
Financial Institution Measures 
Banks and other financial institutions have great resources at their disposal to prevent 
fraudulent transactions. Many of them need me rely to enforce their existing policies.  
• New account screening — Educate personnel to thoroughly check applicants’ 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1034                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
information, comparing ID information, addresses, and credit reports for accuracy.  
• PIN activation — Bank customers are often required to provide personal identification 
numbers in order to activate their cards over the phone. Callers who are not able to 
provide the PIN number may have manufactured or stolen the card in question.  
• Caller ID — Most people calling to activate their card will do so from home. If the 
number on Caller ID does not match any of the telephone numbers listed in the 
customer’s account information bank personnel should ask some identifying questions.  
• CVV2/CVC2 — Implement these systems as soon as possible. They are among the best 
defenses financial institutions have against credit card fraud.  
 
Smart Cards 
Smart Cards contain a microprocessor memory chip instead of holograms. These cards are 
able to identify the user through encrypted information on the chip, and must be inserted 
into a “card reader” attached to the computer. That means the card cannot be used unless 
the purchaser is currently holding it. A PIN is also required for the card so the thief needs to 
physically have the card and the security code in order to use it. This allows cardholders 
more purchasing options as well as increased security. 
 
Judging from the past, credit opportunities for consumers will increase over time and, 
consequently, more will fall victim to fraud. In the future, the trend will be one card for all 
types of financial transactions. Prototypes are currently being developed and tested by the 
major credit card issuers. Fraud rings will adjust accordingly, and new counterfeiting 
methods will emerge. Law enforcement and investigators must maintain a global outlook 
when facing this type of fraud, as much of it originates outside the U.S.  
 
 
Electronic Bill Payment and Person-to-Person Payments 
Increasingly, consumers are using electronic funds transfers, rather than actual currency or 
paper, to pay bills or make online purchases. Through online services offered by many 
financial institutions, an individual can make banking transactions using a system called 
electronic bill payment and presentment, or EBPP. Individuals can pay each other for goods or 
services through this same electronic form, which is known as the person-to-person, or P2P, 
system.  
 
Although these systems are still young, some experts suggest that they will play an important 
part in the way payments are made, according to the Sheshunoff and A.S. Pratt’s publication, 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1035 
“Electronic Fund Transfer Fraud Protection: Identity Theft to Wire Transfer Fraud.” There 
is relatively low processing and customer service costs for billers, while customers can 
reduce time and costs in making payments. With some EBPP systems, some customers may 
even be able to manage their funds more effectively. Electronic bill payment has received 
faster acceptance than bill presentment, though acceptance appears to be dependent on the 
prices of these services. As the EBPP method of payment continues to increase, it is 
important to be prepared to combat fraud that may surface in this area.  
 
Electronic Fund Trans fer 
The Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA) is intended to protect the rights of consumers. 
Unlike the state law that governs checks or wholesale wire transfers, the law concerning 
electronic fund transfers initiated from consumer accounts is federal law.  
 
As defined in the EFTA, an “electronic fund transfer” is any transfer of funds, other than 
one originated by a check or similar paper instrument, that is initiated through an electronic 
terminal, telephonic instrument, or computer or magnetic tape that orders or purports to 
authorize a financial institution to debit or credit an account. Each of the following would 
constitute an electronic fund transfer for purposes of federal law: 
• A customer’s withdrawal of funds from the customer’s own account by use of an ATM. 
• A customer’s transfer of funds from the c ustomer’s checking account to the customer’s 
savings account at the same financial institution initiated by the customer through his 
personal computer.  
• A customer’s transfer of funds from the customer’s checking account to the customer’s 
savings account at the same financial institution initiated by the customer through the 
bank’s automated telephone service. 
• A customer’s use of a debit card to purchase goods from a merchant who swipes the 
customer’s card through a point-of-sale (POS) device to authorize deduction of the 
amount of the sale from the customer’s checking account. 
• A customer’s transfer of funds from his bank account to a third-party initiated by the 
customer through his personal computer. 
• An employer’s instruction, initiated by computer or through a magnetic tape, to a 
financial institution to deposit funds representing an employee’s pay into the  
employee’s account. 
• A noncustomer’s instruction, initiated by computer or through a magnetic tape, to a 
financial institution to withdraw funds from the checking account of a customer and 
transfer the funds of a noncustomer’s bank account. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1036                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Federal Reserve Board has promulgated a series of regulations, known as Regulation E, 
which informs banks of how they must implement the EFTA. Banks must be aware of their 
obligations under these laws and regulations in order both to minimize their exposure to 
electronic fund transfer fraud and to know how to deal with their customers when such 
fraud occurs. Under these laws and regulations, EBPP and P2P systems will usually qualify 
as electronic fund transfers. Other transactions that are initiated by the consumer through 
computer or telephonic instruments without the intervention of bank personnel, including 
transactions involving debit cards and automated teller machine (ATM) transactions, may 
also qualify as electronic fund transfers.  
 
Access Device 
An “access device” includes a card, code, or other means of access to a customer’s account 
for the purpose of initiating electronic fund transfers. These include debit cards, personal 
identification numbers (PINs), telephone transfer and bill payment codes, and other means 
that a consumer may use to initiate an electronic fund transfer from his account. A 
consumer’s account is considered an asset account, such as a demand deposit or savings 
account, established for personal, family, or household purposes. A credit card is not 
considered an access device since it provides access to a credit line rather than to a 
consumer’s account. The term “access device” does not include a check or draft used to 
capture to MICR encoding to initiate a one-time ACH debit. For example, if a customer 
authorizes a single ACH debit from his account by giving a check to the merchant so they 
can capture the routing, account, and serial numbers to initiate the debit, the check is not an 
access device. If the customer, however, provides a payee with a check, or with information 
from a check that is physically retained by the consumer, in order to allow the payee to 
capture routing, account, and serial number information, the result transfer does constitute 
an electronic fund transfer.  
 
When an access devise is necessary to instruct a financial institution to perform a transfer, 
the financial institution will be able to claim that it was authorized to debit or credit a 
consumer’s account only if the transfer was initiated through use of an “accepted” access 
device. An access device will qualify for this status only if the devise was issued to a person: 
• Who requested and received it. 
• Who signed and used it. 
• Who authorized another to use the access device. 
• For the purpose of transferring money between accounts or obtaining money, property, 
labor, or services. 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1037 
If a consumer uses an accepted access device to initiate a transfer, the EFTA will cover the 
transaction, even though a bank employee has intervened to complete the transaction. 
Assume, for instance, that Smith wishes to transfer $100 from her checking account to her 
savings account. She asks the teller at her bank to perform the transaction. The teller 
requests that Smith enter her PIN into a card-reading device at the teller’s station. If the PIN 
is used to initiate the transfer, the transaction is an electronic fund transfer. 
 
Consumer Initiation 
Notice that the definition of electronic fund transfer applies literally only to consumer 
transactions. One might speculate that if the consumer does not actually use the terminal, 
the transaction is not an electronic fund transfer. If, for instance, a consumer desires to 
purchase goods and hands the merchant a debit card to pay for the transaction, one might 
argue that the consumer has not initiated the transaction. Nevertheless, the Federal Reserve 
Board has construed the definition to apply to a POS terminal that captures data 
electronically in order to debit or credit a consumer’s bank account. This definition is broad 
enough to include the situation in which a merchant physically swipes or inserts the 
consumer’s debit card through the terminal, but does so at the direction of the consumer. In 
any event, the transaction would constitute an electronic fund transfer under the part of the 
definition that includes transfer “initiated through computer.” 
 
Even though a telephone is not itself an electronic terminal, transfers that the consumer 
initiates by telephone may be considered electronic transfer funds. Telephone transfers 
(which likely include fax transmissions) fall within the EFTA if made pursuant to a 
prearranged plan or agreement that is entered into between the consumer and the financial 
institution making the transfer and that contemplates periodic or recurring transfers. If an 
effective agreement exists, a transfer that the consumer initiates by telephone falls within the 
EFTA, even though an employee of the bank completes the transfer, or the consumer 
initiates the transfer through a facsimile machine, or the consumer initiates the transfer 
through the bank’s audio- or voice-response telephone system.  
 
Electronic Bill Presentment and Payment 
Electronic bill presentment and payment (EBPP) involves the presentment of bills from one 
or more sellers of goods, or providers of services, to a consumer through electronic means 
and the payment of that bill by the consumer, also through electronic means. Some experts 
expect EBPP to become one of the fastest growing applications of electronic fund transfers. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1038                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
At present, EBPP systems vary in organization and complexity. They may involve a 
transaction between a single merchant and a customer, or the consolidation of multiple bills 
from different billers or of multiple payments from different customers. Initially, EBPP 
systems were offered by proprietary providers. More recently, however, banks have begun to 
enter the field, often by contracting out implementation of the system to proprietary 
providers. Banks may have an advantage in marketing these systems because consumers who 
are likely to use these systems often have existing relationships with their banks. Bank 
customers, therefore, may be more willing to trust those institutions to handle their accounts 
than to entrust funds to a new entity with whom they have no previous or tangible 
relationship. 
 
Biller Direct Systems 
Existing EBPP systems usually fall within one of two categories: biller direct systems and 
consolidation/aggregations systems. In a biller direct system, merchants deal with each 
customer individually. In a typical transaction, the customer will enter an Internet site that 
the biller has created. There, the customer who wishes to pay his telephone bill online will 
simply log on to the telephone company’s web site, enter a username and password that 
allows the customer to pull up a copy of his bill, review it, and instruct the biller to obtain 
payment from the customer’s bank account. Prior to this time, the customer will have 
entered into an agreement with the biller to receive and to pay his bills electronically. The 
customer will have created the username and password (which qualifies as an access device 
under EFTA) and will have provided the biller with information about the customer and the 
customer’s account at the financial institut ion from which the biller may collect payment. 
Typically, this will include the customer’s e-mail address, the routing number of the 
customer’s bank, and the customer’s account number at the bank. In some systems, the 
biller will send an e-mail to the customer indicating that a bill is outstanding and directing 
the customer to the biller’s website. 
 
After the customer views the information posted by the biller, the customer may approve 
the information and authorize payment. The biller will then initiate payment by contacting a 
payment provider that has agreed to collect payments on behalf of the biller. The payment 
provider will contact the financial institution that holds the customer’s account and request 
the institution to debit the customer’s a ccount and remit the proceeds to the payment 
provider. The payment provider will then credit the proceeds, minus any fees, to the biller. 
These payments may be transferred through an ACH transfer or through a paper transfer 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1039 
such as a cashier’s check when the recipient is not able to receive payments in an electronic 
form.  
 
Person to Person (P2P) Payment Systems 
Personal online payment systems, often called P2P or person-to-person payment systems, 
have become popular ways for making relatively small payments between individuals or 
between an individual and a business. These payments have become popular in the online 
auction market, where winning bids may be too small to justify the use of a credit card or the 
seller is an individual who does not accept credit card payments. In 2002, eBay, the online 
auction site, acquired PayPal, the dominant provider of P2P services. PayPal currently has 
more than 164 million accounts worldwide, and is available in 190 markets and 17 different 
currencies. The success of proprietary systems like PayPal has induced conventional banks to 
consider entering the P2P arena. Many banks have begun to offer similar services. 
 
One restriction of most current P2P systems is that they will only complete transfers to 
persons who are also subscribers to the service. While this restriction may help a system to 
gain a customer base and reduce fraud by obtaining information about recipients, it also 
limits the scope of potential users.  
 
A Model of P2P: PayPal 
There is a significant opportunity for change and growth in implementation since P2P 
systems are still in their beginning stages. PayPal is dominant in the market at this point, so 
we will use it as the model of the P2P system for illustrative purposes. Potential users of the 
system must log in to the provider’s websi te and submit registration information including 
their name, mailing and e-mail addresses, and phone number. An e-mail is sent from PayPal 
to the user’s provided e-mail address with the user’s password. Before initiating any 
transfers, the user must send that password from the e-mail account that the user indicated 
at the time of registration. This permits the provider to verify information about the user 
and reduce the probability that the user is engaged in fraudulent activity or has established an 
account in the name of a fictitious person.  
 
In order to make a payment, the user enters his username and password along with the e-
 mail address and payment information for the recipient. Users may authorize the provider to 
withdraw funds from any of three sources. First, the user may maintain an account directly 
with the provider. The user may authorize the provider to withdraw funds from the user’s 
account at another financial institution. If the user registers his bank account as a source of 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1040                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
payment, the provider will verify the user’s control of the account by making two small 
deposits to the account in an undisclosed amount and requiring the user to confirm the 
amount of the deposits. Third, the user may authorize the provider to charge his credit card 
with the amount of the payment.  
 
Transfers initiated by the user from his account registered with the provider will constitute 
electronic fund transfers. This is true even if the provider is not a bank. (Proprietary 
providers such as PayPal probably do not qualify as “banks” because they do not make 
loans. They may, however, qualify as money transmitters and may require state licenses for 
that purpose.) The EFTA defines an electronic fund transfer as a transfer of funds “initiated 
through an electronic terminal, telephonic instrument, or computer so as to order a 
financial institution to debit or credit an account.” But a “financial institution” is defined 
with sufficient breadth to include institutions that do not qualify as banks. A “financial 
institution” for purposes of EFTA is “any person who, directly, or indirectly, holds an 
account belonging to a consumer,” and an “account” is any “asset account established 
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.” Therefore, electronic transfers 
initiated by a consumer to transfer funds from an asset account held by a proprietary P2P 
provider would be governed by EFTA and Regulation E.  
 
Types of Fraud 
There are several ways in which fraud may be perpetrated through EBPP and P2P systems 
since passwords that allow access into customer bank accounts must be made available to 
third parties. Also, bills that contain significant information about customers must be passed 
through multiple parties. Potential sources of fraud include the following: 
• A biller may send a bill for services not rendered or for goods never sent. 
• A person who has obtained information about another person’s bank account may  
instruct a biller to obtain payment from the other person’s account. 
• A hacker could obtain passwords and usernames from an aggregator and use that  
information to direct transfers from a consumer’s bank account. 
• An employee at the site providing EBPP services that has been provided a consumer’s 
usernames and passwords for screen scraping purposes could use that information to 
direct transfers from the consumer’s bank account. 
• A bank employee may use customer information to direct transfers from a  
customer’s account. 
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1041 
Unfortunately, the financial institution that offers electronic fund transfers to its customers 
will have difficulty determining the source of any leak of customer information necessary to 
initiate a transfer. Therefore, in order to maintain good relations with its customer and to 
avoid further liability, a bank may accept responsibility for them. Thus, the best strategy for 
the bank will be to take measures that reduce the probability that fraud will materialize in the 
first place.  
 
Detection and Deterrence of Electronic Transfer Fraud 
Considering the limited capacity of banks to shift losses from unauthorized electronic fund 
transfers to their customers, banks should make efforts to minimize the incidence of fraud. 
The very justification for limiting consumer liability may be that banks are in a superior 
position to learn of and counteract fraudulent schemes that are employed to effect 
unauthorized transactions. Banks can take certain initiatives to secure access devices and 
computers from interference. Banks can also follow “know your customer” rules in order to 
prevent the issuance of access devices to individuals who are likely to use them fraudulently.  
 
The following sections provide specific safeguards that banks can perform to reduce the risk 
that they or their customers can become victimized by unauthorized electronic fund 
transfers. 
 
Issuance and Use of Access Devices 
Electronic fund transfer fraud often involves individuals who use information to obtain 
access to the accounts of others. As a result, bank personnel can prevent fraud by exercising 
care in the initial decision to allow an individual to access the bank’s computerized services. 
Banks offering EBPP or P2P systems to customers should: 
• Confirm phone and mailing addresses on the application to ensure that they are  
consistent with information about the applicant that is available from other sources and, 
with respect to existing customers, consistent with current records about these  
customers. This may involve obtaining credit reports about the applicant or obtaining 
copies of utility bills that show the applicant’s address. 
• Make sure that the area code on the applicant’s telephone number matches the  
geographical area for the applicant’s address. 
• Send a “welcome” letter to the address on the application with the bank’s return address 
so that the letter will be returned if the applicant is not living at that address. 
• Verify by telephone or additional mailings any change of address requests in the same 
way that you would verify a new account application. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1042                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• If a customer reports the loss or theft of an access device, cancel the existing card, PIN, 
or other form of access and issue a new one. 
• If a customer reports that a person previously authorized to use access device reports no 
longer has that authority, cancel all cards, PINs, or other access devices and issue new 
ones to the customer. 
• Always mail PINs separately from other information, such as usernames, with which 
they are associated. 
• Separate the responsibility of bank employees who have custody of information relating 
to access devices from those who have responsibility for issuance, verification, or 
reissuance of PINs. 
• Ensure that any communication concerning usernames or passwords is sent in a secure 
encrypted format. 
• Customers who register for EBPP or P2P systems should be required to provide 
information indicating that they are authorized to use the bank account or credit card 
from which payments will be made. 
 
Use of ACH Network 
When non-customers of the bank are able to attain access to information about an actual 
customer, fraud may occur. To limit this possibility, banks should perform strict user 
authentication standards. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) requires 
banks within its jurisdiction to uphold a commercially reasonable method to authenticate the 
identity of a customer. Banks that use the ACH are also subject to National Automated 
Clearing House Association (NACHA) rules that require originating banks to take certain 
measures to ensure that the correct customer has authorized the transaction. 
 
NACHA has implemented specific rules for Internet-initiated entries. A specific standard 
entry class (SEC) code must be used for Internet-initiated entries. That code, WEB, must be 
used to identify an ACH debit entry to a consumer account that a receiver authorizes 
through the Internet. The rules apply to both single-entry and recurring debits and require 
ODFIs that transmit WEB entries to warrant that their originators have complied with 
certain standards that protect the security of the ACH network and consumer financial 
information. 
Originators of WEB entries are required to: 
• Obtain consumer authorization prior to initiating a WEB entry. The authorization must 
provide evidence of the consumer’s identity and asset to the authorization. 
• Employ commercially reasonable fraudulent transaction detection systems to screen 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1043 
entries in order to maintain the risk of fraud. Different transactions may require different 
levels of authentication, depending on the risk level of the transaction. 
• Use commercially reasonable fraudulent transaction detection systems to screen entries 
in order to minimize the risk of fraud. Different transactions may require different levels 
of authentication, depending on the risk level of the transaction. 
• Establish a secure Internet session with each customer using a commercially reasonable 
security technology. That session must be in place from the time consumers enter their 
banking information through the time of the transmission to the originator, including 
any transmission to a service provider such as an aggregator. 
• Conduct an annual security audit to ensure that financial information obtained from 
consumers is protected by security practices and procedures that include adequate levels 
of (1) physical security to protect against theft, tampering, or damage; (2) personnel and 
access controls to protect against unauthorized access and use; and (3) network security 
to ensure capture, storage, and distribution of financial information. 
 
Operation of Payment Systems 
Banks that participate in EBPP or P2P systems can take steps to detect fraudulent 
transactions, either by providing information to customers or by analyzing transactions that 
have characteristics associated with fraud. These measures include the following: 
• Send customers e-mail alerts when a new bill arrives or a payment is sent. The e-mail 
should advise the customer to contact the bank immediately if the bill was not expected 
or the payment was not authorized. 
• Refuse or scrutinize any transactions from a payer or recipient who has been the subject 
of a notice from a credit card issuer indicating that the person was involved in an 
unauthorized credit card transaction or unauthorized transfer to or from a bank account. 
• Ensure that the name on the bank account associated with the P2P account matches the 
name on the P2P account itself. 
• Track and verify payments of similar amounts to the same recipient. 
• Since P2P systems are frequently used to make payments for online activities, be aware 
of activities that are typically associated with fraud and scrutinize transactions with 
customers who engage in such activities. These activities include pyramid schemes, 
online auctions, and sale of items that have a delayed delivery date. 
 
Protection of Internet Addresses 
Banks or their customers may become victims of fraud, especially identity theft, if they do 
not carefully monitor the use of their name on the Internet. Fraudulent actors may create 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1044                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
false domain names to attract the bank’s customers and get them to provide information that 
will then be used for illicit purposes. This activity, known as cybercloning, involves the creation 
of a “spoof” site, complete with a domain name close to the domain name of a legitimate 
bank and containing the real bank’s logo. An e-mail may be sent asking customers and 
potential customers to log on to the false domain name. Those who respond may be asked 
for information such as account numbers and credit card numbers. Alternately, individuals 
may register domain names close to the domain name of actual banks and use those sites to 
market goods or services with which the bank would not want to be associated. For instance, 
Citigroup had a battle with an individual who registered the name citicard.com and directed 
users who logged in to this site to an online gambling site.  
 
Prevention of EFT Fraud in Other Companies 
The Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) recommends several 
steps for prevention of EFT fraud in companies. The following is a brief overview: 
• Define the EFT process and controls points  
• Define EFT policies and procedures 
• Ensure physical security surrounding all EFT components 
• Implement effective EFT application security 
• Implement effective network operating system security 
• Implement effective security surrounding EFT data 
• Implement effective system logging that establishes a baseline that can be used to 
measure unusual activity. 
• Conduct reconciliations to allow for the determination of whether data have been 
modified during any stage of the EFT process. 
  
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1101 
INSURANCE FRAUD 
 
The insurance business, by its very nature, is susceptible to fraud. Insurance is a risk 
distribution system that requires the accumulation of liquid assets in the form of reserve 
funds, which are in turn available to pay loss claims. Insurance companies generate a large 
steady flow of cash through insurance premiums. Steady cash flow is an important economic 
resource that is very attractive and easily diverted. Large accumulations of liquid assets make 
insurance companies attractive for take over  and loot schemes. Insurance companies are under 
great pressure to maximize the return on investing the reserve funds, thus making them 
vulnerable to high yielding investment schemes.  
 
 
Types of Insurance Policies 
Property insurance indemnifies against pecuniary loss to the insured’s property (a nd, in some 
policies, to the property of others) for specific losses, for example, from fire, theft, or auto 
collision. Casualty insurance indemnifies against legal liability to others for injury or damage to 
people, property, or other defined legal interests because of specified risks or conduct. 
Casualty insurance is of several types, such as health, disability, life, fidelity, and bonds. 
Health insurance indemnifies against medical care costs under specified circumstances.  
 
Disability insurance indemnifies against income loss under defined circumstances. Life insurance 
indemnifies for the death of the insured. Fidelity insurance indemnifies against economic loss 
to the insured because of employee dishonesty. Bonds indemnify against loss to third-party 
beneficiaries when the insured fails to fulfill a specific undertaking for the third  
party’s benefit. 
 
Insurance policies can be marketed in combinations. Homeowners insurance and auto 
insurance policies usually include features of both property and casualty insurance. Some 
health insurance plans, for example, also might include disability benefit provisions. There 
are a multitude of insurance fraud schemes. Likewise, there are fraud schemes that are 
prevalent only in specific insurance areas. The largest amount of fraud is in health care. Like 
all other industries, insurance is susceptible to both internal and external fraud schemes. 
 
  
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1102                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
External health care fraud is perpetrated by outsiders against the company. The two main 
types of external fraud schemes are those committed by providers (such as doctors, 
institutions, and home health agencies) and claim fraud by the insured. Health care frauds —
 a specific variation of insurance fraud — will be discussed in the next chapter. 
 
 
Agent/Broker Fraud 
 
Cash, Loan, and Dividend Checks 
A company employee without the knowledge of an insured or contract holder requests cash, 
a loan, or a dividend check, and either deposits the check into his bank account or into a 
fictitious account. The employee, in order to minimize his chances of being detected 
committing a fraudulent act, might change the company policyholder’s address of record to 
either his address or a fictitious address. Once the check is issued, the address is then 
changed back to the previous address. 
 
Settlement Checks 
Company employees can misdirect settlement checks such as Matured Endowment, Paid 
Up, etc., to the branch office, to their homes, or to fictitious addresses. The employee can 
easily create a check defalcation by changing the address of record prior to the settlement 
check issue date, thus misdirecting the check in question. Also, periodically an orphan 
contract holder might be transferred to his agency affording the opportunity to improperly 
request the issuance of a settlement check. 
 
An orphan contract holder is a policyholder or contract holder who has not been assigned to a 
servicing agent or the whereabouts of this individual is unknown. The servicing agent 
attempts to locate this family group and can possibly influence them to purchase  
additional insurance. 
 
A clerical support employee might receive notification that the orphan contract holder does 
not reside at the given address. This will give the support staffer an opportunity to change 
the address to either his home or a fictitious address and possibly create a fraud. 
 
Premium Fraud 
An agent collects the premium, but doesn’t re mit the check to the insurance company. The 
insured has no coverage. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1103 
Fictitious Payees 
An agent or a clerk can change the beneficiary of record to a fictitious person and 
subsequently submit the necessary papers to authorize the issuance of a check. 
 
Fictitious Death Claims 
An agent or employee obtains a fictitious death certificate and requests that a death claim 
check be issued. The agent receives the check and cashes it. 
 
The sales representative can also write a fictitious application and, after the contestable 
period (two years), submit a phony death claim form and obtain the proceeds. The agent, by 
investing a couple of thousand dollars, could receive $50,000 or more in misappropriated 
claims.  
 
A company is particularly vulnerable to this scheme if the perpetrator has knowledge of the 
underwriting procedures such as the limits under which insurance can be written without a 
medical exam and what should be submitted on a death claim. 
 
 
Underwriting Irregularities 
 
Equity Funding 
Equity funding is the process of using existing premium/policy values to finance new 
businesses. So long as the insured is aware of what is being done by the agent and fully 
understands the long-range method of payment on the new contract, there is no apparent 
underwriting irregularity. 
 
Equity funding techniques, also known as piggybacking, usually do not produce quality 
business. Furthermore, the company increases the amount of life insurance on the books but 
receives little or no new funds while incurring increased sales and administrative expenses 
associated with the issue of that new business. 
 
Each jurisdiction has its own requirements on piggybacking as it relates to replacement 
insurance. Companies must comply with these regulations to prevent being fined or the 
possibility that the company’s insurance license can be suspended or taken away for 
noncompliance. 
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1104                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Equity funding irregularities might involve improper financial benefits to field personnel as 
well as annual incentive compensation bonuses paid to management if applicable. The fraud 
examiner should determine what financial benefit will occur from an improper equity 
transaction. 
 
Misrepresentation 
Misrepresentation might occur if a sales representative makes a false statement with the 
intent to deceive the prospective insureds in order to knowingly obtain an unlawful gain.  
 
False Information 
A company employee might submit the following false information to obtain unlawful 
financial gain: 
• Improper medical information to obtain a better insurable rate for the prospective 
policyholder (for example, standard to preferred rate). 
• Improper date of birth to obtain a cheaper premium on the new policy. 
• Improper home address to obtain a cheaper premium for home or automobile 
insurance. 
• Improper driving history prior to purchasing automobile insurance to reduce the annual 
premium or obtain insurance where normally the individual would have to apply through 
the risk pool. 
 
Fictitious Policies 
A salesman, in order to keep his position, submits fictitious policies to improve his writing 
record. Also prior to an individual leaving the company he writes fictitious policies called 
tombstone cases to improve his commission pool so that his compensation will be greater. 
Tombstone means an agent literally takes names from tombstones in a cemetery and writes 
new policies.  
 
Surety and Performance Bond Schemes 
Surety and performance bonds guarantee that certain events will or will not occur. An agent 
issues worthless bonds to the insured for high-risk coverage in hopes that a claim is never 
made. If a claim is made, the agent might pay it off from agency funds, delay the payment, or 
skip town. 
 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1105 
Sliding 
Sliding is the term used for including additional coverages in the insurance policy without the 
knowledge of the insured. The extra charges are hidden in the total premium and since the 
insured is unaware of the coverage, few claims are ever filed. For example, motor club 
memberships, accidental death, and travel accident coverages can usually be slipped into the 
policy without the knowledge of the insured. 
 
Twisting 
Twisting is the replacement, usually by high-pressure sales techniques, of existing policies for 
new ones. The primary reason, of course, is for the agent to profit since first year sales 
commissions are much higher than commissions for existing policies. 
 
Churning 
Churning occurs when agents falsely tell customers that they can buy additional insurance for 
nothing by using built-up value in their current policies. In reality, the cost of the new 
policies frequently exceeds the value of the old ones.  
 
 
Vehicle Insurance Schemes 
 
Ditching 
Ditching, also known as owner give-ups, is getting rid of a vehicle to cash in on an insurance 
policy or to settle an outstanding loan. The vehicle is normally expensive and purchased with 
a small down payment. The vehicle is reported stolen, although in some cases, the owner just 
abandons the vehicle hoping that it is stolen, stripped for parts, or taken to a pound and 
destroyed. The scheme sometimes involves homeowner’s insurance for the property that 
was “stolen” in the vehicle. 
 
Past Posting 
Past posting is a scheme in which a person becomes involved in an automobile accident, but 
doesn’t have insurance. The person gets insurance,  waits a little bit of time, and then reports 
the vehicle as being in an accident, thus collecting for the damages. 
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1106                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Vehicle Repair 
This scheme involves the billing of new parts on a vehicle when used parts were actually 
replaced in the vehicle. Sometimes this involves collusion between the adjuster and the body 
repair shop. 
 
Vehicle Smuggling 
This is a scheme that involves the purchase of a new vehicle with maximum financing. A 
counterfeit certificate of the vehicle’s title is made showing that it is free and clear. The 
vehicle is insured to the maximum, with minimum deductible theft coverage. It is then 
shipped to a foreign port and reported stolen. The car is sold at its new location and 
insurance is also collected for the “theft.” 
 
Phantom Vehicles 
The certificate of title is a document that shows the legal ownership of a vehicle. Even 
though it is not absolute proof that a vehicle exists, it is the basis for the issuance of 
insurance policies. Collecting on a phantom vehicle has been shown to be easy to do. 
 
30-Day Special 
In this scheme, the vehicle’s owner reports the vehicle stolen and hides it just long enough 
for the insurance company to settle the claim—usually 30 days. Once the claim is paid, the 
vehicle is abandoned by the owner. 
 
Paper Accident 
This scheme involves the invention of an auto accident that only exists on paper. When the 
repair costs are less than $1000, many insurance companies don’t bother to send an 
investigator to examine the vehicle. Because this is a low-risk endeavor, and no police are 
involved, this scheme is very popular within organized crime rings.  
 
Hit and Run 
The hit and run is a variation of the paper accident. The owner of a previously damaged 
vehicle calls the police and claims to be the victim of a hit and run accident. The resulting 
police report is used to file an insurance claim. This scheme may also be perpetrated after a 
single-car accident with no witnesses.  
 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1107 
Staged Accidents 
Staged accidents are schemes in which an accident is predetermined to occur on a vehicle. 
The schemes are organized by rings and the culprits move from one area to another. They 
often use the same vehicle over and over, which sometimes causes their scheme to  
be uncovered. 
 
Two Vehicle Accident 
Perpetrators cause an accident and then lead the innocent driver to believe it’s his fault. 
 
Three or More Vehicle Accident 
Perpetrators set up an accident in which all the drivers are involved. 
 
Side Swipe 
The side swipe is a scheme that relies on opportunity. In a busy intersection with multiple 
left-turn lanes, the perpetrator makes the left turn over and over again, waiting for a driver to 
cross into his lane. When a driver finally does, the perpetrator purposely drives into the 
other car. Witnesses and police involvement are helpful to the perpetrator in this case. 
 
Drive Down 
The scheme involves a perpetrator waving on a driver attempting to merge in front of him, 
then intentionally colliding with the merging vehicle. After the accident, the perpetrator 
denies having waved on the merging driver. 
 
Other Staged Accidents 
Two drivers purposely collide where they will not be observed. Additional damage may be 
added to the vehicles after impact. The cars are then driven to a road or highway and 
arranged so that the accident appears to have occurred there. The police are then notified. 
 
SWOOP AND SQUAT 
A victim of this scheme will find himself passed by two cars while driving. The car in the 
lead will cut in front of the second, forcing it to stop abruptly. The victim rear-ends the 
second car while the other driver speeds away. Victims usually accept responsibility for the 
accident, thinking it their fault for not paying attention. The rear-ended vehicle usually 
contains the maximum amount of passengers, all with injuries. 
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1108                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inflated Damages 
The business environment and competition for work in the automobile repair industry have 
motivated a scheme where some establishments inflate the estimated cost to cover the 
deductible. The insured is advised by the repair shop that the shop will accept whatever the 
company authorizes. 
 
Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) Switch  
VIN-switch fraud schemes are the work of professionals in which a wrecked vehicle is sold 
and reported as being repaired. The vehicle is not repaired, but the VIN plate is switched 
with a stolen vehicle of the same make and model.  
 
Rental Car Fraud 
A person doesn’t need to own a vehicle to incur automobile fraud. There are several 
schemes that can be perpetrated using rental cars. The most prevalent involve property 
damage, bodily injury, and export fraud. 
 
 
Property Schemes 
Property schemes usually involve the filing of insurance claims for property that never 
existed or for inflated loss amounts. 
 
Inflated Inventory 
Property that is lost through fire is claimed on an insurance form. However, property that 
doesn’t exist also finds its way onto an inventory of the property clai med. Property claimed 
might have been previously sold or never owned by the claimant. 
 
Phony or Inflated Thefts 
A home or car that has been burglarized is the basis for filing a claim for recoveries of 
monies lost. However, as with items “destroyed” by fire above, the items never existed or 
were previously sold. 
 
Paper Boats 
A claim is filed for a boat that sank, but actually never existed. It is not difficult to register a 
boat that is based on a bill of sale. After a period of time, a loss is claimed for the sinking of 
the boat. It is difficult to prove that the boat didn’t exist or wasn’t sunk intentionally. 
 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1109 
Life Insurance Schemes 
 
Fraudulent Death Claims 
To obtain reimbursement for life insurance, a death certificate is required. However, phony 
death certificates are not that difficult to obtain. The person might be very much alive and 
missing or the person might be dead, and the death is past posted. With small settlements, 
death claims are not closely scrutinized and paid relatively easily. 
 
Murder for Profit 
This scheme involves the killing (or arranging for the killing) of a person in order to collect 
the insurance. The death might be made to look like it was an accident or a random killing. 
 
Vanishing Premium Scheme 
This scheme involves insurance companies marketing deceptive “vanishing premium” life 
insurance policies. The idea of the “vanishing premium” policy is that, after a set number of 
years of paying the policy’s premium, the policy would be paid off. At that point the policy 
holder would not have to make any more payments toward the policy. 
 
In reality, though, around the time the policy would be paid off, the insurance company 
would explain that the policy had been revised, and that several more years of payments 
would be necessary. The policy holder would then be faced with a dilemma: either cease 
making payments and risk having the policy lapse due to non-payment, or continue making 
the expensive payments for several more years. 
 
 
Liability Schemes 
In a liability scheme the claimant has claimed an injury that did not occur. The slip-and-fall 
scam is the most common, where a person claims to fall as the result of negligence on behalf 
of the insured.  
 
 
“Red Flags” of Insurance Fraud 
Red flags of insurance fraud may include any of the following: 
• The claim is made a short time after inception of the policy, or after an increase or 
change in the coverage under which the claim is made. This could include the purchase  
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1110                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of a scheduled property or jewelry floater policy, or more than one during the time 
before the loss. 
• The insured has a history of many insurance claims and losses. 
• The insured earlier asked his insurance agent hypothetical questions about coverage in 
the event of a loss similar to the actual claim. 
• The insured is very pushy and insistent about a fast settlement, and exhibits more than 
the usual amount of knowledge about insurance coverage and claims procedures, 
particularly if the claim is not well documented. 
• In a burglary loss, the claim includes large, bulky property, which is unusual for  
a burglary. 
• In a theft or fire loss claim, the claim includes a lot of recently purchased, expensive 
property, or the insured insists that everything was the best or the most expensive 
model, especially if the insured cannot provide receipts, owner’s manuals, or other 
documentary proof of purchase. 
• In a fire loss claim, property that would be personal or sentimental to the insured and 
that you would expect to see among the lost property — photographs, family heirlooms, 
or pets — is conspicuous by its absence. 
• A large amount of the property was purchased at garage and yard sales and flea markets, 
or otherwise for cash, and there are no receipts (the insured will usually be unable to 
recall exactly where these sales took place or by whom). 
• The insured cannot remember or does not know where he acquired the claimed 
property, especially unusual items, and/or he cannot provide adequate descriptions. 
• On the other hand, the insured already has receipts and other documentation, witnesses, 
and duplicate photographs for everything; the claim is too perfect. 
• Documentation provided by the insured is irregular or questionable, such as: 
? Numbered receipts are from the same store and dated differently or sequentially. 
? Documents show signs of alteration such as dates, descriptions, or amounts. 
? Photocopies of documents are provided and the insured cannot produce  
the originals. 
? Similar handwriting or signatures — or the insured’s apparent handwriting — on 
different receipts, invoices, gift verifications, appraisals, etc. 
? The amount of tax is wrong, either for the price of the property or for the date 
appearing on the receipt. 
? Receipts, invoices, or shipping documents do not have “paid,” “received,” or other 
shipping stamps. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1111 
? In a theft or loss away from home, the insured waits an unusually long time before 
reporting the theft to the police. 
? The insured is able to give the police a complete list of lost property on the day of 
the burglary or shortly after. 
? The amount of the claim differs from the value given by the insured to the police. 
? In a business inventory or income loss claim, the insured does not keep complete 
books, or the books do not follow accepted accounting principles. 
? The physical evidence is inconsistent with the loss claimed by the insured. 
? In a burglary loss, there is no physical evidence of breaking and entering, or a 
burglary could not have occurred unnoticed under the circumstances. 
? In a fire loss: 
The apparent cause and origin of the fire is inconsistent with an accidental cause and 
origin, or there is evidence of the use of an accelerant. 
The remains of the property do not match the claimed property. 
? The premises do not show signs of having contained the claimed property, or the 
amount of property will not fit into the space where the insured says it was. 
? Physical damage to the insured’s car is inconsistent with its having been in a collision 
with an uninsured car. 
? The insured has discarded the claimed damaged property before the adjuster can 
examine it. 
? The cost of the claimed property, over the period of time it was allegedly acquired, 
seems to exceed the insured’s financial ability to purchase it. 
? The insured refuses or is unable to answer routine questions. 
? The insured provides supporting evidence and documentation that cannot be 
corroborated. 
• Information on a life application is very vague or ambiguous as to the details of health 
history: dates, places of treatment, names of  physicians or hospitals, or specific diagnosis. 
• Applicant fails to sign and date the application. 
• Pertinent questions on the application are not answered, such as income, other insurance 
carried, hazardous duties, or aviation or flying activity. 
• The insured has “excess insurance,” either shown at the time of application or developed 
through an underwriting report of database information. 
• Earned income does not warrant the amount of insurance being applied for. 
• The applicant’s date of birth as shown on the application is much earlier than shown 
with other carriers or in previous applications or policies. 
• The agent is putting on a great deal of pressure to have the policy issued because of the 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1112                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
large amount applied for, but is going over the underwriter’s head in order to do so 
(working out of the system). 
• The physician’s report is very vague on details of past medical history and does not 
coincide with the information shown on the application. 
• A death claim is presented in which the death has taken place outside of the country. 
• The signature on the application for insurance does not appear to be the same signature 
as shown on an authorization at the time of the claim. 
• A claimant or claimant’s attorney attempts to limit the type of information to be related 
by a signed authorization, which is a standard authorization used by the company. 
• An attorney is immediately brought into a contestable death claim, attempting to 
interfere with the investigation and to withhold information required by the company. 
• A contestable death claim that is reported as an accidental death could possibly be a 
suicide (fatal accident involving only one vehicle, a hunting accident, an accidental 
shooting while cleaning a weapon or repairing same, etc.). 
• An autopsy report discloses a different height and weight than what is shown on the 
recent application (auto or house fire death). Dental records do not coincide with those 
dental findings as shown by an autopsy report. 
• Records are missing on a patient who was confined to a hospital, or records are missing 
on a patient from a physician’s office. 
• The death claim package sent to the insurance company is too well packaged and 
complete in every detail with supportive documents. Documentation that was not 
initially requested or required by the insurance company was voluntarily sent, such as 
newspaper reports, burial certificates, shipment of the body from one country to the 
home country. 
• The routine audit of a designated insured group shows a significant increase of added 
employees whose names do not show up on the payroll. 
• Gunshot wounds or stabbings were inflicted by the insured as the aggressor or were  
self-inflicted. 
• Police accident reports were submitted by the claimant. 
• Pressure for speed of handling — claimant wants to stop by the office to pick up his 
check “as we’re leaving for vacation in the morning.” 
• A series of prescription numbers from the same drug store don’t coincide 
chronologically with the dates of the prescriptions. 
• An automobile fire in a very remote rural area with no witness, but the driver claims an 
electrical shortage in the engine compartment caused the entire car to be gutted  
by flames. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1113 
• Preliminary information for a business fire loss or home fire loss indicates considerable 
financial difficulties and financial pressures being brought upon the owner and the fire is 
suspicious in nature and/or origin. 
• An employee within the claims operations of an insurance company is known to have a 
drinking problem, drug problem, financial pressures, or is having serious marital 
difficulties or having an affair and irregularities start to appear. 
• On burglary losses from a business or especially a home, the investigator observes that 
the remaining contents at the scene are of much inferior quality than that which is being 
reported stolen. There is no indication of indentation in the piling of the carpet where 
heavy items of furniture or equipment were to have been placed. There are no hooks or 
nails on the walls where valuable pictures might have been hung. Entrances or exits are 
too small to take a large item through without laboriously disassembling it. 
• Any information on a claim that has been filed if it is determined that there is deliberate 
cover-up or false statements contained therein. 
• A disability income protection claim is filed and it is determined that the claimant had 
recently purchased numerous expensive items on credit and had them all covered by 
credit A&H insurance coverage. 
• Public transportation accidents in which there are more passenger claims filed than there 
were passengers at the time of the accident. 
• A witness to an accident or incident deliberately tries to hide from investigators rather 
than come forth and tell the truth. 
• An official document of findings is in complete conflict with the facts in the case and 
there is no explanation for this conflict of facts. Photographs or other documents do not 
substantiate the reported findings. 
 
 
Computer-Generated Detection Reports 
Computers can be used to generate detection reports that provide the fraud examiner with 
good leads to possible fraud.  
 
Address Similarity Report 
Address similarity reports electronically compare multiple checks going to the same address. 
They are extremely useful because they might show a check defalcation or funds going to 
another insurance company, broker, or fictitious payee.  
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1114                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Downloading of Files 
Comparison of issue files to disbursement files can determine if funds are being used to 
place new policies by using the equity of old policies. For example, computer-assisted 
auditing tools and techniques (CAATTs) are used to download and compare electronic files, 
such as comparing the administrative file on group business to the Social Security file to 
determine if the company is paying out monthly payments on people who have passed away. 
 
Electronic Confirmations 
Mailed disbursements in force or lapsed premiums, change of address, etc., to verify that 
company records agree with policyholder records. 
 
Exception or Manual Override Reports 
Computerized reports that list all exceptions to normal electronic processing. All human 
intervention can appear on a periodic management information report and be test-checked 
by management. It is imperative that management review on an ongoing basis all exception 
reports for possible frauds. 
 
 
Workers' Compensation Fraud 
Workers' compensation laws require employers or their insurance plan to reimburse an 
employee (or on his behalf) for injuries that occurred on the job regardless of who is at fault 
and without delay of legal proceedings to determine fault. The injury may be physical, such 
as a broken limb, or mental, such as stress. 
 
Common Schemes 
Schemes are generally broken into four categories: premium fraud, agent fraud, claimant 
fraud, and organized fraud schemes. 
 
Premium Fraud  
Misrepresenting information to the insurer by employers to lower the cost of workers’ 
compensation premiums. 
 
EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATION 
Workers’ compensation rates vary depending on the job classification of an employee. 
Employees that have a higher risk for injury on the job will have a higher premium rate. 
Clerical employees have a lower probability for an injury than, for example, truck drivers or 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1115 
construction workers, and accordingly their premiums should be lower. Therefore to lower 
their premium rate, an employer might intentionally misclassify employees. 
 
UNDERSTATEMENT OF PAYROLL 
The premium for a specific job classification is based on the total payroll for that 
classification. The employer may understate the amount of the payroll for higher risk 
classifications. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Two men in Massachusetts pleaded guilty to charges of conspiracy and mail fraud in 
connection with a fraudulent scheme to re duce workers’ compensation claims for a 
construction company. The men falsely reported that workers in high-risk trades were 
engaged in less dangerous occupations in order to lower premiums. They also concealed 
millions of dollars on the company payroll from the insurance company, thereby avoiding 
workers’ compensation payments on those dollars. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Boise couple found themselves responsible for a $71,049 judgment after being accused of 
misreporting payroll in their drywall business. Two former employees tipped off investigators 
that they were being paid with checks bearing different company names. 
 
Half of their payroll money was paid by an insured drywall company, and the other half 
came from one that was not insured. Workers’ compensation claims came from the 
company that was paying premiums.  
 
GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION OF THE INSURED’S OPERATION 
Premium rates differ significantly based on geographic location from state to state. An 
employer might have a storefront location or a P.O. box in a state that has lower rates. A 
multistate employer may list all of its employees as operating in the state that has the lowest 
rates. 
 
HISTORY OF PAST LOSSES 
The modification or “mod” factor is a multiplier that is used to determine premium rates. 
The multiplier is derived by comparing the employer’s claims history with other employers’ 
claims histories in the same industry. The higher the claims loss, the higher the mod, and 
thus the higher the premium. A new business will start with a neutral mod for that type of 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1116                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
business. Employers that have a high mod factor may become a “new” business that does 
not have a mod established and thus have lower premiums than it should.  
 
CORPORATE GERRYMANDERING 
The risk pool assigned to an employer will accept any business no matter what the claim 
experience is. However, it does not have to accept any employer that owes premiums. Some 
employers will create a new corporate entity in order to obtain coverage or to avoid higher 
premiums due to past heavy losses. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Fireman’s Fund Insurance was awarded a $15 million judgment against a Hollywood 
entertainment company in a suit involving a workers’ compensation fraud scheme. The 
entertainment company set up a shell corporation to pose as a start-up production company 
needing insurance. The ruse allowed the company to get workers’ compensation at much 
lower rates than if Fireman’s Fund had known who they were actually insuring. The 
entertainment company then manipulated the coverage to other films in which it had an 
interest, again at significantly lower rates.  
 
FORGED DOCUMENTS 
Some employers will forge or alter prior certificates showing coverages in order to collect 
payment for work done or as proof of coverages to authorities. 
 
Agent Fraud  
POCKETING PREMIUMS 
Agents issue certificates of coverage indicating the customer is insured, but never forward 
the premium to the insurance company.  
 
CONSPIRING TO REDUCE PREMIUMS 
Agents may alter the application for coverage completed by the employer in order to be able 
to offer a lower premium to his client.  
 
The agent may also improperly advise the employer as to how to complete the application.  
 
The agent may also advise the employer to transfer a group of employees into a lower risk 
classification to avoid the experience modifier. 
 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1117 
While the employer may not be aware that the schemes are a violation of law, since the 
employer signs the application, he can be charged for his part in the scheme however 
unknowing. 
 
Claimant Fraud 
Misrepresenting the circumstances of any injury or fabricating that an injury occurred. 
 
INJURY FRAUD 
In this type of fraud, false information about the injured worker is submitted to the workers’ 
compensation carrier. The report describes the injury and states the employee is either totally 
or partially disabled and either unable to work or only able to work part-time. In many of 
these schemes the fraud is helped along by a doctor who, for a fee, will provide a false 
diagnosis and false medical records for phony treatments. 
 
The employee may stage an accident and fabricate an injury, or actually have an accident, and 
then exaggerate the injury.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A former personnel supervisor for the city of Los Angeles was charged with embezzling 
funds from the city’s workers’ compensation  system. It was charged that she provided 
information to a doctor that enabled him to submit almost $500,000 in fake claims for 
medical services that were supposedly provided  to city employees. The supervisor was also 
alleged to have, working on her own, altered the computerized personnel records and then 
authorized payment of $300,000 in bogus disa bility claims to her friends and relatives.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A firefighter in Washington was arrested for insurance fraud related to workers’ 
compensation payments he had received. The man claimed he fell off a ladder and injured 
his knee while working as a meat  cutter in a grocery store. He  collected temporary disability 
benefits and received medical treatment for six months, complaining of pain and telling 
doctors that he could barely walk. At the same time, the man was training with his city fire 
department as a reserve firefighter. The training consisted of strenuous exercise such as 
heavy lifting and an hour of physical training each day.  
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1118                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT 
Employees who are collecting workers’ compensation benefits may also secure a job with 
another employer — either part-time or full-time. The employee may fake his identity or 
assume someone else’s identity to receive compensation. 
 
Organized Fraud 
Organized fraud schemes are composed of the united efforts of a lawyer, a capper, a doctor, 
and the claimant. This scheme is used not only in workers’ compensation cases, but also in 
other medical frauds, such as automobile injuries. 
 
THE LAWYER 
Lawyers are usually the organizers of the schemes and the ones who will profit the most. 
The majority of workers’ compensation cases are accepted on a contingency fee basis. If no 
settlement is awarded, then the lawyers will not be paid. This is a high volume business, and 
the lawyers do not want the cases to be litigated. They are relying on the insurance 
company’s desire to settle as quickly as possible.  
 
The lawyers will entice the claimant into securing their services by promising a large 
settlement from the insurance company. The claimants may or may not have to undergo the 
medical tests, since the only requirement of the claimants is that they be insured. The lawyer 
will then refer the injured party to a doctor for “treatment.” 
 
THE CAPPER 
Cappers, also known as runners or steerers, are used to recruit patients for the scheme. They 
may be employed by either the attorney or doctor and are paid, either on a percentage of the 
total take or on a per person basis, for bringing in patients. Cappers may approach patients 
at unemployment compensation lines, work sites, scenes of accidents, or at any other types 
of organized gatherings. With promises of enrichment, patients are brought into the scheme. 
 
EXAMPLE 
In August of 2010, the last member of a group of 51 suspects in Miami, Florida was 
arrested for insurance fraud and other crimes. The insurance fraud included clinic workers 
and owners who hired runners to recruit auto accident victims, as well as staged auto 
accident participants when they ran out of “legitimate” accident victims. Runners received 
$500 to $700 per patient, and the estimated fraudulent claims from this scheme exceeded 
$4 million.   
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1119 
THE DOCTOR 
Doctors may be organizers or players in the scheme, but must be a part of it in order for it 
to work properly. Doctors are used to lend authenticity to the scheme, and they are well 
compensated for their efforts. The doctors bill for services that they may or may not render 
as well as for unnecessary services. In addition, if patients have regular health insurance, 
doctors may double bill for the services. If an injury is the result of an automobile accident 
that occurred while the patient was on the job, the doctor may bill all three insurance 
companies: the workers’ compensation carrier, the employee’s health insurance, and the 
automobile carrier. 
 
Because of coordination of benefit clauses in most insurance contracts, the insurance 
companies will coordinate the benefits to the extent that the maximum amount paid will be 
100 percent of the injuries. However, the doctors will not let the patient’s health insurance 
company know that the injury is work-related or accident-related and thus the claim may be 
overpaid, since both claims are paid at their full liability.  
 
Most of the treatment rendered will be office visits, x-rays, vascular studies, physical therapy, 
and spinal manipulations. In some cases hospital employees will be part of the scheme and 
allow the use of the facility fraudulently.  
 
Red Flags 
• Documents that have obviously been altered; white-out or erasure is evident. 
• Documents that are improperly filled out with entries in the wrong place or information 
that doesn’t make sense. 
• Claims filed where the carrier indicated no record of coverage. 
• Poor quality photocopies of documents that should be original documents. 
• Small payrolls for large contractors or employee leasing operations. 
• Payroll figures reported to insurers that disagree with payroll reported for other 
purposes. 
• Claims for employee injuries inconsistent with that employee’s classification. 
• Industrial or construction enterprises with a work force reported to be in low-rate 
categories. 
• “New” corporations on ongoing jobs. 
• Most of the employees from an employer  with a high experience suddenly become 
employees in a new business. 
• Agency employs large numbers of support staff and only has one licensed agent. 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1120                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The agent only accepts cash or money orders for premiums. 
• No policy is received after an extended time. 
• No bill is received for premiums. 
• Employer review of the application indicates that it is inaccurate. 
• The reclassification of the individual employees into a lower classification. 
• The employer begins to declare a smaller payroll. 
• Claimants that have or are: 
? Disgruntled, soon-to-retire, or facing disciplinary action or layoffs. 
? Involved in seasonal work that is about to end. 
? Taken unexplained or excessive time off prior to claimed injury. 
? Taken more time off than the claimed injury seems to warrant. 
? No witnesses to the accident. 
? Accidents that occurred in an area where the employee normally would not be 
working (especially if it’s a high-risk area). 
? Delayed the reporting of an accident. 
? New on the job or have a history of short-term employment. 
? A history of injuries. 
? Inappropriate or lack of medical treatment for injuries. 
? Experiencing financial difficulties. 
? Changed physicians when a work release has been issued. 
? Frequently changed medical providers. 
? Demands for quick or early settlement. 
? Never at home after a “serious” injury or can only be reached by return  
telephone calls. 
? Unusually familiar with workers’ compensation procedures. 
? Consistently uncooperative. 
? Received mail at a post office box or at an address different from employment or 
Department of Motor Vehicles. 
? Soft tissue injuries that are hard to prove. 
? Incapacitated, but seen in activities that require full mobility. 
? Independent medical exams that reveal conflicting medical information. 
? A history of self or family employment; have a trade or work in a cash business. 
? Injuries that occur in an area where the employee would normally not be working. 
? Injuries that would not normally be the type the employee should have. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1121 
? Injuries that occur on a late Friday afternoon or are reported on a Monday morning 
(if injuries are reported Monday morning, the injury could have resulted over  
the weekend). 
? Actively involved in contact sports or physically demanding hobbies. 
? Dates of disability or absences from work that does not coincide with the physician’s 
date of disability or dates of treatment. 
? Unprofessional diagnostic terminology. 
? Misspelled medical terminology throughout the medical report or hospital record. 
? A pattern of accident claims by an individual or family members. 
• Claimant that repeatedly doesn’t show up for his requested independent physical 
examinations or is not home when the regularly scheduled nurse stops by for therapy. 
• The claimant’s attorney is known for handling suspicious claims. 
• Attorney reports his representation began on the day of the reported incident. 
• Same doctor and attorney are known to handle these types of cases. 
• Claimant complains to the insurance company’s CEO in order to press for payment. 
• The attorney threatens further legal action unless a quick settlement can be made. 
• The attorney inquires about a settlement early into the life of the claim. 
• Wholesale claim handling by law firms and multiple class action suits. 
• Dates of the accident are vague or contradictory. 
• Treatment for the injury follows previous first-time visits to a provider. 
• Same provider always bills for extra time or extra consideration on a claim. 
• Provider is working through an attorney. 
• Provider is reluctant to communicate with the insurance company. 
• Provider shares the same patients with the same colleagues. 
• Provider refers patients to specific other providers. 
• Provider prescribes unnecessary supplies and/or care by a specific provider. 
• Medical records are “canned.” 
• Medical records are out of sequence and missing dates of service. 
• Different handwriting with same dates of service. 
• Lost, burned, or stolen records when requested. 
• Progress notes consistently reflect that the patient has a high degree of pain, yet his 
condition is improving or progressing as planned. 
• Inconsistent diagnosis for the treatment rendered. 
• Provider bills on a holiday or Sundays. 
• Conflicting medical reports. 
• Claims are photocopied. 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1122                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Claims for other patients are identical. 
• Billing or harassing the insurance company for payment. 
• Claimants address is different on the claim form than it is on the enrollment file. 
 
Premium Fraud Investigation Tips 
• Review the application for coverage for completeness and accuracy. 
• If the business is claiming to be new, then it should be verified that it is indeed new and 
no mod factors have been established. 
• Review the underwriting of the application for suspicious activity. If the company is a 
large company and has a small payroll, verify the number of employees, as well as their 
classification. 
• Review claims to determine if they are consistent with the type of employment reported 
and the number of employees claimed. 
• Conduct an on-site audit of their payroll and related records for the policy period as well 
as to determine where their principal place of employment is located. 
• Observe if there are too many clerical employees or other low risk occupations that 
make up the calculation leading you to believe that the records are misstated. 
• Analyze the financial statements, when available, to determine what payroll expenses 
actually are compared to what is reported. 
• Review accident and injury reports for suspicious activities. 
• Conduct surveillance as needed to observe and document various activities. 
• Document findings and report the results of the activity as required.  
 
Claimant Fraud Investigation Tips
• In spite of the possible indicators of fraud, medical treatment must be secured 
immediately, but an investigation should be opened immediately if there is a suspicion of 
fraud. 
• The manager who is responsible for the area where the injury occurred should initiate an 
investigation on each reportable accident. 
• As soon as possible the accident should be discussed with the employee. 
• Obtain a signed statement from the employee as soon as the employee is able to do so. 
• In obtaining a signed statement, the following questions should be answered as 
applicable: 
? What was the employee doing just prior to the accident, and after the accident? 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1123 
? Was the employee carrying out his regular duties and in the manner they should 
normally be conducted? 
? Had the employee been properly instructed as to how to safely perform the duties? 
When, and by whom? 
? Did they work in accordance with these instructions? 
? Did another employee cause the injury? 
? Was the equipment or machinery properly guarded and in good condition? 
? Was the equipment suited for the purpose it was being used? 
? Was the workplace properly lighted? 
? What were the housekeeping conditions in the area? 
? Does the work being done by the injured employee differ in any way from that being 
performed by other employees? 
? Is there a safer way that his operation can be performed? 
? Was the injured employee in good health when he reported to work on the date of 
the accident? 
 
Have an independent medical examination performed to document the illness. The person 
performing the exam should photograph the patient, obtain a copy of the patient’s photo 
identification such as a driver’s license, and obtain the patient’s signature. 
The following questions should be asked: 
• Are you disabled from working? 
• Are you now working part-time, full-time, or not at all? 
• What are your daily activities? 
• What is your activity level with regards to your ability to walk, jog, run, drive, swim, or 
participate in sports activities or hobbies? 
  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1201 
HEALTH CARE FRAUD 
 
According to the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS), total health care 
expenditures are estimated to have reached approximately $2.5 trillion by the end of 2009, 
and are projected to rise to over $4.5 trillion by 2019 and comprise 19.3 percent of Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP). Per person health spending is expected to reach over $8,600 by 
the end of 2011 and is projected to increase to $13,400 by the end of 2019. 
 
Health care spending continues to increase much faster than the overall economy. This gap 
between health care spending and the overall economy is one of the main reasons that fraud 
in the health care industry is so prevalent. According to the U.S. Government Accountability 
Office (GAO), the most common estimate of health insurance fraud is 10 percent of our 
total health care spending. However, because no one knows exactly what the figure is, the 
figure has also been estimated to be from 3–10 percent per year. Health care providers 
perpetrate the majority of this fraud. 
 
 
Laws Relating to Health Care Fraud 
Numerous criminal and civil federal and state laws are available in the prosecution of health 
care fraud. In addition, regulatory agencies are also available for licensure action.  
 
Federal Criminal Laws 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
As part of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996, 
Congress made a number of changes to the federal criminal code. In fact, the promulgation 
of HIPAA was the first massive sweep to wipe out health care fraud.  
 
The Act established several criminal statutes related specifically to health care fraud.  Under 
HIPAA, there are five federal crimes directed at health care fraud. Specifically, HIPAA made 
it illegal for anyone to knowingly and willfully: 
• Carry out a scheme to defraud any health care benefit program (18, U.S.C., § 1347) 
• Steal or embezzle any funds, property, or money of a health care benefit program (18, U.S.C., § 669) 
• Make false statements relating to health care matters (18, U.S.C., § 1035) 
• Obstruct a criminal investigations of a health care offense (18, U.S.C., § 1518) 
 
Health Care Fraud Financial Transactions   
1.1202                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
More specifically, under section 1347, which establishes a federal offense of “health care 
fraud,” it is illegal for anyone to:  
• Knowingly and willfully  
• Executes, or attempts to execute  
• A scheme or artifice intended to 
? Defraud a health care benefit program, or 
? By false or fraudulent means, obtain money or property owned by, or under the 
custody or control of, any health care benefit program 
 
The term health care benefit program as used in these statutes is defined to mean “any public or 
private plan or contract, affecting commerce, under which any medical benefit, item, or 
service is provided to any individual, and includes any individual or entity who is providing a 
medical benefit, item, or service for which payment may be made under the plan  
or contract.” 
 
The Act also provides that a judge order a person convicted of a federal health care offense 
to forfeit any property that can be traced from the proceeds received from the offense. More 
information concerning these statutes is set out in the Law section. 
 
Moreover, pursuant to its purpose in providing funds to combat health care fraud, HIPAA 
launched the Fraud and Abuse Control Program, which: 
• Coordinates federal, state, and local law enforcement programs to control fraud and 
abuse as applicable to Medicaid programs;  
• Conducts investigations, audits, evaluations, and inspections as they relate to delivery and 
payment for Medicaid services;  
• Modifies and establishes Safe Harbor Provisions;  
• Issues advisory opinions and special fraud alerts; and  
• Provides reporting and disclosure requirements of adverse actions (under the Health 
Care Fraud and Abuse Data Collection Program).  
 
Furthermore, as part of the implementation of HIPAA, the Secretary of the Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS) was directed to create the Health Integrity and 
Protection Data Bank (HIPDB). The HIPDB is a reporting mechanism that allows users to 
access and review final adverse actions taken against practitioners, providers, and suppliers. 
Access to the data bank, however, is limited to federal and state government agencies and 
health plans.  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1203 
The Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute (42, U.S.C., § 1320a-7b(b)) 
The Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute (also known as the Federal Healthcare 
Anti-kickback Act) may also be used to combat healthcare fraud. This statute prohibits an 
individual from making payments to induce the purchase of healthcare goods or services that 
will be paid for by a federal health care program. Specifically, the statute prohibits: 
• The knowing and willful 
• Payment or receipt of any form of remuneration (including kickbacks, bribes, and 
rebates)  
• To induce someone to recommend or to purchase, order, or recommend any service that 
may be paid for under a federal health care program 
 
The statute encompasses a very broad array of activities that can be classified as Medicaid 
fraud. It applies to all federally funded health care programs, not just Medicaid.  
 
The statute criminally penalizes individuals who actually receive, as well as those who merely 
solicit, Medicaid remuneration. So long as the defendant’s intent is knowing and willful, and 
his means of involvement includes the receipt or solicitation of the kickback, the crime is 
prosecutable. But generally, it is difficult to determine whether the defendant intended to act 
knowingly and willfully, and neither “knowingly” nor “willfully” is defined in the statute. 
Thus, their interpretations are left for the courts to decipher, and this has inherently led to 
discrepancies in determining a defendant’s intent. 
 
The following examples are types of activities that typically violate the Medicare and 
Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute: 
• Payments for Medicaid patient referrals 
• Payments from a self-referral joint venture to investors for Medicaid patient referrals 
• Involvement in a consignment agreement, whereby performance under the agreement is 
based upon a percentage-based compensation scheme 
• A physician who performs little or no services to Medicaid patients yet receives large 
amounts of money for referring those patients to hospitals under ostensible services 
contracts 
 
The Stark Law (Physician Self-Referrals) 
The Stark Law (also known as the physician self -referral law) attempts to limit the ability of 
physicians to profit from their referrals by prohibiting physicians from referring 
Medicare/Medicaid patients for designated health services (DHS) entities with which the 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1204                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
physician or his immediate family member has a financial relationship. The law was passed in 
two phases.   
 
Stark I was enacted as part of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989; it prohibited 
a physician from referring a patient to a clinical laboratory with which he (or an immediate 
family member) has a financial relationship. 
 
Stark II provided additional amendments and expanded the referral and billing prohibitions 
to additional “designated health services.” It strengthened Stark I’s prohibitions on physician 
referrals from certain designated health services (DHS) entities with which the physician or 
his immediate family member has a financial relationship. 
 
As related to Medicaid, Stark II prohibits a physician, in exchange for a payment of equity or 
reduction of debt, without an exception, to make: 
• A Medicaid referral;  
• A Medicaid claim; or  
• Compensation arrangement.  
 
In addition to these codified requirements, states often supplement the federal requirements 
with more stringent state requirements. For example, in Pennsylvania, physicians are 
prohibited from making any automatic referrals, whether they are enunciated in direct or 
indirect agreements with other health providers.  
 
Despite the general rule that physicians cannot profit from their referrals, there are several 
exceptions and safe harbor provisions to protect physicians from making certain referrals. In 
part, these exceptions include: referrals to and from physicians in the same group practice, 
same in-office ancillary services, prepaid plans, legitimate personal services arrangements, 
and physician recruitment. 
 
Although Stark II appears to mimic the Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute, the 
two laws are different. First, unlike the Anti-Kickback Act, which applies to all individuals, 
Stark II only applies to physicians and their family members. Second, where the Medicare 
and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute provides criminal penalties for its violations, Stark II is 
codified as a civil statute, and therefore only imposes monetary penalties, suspension, and 
termination. Finally, under Stark II, each Medi caid entity providing items or services for 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1205 
payment must comply with reporting requirements and disclose information relating to the 
entity’s ownership, investment, and compensation arrangements. 
 
Violations of Stark II may subject a defendant to  $15,000 for each service improperly billed 
or claimed, $100,000 for participation in a circumvention arrangement or scheme, exclusion 
from participating as a provider in Medicaid programs, and/or a penalty of $10,000 each day 
reporting is delinquent. 
 
False Claims and Statements 
Though there is a statute specifically designed to combat false claims in connection with 
health care benefits programs, the federal false claims statutes may be used to combat certain 
types of health care fraud. Some examples of false claims and statements include: 
• Falsified contractor qualifications 
• False certifications or assurances 
• False records or invoices 
• Invoices from nonexistent companies 
• Claims made in duplicate or altered invoices 
• Billing for fictitious employees 
• Billing for goods and services not provided 
• Inflated costs or substitution of cheaper goods 
 
Although these statutes are discussed in more detail in the Law section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual, this discussion will provide a brief overview of the main false claims and 
statements statutes used to combat health care fraud, including: false statements under 
section 1001, the criminal False Claims Act, and the Civil False Claims Act. 
 
FALSE STATEMENTS (18, U.S.C., § 1001) 
Although there are a number of federal statutes that prohibit making false claims and 
statements to the federal government, the term false statement usually refers to the Federal 
False Statements statute laid out in Section 1001 of Title 18, United States Code. Briefly 
stated, the law prohibits a person from lying to or concealing information from a federal 
official. 
 
Under section 1001, a false statement can be oral, written, sworn or unsworn, signed or 
unsigned. The false statement, however, must be about a material fact, and it must be 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1206                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
capable of influencing the outcome of the agency action. The elements of a typical section 
1001 violation are set forth below: 
• The defendant made a false statement (or used a false document) 
• That was material 
• Regarding a matter within the jurisdiction of any agency of the United States 
• With knowledge of its falsity 
 
THE CRIMINAL FALSE CLAIMS ACT (18, U.S.C., § 287) 
This statute makes it illegal to present or make any false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim 
against any agency or department of the United States. The crime is complete when the 
claim is presented and payment of the claim is not an element of the offense.  
 
To establish violation of this statute, the government must establish all of the following 
elements:  
• The defendant made or presented  
• Any claim that was false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
• The defendant knew the claim was false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
 
Violators of this statute may be imprisoned not more than five years and subject to a fine of 
$250,000. 
 
THE CIVIL FALSE CLAIMS ACT (31, U.S.C., § 3729 ET SEQ.) 
The False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. §§ 3729 through 3733) is a civil statute that generally 
provides liability for false statements and representations made to an officer or employee of 
the federal government. As the civil counterpart to the criminal False Claims Act, it provides 
a separate civil cause of action that may be taken in addition to a criminal prosecution. 
 
The Civil False Claims Act provides in part that a person who violates its provisions is liable 
to the government for any treble damages it sustains and a civil penalty of $5,000 to $10,000 
per false claim. 
 
The penalties for violation of the Act range from $5,000 to $10,000 plus up to three times 
the amount of the government’s damages. In  addition, violators may be suspended from 
participating in Medicaid programs. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1207 
In addition to allowing the government to recover penalties and damages for false claims, 
the Civil False Claims Act allows a private party to prosecute a civil action against the 
perpetrator(s) on behalf of the government. This is called a qui tam action and is discussed in 
further detail below. 
 
The most commonly prosecuted acts under the statute result from the following: 
• The receipt of false or fraudulent claims paid by the government 
• The use of false or fraudulent records or statements to avoid payment to the government 
 
To bring an action under the Civil False Claims Act stemming from Medicaid fraud, there 
must be a false statement or representation in connection with either of the following: 
• The wrongful disposal of Medicaid assets 
• Solicitation or payment of Medicaid claims 
 
Even if a state’s Medicaid program is admini stered exclusively by the state, because the 
program is subsidized with federal funds, all false or fraudulent claims submitted to the 
state’s Medicaid program fall within the guise of  the Civil False Claims Act as claims against 
the federal government. 
 
The following examples are typical violations under the Civil False Claims Act: 
• Physician billing for services provided by residents as if the services were performed by 
the physician 
• Billing for upcoded medical services covered by Medicaid 
• Marketing and selling bundles tests (necessa ry and unnecessary tests) to referring 
physicians, who then bill Medicaid at a higher rate than authorized 
• Misdiagnosing Medicaid beneficiaries as having medical conditions, and then billing for 
services that wouldn’t otherwise be covered 
 
Computer Fraud 
Section 1030 of Title 18, U.S. Code, may also be used to combat health care fraud schemes 
involving computers. Under this section, any scheme that uses a computer as the instrument 
or vehicle by which funds could be illegally transferred or uses a computer to obtain 
confidential information may be prosecuted.  
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1208                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An insurance company employee generates a false claim in the company computer making a 
fraudulent payment to a friend who then  shares the bounty with the employee. 
 
Money Laundering 
The money laundering statutes may also be effective in deterring and punishing individuals 
who commit health care fraud. Section 1956 of Title 18, U.S. Code, criminalizes financial 
transactions involving proceeds of unlawful activity. Property qualifies as the proceeds of 
illegal activity if it is derived from a “specified unlawful activity,” which HIPAA amended to 
include health care offenses.  
 
Using the federal money laundering statutes is beneficial because they allow the government 
to seize property through civil forfeiture (i.e., the government may seize property before 
judgment to ensure it will be secure until a hearing can be held). 
 
The text of the money laundering statutes can be found in the Law section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual. 
 
Other Federal Statutes 
The following federal laws are also commonly used in the prosecution of health care fraud 
cases. More detail on each of these statutes can be found in the “Law Related to Fraud” 
chapter in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
• Mail and Wire Fraud, Title 18, U.S.C., §§ 1341, 1343 : Mail and wire fraud makes it a crime 
to use the mails or wire communications to perpetrate a scheme to defraud a victim of 
money or property (e.g., present a false claim to Medicare, state health plan, or private 
insurer).  
• Conspiracy, Title 18, U.S.C., § 371, Title 18, U.S.C., § 286 : Section 286 makes it a crime for 
two or more people to agree or conspire to defraud the United States by obtaining, or 
aiding in obtaining, payment or allowance of any false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim. 
• Obstruction of Federal Audit, Title 18, U.S.C., § 1516 : This statute, originally passed in 1988, 
makes it a felony for anyone to influence, obstruct, or impede a federal auditor in the 
performance of his official duties. This statute is relevant to health care fraud because 
audits are the main tool used by the government to monitor healthcare provider 
performance and are generally the first step in any health care fraud investigation.  
• Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Statute, Title 18, U.S.C., § 1961–1968: 
RICO outlaws the investment of ill-gotten gains in another business enterprise, the 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1209 
acquisition of an interest in an enterprise through certain illegal acts, and the conduct of 
the affairs of an enterprise through such acts. 
• Electronic Funds Transfer Act, Title 15, U.S.C., § 1693n: Section 1693n applies to paperless 
money transfers between accounts, and in general, it attaches criminal liability to the acts 
of giving false or inaccurate information under the banking laws and regulations and 
failing to provide information required under the banking laws and regulations. 
 
Civil Remedies 
There are many federal statutes that victims of health care fraud can use to obtain relief. The 
False Claims Act and RICO both provide for civil remedies in addition to criminal penalties.  
 
In addition, one of the most effective remedies is available under the Civil Monetary 
Penalties Law (42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7a). Under this  law, administrative actions can be invoked 
against providers who defraud any federally funded program by filing false claims or other 
improper billing practices. Any person (including an organization, agency, or other entity, 
but excluding a beneficiary) who violates the law is subject to civil monetary penalties. 
Violators can be fined up to $10,000 for each medical service that was fraudulently 
represented, and they may be excluded from participating in government programs.  
 
State Statutes 
Although fraud is illegal in every state, not all states have specific legislation against insurance 
fraud. Laws such as “grand theft,” “scheme to  defraud,” or “fraud by deception” must be 
used to charge offenders. Nineteen states have passed legislation that specifically prohibits 
insurance fraud although the effectiveness varies according to the provisions in each statute. 
For example, in some states, health insurance fraud is illegal, but there is no immunity to the 
insurance company for reporting fraud. 
 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) adopted the Insurance 
Fraud Prevention Model Act. The key provisions include:  
• Mandatory reporting of fraud. 
• Immunity from prosecution for reporting fraud. 
• Making insurance fraud a felony under state law.  
• Requiring a fraud warning on claim forms. 
• Requiring anti-fraud initiatives including mandatory special investigation units. 
• Restitution to the victim. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1210                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Regulatory Boards 
Since most medical practitioners are required to be licensed by their state to practice, the 
regulatory boards have jurisdiction over the licensees and can take action when appropriate. 
The regulatory boards will take action when the patient’s health is in jeopardy, fraud has 
been committed, continuing education requirements are not met, or other similar 
circumstances. In most instances, when a licensee is convicted of fraud, it is not automatic 
that his license is suspended or revoked. A separate action and investigation must be 
completed for that to happen. In many cases, however, when there is not enough evidence 
to sustain a criminal conviction, the licensing boards may be able to take action and offer 
relief. 
 
“Running” and “Capping” Legislation 
Many states have enacted legislation to prevent attorneys from using runners or cappers to 
solicit business. Although state disciplinary rules generally prohibit this practice, very few 
attorneys have received any substantial sanctions. Some states, such as California, have taken 
the initiative to criminalize running and capping.  
 
Under a California law passed in July 1993, insurance companies now have the right to bring 
a lawsuit against any person who hires runners or cappers to procure clients or patients to 
obtain workers’ compensation benefits (Ins. Code 1971.7). This action need not be brought 
in the insurance company’s name. Instead, the insurance company can act on behalf of the 
“People of the State of California.”  
 
 
Fraud by the Insurance Company 
Frauds committed by insurance companies include some of the following: 
• Submission of false documentation and improper billing 
• Mishandling claims 
• Failure to pay legitimate claims 
• Charging unapproved rates 
• Requesting rate increases based on fraudulent data 
• Using illegal or deceptive tactics to sell insurance 
• Failure to give “fee breaks”  
• Patient screening 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1211 
Submission of False Documents 
If the insurance company acts as an intermediary for the payer, such as Medicare, then the 
insurance company commits fraud when it improperly bills the government or submits false 
cost reports or audits. 
 
Mishandling Claims 
Mishandling claims also arises primarily in the area of an insurance company acting as an 
intermediary administering the insurance program of the payer. The insurance company is 
under a duty to try to detect false claims. Although it is impossible to detect every fraudulent 
claim, if a company bypasses its own claims verification procedures, it can be guilty of fraud. 
 
Failure to Pay Legitimate Claims 
The insurance company or carrier is required to pay any claim that is properly submitted, 
contains all the required the information, absent of fraud, and has benefits available. An 
insurance company might commit fraud when claims are consistently rejected even though 
the required information has been submitted. Many states have regulations regarding the 
amount of time an insurance company has to pay a “clean” claim — one that has all the 
needed information. Even if an insured has committed fraud in the past, and for some 
reason or another is still an insured, the insurance company must still adjudicate a valid 
claim. 
 
Charging Unapproved Rates 
Some states require insurance companies to obtain approval on their premium rates. Until 
the approval is received, the rates cannot be charged to the insured. An insurance company 
may improperly begin charging the unapproved rate before it is allowed to. 
 
Requesting Rate Increases Based on Fraudulent Data 
Similar to the above, insurance companies or carriers needing regulatory approval for rate 
increases use cost data to justify their increases. In order to get their rate hike, they may use 
fraudulent cost data.  
 
Deceptive or Illegal Sales Practices 
Insurance companies may promote or condone deceptive or illegal sales practices in order to 
increase sales. The most common example is to disguise an insurance policy as a savings plan 
or investment. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1212                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Failure to Give “Fee Breaks” 
An insurance company may be guilty of fraud if it fails to pass on fee breaks it negotiates 
with its providers. The alleged overcharging occurs when an insurance company negotiates a 
discount on a medical bill. If the company does not pass along the discount, the consumer’s 
co-payment is made on the full price rather than the discounted price, and the consumer 
ends up paying a higher percentage of their bill than they should. For example, if a bill is 
$1,000 and a 50 percent discount is negotiated, the consumer’s 20 percent portion should 
equal $100. If the company does not pass along the discount, the consumer pays 20 percent 
of the full $1,000, or $200.  
 
Patient Screening 
In the managed care environment, because so much emphasis is placed on preventive care, 
some insurance companies may be reducing their risk by limiting their insured to only 
healthy patients. 
 
Detection 
Detection of fraud committed by an insurance company may include the following: 
• Review complaints by insureds. 
• Compare financial statement data to data used to request rates. 
• Compare rates charged with rates approved. 
• Compare discounts negotiated with providers with the amounts allowed on the claims 
and coinsurance charged. 
• Review rejected members to determine if underwriting guidelines were abused. 
 
 
Employee Claims Fraud 
Employees of insurers, especially claims examiners and customer service representatives, can 
present additional problems to the fraud examiner. Due to their ability to access claims and 
subscriber files, the frauds perpetrated can be almost limitless. 
• Claims fraud using the employee’s contract  
• Claims fraud using another insured’s contract number 
• Claims payment using a relative’s contract 
• Claims adjustment system 
• Payment for canceled contracts or deceased insureds 
• Improper payee  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1213 
Claims Fraud Using the Employee’s Contract  
Claims employees generally have access to claims data and claim forms. They can sometimes 
adjust claims or pull someone’s claim, change the claimant’s contract number, and have the 
claim processed.  
 
Claims Fraud Using Another Insured’s Contract Number  
Employees who have access to insureds enrollment file can locate an insured with a similar 
name as the employee. From there, the employee only has to complete a claim form and 
submit the claims through the regular processing system. The employee only has to put his 
own address in order to receive the payment. 
 
Claims Payment Using a Relative’s Contract 
Employees can fabricate claims and submit them under a relative’s contract number. 
 
Claims Adjustment System  
Claims that are legitimately paid incorrectly need to be adjusted. An adjustment examiner can 
adjust a claim for fraudulent purposes also. 
 
Payment for Canceled Contracts or Deceased Insureds   
If an adjuster has access to the enrollment files, he may run across a deceased insured. By 
submitting or processing a claim before cancellation, an examiner can manipulate the claims 
system and divert payment to himself. 
 
Improper Payee  
A claim approver overrides a claim payment system and pays out claims to improper payees. 
The claim approver inserts her son and daughter-in-law as payee. Checks are submitted to 
other than the insured’s address. 
 
Detection 
The following steps can be used to determine if a company is dealing with an employee who 
is defrauding the system: 
• Pull high-dollar claim payments for insureds. Investigate all unusual patterns by  
verifying services. 
• Review printouts for special payee codes to search for employees. 
• Review printouts for a high number of adjusted claims per insured. 
  
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1214                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Review printouts of recently canceled contracts for unusual claims activity just prior to 
cancellation. 
• Once unusual activity has been identified, follow normal investigative procedures. 
• Review address change lists for employee names or unusual activity. 
 
 
Agent Fraud 
Nearly all insurance companies use the services of a broker or agent external to the firm. 
Unfortunately, the best interests of the insurance company are not always served. Several 
schemes have been identified that can be classified as fraudulent. 
 
Phony Groups 
Agents will set up bogus companies in order to sell health insurance to individuals at  
group rates. 
 
Phony or Nonexistent Policies 
Rather than going to the trouble of setting up a bogus company, many agents will sell a 
phony policy, and take the money and run. 
 
Medical Underwriting Fraud 
The broker will write a policy knowing that the client has pre-existing conditions that would 
prevent acceptance for coverage. 
 
Eligibility Fraud 
A broker may seek to add ineligible family members, girlfriends, or associates to a group 
policy by representing them as employees.  
 
Another eligibility fraud is where a broker may sell a low-cost group policy to an 
organization that employs a small percentage of people with serious health problems. A 
better rate can be obtained by separating healthy people from sick people. The broker splits 
off the unhealthy people in their own group, placing the coverage with an insurer of last 
resort such as a carrier that is given favorable tax status in exchange for issuing coverage  
to anyone. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1215 
ERISA Fraud 
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act regulates all trust accounts held by an 
employer for the purpose of paying benefits such as retirement annuities or health and life 
policies. Under the Act, if an insurance company believes that a plan administrator is 
engaging in violations of the Act, it is required to report the matter to the U.S. Department 
of Labor. As an example, a corporation may use funds collected from employees through 
payroll deduction to finance daily operations of the company.  
 
Payment Inducements 
These schemes involve brokers furnishing group coverage to individuals who would not 
otherwise qualify for such policies by adding them to legitimate groups or establishing a 
fictitious group for the purpose of obtaining waivers and/or cheaper rates. The broker 
profits not only from the normal sales commission, but also from a “surcharge” or billing 
fee that is added to the published premium that is collected from the policy holder by the 
broker. In another scenario, a broker may charge a markup for adding employees to a 
legitimate group.  
 
Switching Policies 
This scheme involves the agents telling the customers that they are obtaining one policy, 
taking the premium for that policy, and then buying a cheaper policy with less coverage 
instead. The agents then pocket the difference. 
 
 
Provider Fraud 
Provider fraud is a fraud perpetrated by medical practitioners, medical suppliers, or medical 
facilities on patients or customers in order to increase their own income by illicit means. 
 
The potential for fraud involving providers has grown with the increased use of computer 
equipment in generating bills. Additionally, providers possess the knowledge of medical 
techniques, procedures, and terminology needed to avoid being questioned by claim-
 handling personnel. More insurance companies are contracting directly with providers for 
billing arrangements, leaving patients out of the loop. In addition, patients are usually 
reluctant to accuse physicians of wrongdoing because they rely on the provider’s continued 
services and because, when providers engage in fraudulent practices, they often forgive any 
out-of-pocket expenses the patient incurs. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1216                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Rolling Labs 
A rolling lab is a mobile laboratory that solicits insureds to participate in health screening tests 
at no cost to the insured. These labs are usually located in semi-trailers parked at health 
clubs, spas, shopping centers, or on vacant property. 
 
Patients are contacted by telephone for a free physical exam. Subsequent to exam, the 
insurance company is billed for eight to 10 claims totaling $8,000–$10,000 for a single date 
of testing performed by multiple providers. Additional claims are billed for later service dates 
even though no more testing is done. The lab moves to another location prior to the patient 
receiving the test results to avoid detection. 
 
The providers market their services in many ways. One way is to rent office space in a 
doctor’s office for one day and then test all of that doctor’s patients. The testing equipment 
itself might arrive in a truck or van and moves from one office to another. Another method 
involves setting up a temporary operation in a shopping center. Rolling labs are also set up at 
health spas, with all members tested at no charge. The most common method, however, is to 
simply set up a small office for a temporary period and use telephone solicitations. 
 
Clinical Labs 
Clinical labs have devised fraudulent billing practices to encourage physicians to order 
unnecessary tests on patients. The schemes caused specific blood tests to be included in a 
panel of frequently ordered tests. The ordering physician pays nothing or a nominal fee for 
the extra tests. The tests are then unbundled and billed separately by the lab to government 
payers and insurance companies.  
 
Suppliers 
Ambulance Transportation 
Fraudulent billing for ambulance transportation can include bills for more mileage than 
incurred, for trips never taken, or for noncovered trips. 
 
Infusion Care 
Fraud schemes involving infusion care treatment include: 
• Services billed at abnormally high rates in comparison to cost. 
• Bills for noncovered patients. 
• Bills in excess of physician’s prescription. 
• Bills for unnecessary treatment. 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1217 
• Kickbacks given to the prescribing physician. 
 
Durable Medical Equipment Suppliers 
Fraud schemes perpetrated by suppliers of durable medical equipment frequently involve: 
• Falsified prescriptions. 
• Excessive supplies. 
• Equipment not delivered or billed before delivery. 
• Billing for equipment rental after equipment was returned. 
• Noncovered supplies,(for example, incontinent care kits). 
• Milk supplement scam. 
• Lymphedema pumps. 
• Scooter scam. 
 
Home Health Companies 
Fraud involving home health care companies gained national exposure after the federal 
government’s investigation of ABC Home Health  Care was released. At the time of the 
investigation, ABC was the largest privately held home health care provider in the United 
States. In 1994, ABC made some 7.8 million visits and billed Medicare $615.9 million. 
Among the types of fraud identified at ABC were: 
• Medical records were altered to make it appear that patients continued to need home 
health visits. 
• Managers directed employees to continue vi siting patients who, in the employee’s 
opinion, did not qualify for home health care because they were not homebound. 
• A manager directed a nurse to record visits that were never made. 
• A manager forged physicians’ signatures on plans of care. 
• If a care plan was signed by a physician, employees would alter the number of visits.  
• ABC reportedly charged Medicare for the cost  of acquiring other home health agencies 
by paying owners a small sum up front and the balance in salary under the form of 
employment agreements. 
• Managers directed employees to market ABC and its services with the intent of charging 
Medicare for costs that were not reimbursable. 
 
Pharmacy 
Fraud schemes stemming from pharmacy transactions include: 
• Merchandising — substituting something of value for a prescription drug. 
• Billing for brand name drugs but dispensing generic drugs. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1218                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Billing beyond amount prescribed. 
• Billing for drugs not prescribed. 
• Billing for a high-priced generic drug but dispensing a lower-priced generic drug. 
• Package size differential—billing third-party payers for the price of drugs purchased in 
small package sizes when they were purchased at less cost in larger quantities. 
• Black market purchasing—purchasing drugs at significantly reduced rates then 
dispensing at regular prices. 
 
Chiropractors 
Dishonest chiropractors may engage in fraud schemes, such as: 
• Billing for services never rendered or unnecessary services. 
• Billing for multiple family members. 
• Purchasing individual contracts for their patients. 
• Billing for physical therapy services when contract does not cover chiropractors. 
• Billing for excessive services. 
 
EXAMPLE 
While certain treatments by chiropractors are usually not covered by insurance, similar 
treatments by physicians may be covered. To correct this perceived inequity, some 
chiropractors have set up medical corporations and then hired medical doctors as employees. 
The chiropractor is CEO of the corporation and has total discretion of how the funds are 
disbursed. The net result of this set-up is that a medical doctor gives the stamp of approval 
to charges that might not otherwise be paid, and the chiropractor reaps the profits. 
 
Chiro-Shenanigans 
PATIENTS FOR LIFE 
Charging annual fees that exceed $5,000, practice management firms teach chiropractors 
how to build million-dollar practices in as little as two years. The literature advises the 
chiropractors not to tell patients the results of their initial exam or how long they will need 
treatment until they’ve been indoctrinated into the benefits of lifelong chiropractic care. 
 
Further, they promote care of infants that will continue for the lifetime of the patient. 
Patients who question the continuation of treatment are given the guilty treatment: “It’s a 
choice you have to make depending on how important your health is to you.” 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1219 
Patients don’t seem to be cured until the insurance benefits run out. When benefits are 
renewed in the next calendar year, the symptoms return, and a new series of treatment 
begins until benefits run out again.  
 
PATIENT RECRUITING PRACTICES 
Some chiropractors use questionable recruiting practices to lure new patients into their 
practices. These might include: 
• Coupons for free meals where the benefits of chiropractic care are explained. 
• Advertising for free initial care. 
• Booths at health fairs, malls, and spas offering free screenings. 
 
TREATMENT FOR NONSPINAL CONDITIONS 
At one time chiropractors only treated spinal problems; however, many chiropractors now 
claim that they can treat any medical condition, including cancer, hernias, pneumonia, 
anemia, and heart conditions. For example, one chiropractic pamphlet stated, “If you are 
suffering from kidney disease, the logical course is to visit your chiropractor. He will 
examine your spine to see where your trouble is.” 
 
OTHER QUESTIONABLE CHIROPRACTIC TREATMENT 
Other types of questionable chiropractic treatment include: 
• Surrogate testing where the leg of a mother is flexed to diagnose her child’s illness. 
• Spinal manipulation of newborn babies to get over the trauma of birth. 
• Spinal manipulation to treat epilepsy, asthma, bedwetting, and learning disabilities. 
• Applied kinesiology whereby diseases can be diagnosed by testing muscles with the help 
of particular food or nutrients. 
• Analysis of x-rays to identify homicidal tendencies. 
• The creation of a treatment plan prior to examination. 
• Spinal manipulations begun at an early age to prevent cancer.  
• Iridology or the examination of patients’ eyes for markings that will indicate what 
diseases the patient has or will get. 
• A magnetic device placed over the thymus gland to diagnose nutrient deficiencies. 
 
Red Flags 
Warning signs that a chiropractor may be engaging in dishonest practices include a 
chiropractor who: 
• Takes full spine or repeated x-rays. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1220                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Prescribes treatments before a medical history or physical are taken. 
• Solicits family members. 
• Promises to prevent disease through regular check-ups. 
• Promises no out-of-pocket expenses for patients. 
• Ends treatment when their insurance benefits are exhausted, but recontacts patients for 
maintenance treatment when their benefits are renewed. 
 
Podiatrists 
Like other medical providers, unethical podiatrists may: 
• Bill for services never rendered. 
• Bill for noncovered services. 
• Provide kickbacks to suppliers. 
 
Ophthalmologists 
Ophthalmol ogists may engage in fraudulent practices such as: 
• Billing for services never rendered and noncovered services. 
• Billing for unnecessary services. 
 
Psychiatrists and Psychiatric Clinics 
Fraud schemes committed by psychiatrists and psychiatric clinics can include: 
• Billing for services never rendered. 
• Billing for noncovered services, such as weight loss services or biofeedback. 
• Billing for services under psychiatrist’s name when the service was actually performed by 
a noncovered but licensed provider, such as a drug counselor or minister. 
• Billing for services performed by an unlicensed employee. 
• Admitting patients with false diagnoses. 
 
Anesthesiologists
Dishonest anesthesiologists may bills for more time than was rendered. 
 
Dental Fraud 
Fraud involving dental providers might include bills for: 
• X-rays that were not taken. 
• Crowns that were not cemented. 
• Amalgams for teeth that were not filled. 
• Teeth that were not extracted. 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1221 
• Fillings for teeth that have previously been extracted. 
• More fillings than a person can possibly have. 
 
Allergists 
Fraud schemes involving allergists can include bills for: 
• Allergy testing not performed 
• Unnecessary services 
• Allergy shots not given. 
 
Infertility Treatment 
Infertility treatment is generally not a service covered by insurance. However, some less-than-honest 
providers will bill such services as hormonal replacement therapy in order to  
be paid. 
 
Impostor Provider 
An impostor provider is a provider who does not exist but bills fraudulent claims. A variation 
on this scam involves assuming the identify of a deceased provider and practice—or putting 
together a group of licensed providers—and fraudulently billing under the group’s provider 
identification code. 
 
Investigation Tips 
To help determine whether a provider is an imposter: 
• Call the telephone number on the bill to determine if the provider exists; however, keep 
in mind that a fictitious provider may actually have rented a location and established a 
telephone number. 
• Contact the applicable licensing board or state to determine if the alleged provider was 
licensed to practice in the area at the time the service was allegedly provided. 
• Check the provider’s Social Security number or Tax Identification number (if listed on 
the bill) with the applicable licensing board. 
• Visit the provider’s physical address to determine if it is valid; if it is, speak to the 
superintendent to determine the tenant for that address. 
• Contact the Postal Inspector to verify what mail is being dropped at that address. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1222                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
False Diagnoses 
When a provider knows that a service is not covered, he may use false diagnoses or 
procedure code manipulation to get a claim for the service paid. Examples of common 
services not covered are: 
• Annual physical examination. 
• School physicals. 
• Weight loss programs. 
• Stop smoking programs. 
• Investigational or experimental procedures. 
• Cosmetic surgery. 
 
In addition, physicians may justify the ordering of expensive x-rays or other diagnostic 
services by falsely purporting that a need exists to make such diagnostic inquiries. The 
services are rendered, but because is the claim for the services is based on false information 
and is used to deceive the insurance company, it is considered a false claim. 
 
Red Flags of Provider Fraud 
Warning signs that a provider is engaging in fraudulent practices include: 
• Pressure for rapid adjudication of claims. 
• Threats of legal action for delay in making payments. 
• Frequent telephone inquiries on claim status. 
• Assertive providers who demand same-day claim payment and special handling. 
• Charges submitted for payment with no supporting documentation available (such as x-
 rays or lab results). 
• Use of a P.O. box as return addresses. 
• Insured’s address on claim form is the same as provider. 
• Routine (not specialized) treatment for patients living more than 150 miles from  
the provider. 
• Referring physician and provider of service in same professional corporation. 
• Medical records that have been altered. 
• Medical records that have additional informat ion attached that would make an apparent 
noncovered service now covered. 
• Missing pages of medical records that would cover the period of time under review. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1223 
Fraud by the Medical Staff 
Employees of providers also have an opportunity to steal and cover up theft of cash. They 
can submit fraudulent claims for patients and divert the payments to themselves. If they are 
covered under insurance, they can also use their own contract to submit fraudulent claims. 
For many employees, care rendered by their employer (doctor) to them or their family is 
free, but claims may be filed and assignment not accepted. 
 
Another scheme involves the provider’s office calling in orders for unneeded prescription 
drugs to pharmacies. Once the drugs are picked up, they can be sold. For example, in a case 
involving collusion between a medical office employee and an elderly lady in a retirement 
community, the elderly lady had developed a business selling the drugs purchased from the 
employee to her friends and neighbors in her community. If the employee is in collusion 
with an insured, the fraudsters can collect not only from the sale of the drugs, but also from 
the proceeds of insurance claims. 
 
 
Kickbacks in the Health Care Industry 
Kickbacks in the health care industry can come from several sources. The medical 
community is facing competition that it has not faced in the past, and monetary offers to 
prospective patients have been difficult to refuse. For example, in one South Florida 
community, incentives such as free transportation to medical facilities, shopping centers, and 
refreshments are common. 
 
Examples of kickbacks are: 
• Payment for referral of patients 
• Waiver of deductible and co-payments 
• Payment for insurance contracts 
• Payment for vendor contracts 
 
Payment for Referral of Patients 
Providers in an area of high competition will pay from $50 to $500 to cappers or runners  for 
recruiting new patients. In addition, patients may receive $50 if they refer a patient to a 
provider. The provider makes up for the kickback in the unnecessary billing of medical 
expenses or false claims. In addition, providers will pay kickbacks to other physicians for 
patient referrals. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1224                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Waiver of Deductibles and Co-payments 
Most insurance contracts require patients to pay a deductible and co-payment for services 
rendered. One of the reasons for having co-payments is to make insureds take an active part 
in the financial responsibility for their care. To attract patients, however, providers will 
forgive the patient’s out-of-pocket expense, but will make up for it in additional services that 
are billed to the insurance company. 
 
Payment for Insurance Contracts 
Physicians with patients who are facing long-term care or lifetime treatment, such as dialysis 
for kidney failure, may purchase contracts for their patients. This ensures that the provider 
will be paid, and the patient has no out-of-pocket expense. 
 
Payment for Vendor Contracts 
Companies doing business with medical practitioners will pay a “consulting” fee for referring 
business to them or using their supplies. 
 
Payments to Adjusters 
In order to get a claim settled quickly, an insured, or someone operating on his behalf, may 
bribe adjusters or other claims-handling personnel to approve or speed up the payment of  
a claim. 
 
 
Inflated Billings 
Health care billings can be inflated by providers as well as insureds. The following are some 
of the most common fraud schemes encountered by investigators and claims approvers: 
• Altering claims  
• Adding services 
• Code manipulation 
 
Altered Claims 
Altering valid claims can be accomplished using a pen; photocopier; or scanner, computer, 
and printer. Common alterations are:  
• Amounts changed 
• Date of service changed 
• Name of patient changed 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1225 
For example, a medical bill can be altered by placing an additional number in front of the 
amount charged. The date of service can be altered so that it becomes a covered expense 
rather than one that was incurred prior to being eligible for coverage. The individual 
submitting a claim can change the name on the bill from a noncovered family member to 
one who is covered under the contract. 
 
Detection 
Procedures can help identify altered claims include: 
• Analyzing charges and identifying any excessive claims for prescription or medical 
services above an acceptable level. 
• Looking for any alterations, erasures, changes of  ink, or white-outs on the original bill 
prior to paying the claim. This is important in today’s environment in which original 
bills, checks, and other documents are destroyed as soon as they are microfilmed to 
minimize storage space for record keeping.  
• Training adjusters to look for obvious alterations when processing claims. 
 
Added Services 
Some fraudsters add on services never rendered to dates of actual services. In these cases, 
the verification process is the same as the procedures listed under the alteration process. 
 
Code Manipulation 
Code manipulation is a problem that is faced by all health insurers. Each service is identified 
using the American Medical Association’s uniformly accepted coding system, called the 
Physicians’ Current Procedural Terminology (CPT). Medicare and most private insurers have 
developed fee schedules that use CPT codes and their accompanying narrative descriptions 
as the basis for paying providers.  
 
However, because the coding system is complicated, providers and insurers often have 
difficulty identifying the codes that most accurately describe the services provided. The 
coding system is difficult to use because it attempts to identify codes for all accepted medical 
procedures, including codes to describe minor procedures that are components of more 
comprehensive procedures. Payment policies add to the difficulty. For example, the fee for 
surgery often includes the cost of related services for the global service period, that is, for a 
set number of days before and after the surgery. To prevent overpayment in these cases, 
insurers need to identify when claims for surgery include codes that represent related 
services and reduce the payment accordingly.  
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1226                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
It is difficult for providers and insurers to maintain proficiency in proper coding practices 
because a substantial number of the codes are changed each year. These complexities can 
inadvertently lead providers to submit improperly coded claims. They also make insurers 
vulnerable to abuse from providers or billing services that attempt to maximize 
reimbursements by intentionally submitting claims containing inappropriate combinations  
of codes. 
 
Unbundling Charges/Fragmentation 
Simple unbundling occurs when a provider charges a comprehensive code as well as one or 
more component codes. For instance, in the examples illustrated below, the provider would 
be overpaid because the fee for the total procedure already includes the value of its 
component parts. 
 
Procedure 
Code Service Billed Correctly Billed Procedure 
58150 
58720 
49000 
44955 
58740  
Total Hysterectomy ($1,300)
 Removal of ovaries & tubes ($950) 
Exploration of abdomen ($671) 
Appendectomy ($250) 
Lysis of Adhesions ($550) 
 
Total Charge $3,721 
 
Total Hysterectomy
  
 
 
 
 
Total Payment $1,300 
29877 
 
29870 
Knee arthroscopy with debridement 
($1650) 
Diagnostic knee arthroscopy ($1625) 
 
Total Charge $3,275  
Knee arthroscopy with debridement  
 
Total Payment $1,650 
 
47610 
 
47600 
Cholecystectomy with common bile duct 
exploration ($1,997) 
Cholecystectomy ($705) 
 
Total Charge $2,702 
Cholecystectomy with common bile 
duct exploration 
 
 
Total Payment $1,997 
 
Unbundling can be detected through the use of a computer program that determines 
whether each code submitted is a component of one or more comprehensive codes. 
 
Mutually Exclusive Procedures 
A variation of unbundling, this scam involves billing for procedures that are  
either impossible to perform together or, by accepted standards, should not be  
performed together.  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1227 
Global Service Period Violations 
Some dishonest providers will bill for a major procedure—such as a surgery—as well as 
related procedures, when the fee for the major procedure already includes the fee for related 
procedures during the predefined time period (the global service period). This type of fraud 
is possible because most surgery includes all related services for a set number of days before 
and after the surgery. Detecting these abuses can be difficult because the examiner must 
determine which services are related to the surgery and which are not. This difficulty is 
compounded by the fact that such services may be rendered by more than one provider. 
 
Upcoding 
Upcoding is billing for a higher level of service than was rendered. One common form of 
upcoding involves generic substitution—filling a prescription with a less expensive drug, 
while billing for the more expensive form of the drug.  
 
Misuse of New Patient Codes 
The CPT coding system includes special codes for new patient visits, which enable the 
physicians to be reimbursed for the additional work that new patient visits typically require. 
Consequently, physicians who want to pad their claims may bill for visits with established 
patients using new patient codes. 
 
 
Insured Fraud 
Insureds may attempt to perpetrate a fraud by submitting fictitious claims forms: 
• Multiple surgeries. 
• Multiple office visits. 
• Foreign claims — Patient supposedly goes out of the country and falls ill. 
• Noncovered dependents. 
 
Doctor/ER Shopping 
Excessive drug claims for controlled substance drugs. Patient “shops” for controlled 
substance drugs. One physician does not know that the other has prescribed the drug. In 
addition, the patient may shop for drugs in emergency rooms complaining of soft tissue 
injuries, sprains, and strains. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1228                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Misrepresentation on Application 
Failure by insured to list all prior medical conditions or group to list medical conditions  
of employees. 
 
Third-Party Fraud 
This category involves an unauthorized use of an insured’s identification card by another  
known person or unknown person. The insurance company is usually notified by the insured 
once they receive a benefit statement work sheet for services rendered. 
 
Death of Insured 
The primary insured passes away; however, the beneficiary does not notify the insurance 
carrier and continues to submit fictitious claims on medical expenses after the death of the 
insured. 
 
Investigation Tips 
• Determine how the insured lost his card. If stolen, the police should be contacted to 
determine if the crime was reported. A copy of the police report should be obtained. 
• Obtain an actual description of the cardholder so that identification can be made of the 
impostor who used the card improperly. 
• Visit the providers or medical doctors to obtain any information to identify  
the perpetrator. 
 
 
Criminal Rings 
Individual criminals infiltrate mailrooms and are able to obtain copies of legitimate bills 
submitted to providers. They subsequently establish a mail drop point or rent an office and 
begin submitting false claims to insurance companies by creating fictitious tax identification 
numbers. Since the claimants are genuine, insurance companies will normally pay these bills. 
 
 
Collusion 
Collusion  is the most difficult insurance fraud to detect since several people are involved in 
committing the fraud. Usually cases of this nature are disclosed by accident or by a tip 
received from someone who may have been involved and has had a falling-out. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1229 
Any time a frauds are committed by insureds, there is no question on the part of the 
perpetrators as to the intent to obtain funds to which they are not entitled. However, it is 
also extremely difficult to detect this type of fraud. 
 
Detection 
• Excessive billings report may show that a provider is submitting large amounts of 
expenses. In addition, the claimant requests substantial payments to be made to him 
rather than the provider. 
• Explanation of benefits, if submitted to the provider, will probably generate some 
reaction from the provider. If substantial, at the time that Form 1099 is submitted to the 
provider, there may also be comments by the provider. 
• Periodically, management should compare the membership/enrollment file to the Social 
Security file to determine if the insurance company is paying claims on deceased 
insureds. The membership file also may be compared to the file from the vital statistics 
department to search for divorced policyholders. 
 
Divorce 
An insured and a covered spouse file for divorce, but neither party notifies the insurance 
company. The ex-spouse, who remains at the address of record, continues to submit claims. 
 
Foreign Insured 
A foreign insured submits phony information that the primary insured passed away. For the 
last month he was hospitalized in a foreign hospital and a sizable bill was mailed to the 
carrier for payment. 
 
Investigation Tips 
• The claim file should be reviewed to determine if the charges are legitimate. 
• Determine if the medical language appears to be proper by comparing samples of bona 
fide claims. 
• It may be necessary to submit a letter to the attending physician to determine if the 
charges are correct. 
• Through law enforcement contacts, it may be necessary to obtain information regarding 
the legitimacy of the claim. 
• Check the style of the date. In many foreign countries, dates are listed with the day first, 
then the month and year, e.g., 07/01/08 would be 7 January 2008. If the U.S. style of 
dating is used (month/day/year), it may indicate a fraudulent claim. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1230                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Detection of External Fraud 
• Misspelled medical/dental terminology. 
• Unusual charges for a given service. 
• Similar handwriting by the claimant and the provider of service. 
• Typed, not printed bill heads. 
• Bills with irregular columns. 
• Unassigned bills that are normally assigned, such as large hospital or surgical bills. 
• Typed or handwritten hospital bills. 
• Drug receipts from the same pharmacy but on different color paper. 
• Erasures or alterations. 
• Lack of any provider’s signature on a claim form. 
• Absence of the provider’s medical degree, i.e., “Dr. John Doe” instead of “John Doe, 
M.D.” 
• An illegible provider signature on the bill submitted or the signature does not match the 
one on file. 
• Surgeries that don’t have other related services such as hospital charges. 
• Physician’s specialty does not agree with diagnosis. 
• Services billed do not agree with diagnosis. 
• Impossible or unlikely services. 
• Photocopied bills. 
• Other indicators that a claim approver or in vestigator should be aware of that could 
result in identifying a possible fraud: 
? Pressure by a claimant to pay a claim quickly. 
? Individuals who hand deliver their claim insist on picking up their claim check. 
? Threats of legal action if a claim is not paid quickly. 
? Anonymous telephone call inquiries regarding the status of a pending claim. 
? Identical claims for same patient in different months or different years. 
? Dates of service just prior to termination of enrollment or just after enrollment. 
? Services billed that do not appear to agree with the medical records. 
? Billing for services or equipment that are clearly unsuitable for the patient’s needs. 
? Foreign claims listing charges in U.S. dollars when that isn’t the currency of that 
country. 
? Foreign claims giving documentation in English when English is not the primary 
language spoken. 
? Multiple foreign claims for same subscriber. 
? Multiple foreign claims from same physician/hospital. 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1231 
Fraud by Medical Institutions 
Fraud schemes perpetrated by institutions and their employees include those commonly 
used by doctors and other providers. However, the more common schemes in which 
hospitals are primarily involved include: 
• Filing of false cost reports. 
• DRG creep. 
• Billing for experimental procedures. 
• Improper contractual and other relationships with physicians. 
• Revenue recovery firms to (knowingly or unknowingly) bill extra charges. 
 
False Cost Reports 
Cost reports sometimes include noncovered items such as golf outings, parties, and exotic 
trips disguised as covered items. For example, an investigation disclosed that a hospital 
recovered silver from the processing of x-ray film, sold it, gave it to the candy stripers, only 
to have it “donated” back to the hospital. Since Medicare doesn’t consider donations as 
revenue, the hospital was able to claim higher expenses, thus more money from Medicare. 
 
Inclusion of Unallowable Items 
• Expenses for tax penalties, late charges, and promotional advertising. 
• Costs incurred from a related-party transaction with a mark-up over the costs incurred 
by the related-party. 
• Expenses that are reimbursed under other programs (e.g., billable medical supplies and 
therapies). 
• Excessive expenses such as hotel, food, travel expenses for recreational events. 
• Luxury items (e.g., lavish furnishings, corporate planes, swimming pools, spas). 
 
DRG Creep 
Diagnostic Related Groupings (DRG) is a reimbursement methodology for the payment of 
institutional claims. It is a patient classification scheme that categorizes patients who are 
medically related with respect to primary and secondary diagnosis, age, and complications. 
Reimbursements are determined by the DRG. For example, a heart bypass operation is 
worth a certain amount of reimbursement and a hernia repair is worth a different amount. 
DRG creep occurs when a hospitalization is coded as a more complex admission than 
occurred. When it becomes a pattern and intent is established, it becomes fraud. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1232                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Another type of fraud using DRG codes involves billing for the DRG code and then billing 
again for services that were included in the DRG payment. 
 
Billing for Experimental Procedures 
It is reported that one form of medical fraud that is little known, but apparently widespread, 
is the third-party billing for experiments with new medical devices that have not yet been 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Some hospitals are deliberately misleading 
third-party payers by getting them to pay for the manufacturer’s research. Many of the 
doctors involved are alleged to have stock in the manufacturing companies. 
 
Improper Relationships with Physicians 
Certain relationships between hospitals and physicians result in fraud to the insurer. For 
instance, a hospital provides no or token reimbursement to pathologists for Medicare Part A 
services in return for the opportunity to perform and bill Part B services at that hospital. 
 
The following transactions are generally regarded as suspect: 
• Payment of any sort of incentive by the hospital each time a physician refers a patient to 
the hospital. 
• Provision of free or significantly discounted billing, nursing, or other staff services. 
• Free training for a physician’s office staff in areas such as management techniques, CPT 
coding, and laboratory techniques. 
• Guarantees that provide that, if the physician’s income fails to reach a predetermined 
level, the hospital will supplement the remainder up to a certain amount. 
• Low-interest or interest-free loans, or loans that may be forgiven if a physician refers 
patients to the hospital. 
• Payment of the cost of a physician’s travel and expenses for conferences. 
• Payment for a physician’s continuing education courses. 
• Coverage on the hospital’s group health insurance plan at an inappropriate or very  
low cost. 
• Payment for services, such as consultation at the hospital, that require few, if any, 
substantive duties by the physician, or payment for services in excess of the fair market 
value of services rendered. 
 
Revenue Recovery Firms 
Another form of health care fraud involves so-called revenue recovery firms padding 
medical bills. These billing consultants review patients’ bills (months or even years after 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1233 
treatment) looking for charges that were missed. Critics have charged that too often these 
firms pad medical bills by adding on fictitious charges. The more charges that are added 
onto the bill, the more the revenue recovery firm gets paid. In addition, their employees may 
be paid bonuses for piling on extra charges and pressured to meet monthly quotas.  
 
Changing Codes 
One of the most common methods used by revenue recovery firms is to change every 
hospital’s or nursing home’s billing codes. For instance, changing each code for an ordinary 
five-cent bandage so that the provider is charged for a $5 surgical dressing. 
 
Adding Items 
Extra charges are added onto hospital bills by assuming that hospitals used certain items, 
even though there was no evidence of the procedure or service. For instance, if the hospital 
had certain procedures for which they sometimes use a piece of x-ray equipment, the auditor 
reviewing the bill would always assume that the hospital had used the equipment, and they 
would put it on the bill. 
 
Kickbacks 
Often hospitals are unaware (sometimes intentionally) of the extent of the fraud committed 
by revenue recovery firms. In other cases, however, revenue firms report that they will 
contact a hospital or nursing home directly and tell them that if the institution will give them 
their bills, they will split the profit produced by the added charges. 
 
Billing for Expensive Treatments 
Numerous charges for the use of expensive treatments such as laser are added to patients’ 
bills. Charges may be added after the patient had already been billed for the use of the laser. 
 
Altering Records 
In some instances, firms may actually alter medical records. For example, in one case a firm 
added more than $1,300 to a patient’s bill for video equipment that was supposedly used 
during surgery. In order to justify the fraudulent billing, the firm checked a box on the 
surgical record to indicate that the equipment had been used. After the original document 
was obtained, it showed that the box was not checked on the original form completed by the 
surgical staff. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1234                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Donating Organs 
One hospital, which has ceased using a particular firm, reported that the firm regularly 
double billed for services and treatments, and in another instance, outside auditors found 
that the firm had tried to charge for dead patients donating their organs. 
 
Additional Anesthesia Time 
Another common scheme is the charging of additional hours of anesthesia. Patients should 
be billed from when they enter the surgery room to when they leave the surgery room. The 
revenue firm pads the bill by increasing the time billed to include time spent in a recovery 
room, or before the patient went into the operating room. 
 
Rent-a-Patient Schemes 
So called “rent-a-patient” schemes involve paying individuals to undergo unnecessary 
medical procedures that are then billed to the patient’s insurance. Rent-a-patient schemes 
typically begin with the leasing of a sham medical clinic. Past investigations show that these 
clinics tend to be nondescript, often within shopping centers, and in destitute sections of 
town. Almost always, the lessee of the clinic is involved in the criminal organization of the 
scheme. Once a sham clinic is in place, recruiters (a.k.a., “coyotes” or “cappers”) are hired to 
solicit low-income individuals, who speak little English, and offer them money in exchange 
for submitting to “minor” surgical procedures. Recruiters are often former criminals, for it is 
not as dangerous to deal patients, as it is to deal drugs, and can be much more lucrative 
(average $2,000 per willing participant). 
 
EXAMPLE 
A surgery center paid hundreds of dollars to patients who endured largely unnecessary 
operations and then falsely charged the go vernment. One of the operations involved 
collapsing the patient’s lung to snip a nerve that would supposedly control “sweaty palms.” 
The surgery did stop the patient’s not-so-sweaty palms from perspiring; it also caused the 
patient to lose strength in his hands, and sweat profusely on other parts of his body. 
 
Recruiters will scour low-income housing projects, elderly neighborhoods, and factories for 
victims. Once recruiters have convinced an individual to become a willing participant, they 
will request a copy of the individual’s benefit ca rd to confirm benefits prior to subjecting the 
patient to an unnecessary treatment. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1235 
Recruiters will drive the patients, usually across state lines, to small “out of network” sham 
clinics. Along the way, the recruiter will advise each patient to describe particular false and 
embellished symptoms to the health professional at the clinic, such as: “I sweat too much”; 
“My stomach is bothering me”; “My nose hurts.” Such descriptions will later be used by the 
scam clinic to create medical charts, justifying a particular surgical procedure. Following a 
night of fast food and a cheap hotel, the patients are driven to a clinic. The patients then 
wait in line, sign an informed consent form, and promise to give the clinic all the checks 
thereafter received. Following administrative procedures, the patients briefly meet with a 
doctor and undergo the procedures that have been predetermined for them. Later that 
evening or the next day, the recruiter will give the patients a few hundred bucks and drive 
the patients home. 
 
After rendering services, the provider will bill the patients’ insurance company, Medicare, or 
Medicaid for the unnecessary procedures beyond the usual and customary cost (past 
investigations evidence up to 5,000 percent above average market price). The claims will 
likely include fees for surgical supplies and medical equipment that were never used or 
distributed. Some insurers reimburse patients directly for out-of-network claims, thereby 
requiring the patient to pay the facility. However, because the patients targeted in rent-a-
 patient scams are often indigent, and believe they deserve the money for enduring the 
unnecessary procedures, it is common for them to deposit or cash the checks. It is a cycle 
whereby the victims are not only used to perpetrate the fraud, but in the end become 
fraudsters themselves. 
 
Insurance companies have difficulty determining when rent-a-patient schemes are being 
committed because their claims systems can only compare codes, and cannot determine the 
usual and customary cost for a particular procedure. To make matters worse, some states 
have prompt pay laws, requiring claims to be paid within a period of time, such as 45-days. 
Rapid claims turnover inevitably leads to poor oversight regarding fraud-related claims. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1236                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Source: U.S. GAO Report: Health Care Fraud: Schemes to Defraud Medicare, Medicaid, and Private Health Care 
Insurers  (July 2000).  
 
What to Do? 
Consumer education is the front line to battling rent-a-patient schemes. Insurance 
companies must educate their insureds on the prevalence of this type of fraud, and provide 
these individuals with means of communication when it is believed fraud is afoot. 
Disadvantaged populations must also be informed about the negative impacts of 
participating in such schemes (i.e., health risks and criminal liability). 
 
Insurance companies must educate from within. Investigation units should be established to 
include skilled fraud examiners. Fraud detection software programs should be purchased to 
detect irregular claims patterns. An example of progressive movement towards the fight 
against health care fraud is Blue Cross Blue Shield’s establishment of the Anti-Fraud Strike 
Force to bring Blue Plans together when faced with multi-jurisdictional health care fraud 
schemes. The program pools resources, insight, and intellect from around the country to 
circumvent and prosecute rent-a-patient schemes. 
 
Likewise, the federal government has implemen ted several organizations and programs to 
target health care fraud. For example, the Health Care Integrity and Protection Data Bank 
(HIPDB) is a flagging system that alerts federal and state government agencies commence 
with a more thorough review of a practitioner’s, provider’s, or supplier’s past dealings. Not 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1237 
only may federal and state governments review the database for potential red flags, but also 
they must report the following information: health care-related civil judgments and criminal 
convictions in federal or state court; injunctions; administrative actions; participation 
exclusions; and the like. Failure to report such information may subject a health plan to a 
civil penalty of up to $25,000 for each adverse action not reported. 
 
Red Flags of Rent-A-Patient Schemes 
• Large influx of out-of-state patients to a particular clinic; including clusters of patients 
from a particular location. 
• Several non-related procedures on a patient in a short period of time (e.g., a colonoscopy 
and circumcision on one patient within a few days or even weeks). 
• Numerous claims by a particular clinic for the following procedures: colonoscopies, 
endoscopies, septoplasties, circumcisions, and thoracoscopies with sympathectomy 
(a.k.a., “sweaty palms surgery”). 
• Parallel procedures on families (husbands, wives, and children) on the same day. 
• Extremely high staff salaries. 
• Charging beyond the average market price for procedures, medical equipment,  
and devices. 
• Frequent patients with out-of-network coverage. 
 
 
Nursing Homes 
Nursing homes have become a multibillion dollar business in the last few years. As such, 
they have become a common target of fraud. A wide array of providers — including durable 
medical equipment suppliers, laboratories, physicians, optometrists, and psychiatrists — have 
been involved in fraudulent or abusive billing for services and supplies furnished to nursing 
facility patients. Most fraudulent activity in volves billing for unnecessary or undelivered 
services, or misrepresenting a service to obtain reimbursement. 
 
There are several features unique to nursing homes that make them particularly vulnerable  
to fraud: 
• Unscrupulous billers of services can operate their schemes in volume because the 
patients are all located together under one roof. 
• In some instances, nursing homes make patient records available to outside providers 
who are not responsible for the direct care of the patient (contrary to federal 
regulations). 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1238                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Under the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ reimbursement procedures, 
providers can bill Medicare directly without the nursing facility or attending physician 
affirming whether the items were necessary or provided as claimed. 
• Scrutiny of the claims at the processor level is inadequate because the automated claims 
systems used do not accumulate data that would timely flag indications of improbably 
high charges or levels of service. 
• Even when abusive practices are detected and prosecuted, repayment is rarely received 
from wrongdoers because they usually go out of business or deplete their resources so 
that they lack any resources to repay the funds. 
• Patient personal funds are controlled by nursing home administration and are an inviting 
target for embezzlement. Individually, patients generally maintain a relatively small 
balance in their personal funds accounts. Collectively, however, these funds generate a 
considerable source of income for an unscrupulous nursing home operator or employee. 
 
Failure of the Nursing Facility to Monitor Outside Providers 
Although nursing homes are required to perform numerous tasks to monitor patients and 
meet their needs, there are no requirements that nursing homes monitor the services or 
supplies provided to their patients. These providers are allowed to bill directly without 
adequate confirmation that the care or items were necessary or were delivered as claimed. 
 
Most nursing facilities do not have the in-house capability to provide all the services and 
supplies their patients need. Accordingly, outside providers market their services and 
supplies to nursing homes to meet the needs of their patients. Typically, provider 
representatives enter the home and offer to handle the entire transaction—from reviewing 
medical records to identify those patients who need their services, to billing—with no 
involvement by the nursing facility. Some homes allow providers or their representatives to 
review patient medical records contrary to federal regulations. By doing so, these providers 
can obtain all the information necessary to order, bill, and be reimbursed for services and 
supplies that are, in many instances, not necessary or even provided. 
 
Excessive Reimbursements 
Although carriers do employ automated controls to prevent fraud, often questionable claims 
and providers are not flagged before excessive reimbursements are paid. In other instances, 
providers bill for quantities of services or supplies that could not possibly have been 
furnished or necessary. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1239 
Psychiatric Hospital Fraud 
Psychiatric hospitals are susceptible to fraud because of the very nature of mental health 
problems and the manner in which they are diagnosed and treated. Unlike the acute care 
field, it is often difficult to determine whether a person is in need of hospitalization for 
psychiatric treatment. 
 
Abuse in the Admissions Process 
Some psychiatric treatment facilities have developed programs for patients who exhibit 
symptoms of both psychiatric illness and substance abuse problems. Fraud occurs when a 
patient is admitted on the basis of a diagnosis that reflects the patient’s insurance coverage 
rather than the patient’s illness. Psychiatric hospitals have been accused of finding something 
wrong with patients when it is discovered that they have insurance coverage. Such patients 
may often be admitted without examination by a physician. 
 
Fraud in the Treatment Process 
The following types of abuses can occur with regard to psychiatric treatment: 
• Extending the length of treatment programs or delaying discharges because patients have 
additional insurance benefits remaining. 
• The use of illegitimate, questionable, non-approved, or dangerous treatment programs 
and forms of therapy, such as brain wave synchronization, magnet therapy, memory 
retrieval/enhancement therapy, and deep sleep therapy 
• Engaging in excessive treatment of psychiatric patients such as thyroid testing, drug tests, 
or psychiatric evaluation tests. 
 
Abusive Marketing Practices 
Many hospitals rely on marketing as a means of encouraging treatment and generating 
referrals. Overly aggressive marketing methods include: 
• Paying bonuses to employees to persuade or pressure prospective patients to undergo a 
psychiatric evaluation and to admit themselves for treatment. 
• Encouraging patients to admit themselves by offering financial incentives such as 
payment of plane fare, child care, COBRA payments, and waivers of patient co-
 payments or deductibles. 
 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1240                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Financial Rewards for Referrals 
Many facilities are dependent on outside sources of patient referrals such as physicians or 
other clinicians. This dependence has led some hospitals to develop economic relationships 
in order to obtain referrals: 
• Rewarding clinicians who refer patients by referring patients who need outpatient 
treatment to those clinicians. 
• Allowing allied health professionals who refer patients to provide therapy for their own 
patients at the hospital; while nonreferring allied professionals are not allowed to use  
the hospital. 
• Paying medical directors or other physicians an incentive bonus linked to the overall 
profitability of the hospital. 
• Paying a physician who is under contract to the hospital but who provides no services. 
 
Red Flags for Psychiatric and Substance Abuse Claims 
• Treatment takes place far from patient’s home. 
• Diagnosis becomes alcoholism when state mandate reimburses alcoholism like any  
other illness. 
• Patient is on disability. 
• Provider’s credentials are questionable. 
• Documentation of treatment is lacking. 
• Ancillary services are not treatment oriented. 
 
 
Other Frauds in the Institutional Setting 
 
Write-Off of Patient Accounts 
When a patient account or other type of receivable has been determined to be uncollectible, 
the account is written-off to bad debts. It becomes a fraudulent transaction when the 
account has been written-off prematurely and the balance subsequently collected with the 
proceeds going to the employee. In this scheme, the employee has the opportunity to collect 
the receivable and divert the funds to himself, because companies typically do not keep track 
of old, written-off accounts receivable. 
 
Often old accounts receivable are assigned to a collection agency. These agencies typically 
are paid on a percentage of the collected amounts. Fraud schemes can be perpetrated by 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1241 
these agencies if the company does not monitor the method by which the agency receives 
old accounts and the collection process itself.  
 
The assignor company needs to assure itself that the collection agency is being assigned truly 
old accounts only and not good accounts that can reasonably be expected to pay within the 
normal course of business.  
 
Additionally, the company needs to be sure that the collection agency cannot compromise 
the indebtedness so that collections are not reported. This would allow the collection agency 
to compromise indebtedness for its own collection and not remit amounts owed the 
company. 
 
Credit Balances 
When patients have more than one payer responsible for payment of an admission, 
institutions have been known to collect more than the original amount billed. This may 
occur when the patient has more than one health insurance company, is in a vehicle accident 
where multiple insurance carriers are involved, or where workers’ compensation is 
applicable. In addition, the facility may also collect the deductible and co-payment from the 
patient. If the hospital has a credit balance, the amount paid above the charges should be 
refunded to the applicable parties. However, this does not always occur. Generally the 
refund will be made upon request, but only upon request. 
 
Theft of Pharmaceuticals and Supplies 
Because of the ready market for selling pharmaceuticals and supplies, they have a propensity 
for being stolen. Narcotic drugs, although they are usually tightly controlled, still may be 
stolen and sold on the street. Supplies such as canes, sunglasses after cataract surgery, and 
admission kits are popular items for theft or employee abuse. 
 
 
Managed Care 
The United States’ health care system is moving toward more and different types of 
“managed” care. As the country moves to a different type of health care delivery system, so 
may the types of fraud. 
 
Traditionally, health care has been provided and paid for on a “fee-for-service” basis where 
payments were made either directly to the health care provider as payment for services 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1242                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
rendered to the insured party, or to the insured as reimbursement for medical expenses 
incurred. The premise behind managed care is that the medical practitioner is responsible for 
managing the total needs of the patient. The primary purpose of managed care is to reduce 
cost by promoting the most appropriate and efficient use of medical services.  
 
The most common managed care arrangements are: 
• Modified traditional coverage 
• HMOs 
• PPOs 
 
Modified Traditional Coverage 
Under this type of coverage, the medical practitioner is reimbursed through a fee-for-service 
arrangement. The patient is free to choose a provider and a claim is submitted for 
reimbursement by either the insured or the provider. It is a managed care model in that cost-
 cutting measures are in the form of utilization review, prior authorization, second surgical 
opinions, and hospital pre-authorizations. 
 
HMOs 
HMOs, or Health Maintenance Organizations, have several variations. The HMO may 
employ all of the providers as in a staff-model HMO, or the managed care organization may 
contract with individual physicians or physician groups. The insured selects a primary care 
physician (PCP) who is the gatekeeper. Generally all medical care is initiated through the 
PCP. Payment is made by capitation, that is, the PCP receives a flat fee per month from the 
managed care organization, although some fees still may be paid on a fee-per-service basis 
usually at a reduced rate. Care that cannot be performed by the PCP is done by a specialty 
care physician who is also a member of the HMO network. The patient is severely penalized 
for going outside the HMO network. 
 
PPOs 
PPO, or Preferred Provider Organization, is  a managed care arrangement in which the 
patient chooses a provider from a list of participating providers in the PPO network. Their 
care is not managed by one provider as in the HMO, and they may see any provider in the 
network. The patient is penalized for going outside the network, although not as severely as 
in an HMO network. Providers usually must bill the third-party payer and claims are 
assigned.  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1243 
How Managed Care Alters the Potential for Fraud 
In a managed care environment, fraud is not eliminated. Insured fraud may be reduced 
substantially, but provider fraud is still alive and well. In addition to billing fraudulent 
services, managed care has an additional incentive for fraud. Because the providers share in 
the financial risk of a patient, there is the potential to provide less services to a patient since a 
fixed capitation rate allows the patients unlimited visits to a provider. 
 
Types of Managed Care Frauds 
• Inadequate treatment of patients. 
• Referring patients automatically to providers outside the network (perhaps in exchange 
for kickbacks from outside providers). 
• Establishment of inconvenient appointment hours, service locations, etc. to suppress the 
number of patients. 
• Inflating reports of patient traffic and treatment costs to induce payers to increase future 
per patient capitation fees. 
• False claims for services not covered by fixed capitation payments. 
• Falsification of quality of care and/or treatment-outcome data. 
• Providers misrepresenting their credentials or qualifications for admission to a given 
payer’s network of managed care providers. 
• Out-of-network overbilling for substandard services. 
• Employees’ creating claim checks during periods when the plan no longer is doing 
business with the HMO, but treatment of members continues due to existing problems. 
• Providing kickbacks to employees of managed care organizations for putting patients in 
their panel. 
 
Managed care systems also create the opportunity for fraud by the insureds. Some of the 
examples of fraud that may be found in the managed care environment include  
the following: 
• Patients (members) loaning or selling use of card to nonmembers. 
• Enrolling noneligible persons as members for obtaining treatment. 
• Failing to disenroll ex-spouse of family members. 
• Out-of-network falsified emergency trea tment in collusion with providers. 
 
Red Flags 
Some of the red flags for managed care frauds are: 
• Identifying providers who regularly waive co-payments or deductibles. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1244                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Unusual referral patterns—either too high or too low. 
• Unusually high pattern of referrals to pharmacies, laboratories, or specialty  
care physicians. 
• High number of emergency room referrals. 
• Patient complaints about the treatment. 
• A pattern of high number of services that fall outside of the capitated services. 
 
 
Medicaid Fraud 
In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Social Security Act, which established 
Medicare and Medicaid. These programs provide medical and health-related services to 
specific groups of people in the United States. Both programs are managed by the Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), a federal agency within the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.  
 
Although both Medicare and Medicaid provide medical and health-related services, there are 
several differences between the two programs. Medicare, which is funded and governed by 
the federal government, is the federal health insurance program for people age 65 or older 
and most people with certain disabilities; it is financed by Social Security contributions. 
Conversely, Medicaid is a federal- and state-funded program that provides health care 
coverage for low-income families and children, medical and long-term care coverage for 
people with disabilities, and assistance with health and long-term care expenses for low-
 income seniors. Although Medicaid is a federal program, it is operated by the states, and 
each state decides eligibility and the scope of coverage. Medicaid does not require recipients 
to make contributions, and it is financed from general revenues. 
 
According to the federal government, Medicaid fraud involves purposely billing Medicaid for 
services that were never provided or received. 
 
As the number of individuals enrolled in Medi caid increases, the amount of funds being 
expended by these programs leaves the industry at a significant risk for fraudulent claims. 
Medicaid expenditures comprised $216 billion of the 2009 federal budget. The proposed 
fiscal year 2011 budget includes a $1.7 billion allotment to fight fraud and abuse in the 
Medicare and Medicaid systems. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1245 
In response to the enormous increase in Me dicaid fraud, the federal government has 
established departments, programs, statutes, and funds for deterring, investigating, and 
prosecuting such types of fraud.  
 
An Overview of the Medicaid System 
For a state to establish a Medicaid program for its residents, it must comply with specific 
federal guidelines. Each state must: 
• Establish its own eligibility standards;  
• Determine the type, amount, duration, and scope of services;  
• Set the rate of payment for services; and  
• Administer its own program. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1246                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
AGENCY RESPONSIBILITY  RELATED ACTIVITIES 
FEDERAL      

CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES
• Assist each state in increasing the 
effectiveness of its Medicaid 
program integrity efforts.  
• Acts as an oversight entity of 
states’ fraud and abuse efforts.  
• Keeps the alliance in working 
order.  
• Oversees state Medicaid agencies. 
• Facilitates communication 
and information sharing 
between the federal 
government and states  
• Establishes a national forum 
for Medicaid fraud and abuse 
issues.  
• Provides ongoing forums and 
training for state officials on 
fraud control.  
HHS (OIG) 
• Oversees state Medicaid Fraud 
Control Units.  
• Investigates federal Medicaid 
fraud cases. 
• Sanctions fraudulent 
providers by imposing 
exclusions and civil monetary 
penalties. 
• Refers investigative findings 
to the DOJ. 
DOJ (U.S. ATTORNEYS)  
• Prosecutes Medicaid fraud cases 
referred by the FBI and OIG.  
• Indicts, negotiates 
settlements, and recovers 
damages. 
DOJ (FBI)  
• Investigates federal fraud cases 
(can’t impose sanctions).  
• Refers investigative findings 
to U.S. Attorneys.  
STATE MEDICAID AGENCY
• Administers state Medicaid 
programs.  
• Conducts pre- and post-payment 
claims reviews. 
• Administers provider 
enrollment processes. 
Program
Integrity Unit 
• Reviews claims data to detect and 
investigates unusual payment 
patterns. 
• Conducts various integrity 
activities. 
• Refers suspected fraud cases 
to the state’s Medicaid Fraud 
Control Unit. 
• Refers civil cases to the state 
Medicaid agency’s collection 
unit. 
MEDICAID FRAUD CONTROL UNIT (MFCU)  
• Investigates and prosecutes cases 
involving Medicaid fraud. 
• Investigates and acts on 
complaints of abuse or neglect of 
patients in facilities receiving 
Medicaid funding. 
• Refers cases that will not be 
prosecuted to the state 
Medicaid agency or other 
authority for administrative 
action.  
 
  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1247 
Federal Legislation 
The following are some of the most common federal statutes used to prosecute  
Medicaid fraud: 
• The Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute 
• The Civil False Claims Act 
• The Stark Law 
• Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
 
State Level Enforcement 
In 1977, Congress devised the Medicaid Fraud Control Units (MFCU) program, to help 
states counter Medicaid fraud. MFCUs are state law enforcement agencies that investigate 
and prosecute cases involving Medicaid fraud, investigate and act on complaints of abuse or 
neglect of patients in facilities receiving Medica id funding, and refer cases, which will not be 
prosecuted, to the state Medicaid agency or other authority for administrative action. The 
only way a state can keep from establishing an MFCU is by certifying that there is no fraud 
in their state. 
 
Under MFCU program, each state is to implement its own MFCU. The federal government 
subsidizes each state’s program with 90 percent of the monies necessary to get that state’s 
MFCU up and rolling. Three years thereafter, the federal government provides the state’s 
MFCU with 75 percent of its operating costs. The only way a state can keep from 
establishing an MFCU is by certifying that there is no fraud in their state. 
 
Federal initiatives such as this have helped states effectively curb Medicaid fraud on state and 
local levels. According to the United States Government Accountability Office, for FY 2008, 
state MFCUs recovered more than $1.3 billion in  legal restitution, obtained more than 1,314 
convictions, and excluded 971 individuals from participating in the Medicaid and Medicare 
programs. 
 
To identify and detect Medicaid fraud at any level, fraud examiners must be apprised of 
various Medicaid fraud schemes because such schemes are, often, more stringently regulated 
at the state level.  
 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1248                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Electronic Claims Fraud 
Auditing electronic claims may use the same techniques as auditing any other type of health 
care if the original source documents are used. The difference may be that the audit may use 
the information electronically transmitted rather than the original information. If reliance 
could be placed on the information being submitted, then there wouldn’t be any difference. 
However, history has proved that electronic claims can be a fertile source for fraud. 
 
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) is the exchange of electronic data between computers in 
which there is no human interaction. This technology has advanced companies’ ability to 
conduct business by light-years, but it has also provided would-be fraudsters an increased 
opportunity to commit white-collar crimes. 
 
EDI’s origins arise in the 1960s, when many industry groups began to develop EDI 
standards in areas such as purchasing, transportation, and financial transactions. The next 
major step forward came when the Transportation Data Coordinating Committee and the 
National Association of Credit Management’s Credit Research Foundation developed the 
first standards of electronic data interchange. At this time, they have developed over 300 
different standards for individual industries concerning the transmission of EDI. These 
standards are published by the Data Interchange Standards Association.  
 
Although these standards have been adopted and used worldwide by a multitude of different 
industries, the health care industry has been notoriously slow in adopting the new 
technology. Only now have a handful of large health care providers such as Blue Cross Blue 
Shield announced their endorsements of the health care industry conducting business 
electronically. The reasoning behind the reluctance to convert is that the health care system 
is so complicated that a switch in operation procedure of this magnitude would cause 
considerable headache in the early phases. 
 
EDI can be used internally within a business as a way of communication and data transfer 
and it can also be used for the same purposes between different businesses. In the case of 
the health care industry, EDI enables the different companies to send claims, invoices, and 
other vital data that once was shipped in a paper format via airmail. The fact that EDI allows 
for an immediate exchange of data makes the process of submitting and approving health 
care claims much more efficient for the health care industry.  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1249 
The health care transactions that will be affected by the emerging of EDI technologies 
include: 
• Claims payment  
• Enrollments 
• Claims submission 
• Eligibility 
• Claim status 
• Crossover COB 
• Health care service review 
• Patient information record 
• Managed care encounter 
• Capitated payment 
• Interactive claim 
• HMO reporting 
• Provider information 
 
In the current health care system, there are over 1,500 insurance companies that process 
over four billion medical claims every year. Because the health care system uses over 450 
different types of forms, it is estimated that in the past, the health care industry spent as 
much as $100 billion per year to process its paperwork. Thus, EDI has the potential to save 
the health care industry from $8 billion to $20 billion every year. It is very simply a more 
efficient way for the health care industry to do business. However, fraud examiners fear that 
a more efficient system also paves the way for more efficient ways to defraud the health  
care industry. 
 
Solid controls must be established to deal with the health care industry’s conversion to EDI 
or the savings that the more efficient system will produce may be gobbled up by bigger fraud 
losses. The electronic conversion of information completely removes paper-based controls. 
 
EDI eliminates the abilities that fraud examiners have to detect fraud in the health care 
industry in three ways: 
• The automation of claims has erased claims professionals’ ability to detect suspicious-
 looking claims. Because they are used to handling the paperwork of claims, EDI 
hampers the claims professional from getting a good picture of the overall nature of an 
account, instead reducing each transaction to individual claims. 
• Because of the impersonal nature of electronic transactions, EDI raises the temptation 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1250                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of would-be fraudsters to commit white-collar crime. 
• EDI leaves no paper trail, making the process of fraud detection difficult for the  
fraud examiner. 
 
The reasons the health care industry is concerned about EDI’s potential to stimulate 
fraudulent activity include: 
• The lack of tools to detect EDI fraud. 
• The variation of health care services precipitates the potential from a plethora of 
dissimilar frauds. 
• The efficiency of EDI allows for more vendors and thus more claims to account for. 
• The swiftness in which transactions take place allow less time to uncover fraud. 
 
In the past, the health care industry has developed sophisticated methods of detecting fraud 
within the paper-based system. Now that the conversion to EDI is taking place, the health 
care industry must find a way to convert those methods to uncovering fraud in the electronic 
format. These methods will only be as sophisticated as the health care industry chooses to 
make them; the less concern that the industry shows for creating fraud indicators, the more 
opportunity they will be giving fraudsters to “beat the system.”   
 
Fraud examiners should not fear that the conversion to EDI will eliminate any fraud-related 
job opportunities. In fact, that conversion will actually open up many fraud examination 
jobs, as the safeguards and red flag system against fraud has not been effectively established 
at this time. Therefore, fraud examiners need to be aware that their jobs include not only 
investigating fraud, but also to creating systems that will effectively deter fraud. 
 
Many new and complicated legal issues are raised as a result of the health care industry’s 
conversion to EDI. Some of the difficult questions that have been pressed include: 
• How does the insurance company prove that all electronic claims are authentic? 
• Who is responsible for errors in electronic health care claims? 
• How does the fraud examiner prove that the contents of an electronic health care claim 
are false? 
• How does the health care industry ensure that all electronic transmissions are received 
exactly as they are sent? 
• What terms and conditions govern electronic claims? 
• How will fraud examiners determine the actual origin of any electronic submission? 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1251 
Because automated claims are quite easily altered, the health care industry must ensure that 
claims are authentic. Fraud examiners must document that claims have been received in the 
same condition in which they were processed if they are to be admissible as evidence.  
 
Some examples of ways to ensure claims’ authenticity include: 
• Data encryption  
• Digital signatures  
• Message authentication codes  
• Prior claims’ history checkups 
• A variety of field checks 
 
The Effects of Prosecution in an Electronic Environment 
EDI creates another type of legal evidence, but the basic legal principles regarding that 
evidence should remain intact. Therefore, the burden falls on the companies of the health 
care industry to demonstrate that its electronic system has proven safeguards that counteract 
fraud. If the system is proven to be reliable, the company can then show that it has created a 
reliable record of transactions. 
 
The greatest weakness within an EDI system is that in the prosecution, a defendant may 
claim that he did not enter the claim or that the claim was mishandled by the health care 
company. Thus, a health care company must maintain the integrity of its electronic records. 
The health care company must have in place several ways to uncover fraud, from automatic 
red flags to intricate fraud analysis programs that pick up on familiar patterns that may 
ultimately lead to fraud. 
 
A health care company must prove the origin of all electronic communication and the 
original content of the transaction. They must also reduce the possibility that the original 
claim’s content can be intentionally or unintentionally compromised. By doing these things, 
the health care industry can effectively use EDI without substantially raising the possibility 
of fraudulent activity. 
 
 
Health Care Compliance Programs 
Recently the government discovered a widespread “upcoding” scheme, in which numerous 
hospitals across the country routinely and fraudulently coded cases in their billing systems 
under a diagnostic related group (DRG) that caused Medicare to overcompensate the 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1252                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
providers by about 28 percent. These “optimization” programs crossed the line of legitimate 
billing and subsequent criminal and civil investigations followed. In dealing with such a large 
number of hospitals, the government utilized compliance programs, also known as corporate 
integrity agreements, to help minimize future instances of fraud without significantly 
damaging a community’s health care needs by sa nctioning or dismissing medical providers. 
 
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Inspector General 
(OIG), is increasingly using corporate compliance programs in lieu of sanctions to control 
medical providers and related entities who have defrauded federal health care programs.  
 
The OIG has devised model compliance guidelines for hospitals, clinical laboratories, 
durable medical equipment companies, and home health companies. The entire contents of 
those model plans can be located on the United States Department of Health and Human 
Service’s website at www.hhs.gov. 
 
Compliance programs are simply a set of effective internal controls designed to ensure that 
company operations adhere to the guidelines, regulations, and laws affecting the 
organization. Ideally, these internal controls should complement controls that already are in 
place within the accounting system. This is imperative because many problems OIG 
investigates center around the financial operations of the company, such as billing and 
collections. Compliance efforts are meant to encourage a culture that fosters prevention, 
detection, and resolution of conduct that is outside established company policies. The 
Federal Sentencing Guidelines also encourage compliance programs in order to reduce 
criminal fines and penalties. 
 
The sentencing guidelines and the Department of Health and Human Services model plans 
have some basic characteristics to which a compliance program should adhere. The seven 
basic elements include: 
• Develop and distribute policies that define standards and procedures to be followed by 
the organization’s agents and employees. Specifically, the organization should establish 
standards of conduct that emphasize the organization’s commitment to compliancy in 
areas such as Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) regulations; fraud and 
abuse laws; federal, state, and local laws; and corporate ethical policies, mission, and 
goals. Annually circulate to every employee a standards of conduct statement that 
requires the signatures of all directors, officers, managers, employees, and contractors 
certifying that they have read, understand, and agree to comply with its terms;  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1253 
• Designate or hire a high-level employee who has ultimate responsibility to operate and 
monitor the compliance program and to report directly to the CEO or governing body. 
This employee would be much like the company’s own internal inspector general; 
• Use reasonable care to identify sanctioned providers and remove those individuals from 
any activity that would violate a law or regulation. This can be done by dismissing the 
provider or reassigning him to an area of the company that does not have direct contact 
with patients covered by government insurance, or to an area that is neither directly nor 
indirectly reimbursed by a government program. If a sanctioned party works in the 
supply division, and part of the costs of that division are allocated on the Medicare cost 
report, then this could constitute a violation;  
• Require regular training programs for all employees and contractors. Each entity should 
have some policy for educating managers, executives, and employees about fraud. This 
can be conducted during employee orientation and/or through ongoing training 
programs and other company communication methods. Initial and annual training for all 
staff, especially for those in the marketing, sales, and billing departments, is essential. 
Training should focus on billing policies and procedures, application of federal rules and 
regulations, disciplinary actions for non-compliance, personal responsibility of every 
employee to comply, CMS policies and procedures, and fraud and abuse laws; 
• Use various kinds of monitoring and proactive auditing systems to detect fraud and 
unusual trends to ensure compliance. There are many statistical aberrations that an 
experienced fraud examiner can monitor in a proactive manner to identify potential 
problem areas, such as noticeable variations in billing patterns. For instance, if suddenly 
there is a 200 percent increase in billing for physician consultations, the fraud examiner 
may wish to review those services to determine if simple office visits are being 
characterized fraudulently as more complex — and thus, more lucrative - consultations; 
• Establish and publicize a reporting system in which employees can report criminal 
conduct without fear of retribution (hotline or ombudsman program). Each employee in 
the company should know where to report suspicious, unethical, or illegal behavior. 
Steps should include establishing a self-disclosure policy, which outlines procedures for 
reporting law violations to the appropriate authorities, and a records retention policy, 
which sets standards on how long records should be stored and in what format 
(electronic media, original paper document, etc.). The Office of Inspector General also 
has a Provider Self-disclosure Program (discussed in detail in the Federal Register dated 
Oct. 30, 1998) that offers a cooperative effort in reporting problems; 
• Develop a system to respond to allegations, investigate those allegations, and, if needed, 
carry out the appropriate disciplinary measures. Be consistent and also discipline 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1254                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
individuals who fail to detect the offense due to negligence. The compliance program 
should outline specifically who will investigate suspected irregularities, and to whom 
these irregularities will be reported (i.e., management, internal investigators, law 
enforcement, and/or legal counsel); and 
• Regularly review for systemic weaknesses in company operations and/or policies and 
make changes as needed. 
 
Essentially, what a compliance program is designed to do is provide insurance for the 
provider. By taking every reasonable and prudent step possible, a provider will have 
demonstrated to a prosecutor, judge, or jury that he has taken steps to prevent fraudulent 
activity from pervading his operations. Consequently, the damage to a provider’s reputation, 
pocketbook, and freedom can be controlled and minimized to the fullest extent possible. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1301 
BANKRUPTCY FRAUD 
 
Introduction 
 
The Bankruptcy System and Players 
Bankruptcy Court 
All bankruptcy cases are filed in the local district of the United States Bankruptcy Court. 
Although bankruptcy courts are federal courts, they are not Article III courts, which derive 
their power from Article III of the Constitution. Article III states that judicial power of the 
United States rests with the Supreme Court and in inferior courts established by Congress. 
Article III courts include the U.S. District Courts, the U.S. Circuit Courts of Appeal, and the 
U.S. Supreme Court.  
 
Bankruptcy courts are not contemplated within this scheme as “inferior” courts, but they are 
considered as an adjunct to “inferior” U.S. District Courts. 
 
Likewise, bankruptcy judges are not Article III judges, which derive their power from Article 
III of the Constitution. Bankruptcy judges hear all cases involving debtors’ and creditors’ 
rights, approve plans of reorganization, award fees to professionals, and conduct hearings 
and trials when necessary to resolve disputes. 
 
Office of the United States Trustee  
The Office of the United States Trustee is a Department of Justice agency that is responsible 
for administering bankruptcy cases; appointing trustees, examiners, and Chapter 11 
committees; overseeing and monitoring trustees; reviewing employment and fee applications; 
and appearing in court on matters of interest to the estate and creditors.  
 
There are 21 regions in the Office of the U.S. Trustee comprising one or more federal 
districts. Each region consists of a U.S. Trustee (or an Assistant Trustee in several regions). 
The Office of the UST in each region principally is comprised of staff attorneys, bankruptcy 
analysts (including accountants) and, in some instances, special investigative units. 
 
Staff attorneys review pleadings (e.g., fee applications and motions to appoint trustees and 
examiners) and represent the UST on these matters.  
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1302                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bankruptcy analysts analyze and review operating reports and other relevant financial 
information and, in general, oversee the debtor’s case to ensure compliance with the 
Bankruptcy Code and to protect the assets of the estate.  
 
Special investigative units investigate criminal referrals (complaints) in bankruptcy cases. In some 
cases they work with criminal investigative agencies, such as the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation and the Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigative Division. 
 
Panel Trustees 
Panel trustees are independent professionals (usually attorneys) who serve in Chapter 7 cases 
in each federal district in the country. Trustees also might serve in Chapter 11 cases where 
operation of the debtor’s business is considered appropriate. Trustees or others might 
develop a plan of reorganization to conclude the Chapter 11 proceedings. If the business 
cannot be reorganized, the trustee might petition the court to convert the case to Chapter 7 
or develop a plan of liquidation under Chapter 11. The duties of a trustee are specifically 
enumerated in Title 11, U.S.C., section 704 (in Chapter 7 cases) and Title 11, U.S.C., section 
1106 (in Chapter 11 cases). The duties of a trustee are as follows: administer assets, liquidate 
assets, pay creditors, litigate matters where necessary, have the right to sue and be sued, 
conduct hearings, conduct investigations of financial affairs of the debtor, file reports as 
required by the Office of the UST and, where a ppropriate, file criminal referrals with the 
United States Attorney’s Office. A trustee’s compensation is statutorily defined under the 
bankruptcy code. 
 
Examiners 
An examiner is normally appointed in a Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceeding to investigate 
certain allegations of fraud and misconduct on the part of the debtor (or principals of the 
debtor). In a typical motion for the appointment of a trustee or examiner, allegations of 
fraud or misconduct are raised by creditors, the Office of the UST, or other interested 
parties. A bankruptcy judge hears evidence submitted by all parties (creditors et al.), as well 
as the debtor’s response to the allegations. After hearing the evidence, the judge has the 
option either to appoint a trustee or an examiner, or leave the debtor in possession of the 
business. If an examiner is appointed, the sole responsibility is to “investigate and report” 
the results of the investigation to the court and other parties in interest as quickly as possible. 
Examiners have the power to subpoena records and depose witnesses. They do not have the 
power to run businesses, make business decisions, or propose plans of reorganizations 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1303 
(generally speaking). Courts might expand the examiner’s powers to perform certain duties 
of trustees or debtors-in-possession.  
 
Debtors 
A debtor is defined in Title 11, U.S.C., section 101(13) as a “person” or “municipality” who is 
the subject of a filing under Title 11. “Person” is  defined as an individual, partnership, or 
corporation. “Municipality” is defined as a political subdivision, public agency, or 
instrumentality of a state. An individual debtor’s objective in a Chapter 7 case is to be 
relieved of all dischargeable debts and to obtain a fresh start. This is accomplished by the 
court granting the individual debtor a discharge. The debtor’s primary objective in a Chapter 
11 should be to have a plan of reorganization confirmed by the court and preserve the 
business operations. 
 
Creditors 
A creditor is defined by the code as one who holds a claim. Creditors can be either secured or 
unsecured.  
 
SECURED CREDITORS  
A secured creditor  holds a claim for which there is a properly perfected security interest. It will 
be considered a secured claim to the extent of the value of the property. When the debt is 
undersecured (amount of note is greater than the value of the security interest), the debt will 
be considered both unsecured and secured. For example, if a note for $500 is secured by 
property having a value of $400, there will be a secured claim for $400 and an unsecured 
claim for $100. If the debtor and the credit or cannot agree on the value of the collateral, 
there will be a hearing under section 506 of the Bankruptcy Code and the court will 
determine the value of the collateral. The bankruptcy court will rely on state law where the 
property is located to determine if a secured claim exists. A security interest generally is 
obtained in personal property by a UCC filing and in real property by filing a lien with the 
county clerk in the county where the property is located. 
 
At the time of the filing of the bankruptcy petition, an automatic stay precludes the creditor 
from taking any action to repossess the property, unless relief from the stay is granted. In a 
Chapter 11 case, the court generally will grant relief only if it can be shown that there is no 
equity in the property and that the property is not needed for reorganizing the business. The 
stay also might be removed if the property is declining in value and the debtor fails to 
compensate the creditor for this decline (referred to as “adequate protection payments”). If 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1304                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the stay is removed, the creditor then can proceed under state law to obtain possession of 
the property (often through a foreclosure) to satisfy the claim. 
 
Holders of secured claims have priority over unsecured creditors and normally get paid first 
in the distributions to creditors made by the trustee or debtor-in-possession. In the 
development of a Chapter 11 plan, the rights of holders of secured claims normally are 
provided for before the unsecured claim holders will receive material consideration.  
 
UNSECURED CREDITORS  
Unsecured creditors  are those that have a claim against the debtor that arose before the 
bankruptcy petition was filed and do not have a perfected security interest. Title 11, U.S.C., 
section 507 gives some of the holders of unsecured claims priority over other unsecured 
claim holders. Among those claims that have priority are administrative expenses (costs 
associated with the operation of the business and professional fees while the business or 
individual is in bankruptcy), selected pre-petition unpaid wages, pre-petition contributions 
required but not made to employees benefit plans, pre-petition unpaid alimony and support 
payments, and selected pre-petition tax claims. 
 
Adjusters 
Adjusters, or operations agents as they are frequently called, are the “right hand” to trustees 
and debtors. An adjuster or operations agent is an individual who handles the peripheral 
duties of a trustee. Such duties include securing the business location, changing locks, 
locating assets of the estate, locating business records, opening new bank accounts, 
investigating thefts of assets in conjunction with the trustee, storing assets of the estate, and 
arranging sales of assets. Adjusters also can assist debtors and trustees in operating the 
debtor’s business and in helping to prepare bankruptcy schedules, as well as interim 
statements and operating reports.  
 
 
The Bankruptcy Code (Title 11, United States Code)   
The Bankruptcy Code is broken down into eight chapters (1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 12, and 13) under 
Title 11 of the United States Code. In addition, there are two other sources of information 
dealing with bankruptcy issues that are found in the United States Code. They can be found 
at Title 18, U.S.C., Chapter 9 (which deals with crimes and criminal procedure) and Title 28 
(which deals with the judiciary and judicial procedure). Some of the provisions of the 
Bankruptcy Code, as amended by the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1994, are outlined below. 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1305 
Chapter 1 — General Provisions  
Chapter 1 contains definitions, rules of construction, powers of the court, who can be a 
debtor, and other miscellaneous information. Chapter 1 has been amended to reflect issues 
dealing with persons who negligently or fraudulently prepare bankruptcy petitions. Section 
101 of this chapter is particularly important as it deals with definitions of terms used in 
bankruptcy proceedings. Section 110 deals with the penalty for persons who negligently or 
fraudulently prepare bankruptcy petitions (see later section on criminal conduct). 
 
Chapter 3 — Case Administration  
Part 1 of Chapter 3 deals with the commencement of cases, filing requirements, and court 
appearances. Part 2 deals with officers, the qualifications of the trustee, the role of the 
trustee, and the compensation of trustees and other officers. Part 3 deals with 
administration, involving meetings of creditors, noticing requirements, property of the 
estate, and other administrative requirements. Part 4 deals with administrative powers, 
including the power of the trustee to protect property of the estate; use, lease or sell the 
property and obtaining credit on behalf of the estate.  
  
Chapter 5 — Creditors, Debtors, and the Estate  
Part 1 of Chapter 5 deals with creditors’ clai ms, their priority, and their allowance. This 
section contains the prioritization of claims and the distribution of estate assets. Part 2 deals 
with specific duties of the debtor, the exemptions debtors can claim, and dischargeability of 
debts. Part 3 deals with property of the estate, recovery of voidable transfers, and contractual 
rights of the estate. 
 
Chapter 7 — Liquidation of Debtor’s Assets  
Part 1 of Chapter 7 deals with officers and the administration of Chapter 7 cases and spells 
out duties of the trustee. Part 2 deals with the collection, liquidation, and distribution of the 
estate’s assets. Part 3 deals with stockbroker liquidations. Part 4 deals with commodity 
broker liquidations. 
 
Chapter 7 is the most common type of bankruptcy; it involves liquidation of the debtors 
assets by a trustee to pay the creditor’s claims. This allows the debtor to get a court order 
under which some or all of his debts may be eliminated. It involves the liquidation of assets 
that are not exempt by state law. Personal bankruptcy does not eliminate taxes, fines, 
alimony, child support, and certain student loans. 
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1306                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A petition for liquidation under Chapter 7 may be filed by any entity (e.g., any individual, 
corporation, partnership, business trust, etc.), but a Chapter 7 case filed by an individual 
debtor may be dismissed (or converted to a case under Chapter 11 or 13 with the debtor’s 
consent) if granting relief under Chapter 7 would constitute an abuse. The means test is used 
to determine whether the Chapter 7 filing is presumptively abusive. Under this test, the 
trustee or any creditor can bring a motion to dismiss a Chapter 7 filing if the debtor’s income 
is greater than the state median income. 
 
Also, a Chapter 7 debtor cannot receive a discharge if a prior discharge was received within 8 
years of the new filing. 
 
Chapter 11 — Reorganization  
Often, debtors want to avoid liquidation, and Chapter 11 provides a type of bankruptcy that 
is designed to help the debtor by reorganizing the business. The code allows for debtors to 
restructure their debt, pay their creditors, and emerge from bankruptcy. Part 1 of the chapter 
deals with officers and administration. Part 2 deals with the plan of reorganization. Part 3 
deals with postconfirmation matters. Part 4 deals with railroad reorganization. 
 
The purpose of the Chapter 11 filing is to allow the debtor breathing room from the 
creditors so that the debtor can reorganize its financial affairs and continue as a going 
concern. If the court is provided with sufficient probable cause regarding the financial affairs 
of the debtor, a trustee or examiner can be appointed by the court. 
 
Chapter 13 — Adjustments of Debts 
Chapter 13 provides another type of bankruptcy that allows a debtor pay off his debts over 
time in accordance with a court approved plan. Under this type of case, the debtor may keep 
certain property that he would not be allowed to retain in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Because 
of changes to the bankruptcy law in 2005, many people are no longer eligible to file for 
bankruptcy under Chapter 7; some have their Chapter 7 case converted to a Chapter 13 case, 
but Chapter 13 is not granted if the debtor received a discharge under Chapters 7, 11, or 12 
within the previous 4 years, or a discharge under Chapter 13 in the previous 2 years. 
 
Also, the court many not grant a Chapter 13 discharge unless the debtor has completed an 
education course in personal financial management. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1307 
The Bankruptcy Case 
A bankruptcy case begins with the filing of a bankruptcy petition, but to be eligible to file a 
bankruptcy petition, an individual debtor must have received credit counseling from an 
approved counseling agency within 180 days before filing. 
 
When a petition is filed, the debtor must file the following documents:  
• A list of creditors 
• A schedule of assets and liabilities 
• A schedule of current income and current expenditures 
• A statement of the debtor’s financial affairs 
• Evidence of payment from employers, if any, received 60 days before the filing date 
• An itemized statement of monthly net income 
• A statement disclosing any reasonably anticipated increase in income or expenditures for 
the 12 months after the filing 
• A record of any interest in an qualified state tuition program or an education individual 
retirement account 
• A certificate of credit counseling from the approved counseling agency (if the petitioner 
is an individual) 
• A statement of the debtor’s intention with respect to his property that secured debt (if 
the petitioner is an individual) 
• A copy of the debtor’s tax return for the most recent tax year 
 
Generally, if an individual debtor in a Chapter 7 case fails to file the documents within 45 
days of the original filing date, the case is automatically dismissed. 
 
Once the bankruptcy case has been commenced, the debtor is protected by an automatic 
stay, which prevents creditors from continuing attempts to collect debts from the petitioner. 
There are, however, exceptions where the automatic stay does not apply (e.g., prosecution of 
criminal cases, paternity cases, domestic support obligation cases, child custody cases, etc.). 
Also, if the bankruptcy petition was filed as part of a scheme to delay, hinder, or defraud 
creditors, a creditor whose claim is securted by a real property interest is entitled to relief 
from the stay.  
 
Additionally, after filing, the debtor will be appointed a trustee who will oversee the case. In 
a Chapter 7 case, the trustee is responsible for collecting, selling, and reduceing the estate’s 
assets to cash; temporarily continuing to operate the debtor’s business; making a final report; 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1308                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
and filing a final account. In a Chapter 11 case, however, the debtor remains in possession of 
his assets and generally retains the same authority as the trustee, except for the duty to 
investigate the debtor and the right to compensation. A trustee is appointed in a Chapter 13 
case, but the trustee’s duties generally involve in vestigating the debtor’s financial affairs.  
 
Provisions Affecting Individuals 
Nondischargeable Debts  
Although a bankruptcy proceeding may result in the discharge of a debtor’s debts, certain 
debts are not discharged in Chapter 7 cases: 
• Taxes: In general, tax claims are not discharged.  
• Debts incurred by fraud, embezzlement, and larceny: Generally, liabilities arising from fraud, 
embezzlement, and larceny are not dischargeable.  
• Luxury goods: Debts owed to a single creditor totaling more than $500 for luxury goods 
incurred within 90 days of filing are preseumed non-dischargeable. 
• Cash advances: Cash advances of $750 that are made within 70 days of filing are presumed 
non-dischargeable.  
• Unscheduled debts: In general, debts that are not listed or are not scheduled are not 
dischargeable.  
• Domestic support obligations: Debts for domestic support obligations are not dischargeable. 
• Property settlements arising from divorce or separation : Debts for property settlements arising 
from divorce or separation are not dischargeable. 
• Certain liabilities: Liabilities arising from willful and malicious injury and liability for death 
or personal injury incurred when operating a vehicle are not dischargeable.  
• Fines and penalties: Obligations to pay a fine, penalty, or forfeiture owed to the 
government are not dischargeable. 
• Student loans: Student loans are not dischargeable, unless it would impose an undue 
hardship for the debt’s survival.  
 
Homestead Exemption 
To prevent individuals who are likely to file for bankruptcy from moving their assets to 
states with more favorable laws, the debtor must satisfy certain holding period requirements. 
To qualify for a state’s homestead exemption, whic h allow filers to exempt the value of their 
homes from creditors, for property worth more than $125,000, the debtor must own that 
property for 1,215 days before filing. Also, before qualifying for a state’s homestead 
exemption, the debtor must have lived in that state for 730 days prior to filing.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1309 
Retirement Plan Exemptions 
Debtors can exempt retiremet funds from the bankruptcy estate if they are in a fund or 
account that is exempt from taxes under the Internal Revenue Code.  
 
Education Account Exemptions 
Debtors can exempt education accounts under Sections 529 and 530 from the bankruptcy 
estate if the beneficiary of the account is a child, stepchild, grandchild, or step-grandchild of 
the debtor for the taxable year during which funds were placed in the account.  
 
Privacy Provisions 
Under the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act, the bankruptcy 
court is permitted to honor the privacy policies of business debtors. The Act creates a 
consumer privacy ombudsman to protect personal privacy in bankruptcy proceedings. 
Measures may be implemented to prevent identity theft and to guide what information is 
readily accessible to the public. Debtors are permitted to request that courts protect sensitive 
information before it is placed in public records.  
 
The Role of the Trustee in Bankruptcy Fraud Matters 
The trustee in bankruptcy matters is often confronted with allegations of fraud and 
misconduct on the part of the debtor and its principals. In Chapter 11 cases, it is often the 
primary reason the court appointed a trustee. Creditors, representatives of the creditors’ 
committee, or private investigators might be interacting with a bankruptcy trustee. For this 
reason, it is important to know how the trustee operates, what the role of the trustee is, and 
how to make the most of the opportunity to work with the trustee. The trustee’s authority to 
investigate fraud is found in the Bankruptcy Code. The following is a brief outline of the 
Chapter 7 and Chapter 11 trustee’s authority to investigate fraud. 
  
Statutory Authority 
In Chapter 7 cases, section 704 of the code spells out all duties of the trustee, which include 
investigating claims filed by creditors, and the code provides that the trustee “shall 
investigate the financial affairs of the debtor.”  
 
Although generally, trustees in Chapter 11 cases do not operate the debtor’s business, 
Chapter 11 trustees has the duty to investigate the debtor’s financial affairs. 
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1310                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Investigation by the Trustee 
The trustee’s powers enable him to gather financial information from various sources 
including the debtor’s attorneys and accountants. A trustee steps into the shoes of the 
debtor, which allows him the opportunity to break the attorney-client privilege. Attorneys 
might attempt to raise the attorney-client privilege as a defense to providing information, but 
they are usually unsuccessful in this regard. Since the trustee is now the client, he must be 
able to understand what legal actions need to be taken. Therefore, it is imperative that the 
debtor’s attorney cooperate with the trustee. The trustee also should have access to the 
accountant’s work papers, tax returns, and client documents in their possession, which might 
provide the trustee and creditors with the opportunity to locate and recover hidden assets. 
Another useful tool in the trustee’s arsenal is the power to have access to debtor’s records 
that are in the possession of the criminal authorities. Since the trustee steps into the shoes of 
the debtor, he has the right to inspect and use these records to conduct the business affairs 
of the debtor. 
 
If the investigation uncovers sufficient evidence of fraud, the trustee should file a report 
detailing the results of the investigation with the United States Attorney. This duty is spelled 
out in Title 18, United States Code, section 3057. 
 
Sources of Information 
The trustee should obtain the various documents or information listed below in the course 
of an investigation. If any of this information is unavailable, the trustee can subpoena these 
documents. The subpoenaed documents could either be the original documents, certified 
copies of these documents, or other information that could be used to reconstruct the 
missing documents.  
  
Type of Information Location 
Debtor’s petition, schedules, statement of 
financial affairs 
Bankruptcy Court’s Office and UST 
Interim and operating statements Bankruptcy Court and UST 
Adversary proceedings, claims registers, 
transcripts of hearings, 2004 examinations 
Bankruptcy Court 
Fee applications Bankruptcy Court and UST 
Real property records County Clerk, County Assessor 
Personal property records County Clerk 
UCC filings Secretary of State 
Financial statements Lending institutions, debtor’s counsel, 
accountants, Chapter 7 or Chapter 11 filings 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1311 
Forwarding address Post Office 
DBAs County recorder; Secretary of State 
Partnerships Secretary of State 
Officers of corporations Secretary of State 
Addresses of individuals Voting records 
Insurance policies Insurance company providing coverage 
Current or prior business activities Interviews conducted of creditors, former 
employees, former spouses, former business 
activities 
Criminal history, current or prior litigation Police records, local court records 
Tapes and transcripts of sworn testimony 
[341(a) and 2004 examinations] 
UST - 341(a) exams 
Bankruptcy Court - 2004 exams 
 
Investigative Procedures 
To fulfill their fiduciary investigative responsibilities, trustees need to gather financial 
information. If debtor’s books and records are missing, incomplete or unreliable, they should 
be obtained from third parties such as banks, customers, related parties, and so on. If the 
third-party resists the trustee’s request, the trustee can subpoena records or testimony under 
Bankruptcy Rule 2004. After receiving third-party records and testimony, the trustee might 
then: 
• Reconstruct cash receipts and cash disbursements journals, and general ledgers. 
• Identify new bank accounts, related-party transactions, and hidden or concealed assets. 
• Take 2004 exams (depositions) of uncooperative witnesses. 
• Take 2004 exams of third-party witnesses and others who can authenticate documents, 
records, etc.  
• Obtain declaration testimony from cooperative witnesses. 
• Interview witnesses — Determine direct versus indirect knowledge of facts. Bookkeepers 
are good sources of information who can provide information regarding cash receipts 
and disbursements, related-parties transactions, and evidence regarding destruction of 
records. 
• After documentary and other evidence has been gathered and analyzed, the trustee 
should prepare an investigative report. 
• If allegations of fraud are present, file a separate report pursuant to Title 18, section 3057 
(filed with United States Attorney’s Office).   
 
 
Creditors’ Rights and Remedies 
Normally when businesses or individuals are not paid, they attempt to collect amounts owed 
to them. When normal collection efforts fail, they resort to legal action. But if, after a 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1312                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
creditor files a legal action, the debtor files a petition for bankruptcy, the creditor can take 
the following steps:  
• Investigate the reasons why payment has not been made. 
? Check with other creditors to see if they have not been paid. 
? Check with credit bureaus for credit history. 
• File a motion for the appointment of a trustee; other creditors and the office of the UST 
might join in with the petitioning creditor. 
• To succeed, the moving party must demonstrate that fraud is suspected, and, therefore, a 
trustee should be appointed to oversee the operations of the debtor. 
• The creditor should have sufficient documentary and other evidence of fraudulent 
conduct, including declarations provided by knowledgeable witnesses. 
• A hearing is held where the judge hears evidence supporting and refuting the fraud 
allegations. Thereafter, the judge issues a ruling regarding the appointment of a trustee. 
• In some cases, the judge might appoint an examiner instead of a trustee because it is less 
intrusive. An examiner’s role is only to investigate and report back to the judge whether 
the allegations of fraud are supported by the independent examiner’s own evidence. 
• If the debtor does not file bankruptcy, the creditor might join other creditors and file an 
involuntary petition against the debtor. 
 
Creditors’ Committees  
After filing a Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition, the UST normally appoints a committee of 
creditors holding unsecured claims. This committee is referred to as a creditors’ committee. 
Title 11, U.S.C., section 1102 provides guidance in the formation of creditors’ committees. 
 
Title 11, U.S.C., section 1103 details the powers of creditors’ committees. They can employ 
attorneys, accountants, or other agents to assist them in the performance of their duties 
under the code. In carrying out their duties, creditors’ committees are authorized to consult 
with the trustee or debtor-in-possession concerning the administration of the case; to 
investigate the acts, conduct, assets, liabilities, and financial condition of the debtor and the 
operation of the debtor’s business; to participate in the formation of a plan of 
reorganization; to request the appointment of a trustee or examiner; and to perform such 
other services as are in the interest of those represented. 
 
Involuntary Petitions (Title 11, U.S.C., Section 303)  
Most bankruptcy cases are voluntary (i.e., voluntarily filed by the debtor). As we have 
described above, debtors have specific reasons for filing bankruptcy. Individuals, 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1313 
partnerships, and corporations have the statutory right to file bankruptcy as a protection 
from their creditors. In exchange for exercising their privilege of filing bankruptcy, debtors 
give up their right to financial privacy and must do other things required under the code. 
 
Most creditors, however, do not want their de btors to file for bankruptcy because it might 
make recovering a claim more difficult, and it might diminish the amount they receive on 
their claim.  
 
To collect amounts owed to them or to obtain a judgment against the debtor, some creditors 
might sue the debtor in state court before any bankruptcy petition is filed. Numerous 
collection actions can be brought against the debtor, which might lead to an increase in 
competition for the debtor’s remaining assets. When this occurs, the debtor normally files 
bankruptcy to prevent these creditors from seizing its assets. In some rare instances, 
however, the creditors might involuntary petition the debtor into bankruptcy, although 
doing so runs contrary to their normal inclination to do everything they can to keep debtors 
out of bankruptcy. 
 
That being said, involuntary petitions serve very important purposes; they can be used to 
stop the financial hemorrhaging that usually takes place in fraudulently operated businesses, 
and they allow the creditors to control the debtor and protect the value of the business while 
investigating the financial affairs of the debtor.  
 
An involuntary petition can only be filed under Chapters 7 and 11. Creditors who have not 
been paid by the debtor can file a petition forcing the company into bankruptcy. Generally, 
the creditors must be able to demonstrate in court that the debtor is not paying debts as they 
mature. 
 
To commence the filing of an involuntary proceeding, creditors must satisfy the following 
criteria: 
• The debts must not be subject to a bona fide dispute and must be noncontingent. 
• The creditor(s) must be owed at least $14,425 more than the value of the lien or 
collateral. 
• If there are 12 or more creditors, then three creditors are needed to file. 
• If there are fewer than 12 creditors, only one creditor is needed to file. 
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1314                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
After the involuntary petition is filed, a court hearing is held. The court might dismiss the 
petition or enter an order for relief. But if the court deems it necessary, an interim trustee 
might be appointed to preserve the property of the estate. At the hearing on the involuntary 
petition, the creditors are required to demonstrate, through direct testimony, that the alleged 
debtor is not paying debts as they come due. 
 
Creditors must be careful when filing an involuntary petition. If the creditors are not 
successful in court and the judge dismisses the petition, they might be sued by the debtor. 
Damages for lost profits and goodwill could be assessed against the creditors who filed the 
involuntary petition. Occasionally, in egregious circumstances, courts have awarded punitive 
damages against creditors who filed an involuntary petition. 
 
Investigations by Creditors  
Individual creditors might conduct their own investigations and assist Chapter 7 and Chapter 
11 trustees in performing their investigations. Trustees are normally very appreciative of 
creditors who can provide information regarding the financial affairs of the debtor. Creditors 
also can attend the 341(a) examination of the debtor and ask pertinent questions. Creditors 
who bring copies of documents, such as prior loan applications or pictures of particular 
assets, to the 341(a) examination are of great interest to trustees. Creditors can ask the 
debtor what happened to the various assets listed on the loan applications or assets shown in 
photographs. 
 
 
Bankruptcy Crime Statutes 
Bankruptcy crimes that are committed during the course of a bankruptcy proceeding, or in 
contemplation of a bankruptcy proceeding, are contained in federal statutes. They are carried 
out through the filing of a bankruptcy petition either to accomplish the purpose of the crime 
or to cover up another crime that has already been perpetrated.  
 
Although the Bankruptcy Code is contained within Title 11, U.S. Code, bankruptcy crimes 
appear within Title 18, U.S. Code, sections 151 through 155. Section 152 is the most 
comprehensive of the individual bankruptcy crime statutes. To constitute and be proved as a 
federal crime, bankruptcy crimes must have been committed during the pendency of a bankruptcy 
proceeding, with the defendant’s knowledge, and with a fraudulent intent to defeat the bankruptcy laws. 
The FBI investigates bankruptcy crimes and the U.S. Attorney’s office prosecutes them.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1315 
It is no defense to these crimes that the creditors have actual knowledge of concealed assets 
or that the concealment was not from all creditors, and it is no defense that the defendant 
returned the estate’s assets, though such facts might mitigate damages. 
 
Generally, the penalty for each bankruptcy offense is a fine (of up to $500,000 in the case of 
bankruptcy fraud committed by an organization) or imprisonment for not more than five 
years, or both. The statute of limitations does not run until the fraud is detected or the 
debtor receives a discharge or is denied a discharge pursuant to the Bankruptcy Code.  
 
The following sections set out the bankruptcy crime statutes as well as related criminal 
statutes that frequently arise in bankruptcy cases.  
 
Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 151 
This section contains the definition of the term debtor, a party who has filed a petition under 
Title 11 of the U.S. Code. 
 
Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 152  
This is the most comprehensive criminal bankruptcy fraud statute; it serves as the primary 
bankruptcy crime statute for prosecuting bankruptcy fraud. Under section 158, the FBI and 
the US Attorneys are charged with enforcement of section 152. There are nine paragraphs in 
section 152 that define various offenses against the bankruptcy laws. The following is a brief 
overview of each of the nine offenses.  
 
Paragraph 1 — Concealment of Property  
 
A person who knowingly and fraudulently conceals from a custodian, trustee, marshal, or other 
officer of the court charged with the control or custody of property, or, in connection with a case 
under Title 11, from creditors or  the United States Trustee, any property belonging to the estate 
of a debtor; 
 
For purposes of this paragraph, estate property consists of assets, records, and anything  
of value.  
 
Paragraph 2 — False Oath or Account  
False oaths apply to oral testimony that might be given in 341(a) examinations, 2004 
examinations (depositions), and testimony provided at hearings and trials.  
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1316                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A person who knowingly and fraudulently makes a false oath or account in or in relation to 
any case under Title 11. 
 
Paragraph 3 — False Declarations 
 
A person who knowingly and fraudulently makes a false declaration, certificate, verification or 
statement under penalty of perjury as permitted under section 1746 of Title 28, in or in relation 
to any case under Title 11.  
 
Written documents filed with the court under penalty of perjury consist of the debtor’s 
petition, schedules and statements of financial affairs, interim statements and operating 
reports, as well as declarations filed with the court. Declarations are made in petitions, 
schedules and in other court filings (motions). This section gives the same weight to 
unsworn declarations as to those sworn under penalty of perjury.  
 
Paragraph 4 — False Claims 
 
A person who knowingly and fraudulently presents any false claim for proof against the estate of 
a debtor, or uses any such claim in any case under  Title 11, in a personal capacity or as or 
through an agent, proxy, or attorney. 
 
This paragraph is designed to prevent fictitious or inflated claims from being filed by 
creditors or others in a bankruptcy case. 
 
Paragraph 5 — Fraudulent Receipt of Property 
 
A person who knowingly and fraudulently receiv es any material amount of property from a 
debtor after the filing of a case under Title 11 with intent to defeat the provisions of Title 11 
 
This paragraph relates back to paragraph 1, above, and it implicates those who work in 
concert with the debtor. This could be a creditor or any other interested party. 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1317 
Paragraph 6 — Extortion and Bribery 
 
A person who knowingly and fraudulently gives, offers, receives or attempts to obtain any 
money or property, remuneration, compensation, reward, advantage, or promise thereof, for 
acting or forbearing to act in any case under Title 11. 
  
This paragraph covers bribery, which also is spelled out in Title 18, principally sections 210 
and 1503. Both Sections discuss the attempt to bribe judicial officers and to unlawfully 
corrupt or influence any officer of the court. Section 1503 also covers threats intended to 
influence, intimidate, or impede an officer in the performance of his duties. 
 
Paragraph 7 — Fraudulent Transfer or Concealment 
 
A person who in a personal capacity or as agent or officer of any person or corporation, in 
contemplation of a case under Title 11 by or against him or any other person or corporation, 
or with intent to defeat the provisions of Title 11, knowingly and fraudulently transfers or 
conceals any of his property or the property of such other person or corporation.  
 
This paragraph is the only paragraph under section 152 that deals with pre-bankruptcy 
conduct. The section addresses situations where a bankruptcy petition filing is imminent. It 
is intended to cover actions by individuals who transfer property rightfully belonging to the 
creditors of the prospective bankruptcy estate. 
 
Paragraph 8 — Fraudulent Destruction or Alteration of Documents 
 
A person who, after the filing of a case under Title 11 or in contemplation thereof, knowingly 
and fraudulently conceals, destroys, mutilates, falsifies, or makes a false entry in any recorded 
information (including books, documents, records, and papers) relating to the property or 
financial affairs of a debtor. 
 
Paragraph 9 — Fraudulent Withholding of Documents 
 
A person who, after the filing of a case under Title 11, knowingly and fraudulently withholds 
from a custodian, trustee, marshal, or other officer of the court or a United States Trustee 
entitled to its possession, any recorded information (including books, documents, records, and 
papers) relating to the property or financial affairs of a debtor. 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1318                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
This section is particularly useful in cases where the debtor does not turn over estate records 
after being compelled to do so by the court, and the records are later discovered by federal 
authorities during the execution of search warrants. 
 
Embezzlement Against the Estate, Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 153 
  
 (a) Offense. A person described in subsection (b) who knowingly and fraudulently appropriates to the 
person’s own use, embezzles, spends, or transfers any property or secretes or destroys any document 
belonging to the estate of a debtor. 
 
 (b) Person to Whom Section Applies. A person described in this subsection is one who has access to 
property or documents belonging to an estate by virtue of the person’s participation in the administration 
of the estate as a trustee, custodian, marshal, attorney, or other officer of the court or as an agent, 
employee, or other person engaged by such an officer to perform a service with respect to the estate.  
  
This statute deals with all property and the records or documents that the court officer 
receives during the tenure of the trustee or officer.  
 
Adverse Interest and Conduct of Officers, Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 154 
 
A person who, being a custodian, trustee,  marshal, or other officer of the court — 
(1)  knowingly purc hases, directly or indirectly, any property of the estate of which the person is such 
an officer in a case under Title 11;  
 
(2)  knowingly refuses to permit a reasonable opportunity for the inspection by parties in interest of 
the documents and accounts relating to the affairs of estates in the person’s charge by parties 
when directed by the court to do so; or  
(3)  knowingly refuses to permit a reasonable opport unity for the inspection by the United States 
Trustee of the documents and accounts relating to the affairs of any estate in the person’s  
charge. 
 
Bankruptcy trustees are in a position of trust and, therefore, should be held to a higher 
standard of conduct than other interested parties. But one critical aspect is the sale of estate 
property. Trustees can influence the sale of property and can make significant profits if they 
directly or indirectly purchase assets of the estate. It would be similar to insider trading by 
individuals in the securities industry. This statute is unlike the others listed above in that a 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1319 
violation of this statute is only a misdemeanor, whereas all of the above are felonies. 
Conviction under this Section carries a fine, as well as forfeiture of the person’s office. 
 
Knowing Disregard of Bankruptcy Law or Rule, Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 156 
 
(a)  Definitions. In this section — 
(1) the term “bankruptcy petition preparer” means a person, other than the debtor’s attorney or an 
employee of such an attorney, who prepares for compensation a document for filing, and 
 
(2) the term “document for filing” means a petition or any other document prepared for filing by a 
debtor in a United States bankruptcy court or a United States district court in connection with a case 
under Title 11. 
 
(b) Offense. If a bankruptcy case or related proceeding is dismissed because of a knowing attempt by a 
bankruptcy petition preparer in any manner to disregard the requirements of Title 11, United States 
Code, or the Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure. 
 
This section is the criminal version of the Title 11, U.S.C., section 110, which deals with 
“petition mills” and petition preparers who de liberately disregard the Bankruptcy Code or 
any of its rules and procedures. Petition mills and preparers who fall under this section might 
file false documents for debtors with deliberately wrong Social Security numbers or other 
incorrect information. In some cases, debtors might not even be aware they are filing 
bankruptcy or the effect of a bankruptcy on their credit rating. 
 
Bankruptcy Fraud, Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 157  
 
A perso n who, having devised or in tending to devise a scheme or artifice to defraud and for the purpose 
of executing or concealing such a scheme or artifice or attempting to do so — 
 
(1) files a petition under Title 11, including a fraudulent involuntary bankruptcy petition under 
section 303 of such title;  
 
(2) files a document in a proceeding under Title 11, including a fraudulent  involuntary bankruptcy 
petition under section 303 of such title; or  
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1320                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
(3) makes a false or fraudulent re presentation, claim, or promise concerning or in relation to a 
proceeding under Title 11, including a fraudulent in voluntary bankruptcy petition under section 303 of 
such title, at any time before or after the filing of  the petition, or in relation to a proceeding falsely 
asserted to be pending under such Title. 
 
This section is very similar to mail and wire fraud statutes both in wording and in concept. 
This section applies to insiders who perpetrate bustout schemes, as well as those who 
attempt to obtain credit immediately prior to filing bankruptcy. Under section 158, the FBI 
and the U.S. Attorneys are charged with enforcement of section 157. 
 
Falsifying, Altering, or Destroying Documents, Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1519 
 
Whoever knowingly alters, destroys, mutilates, conceals, covers up, falsifies, or makes a false entry in 
any record, document, or tangible object with the intent to impede, obstruct, or influence the 
investigation or proper administration of any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency 
of the United States or any case filed under Title 11, or in relation to or contemplation of any such 
matter or case, shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 20 years, or both. 
 
This section was added as part of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in 2002. It specifically provides 
that altering, falsifying, or destroying documents filed under Title 11 (the Bankruptcy Code) 
is a criminal violation subject to imprisonment of up to 20 years. 
 
Bankruptcy-Related Violations  
Although bankruptcy crimes are the focus of this section, there are other crimes that are 
usually perpetrated prior to the filing of a bankruptcy petition. In some cases, the bankruptcy 
process is the culmination of a pattern of prior criminal activity. There are many other crimes 
frequently associated with bankruptcy including mail fraud, wire fraud, bank fraud, interstate 
transportation of stolen goods or property, aiding or abetting, false statements, conspiracy, tax 
evasion, and money laundering. Bankruptcy fraud is also a predicate offense under RICO. For 
more information on these offenses, see the “Law Related to Fraud” chapter in the Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
Although the criminal aspects of bankruptcy crimes are heard in District Court, the 
underlying facts dealing with a debtor’s misc onduct also are heard in the form of civil 
proceedings before the United States Bankruptcy Court. Parallel proceedings occur in cases 
where bankruptcy fraud allegations have been made. Several examples of civil proceedings 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1321 
that ensue as a result of fraud allegations against the debtor are motions for the appointment 
of trustees and examiners, lawsuits for recovery of fraudulently transferred property, and 
objections to the debtor’s discharge.  
 
 
Bankruptcy Schemes 
 
Concealed Assets 
The most common crime is the concealment of assets rightfully belonging to the debtor 
estate. Assets might consist of cash, consumer property, houses, and interests in partnerships 
and corporations, as well as lawsuits in which the debtor is a plaintiff. Assets also include 
books and records of the debtor. Concealments vary from little or no monetary value to tens 
of millions of dollars. The various concealment offenses are described in more detail under 
the bankruptcy crime statutes. 
 
The Planned Bustout 
A bustout is a planned bankruptcy. It can take many different forms. The basic approach is 
for an apparently legitimate business to order large quantities of goods on credit, then 
dispose of those goods through legitimate or illegitimate channels. The perpetrators then 
close shop, absconding with the proceeds, and leaving the suppliers unpaid. 
 
Bustout schemes are planned and perpetrated by individuals both prior to and subsequent to 
the formation of the new business entity. Other characteristics of bustout schemes follow: 
• They are planned from the beginning. 
• Sometimes organized crime is involved. 
• Credit is established with numerous vendors; prompt payments are made to all vendors; 
vendors feel comfortable in dealings, thereby extending existing credit lines. 
• Perpetrators build inventory by ordering everything they can from vendors; they promise 
to pay soon and order more merchandise. 
• Sell out inventory at deep discount or move it before vendors can take possession of it. 
• Business fails or closes up, files bankruptcy, or creditors beat them to it with involuntary 
bankruptcy. 
  
Detection  
Some red flags that signal that a bustout scheme might be in process include: 
• A business relationship based principally on trust. Creditors are willing to offer extended 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1322                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
terms for payment, hold checks, or take post-dated checks. This makes them vulnerable. 
• Buyers with a history of purchasing goods for an unreasonable discount. 
• A large number of bank accounts, indicating a possible kiting scheme. The perpetrator 
occasionally pays some of his creditors with funds generated by floating checks between 
bank accounts. 
 
Prevention 
Lenders and suppliers should evaluate potential customers carefully prior to extending credit 
by performing due diligence and obtaining detailed background information. Lenders  
and suppliers should at times visit their customers’ locations to verify the legitimacy of  
the businesses. 
 
Multiple Filings 
This scheme involves repeated bankruptcy filings by the same debtor in order to obtain the 
benefit of the automatic stay. Usually each petition is dismissed for failure to file the required 
statements or to appear for examination. False statements on petitions are common, 
including a denial that the debtor has filed any previous petition. 
 
Credit Card Bustout 
The debtor intentionally runs up a number of credit cards to their limit and files bankruptcy 
with no intent to repay. Credit card debts might include purchases for jewelry, luxury items, 
or other personal property that are not disclosed on the schedules. Credit card debt also 
might include large cash advances taken prior to filing bankruptcy. 
 
Forged Filings 
Bankruptcy petitions are sometimes filed in another (uninvolved) person’s name, usually as 
part of a larger scheme using an assumed identity. It can take years to correct the credit 
records of the person whose identity has been stolen. Sometimes the debtor’s name is 
obtained from obituary notices. 
 
Typing Services or Petition Mills 
This scheme involves companies that file bankruptcy petitions typically on behalf of low-
 income and often unsuspecting clients. The petitions often contain numerous false 
statements. The debtor usually has no idea a bankruptcy has been filed, as the service has 
held itself out to be a renter’s rights group and has not told the client how it will accomplish 
what it has promised.   
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1401 
TAX FRAUD 
 
Introduction 
The most important distinction in determining whether an individual or company has 
committed tax fraud is whether the tax-filing party intentionally filed an improper tax return 
with the federal government. The intent of the party to wrongly file a return will determine 
the difference between tax avoidance and tax evasion. The U.S. courts have determined evasion 
to be unlawful, while avoidance has been deemed lawful. 
 
The definition of tax fraud is 
 
… the actual intentional wrongdoing, and the intent required … to evade a tax believed to 
be owing. Fraud implies bad faith, intentional wrongdoing, and a sinister motive. It is 
never imputed or presumed and the courts will not sustain findings of fraud upon 
circumstances which at most create only suspicion.    
 
This definition tells us that a false tax return is considered fraudulent if the responsible party 
has knowingly attempted to defraud the government of owed tax dollars. In U.S. v. 
Pomponio, the courts further refined the scope of tax fraud by stating that willfulness is “… a 
voluntary, intentional violation of a known legal duty, [that] does not require proof of an evil 
motive.” It can thus be accepted that accidental false tax returns do not qualify as fraudulent 
returns.  
 
Fraudulent Intent  
An example of fraudulent intent is the filing of a tax return in the wrong district, when the 
taxpayer (a CPA) knew or had reason to know the proper district (Spencer D. Lorton v. 
Commissioner, TC Memo 1954–872). 
 
Objectively Reasonable “Good Faith” Misunderstanding of the Law  
Good faith or a legitimate misunderstanding of the requirements of the law negates 
willfulness, [ U.S. v. Cheek, 931 F.2d 1206 (7th Cir 1991), aff’d. 111 U.S. 604 (1991)]. The case 
held, however, that the belief that taxes are in violation of the Constitution was not 
“objectively reasonable” so as to negate willfulness. 
                                                          
114 Mertens, Law of Federal Income Taxation, sec. 55.21, page 64, (1991 Rev);  Ross Glove Co. v. Commissioner, 60 TC 569 (1973). 
2 U.S. v. Pomponio, 429 U.S. 10 (1976); 76-2 USTC 9695. 
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1402                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Willfulness can be inferred from conduct, such as: 
• Keeping a double set of books (not to be confused with GAAP and tax records). 
• Making false entries or alterations or creating false invoices or documents. 
• Destruction of books or records. 
• Concealment of assets (illicit income). 
• Covering up sources of income. 
• Avoiding making records usual in transactions of the kind. 
• Conduct that misleads or conceals [ Spies v. U.S., 317 U.S. 492 (1943).]. 
 
 
Hallmarks (Badges) of Fraud 
The courts recognize certain hallmarks or badges of tax fraud. Some of these are: 
• Misrepresentation of facts 
• Artifice 
• Device to hide income or assets 
• Double set of books 
• Secret bank accounts under false names 
• Overstatement of deductions 
• Fictitious transactions 
 
Fraud Is More Than a Mistake in Judgment  
The failure to know and understand the rules of “first in, first out” (FIFO) is not sufficient 
to sustain a fraud charge, Smith v. Commissioner, 40 BTA 387, supplemental opinion 42 BTA 
505. There was no indication in this case that the taxpayer misrepresented any fact, withheld 
any information, or resisted or prevented the discovery by the commissioner of any 
pertinent data. 
 
False Versus Fraudulent 
Definitions of False 
• When “false” appears by itself, and not coupled with a penalty or the creation of an 
offense, then false means incorrect [ Eliot National Bank v. Gill, 218 F. 600 (1st Cir 1914)]. 
• False means it is incorrect, but made in good faith [ National Bank of Commerce in St. Louis 
v. Allen, 223 F. 472 (8th Cir 1915)]. 
• Statements of opinion, as distinguished from those of material fact, are not fraud [ Ohio Brass 
Co. v. Commissioner, 17 BTA 1199 (1929)]. 
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1403 
Corporate Fraud  
Corporate fraud  depends on the intent of the corporate officers [Auerbach Shoe Co. v. 
Commissioner, 21 TC 191 (1st Cir. 1953)]. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Charging airline tickets to “air freight” (a false representat ion) coupled with the failure to 
credit refunds for redeemed tickets to the corp oration was sufficient to render the corporate 
returns fraudulent [ Kreps v.  Commissioner, 42 TC 660 (1964) aff’d, 351 F.2d 1 
(2nd Cir 1965)]. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A 40 percent shareholder/officer of a corporation embezzled corporate funds for her 
personal use, then falsified corporate records.  The corporation incorrectly claimed deductions 
based on the false records. The fraud claim was not sustained against the corporation 
[Botwinik Bros. of Mass., Inc. v. Commissioner, 39 TC 988 (1963)]. 
 
Burden of Proof  
In July of 1998, President Clinton signed in to law the IRS Restructuring and Reform Act. 
This Act made sweeping changes in the structure and procedures of the IRS. One of the 
most important changes involves the shift of the burden of proof in civil cases. The general 
rule prior to the Act was that the taxpayer bears the burden of proof at trial in civil 
proceedings. The Statutory Notice of Deficiency (90-day letter) enjoyed the presumption of 
correctness. The presumption of correctness in favor of the IRS required the taxpayer to go 
forward with prima facie evidence to disprove the IRS’s determination. After successfully 
rebutting the presumption of correctness, taxpayers had the burden of proving their case by 
at least a preponderance of the evidence.  
 
However the rule established under the Reform Act is that IRS has the burden of proof in 
civil court proceedings on income, gift, estate, or generation-skipping tax liability with 
respect to factual issues that are relevant to determining the taxpayer’s tax liability, provided 
the taxpayer: (1) provides credible evidence on the factual issue; (2) keeps records and backs 
up items as presently required under the Code and regulations; and (3) cooperates with IRS 
in regard to reasonable requests for meetings, interviews, witnesses, information, and 
documents. Corporations, trusts, and partnerships with a net worth in excess of $7 million 
continue to bear the burden of proof. The Senate Finance Committee Report states that if 
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1404                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the taxpayer’s evidence and the IRS’s evidence are equally balanced, the court should find 
that the IRS has not sustained its burden of proof.  
 
Fraud 
Even under the old IRS Code, there was no presumption of correctness afforded the IRS 
when fraud was involved. Therefore, the IRS had the burden of proving fraud [ Armstrong v. 
U.S., 354 F.2d 274; 173 Ct.Cl. 944 (1965)]. If the fraud claim is for more than one year, the 
IRS must show that some part of the underpayment was due to fraud for each year that the 
penalty is added [Professional Services v. Commissioner, 79 TC 888 (1982)]. First, there must be a 
deficiency and second, the deficiency must be substantial [U.S. v. Morse, 491 F.2d 149 (1st Cir 
1974)]. Substantiality  is a question of fact [U.S. v. Marks, 282 F. Supp. 546 (D Or 1966), aff’d  
391 F.2d 210; (9th Cir 1968); cert denied 39 3 U.S. 839 (1968)]. There is controversy about 
whether substantiality applies to the unpaid tax or to unreported income. Fraud penalties 
survive the death of the taxpayer. 
 
 
Civil Versus Criminal 
Although the burden of proving fraud is on the IRS, the primary determinant of whether the 
IRS pursues a civil rather than a criminal fraud charge is what it believes it can prove. There 
also might be budgetary and staffing constraints that might dictate whether a suit is pursued 
civilly or criminally.  
 
The difference between civil and criminal in the view of the IRS is that a civil case never 
ripens into a crime, and criminal offenses involve behavior too insidious to be disposed of 
on a civil basis. Failure to cooperate might raise a civil case to a crime because it might 
demonstrate willful intent. 
 
 
Taxpayer Penalties 
Taxpayers with a tax deficiency may be subject to civil or criminal penalties. The primary 
determinant of whether the IRS pursues a civil rather than a criminal fraud charge is what it 
believes it can prove.  
 
From the IRS’s perspective, a civil case never ripens into a crime, but a criminal offense 
involves behavior too insidious to be disposed of on a civil basis. 
 
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1405 
Civil Taxpayer Penalties 
Negligence, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6662 
If a taxpayer’s underpayment is attributable  to negligence or one of the other reasons 
specified in this section, the government may impose an accuracy-related penalty. Negligence 
is strongly indicated where information is omitted on tax returns or deductions are “too 
good to be true.” 
 
If guilty under this law, the government will impose a penalty based on a percentage of the 
underpayment in the case of negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, substantial 
understatement of income tax, substantial valuation misstatement, substantial overstatement 
of pension liabilities, or substantial understatement of estate or gift tax valuations.  
 
Frivolous Return, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6702 
If a taxpayer files a frivolous return — one that is incorrect on its face or one that does not 
contain enough information to determine the tax liability — the government may impose a 
separate $5,000 civil penalty. An example of a frivolous return is one written in Roman 
numerals rather than Arabic numbers. 
 
Fraud, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6663 
If a taxpayer’s underpayment is attributable to fraud, the government may impose a penalty 
of 75 percent of the portion of the underpayment that is attributable to fraud. If, however, 
the taxpayer is successful in proving that a portion of the underpayment is not the result of 
fraud, that portion might still be subject to the negligence penalty.  
 
Criminal Taxpayer Penalties 
Tax Evasion, Title 26, U.S.C., § 7201 
If a taxpayer is found guilty of tax evasion, which is the intentional evasion of tax 
obligations, the government shall impose a penalty of not more than $100,000 ($500,000 in 
the case of a corporation) and/or imprisonment for not more than five years.  
 
There are three elements to the crime of tax evasion. 
 
WILLFULNESS 
A willful and positive attempt to evade or defeat the tax in any manner lifts a misdemeanor to 
a felony [Spies v. United States, 317 U.S. 492 (1943)]. A consistent pattern of not reporting or 
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1406                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
underreporting income is sufficient to infer willfulness [United States v. Stone, 770 F.2d 842 (9th 
Cir 1985)]. 
 
EXISTENCE OF A SUBSTANTIAL DEFICIENCY 
There must be a deficiency and that deficiency must be substantial [Lawn v. United States, 355 
U.S. 339. Morse, supra]. Therefore, there must also be a tax liability [§ 7202. But see Marks, 
supra]. 
 
AFFIRMATIVE ACT 
There must be an affirmative act constituting an evasion or attempted evasion of tax 
obligations, but to be found guilty of this felony, one needs only to attempt to evade the tax. 
 
Making a False Return (Tax Perjury), Title 26, U.S.C., § 7206(1) 
This crime occurs when a taxpayer uses false or misleading information on his tax return. 
The elements of this crime include all of the following: 
• The defendant made and subscribed a return, statement, or other document that was 
false with regard to a material matter. 
• The return, statement, or other document contained a written declaration that it was 
made under the penalties of perjury. 
• The defendant did not believe the return, statement, or other document was true and 
correct as to every material matter. 
• The defendant falsely subscribed to the return, statement, or other document willfully, 
with the specific intent to violate the law. 
 
Failure to File and Pay, Title 26, U.S.C., § 7203 
This statute makes it a crime to willfully do any of the following:  
• Fail to pay any tax or estimated tax 
• Fail to file a return 
• Fail to keep required records 
• Fail to supply any required information.  
 
A person convicted under this statute can be fined up to $25,000 ($100,000 in the case of a 
corporation) or sentenced to up to one year in prison in addition to any other penalties. 
 
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1407 
Conspiracy to Defraud the United States, Title 18, U.S.C., § 371 
The criminal tax statutes of the Internal Revenue Code do not include a statute for the crime 
of conspiracy, but tax conspiracies can be prosecuted under the general conspiracy statute 
under section 371 of Title 18, U.S. Code. Section 371 makes it illegal for two or more 
persons to agree to commit an offense against the United States or to defraud any federal 
agency. Conspiracy in tax cases usually involves a conspiracy to commit tax evasion or to file 
false tax returns. 
 
 
Tax Preparer Penalties 
 
Aiding and Abetting Understatement of Taxpayer's Liability, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6701 
The Code imposes a civil penalty on any person who aids or assists, or procures or advises, 
in the preparation or presentation of any tax-related document if the person knows or has 
reason to believe that the document will be used in connection with a material tax matter 
and will result in the understatement of a taxpayer’s liability. The penalty may also be 
imposed if the person acts through an employee or agent by ordering or causing his 
subordinate to act or by failing to prevent his subordinate from acting.  
 
The amount of the penalty is $1,000 for each un derstating taxpayer ($10,000 in the case of a 
corporate client return) per period.  
 
Understatement of Taxpayer's Liability, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6694 
Section 6694 provides a penalty against a return preparer for understating a taxpayer’s 
liability due to an unreasonable position. Understatement means any understatement of the 
net amount payable or any overstatement of the net amount refundable. 
 
Section 6694 provides that unless there is a reasonable cause for an understatement and the 
preparer acted in good faith, a penalty of the greater of $1, 000 or 50 percent of the income 
derived (or to be derived) by the tax return preparer will be assessed against any preparer 
who knew or reasonably should have known that a position taken on a return was: 
• Not realistically possible of being sustained on its merits. 
• Not disclosed under U.S.C., § 6662(d)(2)(B)(ii). 
• A frivolous position. 
 
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1408                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Additionally, the penalty increases to the greater of $5,000 or 50 percent of the income 
derived (or to be derived) if the understatement is willful or reckless.  
 
Criminal Fraud, Title 26, U.S.C., § 7206(2) 
Aiding or Assisting in the Preparation of a False Return 
Section 7206(2) makes it a crime to aid or assists in the preparation of a false return. Under 
this section, a person is guilty of a felony and may be subject to a fine of up to $100,000 (or 
$500,000 in the case of a corporation) and/or imprisonment of up to three years  
 
This felony is without regard to the knowledge or consent of the person(s) authorized or 
required to present the return, affidavit, claim, or other document. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Rudolf deSouza, president and owner of de fense contractor R.D. International, was 
indicted on 86 counts of conspiracy, conversion of government property, money laundering, 
filing false income tax returns, and submitting false claims and false statements. The 
indictment is the result of a three-and-half-year investigation by the Naval Investigative 
Service and the Criminal Investigative Division of the IRS.  
 
According to the indictment, deSouza conspired to inflate the expenses of RDI — and his 
own income — in an effort to impede the IRS. As  part of the conspiracy, he allegedly filed 
false corporate income tax returns for RDI that claimed deductions for salaries that were 
never paid. The indictment says that RDI used an accrual method of accounting, and 
deducted as a business expense salaries that accrued to deSouza. During a five-year period, 
the contractor claimed $490,000  in such deductions. The accrued salaries not paid were 
entered on RDI’s books as loans from an officer. 
 
In addition, the indictment alleges that RDI employees purchased computer equipment from 
a vendor, and then leased it at deSouza’s dire ction to BKS Trading at an inflated price. 
Consequently, RDI billed the government for the cost of the fictitious lease, and did not give 
the computers to the government even though it had been reimbursed for them. Moreover, 
the indictment accuses deSouza of  claiming thousands of dollars worth of personal expenses 
as business expenses. Specifically, he is alleged to have charged the government for trips to 
Disneyland, Disney World, and Canada. 
 
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1409 
The money laundering charges involve allegations that deSouza used several bank accounts 
to conduct approximately $900,000 in financial transactions designed to hide corporate 
assets from the bankruptcy court. Specifically, deSouza is accused of having caused 
numerous transfers of money from RDI acco unts to those of GM Technologies. These 
transfers had the effect of reducing the balance of funds in RDI accounts. Further, deSouza 
did not disclose to the bankruptcy court the existence of GM Technologies, his family’s 
controlling interest, or the money transfers fr om RDI. The indictment  also alleges that 
deSouza transferred money from RDI to another family-owned company while the 
bankruptcy petition was pending.  
 
 
Whistleblower Programs 
As part of the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006, Congress amended section 7623 of 
the Internal Revenue Code to greatly enhance the IRS’s whistleblower program. Under this 
amendment, taxpayers have a statutory right to rewards of 15–30 percent of the collected 
proceeds (taxes, penalties, and interest) for information that leads directly to an 
administrative or judicial action by the Treasury Department. It also provides for up to 10 
percent of the collected proceeds for “less substantial” information. Congress also 
eliminated any cap on the potential amount of recovery by the informant. 
 
To manage this revised reward program, Congress established the IRS Whistleblower Office 
(WBO). This was done in response to complaints that the previous reward program had  
not been effectively managed.  
 
One important note before you pick up the phone to call the IRS: These 15–30 percent 
recoveries do not apply to smaller, individual cases. These larger percentage rewards do not 
apply to reports against individuals who make less than $200,000 and whose tax liability is 
less than $2 million. The rules do apply to all other individuals and entities. 
  
 
Defenses for Tax Fraud 
 
No Deficiency 
To prove innocence of tax fraud matters, the defendant can establish that there is no 
deficiency. If there is no deficiency, there is no tax liability.  
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1410                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Lack of Willfulness 
A lack of willfulness reduces the defendant’s culpability for fraud. 
 
Avoidance Not Evasion 
In contrast to tax fraud, which refers to illegal methods of tax reduction, tax avoidance refers 
to a legal means of lowering one’s tax bill through legitimate deductions, credits, and 
shelters. Thus, establishing that the taxpayer was engaging in tax avoidance and not evasion 
provides a defense to tax fraud.  
 
Objectively Reasonable Position 
A defendant might also claim that he took an “objectively reasonable” position with respect 
to the tax return.  
 
Claim of Right Doctrine 
In the United States, a taxpayer must recognize income if he receives the income, even if he 
does not have a fixed right to the income. Thus, a taxpayer may seek to evade paying their 
income tax by claiming that he does not have an unrestricted right to the money at issue.  
 
Other Defenses 
Mental Illness 
This defense is applicable in regard to the time the return was prepared. 
 
Incompetent Bookkeeper 
[Josey v. Commissioner, TC Memo 1956-153.] In one case a bookkeeper “filed” the tax return 
by putting it in a file cabinet rather than sending it to the Internal Revenue Service. 
 
Ignorance of the Law 
[Rutana v. Commissioner, TC Memo 1986-336.] A court has held that consideration must be 
given to the intelligence and expertise of the taxpayer. 
 
Innocent Spouse 
Innocent spouse relief permits a spouse to avoid tax liability. Under this doctrine, a spouse 
may be excused from tax liability for tax or tax penalties if a joint tax return was filed and the  
spouse can establish the following elements:  
• The underpayment of tax is due to unreported income or disallowed deductions that are 
attributable to the other spouse  
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1411 
• The spouse “did not know and did not have reason to know” of the facts surrounding 
the underpayment of tax.  
 
Additionally, innocent spouses may obtain relief for “erroneous” income items.  
 
Reliance on an Attorney or Accountant 
One can assert a defense of reliance on an attorney or accountant if all of the following 
conditions are met: 
• The reliance is specific. 
• The expert is qualified, which is determined by a facts and circumstances test. 
• Full disclosure to the expert is required. 
 
Inappropriate Defenses 
Some defenses are inappropriate. They include those discussed below. 
 
Amended or Delinquent Return 
A taxpayer will receive no mitigation of penalties for filing an amended or delinquent return. 
[Badaracco v. Commissioner, 464 U.S. 386 (1984).] 
 
Statute of Limitations 
The three-year Statute of Limitations does not apply to tax fraud. [U.S.C., § 6501(c).] 
 
Death of Taxpayer 
Fraud penalties survive the death of the taxpayer. [Helvering v. Mitchell, 303 U.S. 391 (1938); 
Rev. Rule 73 -293, 1973-2 C.B. 413.] 
 
Bankruptcy
Taxes owed as a result of filing fraudulent federal income tax returns are not dischargeable in 
bankruptcy. [11, U.S.C., Sec. 523(a)(1)(c). In Re: Harris, 59 BR 545 (BC-DC Va. 1986); Rev. 
Rule 87-99, 1987-2 C.B. 291.] 
 
 
Evidence of Tax Fraud 
Evidence of tax fraud may be direct or circumstantial. Direct evidence includes testimony that 
tends to prove or disprove a fact in issue directly, such as eyewitness testimony or a 
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1412                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
confession. Circumstantial evidence is evidence that tends to prove or disprove facts in issue 
indirectly, by inference. 
 
Direct Evidence 
Certain circumstances constitute direct evidence of tax fraud, including: 
• Unexplained bank deposits (e.g., using bank accounts in another person’s name or a 
fictitious name) 
• Submission of false documents (e.g., if a taxpayer claims medical deductions but cannot 
provide any evidence that he had seen or paid the bills) 
• False explanations for prior conduct (e.g., the taxpayer destroyed his company’s cash 
register tapes, which were the only records for the company’s sales) 
• Participation in an illegal business (e.g., over several years, a taxpayer who ran an illegal 
lottery substantially underreported his income) 
• False claims of extra withholding exemptions (e.g., a taxpayer claimed 50 withholding 
exemptions, but could not substantiate that he was entitled to claim them) 
 
Circumstantial Evidence 
Certain circumstances constitute circumstantial evidence of tax fraud, including: 
• Illicit income, which can be proved by showing that the subject’s assets or expenditures 
for a given period exceed that which can be accounted for from admitted sources of 
income  
• Income in excess of deposits (e.g., audits of service industry people in Texas led to 
assessments of several thousand dollars in back taxas and penalties) 
 
 
Other Legal Elements of Tax Fraud 
Embezzled Money is immediately income to the embezzler even though he is under a duty 
to repay it, but upon repayment, the embezzler gets a deduction for the repayment. For 
example, in Stephens v. Commissioner, 905 F2d 667 (7th Cir. 1990), a taxpayer embezzled about 
$530,000 from his employer (Raytheon) and recorded it on his tax return as “consulting 
income.” The taxpayer was ordered to pay restitution to Raytheon plus interest. He was 
allowed deductions under IRS Code section 165 (c)(2), relating to ordinary and necessary 
business expense for the restitution amount in the year paid. But the court did not allow a 
deduction for the interest. 
  
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1501 
SECURITIES FRAUD 
 
Introduction 
In order to effectively conduct investigations or examinations of fraudulent securities 
transactions, fraud examiners and investigators need a general understanding of both federal 
and state laws and the philosophy behind regulation. Many financial products and 
opportunities can be deemed to be securities, but that is often far from obvious to an 
untrained observer. This section helps provide fraud examiners with the tools necessary to 
recognize securities fraud and conduct a successful investigation.  
 
The primary purpose of securities regulation is to balance the legitimate needs of business to 
raise capital against the need to protect investors. The worth of a security comes from the 
value of the interest it represents—it has no inherent value. Securities are not a commodity 
to be consumed, but more resemble a currency being traded. 
 
Although there is some commonality between federal and state laws regarding the regulation 
of the securities industry, there exists a complex web of laws from 50 states in addition to 
federal regulation. Each state has its own securities laws and even where the law is similar, 
interpretation and rules may differ markedly. Regulation of securities transactions covers not 
only their sale, but also the offer of securities to the public.  
 
 
Federal Regulation 
 
Securities Act of 1933 
Concern over the 1929 stock market crash and over the manipulation of the securities 
markets precipitated the need for federal intervention. In 1933, the Securities Act was 
enacted to regulate the public offering of securities and protect investors. The 1933 Act, 
sometimes known as the “Truth in Securiti es Act,” defines securities to include: 
 
 “…any note, stock, treasury stock, bond, debenture, … investment contract, fractional 
undivided interest in any oil, gas or other mineral rights, any put, call, straddle, option … 
any interest or instrument commonly known as a security…” [Title 15, U.S.C., § 
77b(a)(1)].  
 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1502                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Of course, both federal and state laws provide for exemptions. Exemptions basically fall 
under two categories, exempt securities and exempt transactions. For example, certain obligations 
issued or guaranteed by the United States government or by state or local governments are 
exempted securities.  
 
This Act also requires that investors be given full and fair disclosure of material information 
concerning their investment or prospective investment. In this way the sale of securities 
differs from many other commercial transactions where caveat emptor is the rule. Here, the 
investor is entitled to all information necessary for an informed investment decision to  
be made. 
 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
Unlike the 1933 Act, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 mainly deals with post-issuance 
trading. This Act, which gave birth to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 
requires the registration of securities brokers and dealers. Simply put the 1933 Act can be 
thought of as regulating the issuance of the securities themselves, while the 1934 Act covers 
subsequent trading. This secondary market trading represents by far the greatest volume of 
securities transactions. Trading generally takes place on markets with actual trading floors, 
called “exchanges,” or on so-called “over-the-counter” markets such as NASDAQ. 
 
The 1934 Act contains section 10(b), a comprehensive anti-fraud provision, which permits 
the SEC to set forth rules and regulations that prohibit manipulative or deceptive devices or 
contrivances via the mails or other means of interstate commerce. For example, under 
section 10(b), the SEC promulgated Rule 10b-5, which prohibits false statements and other 
fraudulent activity in connection with securities transactions. Specifically, Rule 10b-5 states 
that:  
 
“It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, by the use of any means or 
instrumentality of interstate commerce, or of the mails, or of any facility of any national 
securities exchange, 
 
(1)  to employ any device, scheme or artifice to defraud, 
 
(2)  to make any untrue statement of a material fact or to omit to state a material fact 
necessary in order to make the statements made, in the light of the circumstances under 
which they were made, not misleading, or 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1503 
(3)  to engage in any act, practice, or course of business which operates or would operate as 
a fraud or deceit upon any person, in connection with the purchase or sale of any 
security.” 
 
Investment Advisor Act of 1940 
Registered securities dealers are required to adhere to the Rules of Fair Practice issued by the 
National Association of Securities Dealers and the Investment Advisers Act of 1940. This 
Act mandates registration and regulation of investment advisers. It applies to anyone who 
advises others as part of a regular business and for compensation on the investment, 
purchase, or sale of securities. This does not apply to those who do not receive 
compensation or who publish financial advice in a newspaper or magazine. 
 
Investment Company Act of 1940 
Under the Investment Company Act of 1940, investment companies are required to register 
with the SEC, which also regulates their activities. This Act dictates qualifications for officers 
and directors, requires that certain matters are submitted for stockholder approval, and 
mandates SEC permission for certain transactions such as those between insiders and 
affiliates. It divides investment companies into three categories: 
• Face-amount certificate companies — Any comp any engaged in issuing fixed income 
debenture type securities. 
• Unit investment trusts—Companies organized under a trust indenture, contract of 
agency, or those similar in nature, which do not have a board of directors and issue only 
redeemable securities. 
• Management companies — Firms that do not fit the criteria of the first two categories fall 
into this one. This includes open and closed-end companies, whether listed on securities 
exchanges or not. “Open-end” companies are commonly referred to as mutual funds 
and the net asset value of a share is calculated based on the market value of the fund’s 
portfolio divided by the number of shares outstanding. The shares of “closed-end” 
companies trade in a similar manner to regular stocks, i.e., the value is determined by the 
market forces of supply and demand.  
 
Although there are criminal penalties attached to violations of the federal securities laws, the 
Securities and Exchange Commission does not have the power to take criminal action. SEC 
investigations that disclose potentially criminal violations are usually referred to the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation.  
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1504                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Less serious violations may be addressed using  the Commission’s administrative powers. The 
SEC has the power to issue “cease and desist” orders, levy fines, and order disgorgement  
of profits. 
 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act  
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 is one of the most significant changes in the securities field 
since the 1934 Act was passed. It was designed to restore investor confidence in capital 
markets and help eliminate financial statement fraud in publicly traded companies while at 
the same time significantly increasing the penalties for corporate accounting fraud.  
 
The most significant changes brought on by the Act include:  
• The creation of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board. 
• Requirements for senior financial officers to certify SEC filings. 
• Standards for audit committee independence. 
• Standards for auditor independence. 
• Enhanced financial disclosure requirements. 
• Protections for corporate whistleblowers. 
• Enhanced penalties for white-collar crime. 
 
The Act is discussed in detail in the “Law Related to Fraud” chapter in the Law section of 
the Fraud Examiners Manual. However, some of the more important provisions as they relate 
to corporate governance are reproduced here. 
 
Certification Obligations for CEOs and CFOs 
One of the most significant changes effected by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is the requirement 
that the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of public companies 
personally certify annual and quarterly SEC filings. These certifications essentially require 
CEOs and CFOs to take responsibility for their companies’ financial statements and prevent 
them from delegating this responsibility to their subordinates and then claiming ignorance 
when fraud is uncovered in the financial statements.  
 
There are two types of officer certifications mandated by Sarbanes-Oxley: criminal 
certifications, which are set forth in section 906 of the Act and codified at 18, U.S.C., § 1350, 
and civil certifications, which are set forth in section 302. 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1505 
CRIMINAL CERTIFICATIONS (§ 906) 
Periodic filings with the SEC must now be accompanied by a statement, signed by the CEO 
and CFO, which certifies that the report fully complies with the SEC’s periodic reporting 
requirements and that the information in the report fairly presents, in all material respects, 
the financial condition and results of operation of the company. 
These certifications are known as “criminal certifications” because the Act imposes criminal 
penalties on officers who violate the certification requirements.  
• Corporate officers who knowingly  violate the certification requirements are subject to 
fines of up to $1,000,000 and up to 10 years imprisonment, or both.  
• Corporate officers who willfully violate the certification requirements are subject to fines 
of up to $5,000,000 and up to 20 years imprisonment, or both.  
 
CIVIL CERTIFICATIONS (§ 302) 
Section 302 of the Act requires the CEO and CFO to personally certify the following in 
their reports:  
• They have personally reviewed the report;  
• Based on their knowledge, the report does not contain any material misstatement that 
would render the financials misleading;  
• Based on their knowledge the financial information in the report fairly presents in all 
material respects the financial condition, results of operations, and cash flow of the 
company;  
• They are responsible for designing, maintaining, and evaluating the company’s internal 
controls, they have evaluated the controls within 90 days prior to the report, and they 
have presented their conclusions about the effectiveness of those controls in the report; 
• They have disclosed to the auditors and the audit committee any material weaknesses in 
the controls and any fraud, whether material or not, that involves management or other 
employees who have a significant role in the company’s internal controls; and 
• They have indicated in their report whether there have been significant changes in the 
company’s internal controls since the filing of the last report. 
 
Note that in items 2 and 3 the CEO and CFO are not required to certify that the financials 
are accurate or that there is no misstatement. They are simply required to certify that to their 
knowledge  the financials are accurate and not misleading. However, this does not mean that 
senior financial officers can simply plead ignorance about their companies’ SEC filings in 
order to avoid liability. The term “fairly presents” in item 3 is a broader standard than what 
is required by GAAP. In certifying that their SEC filings meet this standard, the CEO and 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1506                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CFO essentially must certify that the comp any (1) has selected appropriate accounting 
policies to ensure the material accuracy of the reports; (2) has properly applied those 
accounting standards; and (3) has disclosed financial information that reflects the underlying 
transactions and events of the company. Furthermore, the other certification rules (see 1, 
and 4–6 above) mandate that CEOs and CFOs take an active role in their companies’ public 
reporting, and in the design and maintenance of internal controls. 
 
It is significant that in item 4, the CEO and CFO not only have to certify that they are 
responsible for their companies’ internal controls, but also that they have evaluated the 
controls within 90 days prior to their quarterly or annual report.  Essentially, this certification 
requirement mandates that companies actively and continually re-evaluate their control 
structures to prevent fraud. 
 
In conjunction with the § 302 certification requirements on the responsibility of the CEO 
and CFO for internal controls, § 404 of the Act requires all annual reports to contain an 
internal control report that (1) states management’s responsibility for establishing and 
maintaining an adequate internal control structure and procedures for financial reporting; 
and (2) contains an assessment of the effectiveness of the internal control structure and 
procedures of the company for financial reporting.  
 
Item 5 requires the CEO and CFO to certify that they have disclosed to their auditors and 
their audit committee any material weaknesses in the company’s internal controls, and also 
any fraud, whether material or not,  that involves management or other key employees. 
Obviously, this is a very broad reporting standard that goes beyond the “material” standard 
generally used in financial statement audits. The CEO and CFO now must report to their 
auditors and audit committee any fraud  committed by a manager. This places a greater burden 
on the CEO and CFO to take part in anti-fraud efforts and to be aware of fraudulent activity 
within their companies in order to meet this certification requirement.  
 
Item 6 is significant because periodic SEC filings must now include statements detailing 
significant changes to the internal controls of publicly traded companies. 
 
Standards for Audit Committee Independence 
AUDIT COMMITTEE RESPONSIBILITIES  
Section 301 of the Act requires that the audit committee for each publicly traded company 
shall be directly responsible for appointing, compensating, and overseeing the work of the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1507 
company’s outside auditors. The Act also mandates that the auditors must report directly to 
the audit committee ? not management ? and makes it the responsibility of the audit 
committee to resolve disputes between management and the auditors. Section 301 also 
requires that the audit committee must have the authority and funding to hire independent 
counsel and any other advisors it deems necessary to carry out its duties.  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act mandates that each member of a company’s audit committee must 
be a member of its board of directors, and must otherwise be “independent.” The term 
“independent” means that the audit committee member can only receive compensation from 
the company for his service on the board of directors, the audit committee, or another 
committee of the board of directors. They cannot be paid by the company for any other 
consulting or advisory work.  
 
FINANCIAL EXPERT  
Section 407 of the Act requires every public company to disclose in its periodic reports to 
the SEC whether or not the audit committee has at least one member who is a “financial 
expert,” and if not to explain the reasons why. The Act defines a “financial expert” as a 
person who, through education and experience as a public accountant or auditor, or a CFO, 
comptroller, chief financial officer or a similar position (1) has an understanding of generally 
accepted accounting principles and financial statements; (2) has experience in preparing or 
auditing financial statements of comparable companies and the application of such principles 
in accounting for estimates, accruals, and reserves; (3) has experience with internal controls; 
and (4) has an understanding of audit committee functions.  
 
ESTABLISHING A WHISTLEBLOWING STRUCTURE 
The Act makes it the responsibility of the audit committee to establish procedures (e.g., a 
hotline) for receiving and dealing with complaints and anonymous employee tips regarding 
irregularities in the company’s accounting met hods, internal controls, or auditing matters.  
 
Enhanced Financial Disclosure Requirements 
OFF-BALANCE SHEET  TRANSACTIONS 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act directed the SEC to issue  rules that require the disclosure of all 
material off-balance sheet transactions by publicly traded companies. The rules require 
disclosure of “all material off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations 
(including contingent obligations), and other relationships the company may have with 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1508                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
unconsolidated entities or persons that may have a material current or future effect on the 
company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, liquidity, capital expenditures, 
capital resources, or significant components of revenues or expenses.” These disclosures are 
required in all annual and quarterly SEC reports. 
 
PRO FORMA FINANCIAL INFORMATION 
Section 401 also directed the SEC to issue rules on pro forma financial statements. These 
rules require that pro forma financials must not contain any untrue statements or omissions 
that would make them misleading and require that the pro forma financials be reconciled to 
GAAP. These rules apply to all pro forma financial statements that are filed with the SEC or 
that are included in any public disclosure or press release.  
 
PROHIBITIONS ON PERSONAL LOANS TO EXECUTIVES 
Section 402 makes it illegal for public companies to make personal loans or otherwise extend 
credit, either directly or indirectly, to or for any director or executive officer. There is an 
exception that applies to consumer lenders if the loans are consumer loans of the type the 
company normally makes to the public, and on the same terms. 
 
RESTRICTIONS ON INSIDER TRADING 
Section 403 establishes disclosure requirements for stock transactions by directors and 
officers of public companies, or by persons who own more than 10 percent of a publicly 
traded company’s stock. Reports of changes in  beneficial ownership by these persons must 
now be filed with the SEC by the end of the second business day following the transaction. 
 
Under § 306, directors and officers are also prohibited from trading in the company’s 
securities during any pension fund blackout periods. This restriction only applies to 
securities that were acquired as a result of their employment or service to the company. A 
blackout period is defined as any period of more than three consecutive business days in 
which at least 50 percent of the participants in the company’s retirement plan are restricted 
from trading in the company’s securities. If directors or officers violate this provision, they 
can be forced to disgorge to the company all profits received from the sale of securities 
during the blackout period. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1509 
CODES OF ETHICS FOR SENIOR FINANCIAL OFFICERS  
Pursuant to § 406 of the Act, the SEC must establish rules that require public companies to 
disclose whether they have adopted a code of ethics for their senior financial officers, and if 
not, to explain the reasons why. The rules require immediate public disclosure any  
time there is a change of the code of ethics or a waiver of the code of ethics for a senior 
financial officer.  
 
ENHANCED REVIEW OF PERIODIC FILINGS 
Section 408 of the Act now requires the SEC to make regular and systematic reviews of 
disclosures made by public companies in their periodic reports to the SEC. Reviews of a 
company’s disclosures, including its financial statements, must be made at least once every 
three years. Prior to this enactment, reviews were typically minimal and tended to coincide 
with registered offerings. 
 
REAL TIME DISCLOSURES  
Under § 409, public companies must publicly disclose information concerning material 
changes in their financial condition or operations. These disclosures must be “in plain 
English” and must be made “on a rapid and current basis.”  
 
Protections for Corporate Whistleblowers Under Sarbanes-Oxley 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act establishes broad protections for corporate whistleblowers. There 
are two sections of the Act that address whistleblower protections: Section 806 deals with 
civil protections and section 1107 establishes criminal liability for those who retaliate against 
whistleblowers.  
 
CIVIL LIABILITY WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION 
Section 806 of the Act, which is codified at Title 18, U.S.C., § 1514A, creates civil liability for 
companies that retaliate against whistleblowers. It should be noted that this provision does 
not provide universal whistleblower protection; it  only protects employees of publicly traded 
companies. Section 806 makes it unlawful to fire, demote, suspend, threaten, harass, or in 
any other manner discriminate against an employee for providing information or aiding in an 
investigation of securities fraud. In order to trigger § 806 protections, the employee must 
report the suspected misconduct to a federal regulatory or law enforcement agency, a 
member of Congress or a committee of Congress, or a supervisor. Employees are also 
protected against retaliation for filing, testifying in, participating in, or otherwise assisting in a 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1510                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
proceeding filed or about to be filed relating to an alleged violation of securities laws or  
SEC rules. 
 
The whistleblower protections apply even if the company is ultimately found not to have 
committed securities fraud. As long as the employee reasonably believes he is reporting 
conduct that constitutes a violation of various federal securities laws, then he is protected. 
The protections cover retaliatory acts not only by the company, but also by any officer, 
employee, contractor, subcontractor, or agent of the company.  
 
If a public company is found to have violated § 806, the Act provides for an award of 
compensatory damages sufficient to “make the employee whole.” Penalties include 
reinstatement; back pay with interest; and compensation for special damages including 
litigation costs, expert witness fees, and attorneys’ fees.  
 
CRIMINAL SANCTION WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION  
Section 1107 of Sarbanes-Oxley ? codified at Title 18, U.S.C., § 1513 ? makes it a crime to 
knowingly, with the intent to retaliate, take any harmful action against a person for providing 
truthful information relating to the commission or possible commission of any Federal 
offense. This protection is only triggered when information is provided to a law enforcement 
officer, it does not apply to reports made to supervisors or to members of Congress, as is 
the case under § 806.  
 
Additionally, the Act codified three criminal offenses to Title 18 of the Code. First, it is a 
criminal offense to alter, destroy, mutilate, conceal, cover-up, or falsify any record or 
document “with the intent to impede, obstruct, or influence” a federal investigation or 
bankruptcy proceeding, carrying a maximum sentence of 20 years imprisonment. (18, U.S.C., 
§ 1519). Secondly, all auditing accountants of securities issuers must “maintain all audit or 
review workpapers for a period of 5 years.” Where  there is a knowing and willful violation of 
this offense, a sentence of up to 10 years may be imposed. (18, U.S.C., § 1520). Finally, the 
Act made codified an additional securities fraud offence that can carry a maximum sentence 
of 25 years’ imprisonment. (18, U.S.C., § 1348). 
 
In general, the coverage of § 1107 is much  broader than the civil liability whistleblower 
protections of § 806. While the § 806 protections apply only to employees of publicly traded 
companies, § 1107’s criminal whistleblower protections cover all individuals (and 
organizations) regardless of where they work. Also, § 806 only applies to violations of 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1511 
securities laws or SEC rules and regulations. Section 1107, on the other hand, protects 
individuals who provide truthful information about the commission or possible commission 
of any Federal offense.  
 
Violations of § 1107 can be punished by fines of up to $250,000 and up to 10 years in prison 
for individuals. Corporations that violate the Act can be fined up to $500,000.  
 
Other Criminal Penalties  
SECURITIES FRAUD  
Section 807 of the Act makes securities fraud a crime under 18, U.S.C., § 1348, providing for 
fines up to $250,000 and up to 25 years in prison.  
 
SECURITIES FRAUD (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, § 1348) 
Whoever knowingly executes, or attempts  to execute, a scheme or artifice — 
 
(1) to defraud any person in connection with any security of an issuer with a class of 
securities registered under section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15, U.S.C., 
78l) or that is required to file reports under section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act 
of 1934 (15, U.S.C., 78o(d)); or 
 
(2) to obtain, by means of false or fraudulent  pretenses, representat ions, or promises, any 
money or property in connection with the purchase or sale of any security of an issuer with a 
class of securities registered under section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15, 
U.S.C., 78l) or that is required to file reports under section 15(d) of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934 (15, U.S.C., 78o(d)); 
 
shall be fined under this title, or imprisoned not more than 25 years, or both. 
 
DOCUMENT DESTRUCTION  
Section 802 of the Act makes destroying evidence to obstruct an investigation or any other 
matter within the jurisdiction of any U.S. department illegal and punishable by a fine of up to 
$250,000 and up to 20 years in prison.  
 
The final rules adopted by the SEC under section 802 specifically require that accountants 
who perform audits on publicly traded companies must maintain all audit or review work 
papers for a period of seven years. Although the original provisions of section 802 only 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1512                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
required a retention period of five years, the SEC extended the requirement to be consistent 
with the seven-year retention period required under the Auditing Standards promulgated by 
the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) per section 103 of the Act. 
Violations of the final SEC rules may be punished by fines up to $250,000 and up to 10 
years in jail for individuals, or fines up to $500,000 for corporations.  
 
Section 1102 of the Act amends § 1512 of the U.S. Code to make it a criminal offense to 
corruptly alter, destroy, mutilate or conceal a record or document with the intent to impair 
its integrity or use in an official proceeding, or to otherwise obstruct, influence, or impede 
any official proceeding or attempt to do so. Violations of this section are punishable by fines 
up to $250,000 and imprisonment for up to 20 years.  
 
FREEZING OF ASSETS 
During an investigation of possible securities violations by a publicly traded company or any 
of its officers, directors, partners, agents, controlling persons, or employees, the SEC can 
petition a federal court to issue a 45-day freeze on “extraordinary payments” to any of the 
foregoing persons. If granted, the payments will be placed in an interest-bearing escrow 
account while the investigation commences. This provision was enacted to prevent 
corporate assets from being improperly distributed while an investigation is underway.  
 
BANKRUPTCY LOOPHOLES 
Section 803 amends the bankruptcy code so that judgments, settlements, damages, fines, 
penalties, restitution payments, disgorgement payments, etc., resulting from violations of 
Federal securities laws are non-dischargeable. This was intended to prevent corporate 
wrongdoers from sheltering their assets under bankruptcy protection.  
 
DISGORGEMENT OF BONUSES 
One of the most unique aspects of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is § 304, which states that if a 
publicly traded company is required to prepare an accounting restatement due to the 
company’s material noncompliance, as a result of “misconduct,” with any financial reporting 
requirement under securities laws, then the CEO and CFO must reimburse the company for: 
• Any bonus or other incentive-based or equity-based compensation received during the 
12 months after the initial filing of the report that requires restating; and  
• Any profits realized from the sale of the company’s securities during the same 12- 
month period. 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1513 
While the Act requires the CEO and CFO to disgorge their bonuses if the company’s 
financial statements have to be restated because of “misconduct,” it makes no mention of 
whose misconduct triggers this provision. There is certainly nothing in the text of § 304 that 
limits the disgorgement provision to instances of misconduct by the CEO and CFO. 
Presumably, then, the CEO and CFO could be required to disgorge their bonuses and 
profits from the sale of company stock even if they had no knowledge of and took no part in 
the misconduct that made the restatement necessary.  
 
 
Self-Regulatory Organizations 
SEC delegates significant regulatory authority to “self-regulatory organizations” (SROs). 
SROs oversee the markets they operate and police the member firms participating in those 
markets. SROs create and enforce rules dealing with such areas as securities listings, 
exchange and settlement procedures, and member qualifications. 
 
The Maloney Act of 1938 amended the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 to allow the 
National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) to regulate the business of members 
subject to Securities and Exchange Commission oversight.  
 
In 2007, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) was created through the 
consolidation of NASD and the member regulation, enforcement, and arbitration functions 
of the New York Stock Exchange. FINRA is dedicated to investor protection and market 
integrity through effective and efficient regulation and complementary compliance and 
technology-based services.  
 
FINRA touches virtually every aspect of the securities business—from registering and 
educating industry participants to examining securities firms; writing rules; enforcing those 
rules and the federal securities laws; informing and educating the investing public; providing 
trade reporting and other industry utilities; and administering the largest dispute resolution 
forum for investors and registered firms. It also performs market regulation under contract 
for the NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Exchange, the International Securities 
Exchange, and the Chicago Climate Exchange. All told, FINRA oversees more than 5,000 
brokerage firms, about 172,000 branch offices, and more than 676,000 registered securities 
representatives.  
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1514                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Securities broker-dealers must register with the SEC and in those states where they plan to 
do business. If they plan to do business with the public they must also become FINRA 
members. Typical registration requirements include business, financial, disciplinary 
information, and disclosure of criminal convictions. 
 
 
State Regulation 
The first state securities laws of any substance were enacted in Kansas around 1911. State 
securities laws are often referred to as “blue sky laws.” The term “blue sky” came into use in 
1917 after a judge issued an opinion describing the purpose of these laws as preventing 
“speculative schemes, which have no more basis than so many feet of blue sky.”  
 
The initial steps taken in Kansas to regulate the securities industry and protect consumers 
were quickly imitated by other states. In 1956, the National Conference of Commissioners 
on Uniform State Laws and the American Bar Association promulgated the Uniform 
Securities Act. More than 30 states have adop ted most or all of the Uniform Securities Act, 
which was revised in 1985 and amended in 1988.  
 
The revised Uniform Act has four parts: 
• Regulation of broker-dealers — Most states require broker-dealers to register with the 
state securities regulator. “Broker-dealer” means “a person engaged in the business of 
effecting transactions in securities for the account of others or for the person’s own 
account” and does not include an issuer selling his own securities.  
• Registration of securities—Most states require that an issuer proposing to offer securities 
for sale file some type of registration application.  
• Anti-fraud provisions — Fraud is usually defined in language similar to Rule 10b of the 
Securities and Exchange Act of 1934. Criminal, civil, and administrative penalties are 
usually attached to violations of state anti-fraud provisions. 
• Definitions, exemptions, administrative provisions — The definition of “security” is 
basically the same as that under the Securities Act of 1933. Provides powers for state 
regulators to examine books and records and take disciplinary action.  
 
To simplify to a general rule of thumb, unless certain exemptions apply, before a security is 
sold or offered for sale: 
• There must be a registration in place to cover the security. 
• The broker-dealer must be registered. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1515 
• There must be full and fair disclosure of all material information. 
 
As long as there is no conflict with federal laws, each state can supplement or duplicate 
federal requirements. However, in 1996, Congress passed the National Securities Markets 
Improvement Act preempting state regulation in several significant areas. 
 
National Securities Markets Improvement Act of 1996  
The most significant federal legislative development in securities regulation in recent years is 
the National Securities Markets Improvement Act of 1996. Often referred to as NSMIA 
(pronounced “nismia”), it is an attempt to standardize securities regulation in the United 
States and use federal law to preempt some of the state requirements. Essentially, the 
authority of a state to require registration of certain securities or control certain transactions 
has been removed. 
 
Three main changes that are of particular importance: 
• So called “covered securities” are no longer regulated by the states. A state cannot 
require registration of securities that are deemed covered. Essentially these are securities 
listed on the major exchanges, mutual funds, and certain private placements.  
• Previously all individuals and companies offering investment advice came under state 
jurisdiction. Now only those with assets of less than $25 million fall under state 
regulation. 
• Although NSMIA significantly reduces the enforcement powers of states in several areas, 
a state can still take action in cases involving fraud. 
 
 
What Constitutes a Security? 
The definition of securities in both state and federal law includes instruments that can easily 
be identified as securities. These more traditional securities are usually easy to spot.  
 
Traditional Securities 
Types of investments most commonly recognized as securities include: 
 
Stocks 
A stock is an equity that represents a right of ownership in a corporation. There are many 
different classes including common, preferred, non-voting, and restricted. 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1516                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bonds 
A bond is a debt instrument. Examples include treasury bills, corporate bonds, municipal 
bonds, and junk bonds. Although the term junk bonds has a very negative connotation, they 
are simply high-risk, below-investment-grade, commercial bonds. 
 
Certificates of Deposit 
A certificate of deposit (CD) is acknowledgement by a bank of the receipt of money with a 
promise to repay it with interest. 
 
Less obvious, but still clearly securities are: 
 
Futures 
A future is a contract agreeing to buy or sell a specified quantity of something (such as foreign 
currency or commodities) at some future time at a price agreed upon now. In futures 
contracts, the delivery or sale of the product is assumed, and the investor has an obligation 
to fulfill the contract. Note that in reality, few futures contracts actually result in delivery. 
Usually, the investor will enter into offsetting futures contracts prior to the delivery date. As 
futures contracts are freely transferable, the two transactions can offset each other. 
 
Options 
An investor can purchase an option to buy (known as a “call”) or sell (known as a “put”) an 
asset (such as stocks, bonds, commodities, or real estate) on or before a future date at a price 
agreed upon now. With an option, the investor buys the right, but not the obligation, to 
perform the contract. The price paid for the option is known as the option premium. The 
price at which the option may be exercised is known as the strike price. Of course, once an 
option has expired it ceases to have any value whatsoever. 
 
Futures and options are essentially methods of managing price risk, often called “hedging.” 
They can be used, for example, by farmers or international manufacturing companies as a 
form of insurance against adverse price or currency exchange rate changes. They are 
examples of derivatives. Many esoteric types of  investment vehicles have been created, often 
using complex mathematical models. These derivative products allow trading to take place in 
various indices (for example the Dow Jones Industrial Index or the Standard and Poor’s 500) 
and also in securities known as strips, collateralized mortgage obligations, and leaps. 
 
Futures and options are discussed in more detail below. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1517 
Investment Contracts 
Other transactions are less obviously securities, but fall under the catch-all category of an 
“investment contract.” Unfortunately, the term “investment contract” is not usually defined 
by statute, and it is, therefore, necessary to look to case law to determine whether a particular 
transaction may constitute an investment contract. Many fraudulent schemes involving 
exotic investments can be argued to constitute the offer or sale of investment contracts. 
 
The Howey Test 
In the case SEC v. Howey Co., 328 U.S. 293, 299 (1946), a company was selling subdivided 
sections of a Florida orange orchard that were to be managed by a subsidiary company. In its 
opinion in the case, the U.S. Supreme Court outlined a four-element test to determine if an 
investment contract was present. In essence, the Supreme Court stated that there must be: 
• An investment  of money or other asset.  
• A common enterprise.  In very general terms, the common enterprise requirement means the 
success of the investor is dependent on the efforts and success of those seeking the 
investment of third parties (typically the promoter). The third party, who provides the 
entrepreneurial skill, shares in the profits (or losses) with the investor. Usually, the 
common enterprise requirement will be met where “the fortunes of the investor are 
interwoven with and dependent upon the efforts and success of those seeking the 
investment or a third-party.” See SEC v. Glenn W. Turn er Enterprises, Inc.,  474 F.2nd 476, 
482 n.7 (9th Circuit, 1973). 
• An expectation of profits. Profit is generally defined to be either money received for the use 
of capital or capital appreciation. In United Housing Foundation, Inc. v. Forman, 421 U.S. 837 
(1975), stock sold to potential apartment renters, which would be applied to their 
security deposit, was not held to be an investment contract because the individuals were 
attracted solely by the prospect of somewhere to live, not financial return on their 
money. 
• Profit must be generated solely from the efforts of others.  The essential managerial efforts, which 
affect the success or failure of the enterprise, come from the third party (the promoter) 
not the investor. In Howey, the subsidiary company was to plant, cultivate, and harvest 
the oranges. As a general rule, the more actively involved an investor is in the enterprise, 
the less likely it is that an investment contract will be held to exist. Subsequent case law 
has diluted “solely” to “primarily” or “substantially” from the efforts of others. 
Nevertheless, if the investor’s efforts  are significant in the success of the enterprise, an 
investment contract will not be found to exist. For example, in the Forman case 
mentioned above, the court stated “an in vestment contract is the presence of an 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1518                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
investment in a common venture premised on a reasonable expectation of profits to be 
derived from the entrepreneurial or managerial efforts of others.” 
 
Risk Capital Test  
As an alternative to the Howey Test many state and federal courts are using the so-called 
“Risk Capital Test.” This “test” allows the invest or to play a more active role if the funds he 
contributes are part of the “risk capital” of the business. A person entrusts money or other 
capital to another with the expectation of deriving a profit. The failure or success of the 
venture is dependent upon the managerial efforts of the other person. Several states have 
formally adopted this test, sometimes known as the Hawaii Market Test, as an alternative 
definition of investment contract. However, the Supreme Court has expressly declined to 
decide if this test should be used. 
 
Examples of Investment Contracts 
Following are types of investments that frequently qualify as “investment contracts” and are, 
therefore, considered securities. Several types of related frauds are also listed to demonstrate 
the broad and expansive nature of investment contract schemes. More information about 
these schemes can also be found in the Consumer Fraud section. 
 
PONZI SCHEMES 
A Ponzi scheme is named after Charles Ponzi who, in the early 1920s, persuaded tens of 
thousands of Bostonians to invest over $10 million. He created an entity, aptly named the 
Securities and Exchange Company, and issued investors a promissory note guaranteeing a 50 
percent return in 90 days on every $1,000 invested. 
 
The scheme involved the alleged buying of international postal reply coupons in Europe 
using foreign currencies, which had depreciated substantially against the dollar in the years 
after World War I. Ponzi claimed that these coupons, bought at a discount, could then be 
redeemed at full face value, yielding a substantial profit. 
 
There were two main problems. First, although Ponzi claimed to be trading over $10 million 
worth of postal reply coupons, only a few hundred thousand dollars worth actually existed. 
A more fatal flaw was the fact that the scheme relied on new investor funds to pay returns to 
earlier investors. In August 1920, after the inevitable collapse of his scheme, Ponzi was 
arrested for mail fraud and larceny. Ponzi served jail time and was later deported to his 
native Italy. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1519 
Of course, the most infamous and costly Ponzi scheme was that of Bernard Madoff. In 
2009, Madoff pleaded guilty to eleven felonies, including one count of securities fraud, one 
count of wire fraud, one count of mail fraud, and three counts of money laundering. He was 
sentenced to 150 years in prison. He has also been ordered to forfeit $170 billion dollars (the 
amount prosecutors say flowed through his business).  
 
Madoff told his clients that he generated such high returns by employing a “split-strike 
conversion” investment strategy, which is a fairly common approach that involves a 
combination of stocks and options. Under this strategy, an investor attempts to generate 
predicable returns and reduce volatility by holding a portfolio of stocks closely correlated to 
an index while concurrently selling options on a stock index and buying put options on the 
same index. 
 
In reality, however, Madoff did not invest any of his clients’ money. According to Irving 
Picard, the trustee overseeing the liquidation of Madoff’s assets, there was “no evidence to 
indicate securities were purchased for customer accounts.” Instead, Madoff simply deposited 
his clients’ money into his business account, which he then used to pay clients who 
requested withdrawals. In other words, Madoff was running a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Unfortunately for Madoff, his scheme began to unravel in December 2008, when the 
financial crisis caused an increasing demand of cash withdrawals from his clients. The 
increase in redemptions caused his scheme to collapse when there were not enough funds 
from new investments to pay them off, and so, like all Ponzi schemes, it collapsed. The 
“Consumer Fraud” chapter contains more detail about the Madoff case. 
 
PYRAMID SCHEMES 
These typically involve a scheme whereby fees or dues paid by a member to join an 
organization are to be paid to another member and there is a provision for increasing 
membership through a chain process of new members bringing in other new members. The 
members make money not by commission on the bona fide retail sale of a legitimate 
product, but by signing up new people. An organizational structure that, like the Ponzi 
scheme, relies on bringing in new people must eventually collapse. Although all pyramid 
schemes are fraudulent, and in many states specifically deemed illegal, not all pyramid 
schemes necessarily meet the Howey Test.   
  
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1520                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
WORM, RABBIT, AND OSTRICH FARMS 
Although sometimes amusing when viewed objectively by the investigator, many investors 
have been defrauded by being persuaded to invest in exactly these types of opportunities. 
Fraud examiners can practice applying the Howey Test to these types of cases in an attempt 
to determine whether an investment contract exists. What, if anything, does the investor 
need to do in order to get the promised return? If, for example, the investor’s involvement is 
purely passive, then an investment contract will be held to exist. However, where the 
investor is involved in feeding the ostriches and marketing the meat, then the last element of 
the Howey Test fails. 
 
PRIME BANK FRAUD 
These schemes involve the issuance and purported trading of so-called “prime bank” notes 
or other high-yield investment opportunities. Investors are often told that they can obtain 
returns exceeding several hundred percent per year when their funds are placed in an off-
 shore trading program. Excessive complexity and secrecy generally characterize these 
fraudulent programs. Investors are usually told that this opportunity is only available to a 
select few and the signing of non-disclosure agreements is mandatory. Typically the 
explanation of how the program actually works is full of obscure terminology and makes 
reference to legitimate banks or organizations such as the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) to lend credibility. Often, investors are told that there is little or no risk of losing their 
principal. Despite warnings published by the state regulators, the SEC, the IMF, the 
International Chamber of Commerce, and the World Bank, this type of fraud continues to 
fleece millions of dollars from investors worldwide. 
 
PRECIOUS METAL SCHEMES 
Typically these involve the purchase of interests in gold or silver coins, bullion, diamonds, 
and other precious or semi-precious stones.  
 
VIATICALS 
A viatical settlement involves the sale by a terminally ill person, at a discount, of the right to 
death benefits from the proceeds of their life insurance policy. In and of itself, this does not 
constitute the offer or sale of a security. However, an industry has evolved to buy these 
rights and then sell fractional interests in them to investors. Frequently, these policy rights 
are pooled and the investors are sold an interest in the pool. Investor returns increase 
according to how deeply the policy is discounted and are inversely related to how long the 
beneficiary survives. Whether such investments constitute securities is a matter of 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1521 
considerable debate. In July 1996, the Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia 
held that viatical settlements sold by Life Pa rtners were not securities because the profits do 
not predominantly derive from the efforts of a party other than the investor. See, SEC v. Life 
Partners, Inc. 87 F. 3d 536 (D.C. Cir 1996). The appellate court ruled, in essence, that the 
ministerial functions performed by Life Partners did not have an impact on the profits of the 
investor and therefore that the last part of the Howey Test was not met. 
 
PARTNERSHIPS 
Interests in limited partnerships are generally held to be securities because this type of 
structure conforms closely to Howey. General partnerships will not usually be held to be 
securities. This is normally because in a true general partnership the partners take an active 
role in the operation of the business. However, be warned that some promoters will try to 
disguise an investment contract as a general partnership. It is important to look beyond the 
surface wrapping and determine if the partners really take an active role in operating the 
entity. Some investment opportunities involving wireless cable and pay telephone leasing are 
good examples of this tactic.  
  
JOINT VENTURES 
Interests in a joint venture will often be found to be securities. The Howey Test should be 
applied and, as with partnership interests, careful attention should be paid to the extent to 
which the investor actively participates in the management or operation of the business.  
 
OIL, GAS, AND MINERAL INTERESTS 
Usually the sale of fractional ownership of oil and gas wells, or mineral rights constitutes the 
sale of a security. The misrepresentations and omissions found in oil and gas scams are often 
repeated in other mineral mining schemes, such as gold or coal. Investors have a right to be 
advised of the risks inherent in a securities investment and oil/gas opportunities are 
traditionally very high risk. If investors have been assured or guaranteed of success in 
striking oil, fraud examiners should consider that a red flag. Naturally, as in all cases of 
securities fraud, one should look for discrepancies in promoters’ credentials, business 
history, and commission. The following types of misrepresentations and omissions are often 
encountered: 
• Drilling and completion costs — Costs are often hugely inflated to bilk the investor. 
• Lease — Promoters frequently do not have a valid mineral rights lease. 
  
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1522                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Discovery and production potential — The investor may be misled regarding the 
likelihood of striking oil and the amount produced. This information is usually contained 
in the geologist’s report. 
• Wells — The promoter may exaggerate the number and depth of wells, thus inflating the 
operating costs paid by investors. 
• Self-dealing — The promoter may declare a good well dry in order to reap the benefits of 
a productive well later when the investors have given up. 
• Dry holes — Often these are completed by the promoter solely to improve his 
completion record and collect completion funds from investors. 
• Royalties — Insiders may be assigned the majority of royalties while investors receive only 
a small portion. 
• Number of partners — Promoters are likely to oversell the well, i.e., 99/64ths. 
 
Occasionally, the investment may be a complete fabrication. This is even more likely in 
overseas mineral investments. Geologists’ re ports may be falsified or promoters may  
rely on investors’ reluctance to travel to remote spots in order to see their well or mine  
for themselves.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A good example of this is the Bre-X gold scandal that occurred in the spring of 1997. The 
Canadian mining company claimed to have found the largest gold deposit discovered in the 
twentieth century in Busang, on the island of Borneo. Share pric es of the before unheard of, 
penny-stock company skyrocketed as rumors of the tremendous discovery circulated. 
Optimistic investors largely ignored the red flags that began to emerge. The initial concern 
that most had was that the mine was located in Indonesia, creating potential difficulties due 
to poor U.S. relations with that country.  
 
Not to be deterred by proximity or diplomatic difficulties, investors continued to avidly 
acquire stock in the former junior mining company. Bre-X geological reports of as many as 
5.68 grams of gold per ton continued the trend. Then, however, a multitude of problems 
seemed to arise. 
 
The accuracy of the sampling began to come into question. Instead of preserving parts of the 
core samples for verification, Bre-X allowed them to be crushed. And soon after, a fire 
destroyed the geologists’ records, further casting the veracity of the discovery into doubt. 
Insiders began surreptitiously selling off large amounts of their shares. News that the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1523 
Indonesian government had withheld key permits was concealed from investors. After the 
exploration manager’s mysterious death (he supposedly committed suicide by jumping out of 
a helicopter), share prices plunged from approximately C$100 to around C$2. Bre-X’s 
market value declined by 90 percent. The Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement 
System lost C$45 million and Canada’s Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec recorded 
a loss of C$70 million. The core samples, it was later revealed, had been “salted.” 
 
The most disturbing aspect of this case is the severe handicap investigators faced caused by 
jurisdictional questions. “This could be a monumental scam that will be nearly impossible 
to prosecute,” said a private investigator wo rking on the case. He explains some of the 
difficulties, “No one really has jurisdiction. The salting [of the gold samples] took place in 
Indonesia, but what laws were really broken in that country? The law against salting? 
There is none. The law against deceiving shareholders? That happened in Canada and the 
U.S. Most of the main suspects probably disappeared in the Philippines. But what law did 
they break in the Philippines? Are they fugitives? No. Can a prosecutor in Canada get a 
warrant for those guys in the Philippines for what they did in Indonesia? Very tricky.” 
 
In Indonesia, no extradition or law-enforcement cooperation agreements exist with Canada 
or the U.S., which means the criminal investigation is being handled by the Indonesians 
themselves. Likewise, though the U.S. Embassy in Jakarta has been asked by 
Washington to look into the Busang fraud, the U.S. and Indonesia have a poor track 
record of cooperating in criminal matters.  
 
Investors in such ventures can easily find themselves with no legal recourse if things go 
wrong. Obviously, different countries have varying laws regarding investor rights. Naturally, 
this makes investigating a case such as this quite difficult. The principals of Bre-X claimed 
not to have known about sample salting. They portrayed themselves as victims and blamed 
the geologists for the fraudulent samples. The geologists, however, were Philippine nationals 
and retreated to their homeland, further complicating the investigation. The Philippine 
government suspects foul play in the death of the head geologist, Michael de Guzman, and is 
more concerned with the Indonesian inquiry into the matter than with turning over their 
countrymen for questioning. 
 
When examining the case from a “follow the money” standpoint, the trail seems to lead to 
Bre-X insiders. Even as they concealed news of  permits being withheld by the Indonesian 
government, insiders secretly sold off huge amounts of stock at great profit. According to 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1524                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the Wall Street Journal, Bre-X Chairman David Walsh, Vice Chairman and Chief Geologist 
John Felderhof, and two other executives sold nearly C$38 million of stock. 
 
HEDGE FUNDS 
Although there is no statutory or regulatory definition of “hedge fund,” the term typically 
refers to private pooled investment vehicles managed by advisers who generally have a very 
large financial interest in the funds based on a management fee that includes a percentage of 
the fund’s performance. Hedge funds employ various speculative and aggressive strategies 
that are not commonly available to mutual funds. They often combine traditional 
investments with short sales, leveraging, and arbitrage strategies to maximize returns.  
 
In the past few years, the U.S. securities market has seen a significant growth in the number 
and size of hedge funds. According to the SEC, assets under management by hedge funds 
have grown dramatically and are now estimated to exceed $2 trillion. This is a massive jump 
from the $38 billion hedge fund industry in 1990. Consequently, hedge fund fraud has grown 
substantially enough for the SEC to take extraordinary measures to regulate it. Between 2000 
and 2004, the SEC brought 51 cases against hedge fund advisers for defrauding hedge fund 
investors or using the funds to defraud others. In 2005, the SEC brought 11 hedge fund 
fraud cases and had several investigations underway. In 2007, the SEC created a hedge fund 
working group within the Division of Enforcement. Working with other federal law 
enforcement agencies and self-regulatory organizations, the group leads agency efforts to 
combat hedge fund insider trading. In the most significant insider trading case in 20 years, 
the SEC filed charges in 2007 against 14 defendants in a scheme involving hedge funds that 
netted more than $15 million in illegal profits on thousands of trades, using information 
stolen from UBS Securities LLC and Morgan Stanley.    
 
With the enormous growth in the hedge fund industry, advisers are becoming more 
aggressive and less meticulous in their transactions. Typical hedge fund fraud by investors 
includes: 
• Theft of investor assets;  
• Late trading;  
• Insider trading;  
• Overvaluation of portfolios;  
• Entering into inappropriate timing arrangements;  
• Exploitation of mutual fund investors for private gain;  
• Entering into inappropriate arrangements with mutual fund advisers in which the mutual 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1525 
fund advisers waive restrictions on market timing in exchange for placement of other 
assets by the hedge fund adviser in funds managed by a mutual fund adviser; and  
• Conspiring with intermediaries to identify hedge funds from mutual fund personnel. 
 
PROMISSORY NOTES 
A note is defined as a security, but in practice, the law is more complicated than that. Under 
certain circumstances, promissory notes are not held to be securities. A note is presumed to 
be a security unless it bears a strong resemblance to a category of instruments that are not 
securities. Generally, longer-term commercial paper is similar in many respects to a bond and 
may be held to be a security unless it relates to such transactions as consumer finance or 
residential mortgages. For example, in the case of a residential mortgage, the note you sign is 
simply a promise to repay, not a method to raise capital for some business venture.  
 
With notes and other potential securities it is often helpful to apply the family resemblance 
test and look at three things: 
 
MOTIVE AND EXPECTATION  
What is the issuer’s primary motive? If it is to raise money for the general use of a business 
enterprise then a security may be held to exist. What is the buyer’s primary motive? Is it 
really a loan or an investment-type transaction? What is a reasonable investor thinking? What 
are his expectations? 
 
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION   
Is there some form of common trading? If so, a security probably exists. 
 
REGULATION  
Is there some other regulatory system that significantly reduces the risk of the transaction 
thereby rendering the application of the securities laws unnecessary? If the transaction is 
deemed appropriately regulated in ways other than through the application of the securities 
laws, then it is less likely that securities laws will be brought to bear. 
 
 
Commodity Futures, Exchange-Traded Options, and OTC Options 
There have been numerous frauds involving commodity futures, exchange-traded options, 
and OTC options. In December 1994, Orange County California became the largest 
municipality ever to file for bankruptcy. This was largely caused by risky investment 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1526                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
strategies utilizing OTC options that resulted in trading losses of about $10 billion. In more 
recent news, the catastrophic failure of Enron was partially caused by a fraudulent hedge 
transaction utilizing an OTC option. Through a company he controlled, Andrew S. Fastow 
sold worthless options to Enron making it appear that the value of Enron’s investment in 
Avici Systems, Inc. was hedged. Fastow pocketed the premium for the bogus options while 
Enron appeared to have established a hedge position, protecting the value of their 
investment. Other notable failures related to exchange-traded derivatives include Barings 
PLC, the 223-year-old London merchant bank that helped finance the Louisiana Purchase, 
and the Canadian Pacific Railway, which collapsed as a result of hidden derivatives losses.  
 
Derivatives trading is risky business. But a lack of adequate internal controls led to many of 
the losses mentioned above. Internal controls must be airtight in a firm that engages in 
hedging or trading activities using exchange-traded or OTC derivatives. Insufficient market 
and product knowledge was also a major factor in these financial debacles.  
 
Commodity Futures Primer 
As mentioned previously, commodity futures contracts are agreements between buyers and 
sellers to make or take delivery of a commodity at a future date, at an agreed upon price. 
Commodity futures contracts are standardized. Contract specifications such as the contract 
size, delivery months, commodity grade, location of delivery, and other details for each 
futures contract are preset in the contract terms. Price and quantity are the only things 
negotiated by the counterparties to a trade. In the United States, agricultural, industrial, and 
financial futures are traded on organized exchanges known as contract markets. 
 
The possibility of delivery keeps futures contracts in line with their underlying cash markets. 
If a contract rises too high in price relative to the cash market, traders might sell futures with 
the intent of making delivery. This forces the futures price down and is the reason futures 
markets reflect the price of their underlying cash market. Some futures contracts are “cash 
settled.” The value of these contracts is derived from an underlying index value. When a 
futures contract is cash settled, traders will often use a calculated “fair value” to determine if 
the futures are high or low compared to the underlying index. If fair value indicates that 
futures are too high, a trader might sell futures, expecting the difference to narrow.  
 
Futures contracts do not have any intrinsic value in and of themselves; their value is derived 
from the underlying commodity, index, or security. Because futures contracts “derive” their 
price from their underlying cash market, they are called derivatives. There are other 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1527 
derivative markets, such as exchange-traded options on futures, options on securities, and 
over-the-counter (OTC) options, which will be discussed later in this section. The contracts 
traded on these markets also derive their values from an underlying commodity, security,  
or index. 
 
The Principle of Offset 
One of the features of commodity futures markets that make them so liquid and cost 
effective is the principle of offset. The obligation of the buyer (to accept future delivery) and 
the obligation of the seller (to make future delivery) is not with each other but with the 
central clearing function of the exchange (exchanges may have a separate clearing 
corporation or clearing may be a part of the exchange itself). Clearing matches futures 
transactions and becomes counterparty to both sides of the trade, eliminating counterparty 
credit risk by guarantying both sides of the transaction. As a result, traders can liquidate their 
positions (obligations) by merely executing an equal and opposite offsetting transaction 
(selling out a long position or buying back a short). Clearing also transfers funds between 
firms when futures trades are marked to market at the end of each day.  
 
Trading on Margin 
Commodity futures are traded on margin. Only a small percentage, usually about 5 percent 
of the contract’s notional value, is required to establish a position (long or short) in a futures 
market (notional value is the contract size in units multiplied by the price per unit). Margins 
are set by the exchange for each commodity and are raised or lowered from time to time to 
reflect changing market volatility and notional contract values. Brokerage firms may require 
greater margin of their customers but may not require less than what the exchange has set. 
Each exchange will have a margin committee made up of exchange members and support 
personnel that monitors and evaluates the markets and makes margin changes  
as appropriate.  
 
There are two types of margin: initial margin, the amount of money per contract that must 
be present in the account when the position is initiated, and maintenance (variation) margin, 
the minimum amount of money per contract that must be maintained in the account while 
the position is open. For example, a December corn contract had a closing price of $2.84 
1/4 per bushel. The notional value of this contract is $14,212 (5,000 bushels x $2.84 1/4). 
The initial margin requirement set by the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) is $810 per 
contract, which is 5.69 percent of the notional contract value, while maintenance margin is 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1528                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
set at $625 per contract, which is 4.39 percent of the notional contract value. Positions can 
be liquidated without customer authorization in accounts that violate margin requirements.  
 
Trading Basics 
A trader who buys futures contracts (assuming this is not an offsetting transaction) is long 
the market and will profit if prices rise (for example, if you bought a December corn 
contract at $2.70 per bushel and the price rose to $2.80 per bushel, you would have an 
unrealized profit of $500 (.10  cents x 5,000 bushels)). Because open commodity positions 
(transactions that are not offset) are marked to market at the end of the trading day, this 
$500 profit will be credited to your trading a ccount and is available as margin for additional 
contract purchases. This transfer of funds occurs through the clearing corporation of  
the exchange.  
 
The transaction counterpart of the long buyer is the short seller. Using the above example, if 
you sold a December corn contract at $2.70 per bushel and the price rose to $2.80 per 
bushel, you would have an unrealized loss of $500 (.10 cents x 5,000 bushels). Again, open 
commodity positions are marked to market at the end of the trading day, meaning that this 
$500 loss will be debited from your trading account. 
 
Options Primer 
Like commodity futures contracts, options contracts are agreements between counterparties. 
The main difference between these markets is that commodity futures impose obligations on 
both the buyer and the seller to either make or take physical delivery of the commodity or to 
agree to cash settlement at contract expiration. Options contracts confer rights, not 
obligations, to the option buyer and impose obligations on the option seller. Importantly, if 
an option is not exercised, it just expires (over 90 percent of exchange-traded options expire 
worthless). In contrast, if a commodity contract is held to expiration, the long gets delivery 
and the short must make delivery. Options can be exchange-traded, over-the-counter (OTC), 
between individual business entities, or between individual persons. Businesses and 
individuals commonly use options in real estate, personal property, and interest rate 
transactions.  
 
Standardized exchange-traded options contracts are known as plain vanilla options. That is, 
there are no embedded features that would affect the basic option contract  
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1529 
(off-exchange or OTC options often have embedded features that can make them complex 
or exotic). Standardized equity options are traded at several exchanges in the United States. 
The most successful is the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE).  
 
Exchange-Traded Options 
Like commodities futures, exchange-traded options are contract markets with central 
clearing that eliminates individual counterparty credit risk and allows offsetting transactions. 
Option contracts are standardized, expire at a future date, are marked to market, call for 
physical delivery, and are derivatives. This is where the similarities to commodity futures 
markets end.  
 
The buyer of an option contract purchases the right, not the obligation, to buy or sell 
something at a specified price (exercise or strike price) by the expiration date of the option 
contract. The object of the option contract (what the option is written on) is called the 
underlying. The value of the underlying is the main (but not only) factor from which the 
option contract derives its value.  
 
There are two kinds of options: calls and puts. A call option is the right but not the 
obligation to purchase the underlying security at the strike (exercise) price by the option’s 
expiration date. A put option is the right but not the obligation to sell the underlying security 
at the strike (exercise) price by the option’s expiration date. In options transactions, the seller 
of a call option is the call writer while the seller of put option is the put writer. Option 
buyers pay a premium to option writers for the options they buy. Option writers (sellers) 
collect this premium for the options they write and are obligated to deliver the underlying 
security if the option is exercised.  
 
Exchange-traded equity options are standardized, plain vanilla, American style options. 
American Style options can be exercised at any time by the buyer (European style options 
can only be exercised on the expiration day). For example, IBM call options traded at the 
CBOE are for 100 shares of IBM common stock.  The option writer is obligated to deliver 
100 shares of IBM common stock at the strike price if the option buyer chooses to exercise 
the option.  
 
Relationship of the Underlying Security to an Option 
The value of options is primarily derived from the value of the underlying security. For 
example, XYZ common stock closed today at $88.29 per share and the strike prices of the 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1530                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
October 2008 XYZ calls ranged from $65 per share to $135 per share. The more that the 
share price of XYZ is above a particular strike price the greater the value of that option. The 
stock price of $88 per share is about $23 over  the strike price of the XYZ $65 calls. The 
current premium for XYZ $65 calls is $22.90 per share. A trader who had previously bought 
this call option could sell it back into the market for about $2,290 ($22.90 x 100 shares) or 
could exercise the option and buy the stock at $65 with the market at $88.  
 
Options can be in the money, out of the money, or at the money. A call option is in the 
money when the price of the underlying security exceeds its strike price. Likewise, a put 
option is in the money when the price of the underlying security is less than its strike price. 
Options are at the money when the price of the underlying security is about the same as the 
strike price. All other options are out of the money.  
 
Option Values and Premiums 
There are two values that make up option premiums: intrinsic value and time value.  
To have any intrinsic value an option must be in the money. Out of the money options have 
only time value. From the above example, the XYZ $85 call closed today at a premium of 
$5.70 per share. This call option is $3 in the money because the underlying XYZ stock 
closed above the strike price at $88 per share.  The premium has $3 intrinsic value while the 
remaining $2.70 is time value. 
 
While the concept of intrinsic value is rather straightforward the concept of time value is 
complex and beyond the scope of this writing. It is worth noting, however, that the 
mathematical formula for pricing option time value was first introduced by Fischer Black 
and Myron S. Scholes in 1973. The formula takes six factors into account: underlying price, 
strike price, time to expiration, volatility of the underlying, dividends and interest rates. For 
further information on this and other topics on options, visit the Learning Center on the 
CBOE Web page (www.cboe.com). 
 
Over-the-Counter (OTC) Options 
OTC options are agreements made between private parties. Banks, large brokerage firms, 
insurance companies, and many other businesses are active in the OTC options markets. 
Trillions of dollars in notional value are at stake in the OTC market on a daily basis. 
 
OTC options are not centrally cleared or standardized. These options are usually customized 
by the option writer to fit the needs of the option buyer. Because OTC options are not 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1531 
centrally cleared counterparty, credit risk can be a major concern and risk factor. The option 
is worthless if the option writer cannot perform.  
 
OTC options can be plain vanilla, complex, or exotic. The complex and exotic forms can be 
particularly problematic for market participants, accountants, and auditors and are beyond 
the scope of this writing. 
 
 
Securities Fraud Schemes 
 
Securities Fraud by Registered Persons and Entities 
Frequent allegations of misconduct by registered individuals or firms fall into one or more of 
the following areas: 
 
Churning  
Churning is the excessive trading of a customer account for the purpose of generating 
commissions. For securities and options there is a commission charged when the trade is 
entered into and when the trade is liquidated. Commodity futures have a round-turn 
commission scheme meaning that the commission covers both the purchase and sale. 
Commissions on commodity futures are not charged until the trade is closed out.  
 
DEFINITION OF EXCESSIVE TRADING ACTIVITY 
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) states that to establish churning, a 
complainant must prove that (1) the broker controlled the trading in an account; (2) the 
volume of trading was excessive in light of the complainant’s trading objectives; and (3) the 
broker acted with intent to defraud or with reckless disregard for the customer’s interests. 
Hinch v. Commonwealth Financial Group, Inc.,  [1996-1998 Transfer Binder] Comm. Fut. L. Rep. 
27,056 at 45,020 (CFTC May 13, 1997); Johnson v. Don Charles & Company, [1990-1992 
Transfer Binder] Comm. Fut. L. Rep.  (CCH) 24,986 (CFTC Jan. 16, 1991).  
 
Two questions arise in churning cases: who had trading authorization over the account and 
when did the account activity and commissions become excessive. If customers are making 
their own trades, they cannot possibly accuse the broker of churning their accounts. But 
brokers or some other people have trading authority (discretion) over the accounts and 
participate in the commissions, a conflict of interest exists and there may be predication for a 
charge of churning.  
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1532                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Many of the regulatory definitions of churning are inherently vague and offer little practical 
guidance. Customer trading objectives are simple: make profits and avoid losses. The best 
test to detect churning is to calculate the amount of monthly gross commissions generated 
from the account as a percentage of the average account balance. For example, an active 
trading account with an average daily balance of $10,000 might reasonably generate (on the 
high side) about $500 dollars (5 percent) in gross commissions in an average month. Gross 
commissions would probably increase in months when the markets are experiencing  
greater price volatility and trading has been successful. The CFE should look for the 
following indicators: 
• Did the broker have trading authority (discretion) over the account? 
• Have gross commissions increased during periods of decreasing market volatility?  
• Are the gross commissions for the month in question substantially higher than the 
average monthly gross commissions for this account? 
• Are gross commissions greater than 5 percent of the average account balance? 
• Did commissions consume realized profits and/or aggravate losses?  
• Were numerous trades entered into and exited over short time periods for small gains or 
losses? 
• Was the trading unit (number of contracts per trade) too large for this account 
(overtrading)? 
• Were the trades made for this account recommended by the research department of the 
brokerage and disseminated to other customers?  
• Did unauthorized trading take place?    
 
If the broker had discretionary authority to trade the account and any of the above factors 
are true, further investigation for churning is warranted. Finally, brokerage supervisors are 
required to perform due diligence to ensure that churning and other trading abuses do  
not occur.  
 
Unsuitable Recommendations 
Securities representatives are required to “know their customer.” They must take into 
account the financial profile and level of sophistication of the individual investor. Placing 
clients into unsuitable securities, for example recommending high-risk options to a senior 
citizen with limited assets, is prohibited. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1533 
 EXAMPLE 
 
UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
Litigation Release No. 20438 / January 24, 2008 
People of the State of California v. Daniel William Heath, Denis Timothy O’Brien, John 
William Heath, and Larre Jaye Schlarmann, Superior Court of California, County 
of Riverside, Case No. RIF117775 
 
The Securities and Exchange Commission announced that on January 10 and 11, 2008 
a jury in Riverside County, California, convicted three men on felony charges involving a 
fraudulent scheme that was the subject of a prior enforcement action brought by the 
Commission, which raised more than $187 mill ion from over 1,800 victims, mostly senior 
citizens and the elderly. Convicted for their role in the scheme were Daniel William Heath, 
51, formerly of Chino Hills, California, Denis Timothy O’Brien, 53, formerly of Yorba 
Linda, California, and Heath’s father, John William Heath, 81, formerly of Covina, 
California. Daniel Heath was found guilty on 400 felony counts, O’Brien on 70 felony 
counts, and John Heath on 52 felony counts. In 2004, the Riverside County District 
Attorney’s Office arrested and charged them with committing securities fraud, elder abuse, 
grand theft, money laundering, tax fraud, and conspiracy, all under California law. Larre 
Jaye Schlarmann, 52, formerly of Carlsbad, California, was also arrested, pleaded guilty to 
securities fraud, elder abuse, money laundering, and tax fraud, and was sentenced to serve 
15 years in state prison. Daniel Heath faces a maximum of 117 years in state prison, 
O’Brien 37 years, and John Heath 28 years.  
 
In April 2004, the Commission filed a compla int against Daniel Heath and his entities, 
and O’Brien, alleging they fraudulently in duced elderly investors through “free lunch” 
seminars to invest in “secured” notes that paid a “guaranteed” return. The court appointed 
a permanent receiver over the Heath entities. Final judgments of permanent injunction and 
other relief were entered against Heath and O’Brien enjoining them from violating the anti-fraud, 
securities registration, and broker-dealer registrations provisions of the federal 
securities laws for their role in the scheme.  The judgments ordered Heath and O’Brien to 
disgorge to the receiver their ill-gotten gains plus prejudgment interest. The Commission then 
instituted administrative proceedings against Heath and O’Brien barring them from 
association with a broker or dealer. Heath and O’Brien consented to the entry of the final 
judgments and administrative orders with out admitting or denying the Commission’s 
allegations and findings. In September 2007, the Commission instituted administrative 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1534                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
proceedings against Martin S. Duffield, 52, of West Covina, California, and Raul A. 
Jordan, 52, of Pasadena, California, for viol ating the anti-fraud, securities registration, 
and broker-dealer registrations provisions for their role in the scheme. Duffield was barred 
association with any broker or dealer and Jordan was barred from association with any 
broker or dealer, with the right to reapply for association after five (5) years to the 
appropriate self-regulatory organization, or if there is none, to the Commission. Duffield 
and Jordan were ordered to disgorge ill-gotten gains to the receiver plus prejudgment interest. 
Duffield and Jordan consented to  the entry of the orders with out admitting or denying the 
Commission's findings. 
 
Administration of the court-order receivership over the Heath entities will continue. 
 
Failure to Supervise  
Broker-dealer firms are responsible for oversight of their representatives to ensure adherence 
to Rules of Fair Practice and state and federal laws. 
 
Failure to Report Client Complaints 
Investment and advisory firms are required to report client complaints to the SEC, yet may 
neglect to do so, fearing an investigation. 
 
Parking
Parking is the practice of selling a security to one party with the understanding that the seller 
will repurchase the security later at an agreed-upon price. This scheme allows circumvention 
of ownership reporting requirements and net capital rules. 
 
Front Running — Dual Trading 
Front running an order is a type of insider trading. Although it usually will not cause a direct 
loss to the customer, it could, and is a violation of exchange rules. Front running involves 
the use for profit of the privileged knowledge of a customer’s order to buy or sell a large 
amount of a commodity, options, or security that, because of its size, is likely to move the 
market. Back office personnel could have knowledge of such an order and buy or sell for 
their own account ahead of the customer. Because order fillers on the exchange floor are 
allowed to trade for their own account and fill orders for customers (dual trading) they also 
have an opportunity.  
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1535 
Consider the following scenario: an order is received from a hedger to sell 500 December 
cattle futures contracts at the market. If the order filler knows that current market conditions 
are such that this order will move the market significantly lower, it would be very tempting 
to sell a few contracts for himself and profit from the market decline when he executes the 
customer order. Order fillers are required to ope rate in the best interest of the customer and 
“work” the order to get the best price. Howev er, once the trader has established his short 
position, it is really in his own interest to drive the market as far down as possible when 
executing the 500 contract sell order. In this situation, the order filler may not give his best 
efforts and could hurt the customer. 
 
The vast majority of exchange members would never put themselves ahead of a customer, 
but it has happened in the past. In today’s markets with sophisticated surveillance, exchange 
investigative personnel actively guard against this type of activity. The time stamps on the 
customer order, time and sales reports from the exchange, and the account activity of the 
trader would have to be obtained and examined to substantiate any front running allegation. 
This information is easily obtainable. Brokerage compliance personnel should easily detect 
front running by back office personnel by periodically checking their account activity or not 
allowing them to open trading accounts at all. 
 
Bucket Shops 
Bucket shops are fraudulent enterprises that masquerade as licensed brokerage operations. A 
true retail futures brokerage would be required to be registered and meet certain financial 
thresholds. Salespeople would be required to pass the Series Three National Commodity 
Futures Examination and all other personnel would need to be registered as Associated 
Persons. There may also be other registration or licensing requirements depending on the 
type of business that the brokerage engages in. (See 
www.nfa.futures.org/registration/who_has_to_r egister.asp). Bucket shops bypass all these 
requirements and operate like legitimate businesses. 
 
The solution to finding whether or not an individual or firm is legitimate is easy. Go to: 
www.nfa.futures.org/basicnet for commodity futures brokers and firms 
www.finra.org/Investors/ToolsCalculators/BrokerCheck/index.htm for stock, options and 
futures brokers and firms 
www.sec.gov/investor/brokers.htm for securities brokers and firms 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1536                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
You will be able to search files for any firm or individual authorized to do securities, options 
or futures business, their license status and any complaints brought against them. If a firm or 
professional does not appear on one of these pages they are not legitimate.  
 
Excessive Markups 
Excessive markups involve selling at a marked-up price or buying at a marked-down price 
not reasonably related to the prevailing market price. 
 
Misuse or Misappropriation of Customer’s Securities 
This scheme may involve outright theft or using the securities in improper ways, for 
example, as collateral for loans or to conduct other securities transactions (e.g., margin 
trading). 
 
Unauthorized Trading 
Unless otherwise agreed to in writing, only the customer named on the trading account can 
authorize trades. Any losses accruing to the customer account because of an unauthorized 
trade, whether made by mistake or intentionally, are the responsibility of the brokerage firm 
and must be reimbursed to the customer. Gains from unauthorized trades also belong to the 
customer. This prevents brokers from executing unauthorized trades, claiming error, and 
taking any profits that may occur. The only entries to the brokerage company error account 
should be losses; profits in an error account should be investigated. Customers must report 
unauthorized trades to the management of the brokerage firm as soon as detected. Silence 
would imply ratification of the transaction. 
 
Systematically Trading Accounts Against Each Other 
Systematically trading accounts against each other usually occurs between investment pools. 
The scheme involves someone with trading authority simultaneously establishing opposite 
market positions in two separate investment pools that he controls. A person who has 
trading authority and other controls over the pool may receive a monthly management fee of 
about 1.5 percent of the pool balance, a percentage of any of the pool’s gains, perhaps 10 
percent per quarter, and a portion or all of the commissions on trades. The conflicts of 
interest in such a business arrangement are obvious. It is in the interest of the pool operator 
to maintain account balances a high as possible, trade the accounts for commissions and to 
have at least some profits. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1537 
Assume that a pool operator established two limited partnerships for trading commodities, 
that he was general partner of both partnerships, and that he was to be compensated as 
previously described. The general partner, who has trading authority, then buys 100 
contracts of December Corn for Pool A, establishing a long market position, and at the 
same time sells 100 contracts of December Corn for Pool B, establishing a short market 
position. (If these transactions occurred in the same account they would offset each other.) 
 
Over time one of the pools will suffer a loss while the other will enjoy a gain. For the general 
partner things haven’t changed much. The amount of equity in the two pools combined will 
be about the same with the loss in one pool being offset by the gain in the other pool. This 
preserves the basis for the general partner’s management fee while the profitable pool will 
owe him a percentage of the gain.  
 
In the long run, one of the investment pools will dissolve because of trading losses while the 
other will enjoy handsome profits. This then takes on some of the characteristics of a Ponzi 
scheme when the pool operator creates a new limited partnership, advertises his success 
from the results of the profitable pool, and participants in the successful pool tell their 
friends. The trick here is to ensure that participants in the original two pools don’t know 
each other.  
 
Supervisors and compliance managers of brokerages should be on the lookout for this type 
of activity. They can do little, however, if the general partner maintains the trading accounts 
at two separate brokerages. The CFE will need to acquire the trading records of all pools run 
by a pool operator in order to establish if such a trading scheme has occurred. The 
comparison of market positions over time is simple and the information is easily obtainable 
from the brokerages once it is discovered who they are.  
 
The general partner would have committed a material breach of contract in that he failed in 
his fiduciary duties to the limited partners. There are also numerous violations of federal 
regulatory and SRO rules that prohibit this type of trading scheme. 
 
Block Order Schemes 
When several different accounts are combined on the same order it is called a block order. 
For example, a broker may wish to execute the same buy order for 10 of his customers. To 
accomplish this he may write an order ticket such as: “For account 12345 and others, buy 
100 contracts of December cattle at the market.” The justification for this type of order is 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1538                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that time is of the essence. If the market is volatile, customers will need their order executed 
as quickly as possible. Writing 10 separate order tickets for each account and calling the 
orders to the trading floor separately would take too much time. By combining all the orders 
on one ticket and providing one account number, time is saved and the other account 
numbers and quantities can be added to the order ticket when the executed order (fill) is 
reported back to the broker. 
 
The potential for abuse is obvious. Prices move rapidly in volatile markets and the accounts 
the order has been executed for have not all been made known. The time from when the 
block order is placed and when the fill is reported back to the broker can take many minutes. 
On some busy days it can take an hour or more. During this time the market is moving and 
the executed order will either be in a loss or gain position by the time it is reported back. 
This is where fraud can occur. 
 
For example, assume that 100 contracts of December cattle were bought at 80.00 (cents per 
pound) and that when the fill is reported thirty minutes later the market is at 81.00. This 
favorable change in market price (100 points) is equivalent to $400 profit per contract or 
$40,000 profit for the entire order. The broker then gives out the “other” account numbers 
to the floor clerk to complete the order with 55 contracts going to a favored account and 5 
contracts going to the other nine accounts. The broker then immediately sells 55 December 
cattle contracts for the favored account realizing a $22,000 profit. Of course, if the market 
had moved lower by the time the fill was reported the favored account would not have been 
added to the order or the loss taken would have been minimal.  
 
Proving such a scheme is easy. The CFE will need to obtain 1) the monthly brokerage recap 
of the salesman, 2) copies of all order tickets written by the salesman for the time period in 
question (brokerages must keep the hard copies for several years), 3) a copy of the telephone 
audio recording of the placement of the order and reported fill from the trading floor (all 
calls to the trading floor are recorded and archived), and 4) copies of the “daily equity 
statements” provided to the salesman by the brokerage firm detailing account numbers, 
account names, open positions and the cash value of all accounts represented by the 
salesman. A block order scheme will easily be detected by analyzing this information. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1539 
Market Manipulation 
Market manipulation consists of a series of transactions designed to artificially raise or lower 
price or to give the appearance of trading activity for the purpose of inducing others to buy 
or sell. This is especially common with penny stocks or micro-cap stocks. Penny stocks are 
low-priced (usually less than $5), speculative securities that are registered but do not meet the 
listing requirements of an exchange. Micro-cap just means the stocks of companies with very 
small market capitalization. Once the price has been artificially inflated the stock is sold to 
unsuspecting victims. 
 
Insider Trading 
Under the legal theory of misappropriation, the use of non-public information to profit from 
purchase or sale of securities may violate the insiders’ fiduciary duty to their company or 
shareholders. Although not all courts accept this argument, criminal charges are not unusual 
in cases of this nature. Ivan Boesky and Michael Milken, indicted for insider trading in the 
late 1980s, both served time in prison.  
  
EXAMPLE 
A California psychotherapist, pleaded guilty to securities fraud after federal officials accused 
him of making a nice profit after trading on some inside information he learned during a 
counseling session with a client. 
 
According to federal officials, the psychotherapist bought common stock in Lockheed Corp. 
hours after his client — a company executive undergoing marriage counseling — mentioned 
the secret and ultimately successful merger talks between Lockheed and Martin Marietta 
Corp. 
 
Under a legal doctrine known as the “misappropriation theory,” he was deemed to have 
violated securities laws because he stole information from a person who had assumed his 
trust and discretion, and then used the in formation to trade on the stock market. 
 
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 
In 2000, the SEC adopted rules concerning public disclosure of information. Regulation FD 
(Fair Disclosure) was promulgated to eliminate “selective” disclosure by companies to 
certain groups (such as brokers and analysts) before such information was made available to 
the public. 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1540                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Regulation states that if a company, or someone on its behalf, discloses “material non-
 public” information to a particular group (primarily market securities professionals), it must 
make a public disclosure of the information. The timing of the disclosure depends on 
whether the disclosure was intentional or inadvertent. If the disclosure was intentional, then 
company must make the disclosure simultaneously. If the disclosure was inadvertent, then 
the company must make the disclosure “promptly.” 
 
The SEC provides three options for proper dissemination: 
1. File the information with the SEC on a Form 8-K.  
2. Disseminate the information through a press release.  
3. Disseminate the information through any other method or combination of methods that 
are reasonably designed to provide broad public distribution of the information, such as 
an announcement at a press conference open to the public.  
 
Regulation FD only applies to material communications between company executives or 
authorized spokespersons to analysts, institutional investors, and holders of the company’s 
stock. Regulation FD also applies only to senior executives and excludes communications 
with the media, with ratings agencies, and with customers conducted in the normal course of 
business. Information is considered “material” if there is a substantial likelihood that a 
reasonable shareholder would consider it important in making an investment decision, or if 
it would have significantly altered the total mix of information available. 
 
INSIDER TRADING RULES 
Rule 10b-5, promulgated under section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 
prohibits any false statements or other fraudulent activity in connection with the purchase or 
sale of any security, including insider trading. It provides the main basis for the SEC to 
investigate possible security fraud claims. Rule 10b-5 contains civil and administrative 
remedies (such as the power to initiate actions to enjoin further violations) enforced by the 
SEC as well as criminal sanctions enforced by the Department of Justice. Specifically, rule 
10b-5 makes it unlawful for anybody to directly or indirectly conduct operations of business 
that would deceive another person concerning transactions involving securities. Although 
the text of the Securities Exchange Act does not provide for a private cause of action for 
rule 10b-5 violations, the Supreme Court found an implied right, which typically requires the 
plaintiff to prove (1) a material misstatement or omission; (2) intentional fraud or deceit by 
the party charged with the violation; (3) relia nce on the misrepresentation or omission in the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1541 
purchase or sale of a security; and (4) econom ic loss caused by the purchase or sale of  
the security.  
 
However, 10b-5 claims do have certain limitations. For example, there is no private cause of 
action against those who merely aided and abetted the primary violators, and in Stoneridge 
Investment Partners, LLC v. Scientific-Atlanta, Inc., the Court held that there is no private cause 
of action against third parties who neither make alleged misstatements nor engage in 
deceptive conduct on which investors relied. 
 
In Stoneridge, a group of investors in Charter Communications, Inc. accused two Charter 
suppliers of entering in a business scheme with Charter, which allowed Charter to issue 
fraudulent financial statements. In the alleged scheme, Charter gave its equipment vendor 
above-normal payments for T.V. set-top boxes and the supplier then gave back the extra 
payments as advertising fees. Charter then fraudulently accounted the returned payments as 
revenue. The Court ruled that the Rule 10b-5 does not extend to third parties (aiders or 
abettors) who do not make alleged misstatements and do not engage in deceptive conduct 
on which investors relied. There was no basis for finding that the group of investors did not 
rely on anything the suppliers said or did. The investors could not have relied upon the 
suppliers’ deceptive acts for two reasons: (1) Charter’s suppliers did not take part in 
preparing or distributing the fraudulent statements; and (2) the suppliers did not make any 
misstatements relied upon by the public or violate any duty to disclose. As a result, the Court 
held that the group of investors could not show reliance on any of the suppliers’ actions.  
 
The interesting thing about the Stoneridge decision is that it cannot be broadly read to say that 
secondary actors (lawyers, accountants, and bankers) are free from liability under Rule 10b-5. 
The Court held that deceptive conduct can provide the basis for securities fraud liability if 
plaintiffs can establish that they relied on that conduct. Unlike the relationship between the 
investors and suppliers in Stoneridge, lawyers and accountants often serve as advisers, which 
could be considered as taking part in activities that investors could rely upon.  
 
The SEC also recently issued Rule 10b5-1 and Rule 10b5-2 to supplement section 10(b) of 
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Rule 10b-5. Rule 10b5-1 and Rule 10b5-2 deal with 
unsettled issues that have arisen under Rule 10b-5. 
 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1542                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Rule 10b5-1 addresses the issue of when insider trading liability arises in connection with a 
trader’s “use” or “knowing possession” of mater ial non-public information. Specifically, rule 
10b5-1 prohibits the purchase or sale of a security “on the basis of” material, non-public 
information. However, the Rule also sets forth an affirmative defense for traders if they can 
show that such trades were made pursuant to a preexisting, written 10b5-1 trading plan.  
 
Recently, the SEC indicated that it intends to scrutinize plans contemplated by Rule 10b5-1 
more critically. This increased scrutiny likely resulted from the publication of a 2006 study by 
Alan Jagolizer, an assistant professor at the Stanford University Graduate School of 
Business, which suggested that on average, sales under Rule 10b5-1 plans were generating 
“abnormal trade returns” and that such plans seemed to outperform the market.  
 
Rule 10b5-2 addresses the issue of when a breach of a family or other non-business 
relationship may give rise to liability under the misappropriation theory of insider trading. 
Under the misappropriation theory, as defined by the Supreme Court case in United States v. 
O’Hagan, 521 U.S. 642 (1997), a person is liable for securities fraud if he: 
• Misappropriates confidential information, 
• For the purpose of securities trading, 
• In breach of a duty owed to the sources, and 
• Trades based on the misappropriated information. 
 
Rule 10b5-2 seeks to provide further guidance regarding what types of relationships create a 
“duty” not to use the information received. For example, if a person agrees to keep the 
information in confidence, a duty of trust or confidence will exist. Similarly, if two persons 
have a “history, pattern, or practice of sharing confidences,” such that the recipient 
reasonably should know that the other expects that the inside information will remain 
confidential, a duty of trust or confidence will exist. 
 
Subsection (b)(3) also creates a presumption that any person who receives inside information 
from his spouse, parent, child, or sibling will owe that other person a duty of trust or 
confidence. 
 
Disclosures (Misrepresentations and Omissions) 
Securities laws require that the investor receive full and fair disclosure of all material 
information. Giving the investor or prospective investor false or misleading information is 
clearly a misrepresentation. An omission occurs when the issuer, in connection with the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1543 
offer or sale of securities, omits a material fact necessary in order to make the statements 
made not misleading. Making misrepresentations to the investor or failing to inform the 
investor of certain facts (omissions) is a violation of both state and federal law only if the 
misrepresentation or omission is material.  
 
It is important to show the materiality of misrepresentations or omissions. Even if 
representations made, for example in a prospectus, are clearly false, it is still necessary to 
show materiality. In a 1988 decision, the Supreme Court stated that a fact is material “if its 
disclosure would change the total mix of facts available and there is a substantial likelihood 
that a reasonable shareholder would consider the facts important to her investment 
decision.”  See, Basic Inc. v Levinson, 485 U.S. 224 (1988). 
 
As a general rule, the examiner or investigator needs to determine the answer to the 
following question: Would a reasonable investor wish to know this information in order to 
make an informed decision? If the answer is “yes,” then this information, or the lack thereof, 
has a high likelihood of being deemed material. (If an actual investor acted based on the 
misrepresentation, that clearly strengthens the case, but it is not essential that the false or 
misleading statement influenced an investor, merely that a reasonable investor could have 
been so influenced.) 
 
The issuer of a biotechnology stock falsely claiming that the Food and Drug Administration 
has approved their new cancer drug would be an example of a misrepresentation that is 
clearly material to any prospective investor. Similarly, if the Chairman of the company had 
recently been released from prison after serving time for securities fraud, this fact should 
feature prominently in any offering document. Failure to disclose this fact would obviously 
constitute the omission of a material fact.    
 
The SEC has adopted a so-called “safe harbor” provision whereby certain forward-looking 
statements and projections will not be held to be fraudulent. Issuers will not be held liable if 
these type of statements were believed true at the time and were accompanied by appropriate 
cautionary language. 
   
Note also that federal and state laws usually prohibit the promoter from stating that the 
offering has government approval of some kind. For example, even if the offering is 
registered, the promoter cannot state that it is “SEC approved.” 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1544                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Securities Fraud by Unregistered Persons 
In conducting investigations or examinations relating to alleged violations of the securities 
laws, the fraud examiner should always begin by seeking the answer to these crucial 
questions:  
• Is the security registered? If not, does it meet an exemption? 
• Is the person offering or selling the security registered? If not, is the transaction exempt? 
• Are there indicators of fraud present? 
 
Exemptions 
Examples of exemptions under the 1933 Act include securities issued by the U.S. 
Government and those issued by state or local governments. Registration is also not required 
for limited offerings of securities issued pursuant to Regulation D of the Act. 
 
Issuance of securities undertaken pursuant to Rules 501 through 508 of “Reg D” is fairly 
complex, but for these purposes the essential elements are as follows:   
• Rule 501 defines “accredited investors” to include banks, insurance companies, certain 
charities, and individuals with a net worth exceeding $1 million or annual income of 
more than $200,000 ($300,000 including spouse).  
• Rule 504 allows an issuer to sell up to $1 million in securities in a 12-month period to 
any number of purchasers. Rule 504 also allows general solicitation and advertising. 
• Rule 505 increases the limit to $5 million, reduces the maximum number of non-
 accredited investors to 35, and does not allow general solicitation or advertising. 
• Rule 506 allows the issuance of any amount of securities to any number of accredited 
and up to 35 non-accredited but sophisticated investors. Again no general solicitation or 
advertising is allowed.  
 
The most relied upon exemption from registration where we are likely to see fraud is the so-called
“private placement” exemption. In most states, this exemption is available where the 
security is sold to a small number of people and there is no general solicitation. In Florida, 
for example, there must be no more than 35 non-accredited investors in a 12-month period, 
they must receive full and fair disclosure of material information, and there is a prohibition 
on general solicitation or advertising. It is common to find that one or more of the 
conditions necessary for the claimed exemption are not present and/or that the offering  
is fraudulent. 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1545 
Backdating Stock Options 
As a supplement to salary, companies frequently offer employees stock options, which grant 
the recipient the privilege to purchase a share of the company’s stock at a future date for a 
specific price, called the strike price. A strike price is the value of a share at a particular date. 
Generally, the strike price is set at the price of the underlying stock on the day the option is 
granted; therefore the option becomes valuable only with future increases in the stock price.  
 
In this way, companies grant stock options as an incentive for employees to boost company 
performance and thus raise the stock price. However, the practice of backdating stock 
options gives the employee a chance to profit by purchasing stock at past low prices, 
providing an immediate payoff. Backdating stock options occurs when a company alters the 
date of the grant to a time when the stock was trading at a lower price in the interest of 
making the option instantly valuable and further increasing the employee’s gain if the stock 
price continues to rise.  
 
For example, on June 1, 2008, Company XYZ grants its CEO a stock option that provides 
the executive the right to purchase 100 shares of XYZ stock on January 1, 2009 for the 
strike price. Per its usual policy, the strike price is set at the price of the company stock on 
the date of the option grant. On June 1, 2008  (the grant date), XYZ stock was trading at $40 
per share. Therefore, if the stock price increases to $45 per share by January 1, 2009, the 
CEO could exercise the option and purchase the shares for $40 per share, then sell them 
immediately on the market for $45 per share, resulting in a gain of $5 per share. However, 
the company has recently experienced a dramatic increase in its share price. On May 24, 
2008, the stock was trading for $15 per share.  To provide the CEO with an opportunity to 
exploit the increase in share price, even though it has already occurred, the company chooses 
to backdate the stock options to make it appear as if they were granted on May 24, 2008. 
Because the strike price is set at the price of the stock on the option grant date, the strike 
price is effectively changed to $15 per share. As a result, the CEO now has the option to buy 
100 shares of XYZ stock on January 1, 2009 for $15 per share. Thus, the CEO has 
immediately gained $25 per share (the difference between the stock price on the actual grant 
date of June 1 and the stated grant date of May 24) based solely on the manipulation of the 
grant date used.  
 
Backdating stock options came to the attention of the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) when academic research revealed a pattern of stock prices descending 
just prior to many reported dates of option grants, then ascending immediately afterwards. 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1546                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Backdating is not necessarily illegal, but can be if not handled appropriately. In order to be 
legal, the practice must be explicitly reported to shareholders and the government. Failure to 
do so may constitute securities fraud.  
 
In August of 2002, certain provisions laid out under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act took effect, 
requiring companies to report stock options grants within two days. These rules greatly 
reduced the time companies had to choose a favorable grant date; companies were 
previously allowed weeks or months before they were required to report stock options 
grants. Consequently, the apparent pattern of backdating nearly disappeared around this 
time. However, reports of actual practices in stock options and the recorded data remain 
inconsistent in many cases because not all companies adhere to Sarbanes-Oxley.  
 
Additionally, the revelation of the prevalence of backdating has caused concern that 
companies may not have recorded and disclosed the option grants on the financial 
statements in an accurate manner. In response to the issue, the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB) issued a practice alert to prepare auditors for the possibility of 
financial misstatements due to backdating stock options. To keep a tight rope on the 
possibility of this type of illegal activity, auditors should assess the information obtained 
from the audit to determine the need for further procedures. 
 
 
Investigative Tips 
 
Promotional Materials 
Usually, but by no means on every occasion, the fraud examiner will discover that various 
written information has been provided to investors and potential investors. This disclosure is 
often in the form of documents entitled “prospectus,” “offering memorandum,” or “private 
placement offering memorandum.” These documents can sometimes provide the “smoking 
gun” and should therefore be examined in detail. Do not overlook the information utilized 
in various advertising media to persuade the public to invest. How did the investor hear of 
this opportunity? Cold call, direct mail, newspapers, magazines, television, or the Internet?    
 
A properly prepared prospectus (which usually indicates that the issuer claims the security is 
registered) or a private placement memorandum (the issuer claims the security is exempt) 
would normally be expected to contain detailed information concerning the issuer and the 
security being offered. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1547 
Such information should describe the type of security, the initial price, and the amount being 
offered for sale. The issuing company, its business, products, background, and the 
qualifications of its officers and directors should be described. Any legal problems involving 
the company or its officers should be disclosed. The financial condition of the issuer should 
be discussed with audited financial statements where applicable. Frequently, there will be 
projections or forecasts of expected future growth and development (see “safe harbor” 
provisions discussed earlier). Usually, there will be risk disclosures of various kinds in bold 
font stating that, for example, “these securiti es have not been registered” or “purchase of 
these securities involves a high degree of risk.” 
   
These documents should be examined thoroughly for misrepresentations, omissions, and 
downright lies. Look closely at the background of principals. If in doubt, conduct a detailed 
background investigation of the principal officers of the corporation. Look especially for any 
previous criminal or regulatory action relating to securities fraud or offenses involving 
dishonesty. Also check for lawsuits, bankruptcies, or other civil or administrative action 
against the entity or its principals whether allegedly resolved or not. Look not only for the 
disposition of the action, but also for potential evidence gathered during the course of the 
suit, for example, depositions. Do not forget to verify any claimed experience in the relevant 
industry or academic qualifications. Closely compare the information, if any, disclosed in 
advertisements and the offering document with the results of the background investigation. 
 
A few other pertinent questions are: 
• What promises are made regarding the viability of the product or service? Is a patent 
claimed? Does it exist? 
• Is there a functioning business you can check out or is it in the developmental stage? 
Ascertain when and where the corporation was legally incorporated, or in the case of a 
partnership, where it was legally filed. 
• Are investors promised guaranteed returns? 
• Can financial statements concerning assets, liabilities, and income be verified? 
• How will investor funds be used? Follow the money trail. Were the proceeds invested as 
represented or used for other purposes? Is the issue potentially oversubscribed? 
• Are sales commissions paid to unregistered persons? Usually this is illegal. Also check to 
see if commissions paid are unusually high or concealed from investors. 
• Are the insiders retaining a majority of the stock while the investors fund the company? 
Are there any other undisclosed benefits to insiders? 
• Is there adequate risk disclosure? Investors may not have been made fully aware of a 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1548                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
high percentage of failure, the degree of competition, or inexperience on the part of  
the principals. 
 
Is It a Security or an Investment? 
Some states include an investment fraud provision in their securities law. The advantage of 
this provision, if available, is that usually “investment” is much more broadly defined than 
“security.” For example, in Florida, investment means the commitment of money or 
property principally induced by a representation that an economic benefit may be derived. In 
many cases, it is much easier to prove that there is an investment than to show there was a 
security sold. The violation, of course, would be the fraud in relation to the sale of the 
investment and would constitute a third degree felony in the State of Florida.  
 
Investigative Resources 
• Central Registration Depository (CRD) run by FINRA is a national database of information 
on registered (and some unregistered) individuals and companies. Now available via the 
Internet to authorized users, it includes qualification, employment, and disciplinary 
actions in addition to basic biographical data. 
• North American State Securities Administrators Association (NASAA) the organization of state 
securities regulators. (www.nasaa.org) 
• Federal Trade Commission has bulletins regarding a number of investment and other 
securities. (www.ftc.gov) 
• Securities and Exchange Commission. The SEC home page is an excellent source of 
information and links. In addition to general information and details of enforcement 
actions, the public can also access the Electronic Data Gathering Analysis and Retrieval 
System (EDGAR). EDGAR contains many of the documents that public companies are 
required to file with the Commission, including the annual report known as a 10-K. 
(www.sec.gov) 
 
Self-regulatory organizations (SROs) mentioned previously are all a good source of information 
and a useful resource for the investigator: 
• Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (www.finra.org) 
• Commodities Futures Trading Commission (www.cftc.gov) 
• National Futures Association (www.nfa.futures.org) 
• New York Stock Exchange ( www.nyse.com) 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1549 
Securities Fraud and the Internet 
Of course, the very technology that gives us access to almost limitless information also gives 
the criminal greater opportunity to commit crime. Another factor that works in favor of the 
online scam artist is that there has traditionally been a culture of trust and benevolence on 
the Internet.  
 
Using the Internet to promote fraudulent investment schemes is relatively easy and cheap. 
There is the potential to reach hundreds of thousands of people using equipment and 
software that are very inexpensive. There is enough competition between providers of 
Internet access that the cost of maintaining a home page on the Web is very low. 
 
The Internet is already being used to solicit investors. Many illegal pyramid schemes have 
professional-looking websites, for example. Use of e-mail and the Internet also makes it 
easier for crooks to conceal their identities and operate anonymously from other countries.  
 
Securities laws are based on geographic boundaries; on the Internet there are no boundaries. 
With the proliferation of “cyber cash” and va rious ways of exchanging payment for goods 
and services over the Internet, the fraud examiner can expect to see a huge rise in financial 
fraud committed online. Particularly prevalent online are the so called “pump-and-dump” 
schemes in which promoters use Internet newsletters and bulletin boards to hype stocks they 
bought for little or no money so they can sell on a rising market. 
 
Same Old Frauds, New Medium 
Many of the fraudulent schemes proliferating in cyberspace are not new; rather, they are 
recycled and repackaged to appeal to a new generation of gullible consumers. 
 
Newsletters 
In this context, a newsletter is not an independent, objective publication discussing the 
merits of a particular securities offering. Such objective analysis does exist, but, more often 
than not, the slick marketing document is a far cry from the independent analysis that it 
purports to be. In reality, the company publishing the newsletter is often paid to hype a 
particular stock by the promoter. Consequently, there is a serious danger of 
misrepresentation to the investor. Usually the cozy relationship between the stock promoter 
and the newsletter publisher is not disclosed to the prospective investor. Neither is the fact 
that the promoter pays to have his offering receive prominent and flattering treatment. 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1550                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The newsletter may take the form of an actual document mailed out to subscribers who may 
or may not pay for the privilege. Often, the information is imparted via a professional 
website designed to motivate investors to act on the great opportunity being offered.  
 
Usually, information will be gathered on those who subscribe to such publications or view 
the website. This data is rich with free leads to securities representatives or others who 
promote the securities being hyped in the newsletter. The identity of investors who have 
shown some type of interest in a particular offering covered in the publication is a valuable 
source of new business.  
 
Online Trading 
A recent legal opinion has allowed a bulletin board to be used to buy and sell securities 
without registration. This bypassing of federal registration requirements may make the 
raising of venture capital easier, but it will reduce consumer protection and potentially create 
a regulatory nightmare. 
 
Greater utilization of the Internet to promote both legitimate and fraudulent securities 
offerings will increasingly challenge the investigator or examiner. The fraud examiner will 
continue to face jurisdictional as well as technical issues as the Internet becomes the medium 
of choice for the financial criminal. 
 
[Editor’s Note: The Association would like to thank Chris Hancock, CFE, for his assistance in preparing 
this chapter. Mr. Hancock is the investigations manager for the State of Florida Department of Banking and 
Finance, Northwest Florida Region, and specializes in the investigation of financial crime with an emphasis 
on securities fraud. 
 
We would also like to thank Richard J. Bobel, CFE, MBA, CPA, who authored the material on 
commodities, options, and derivatives. Mr. Bobel is a former commodity broker and college/university faculty 
member who specialized in derivati ve markets and worked for many years as a research economist for the 
Chicago Board of Trade where he designed commodity  futures and options contracts. Richard was a 
contributing author to the CBOT Commodity Trading Manual  and the CBOT Speculation 
Workbook. He can contacted at 847-828-7417 or at RJB@RJBCPA.com] 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1601 
MONEY LAUNDERING 
 
Introduction 
Money laundering is the disguising of the existence, nature, source, ownership, location, and 
disposition of property derived from criminal activity. Although it is not currently possible 
to quantify the total volume of money laundered globally or in the U.S., it is clearly an 
enormous problem existing within every financial system. Nevertheless, the continuing 
demand to know how much money is laundered annually has led many organizations to 
calculate and offer their own estimations. For example, the International Monetary Fund 
estimated that money laundering caused a total monetary loss of $590 billion to $1.5 trillion 
globally in 1996, the United Nations estimated a loss of $500 billion to $1 trillion globally in 
2005, and a 2007 KPMG survey found that money-laundering flows exceed $1 trillion per 
year. 
 
The “washing” of money includes all forms of illegal activities. In most instances the goal is 
to conduct transactions in cash (currency) in such a way as to conceal the true nature of 
transactions. Problems occur regarding large volumes of cash, transporting it, converting 
small denomination bills to larger denomination bills, and converting cash into assets that 
can be invested or spent. Money laundering is generally accomplished in three stages: (1) 
placement; (2) layering; and (3) integration. 
 
 
The Money Laundering Process 
 
Placement 
Placement of funds into a financial institution is the initial step in the process. It is at this 
step that legislation has been developed to prevent launderers from depositing or converting 
large amounts of cash at financial institutions or taking cash out of the country. Money 
laundering schemes are most often detected at this stage.  
 
Placement can take any number of forms. If the money launderer has a large amount of 
cash, he can move the money out of the country in a suitcase and deposit it in an off-shore 
bank. Another choice is to break up the money into smaller amounts and deposit it into 
bank accounts or purchase cashier’s checks, traveler’s checks, or money orders. The process 
of breaking transactions up into smaller amounts to evade the reporting requirements is 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1602                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
known as smurfing. A sophisticated smurfing operation might involve hundreds of bank 
accounts in dozens of cities. 
 
Layering 
If the placement of the initial funds goes undetected, financial transactions can be designed 
in complex patterns in order to prevent detection. This stage of the process is referred to as 
layering  and represents the most difficult area of detection. Once the funds have been 
deposited into a financial institution, a launderer can move the funds around by using layers 
of financial transactions designed to confuse the audit trail. The money can even be 
transported out of the country through wire transfers. 
 
Integration 
The final stage in the laundering process is the integration  of the money back into the 
economy in such a way as to make it appear to be a legitimate business transaction. This 
stage of the process is also difficult to detect; however, if the integration process creates a 
paper trail — such as deeds for real estate, invoices, loan documents, Currency Transaction 
Reports (CTRs), or checks—and if there is cooperation from informants or foreign entities, 
then the chances of detection are improved. 
 
A money laundering scheme cannot be successful until the paper trail is eliminated or made 
so complex that the flow of illegal income cannot be easily traced. The number of steps used 
to launder funds depends on how much distance the money launderer wishes to put between 
the illegally earned cash and the laundered asset into which it is converted. A greater number 
of steps increases the complexity of tracing the funds, but it also increases the length of the 
paper trail and the chance that the transaction will be reported. 
 
The object of money laundering is not only to disguise the source of illegal funds, but also to 
convert large stores of currency into other assets. In some cases, illegal funds are spent on 
personal assets, such as homes, cars, jewelry, and furniture. But the typical money launderer 
will not dispose of all his illegal currency in this manner; he will want to have a certain 
amount of liquid reserves for spending. Keeping large bundles of cash is inefficient because 
they are difficult to hide and transport. Therefore, money launderers will often convert 
substantial portions of their currency into negotiable instruments such as cashier’s checks 
and money orders, which are routinely issued by financial institutions. Criminals prefer these 
negotiable instruments for two reasons. First, cashier’s checks and money orders are bearer 
instruments, and the holder can use them or deposit them without having to prove the 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1603 
source of the funds. Second, they are “liquid” assets because the holder can use  
them immediately. 
 
The following is an example of how a money laundering scheme operates.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Alberto Barrera, dubbed Papa Smurf by the federal agents investigating him, ran a rather 
sophisticated smurfing operation out of Miami involving bank accounts in cities all over the 
country. Barrera and his accomplices would fly to Phoenix, Denver, Omaha, Portland, and 
other cities. When they arrived they would immediately travel to various banks. The scheme 
would begin with the purchase of cashier’s checks and money orders in amounts less than 
$10,000 (to avoid federal report ing requirements). This would be repeated several times at 
different banks. The “smurfs” would then travel to another city where some of the 
previously purchased check and money orders would be deposited in accounts controlled by 
Barrera. Then more purchases of cashier’s checks and money orders would be made before 
the group traveled on to the next city. Once the money was converted or deposited, much of 
it was transferred to off-shore banks.  
 
Using a Legitimate Business to Launder Funds 
One of the most comm on methods of laundering funds is to filter the money through a 
legitimate business, otherwise known as a “front” business. A front business can be a very 
effective way to launder money because it provides a safe place for organizing and managing 
criminal activity, where the comings and goings of large numbers of people will not arouse 
undue suspicion. In addition, a front that does legitimate business provides cover for 
delivery and transportation related to illegal activity. The expenses from illegal activity can be 
attributed to the legitimate enterprise, and illegal revenues can be easily placed into the 
enterprise. 
 
The three methods most commonly used to hide assets or launder money through a front 
business are: overstatement of reported revenues, overstatement of reported expenses, and 
balance sheet laundering. 
 
Overstatement of Reported Revenues 
Overstating revenues, also known as income statement laundering, occurs when the money 
launderer records more income on the books of a business than is actually generated by that 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1604                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
business. The fictitious revenue accounts for the illegal funds that are secretly inserted into 
the company.  
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC Used Cars encourages customers to pay with cash. If the customer pays in cash, 
he receives a discount that might be as high as 25 percent. The invoice, however, makes 
no mention of this cash discount. The company reports the full sales amount as income. 
Depending on the number of cars sold, the company can launder thousands of dollars 
in illegal income. 
 
Overstatement of Reported Expenses 
The disadvantage of overstating revenues is that taxes will be due on the reported income. 
Therefore, if a company overstates its revenue, it will also want to overstate its expenses to 
offset its tax liability. The fictitious expenses also enable the perpetrator to siphon money 
out of the business in order to make payoffs, buy illegal goods, or invest in other  
criminal ventures. 
 
Overstating expenses can be accomplished very easily by reporting payments for supplies 
never received, professional services never rendered, or wages for fictitious employees. 
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC Used Cars reports wages for three mechanics and an assistant manager who do 
not exist. The company also reports payments of over $200,000 a year to several 
lawyers, accountants, and other “consultants” who do little, if any, actual work. 
 
Income statement laundering, which includes both overstated revenues and expenses, can be 
difficult to detect. When artificial price inflation is applied in moderate percentages to goods 
and services whose market value is difficult to establish (e.g., artwork, used cars, consulting 
fees, advertising expenses), detection is exceedingly difficult without inside information. 
Complete fabrication of transactions, on the other hand, or creation of “ghost” employees is 
somewhat easier to spot. 
 
Depositing Cash and Writing Checks in Excess of Reported Revenues and Expenses (Balance Sheet Laundering) 
Rather than attempting to disguise money as normal business revenue, excess funds can 
simply be deposited into the bank account of the business. This technique is known as 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1605 
balance sheet laundering because it is independent of the money that flows in and out of  
the business. 
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC Used Cars deposits an additional $30,000 per month in its account although 
there are no recorded sales for this amount. At the end of the year, the company has an 
extra $360,000 in cash in its account. 
 
This type of scheme can be detected by examining the revenue records of the business. 
Every legitimate asset in a company’s possession had to have come from somewhere — if not 
from revenues then from a limited number of other credible alternatives. The basic 
alternative sources are loans, sale of property or equipment, and capital investments from 
shareholders. All of these transactions require significant documentary evidence, which the 
examiner should seek out to explain any suspicious infusion of cash into a suspect business. 
 
Favorite Businesses for Hiding or Laundering Money 
In general terms, the businesses chosen for money laundering possess one or more of the 
following characteristics:  
• Revenue — A revenue base that is difficult to measure because most revenue comes from 
cash transactions with a highly variable amount per customer. This allows extra money 
to be brought into the business and disguised as revenue. 
• Expense — Expenses that are variable and difficult to measure can enable the launderer 
to extract money from the front business without giving rise to undue suspicion.  
• History — Historical ties either with the ethnic base of a particular criminal group or with 
industries that have traditionally served as a base for criminal activity.  
 
Bars, Restaurants, and Night Clubs 
Businesses that are commonly used to front money laundering operations include bars, 
restaurants, and nightclubs. These businesses charge relatively high prices, and customers 
vary widely in their purchases. Sales are generally in cash, and it is notoriously difficult to 
match the cost of providing food, liquor, and entertainment with the revenues they produce. 
Fast food restaurants are also frequently used to front for money laundering operations. 
Although they tend to charge lower prices than other types of restaurants, most of their sales 
are made in cash, and expenses can be easily inflated.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1606                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Vending Machines 
Vending machine operations also possess many characteristics favorable to a money 
laundering operation. They have a highly variable and difficult to measure volume of cash 
receipts, and in large operations there is a fair amount of flexibility with various 
transportation, installation, and promotion expenses, providing cover for the withdrawal of 
laundered funds.  
 
Wholesale Distribution 
Wholesale distribution businesses have historically been a prominent part of money 
laundering. The revenues in a wholesaling business are not typically as flexible as in food 
service and vending machine operations, but with a diverse product line and falsified 
invoices, it is still possible to inject a good deal of illegal cash into the business. More 
importantly, the industry is ideal for money laundering from the standpoint of expenses. The 
activities required to run this kind of business are so diverse and difficult to measure that 
expenses are easy to inflate. Furthermore, a wholesale business’s buildings, warehouses, 
transportation fleet, and its contact with retail establishments are all attractive factors. Many 
of the classic criminal activities (such as drugs, fencing, and contraband) are themselves 
nothing more than distribution operations and can hide behind this type of business cover.  
 
The Real Estate Industry 
Money launderers often use the real estate industry to launder illicitly obtained money. 
Generally, the real estate industry is attractive to money launderers for various reasons. For 
example, the vast array of financial transactions linked to real estate provides money 
launderers an exceptional range of options for abusing these procedures to launder and use 
illegally obtained funds. In addition, real estate transactions often involve multiple parties 
(such as brokers, agents, and appraisers), which can obscure the source of investment funds 
and the identity of the true owner. Finally, money launderers may earn additional profits 
from introducing illicit funds into the real estate industry, especially in vibrant real  
estate markets.   
 
Although there is a vast number of methods to launder money in the real estate industry, 
there are a few common schemes that warrant identification and discussion, including: 
• Loan-back schemes 
• Back-to-back loan schemes 
• Shell companies 
• Appraisal fraud 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1607 
• Monetary instruments 
• Mortgage schemes 
• Indirect investments in the real estate industry 
 
LOAN-BACK SCHEMES 
Money launderers often use loan-back schemes to finance the purchase of properties directly 
or indirectly through purchasing shares in property investment funds. In a typical loan-back 
scheme, money launderers will deposit illicit funds in an overseas entity that they own and 
then the entity loans the funds back to the launderers. The purpose of the loan is to make 
the money source appear legitimate and to conceal the parties’ identities or the nature of the 
financial transactions associated with the loans.  
 
BACK-TO-BACK LOAN SCHEMES 
As with loan-back schemes, money launderers often use back-to-back loan schemes to 
purchase property. In a back-to-back loan scheme, a money launderer obtains a loan by 
presenting collateral, which originated from illicit funds, to a financial institution. Like the 
loan-back scheme, this technique gives the loaned money the appearance of a genuine loan.  
 
SHELL COMPANIES 
Money launderers often use shell companies, which are discussed in more detail below, to 
purchase real estate. Generally defined, shell companies are business entities, including 
limited liability companies, trusts, business trusts, and corporations, without active business 
or significant assets. Because there is a lack of transparency in the formation of shell 
companies, money launderers often use them to hide the identity of the true owner, the 
source of the money, or the destination of the money. 
 
APPRAISAL FRAUD 
Appraisal fraud is often associated with money laundering schemes. Money launderers may 
purchase properties to launder money or may use illicit funds to service the interest on the 
debts. Such schemes can conceal the true identity of the property owners and the true origin 
of the funds used in the transaction.  
 
Appraisal fraud occurs where appraisers fail to accurately evaluate the property, or when the 
appraiser deliberately becomes party to a scheme to defraud the lender, the borrower, or 
both. A common technique is the over- or under-valuation of property, which consists of 
buying/selling property at a price above/below its market value. In addition to manipulating 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1608                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
appraisals, money launderers also over-value property through a series of subsequent sales, 
each time at a higher price, which tend to conceal the true purposes of the transactions. 
 
MONETARY INSTRUMENTS 
In many instances, money launderers purchase, build, or renovate property with cash, wire 
transfers, or other payable-through accounts. This allows the integration of large sums of 
illicit money into legal financial systems. Later, if sold, it is difficult to relate the transaction 
to any criminal activity and therefore, successfully conceals the true origin of the illicit funds 
and their ownership.   
 
MORTGAGE SCHEMES 
Often, money launderers will use illicit funds to pay the interest or repay the principal on 
mortgage loans, and in so doing, the illicit income is converted into seemingly legitimate 
profits when the property is sold. Mortgage schemes also involve under- and over-valuation 
of property. For example, in a common under-valuation scheme, a money launderer will 
under-value the purchase price of property, obtain a mortgage loan for the under-valued 
amount, use the loan to pay for the under-valued price, and pay the excess amount under the 
table with illicit funds.  
 
INDIRECT INVESTMENTS IN THE REAL ESTATE INDUSTRY 
Indirect investments, which are those in which the investor has no direct control over the 
assets or investment vehicle, in the real estate industry offer opportunities to conceal an 
investor’s identification and monetary sources primarily because multiple parties are involved 
with the process.    
 
ATMs 
Law enforcement officials are also reporting an  increasing use of automatic teller machines 
(ATMs) to launder money. ATMs can be purchased for as little as $3,000. Money launderers 
purchase the machines and place them either in establishments they control or in legitimate 
businesses. The machines work the same as any other ATM machines, and all transactions 
are legitimate. The money launderer simply fills the machine with cash from illegal activities. 
The customer uses the machine and never realizes the source of the cash. 
 
The ATM banking system debits the cardholders account and credits the ATM owner’s bank 
account. At the end of the month, the launderer receives a bank statement showing funds 
being deposited from a legitimate financial institution. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1609 
This option is attractive for money launderers because there are currently no regulations 
governing the use and operation of privately-owned ATMs. There is no requirement to 
check the backgrounds of purchasers of the machines, and there are no mandatory reporting 
procedures and no rules for maintaining ATM sales records. 
 
Gift Cards 
Although gift cards are a convenient way to show someone you care, the ease with which 
they can be purchased and used makes them attractive for money laundering. It is estimated 
that American consumers purchase more than $100 billion each year in stored-value cards. 
Closed-system cards are those that can be used at only one retailer or group of retailers. 
Open-system cards (such as those issued by VISA, MasterCard, and American Express) can 
be used at any merchant who accepts those credit cards.  
 
Although closed-cards can only be used at certain locations, there is no oversight as to their 
purchase. As long as the purchase does not involve a cash transaction greater than $10,000, 
there is no obligation on the part of the retailer to perform any type of due diligence or even 
obtain the identity of the purchaser. 
 
Even for open-system cards purchased at financial institutions, there is no requirement that 
purchaser have an account at the bank or provide identification if the transaction is under 
$10,000. Banks are not required to perform due diligence on individual purchasers. 
 
Money launderers can anonymously purchase stored-value cards at a number of different 
locations and then easily transport them out of the country. A small box containing just 200 
cards could store almost $2,000,000 without the necessity of currency reporting. 
 
Banks and Other Depository Financial Institutions 
Banks and other depository institutions are susceptible to individuals attempting to launder 
illicit funds because they are the primary gateway to the U.S. financial system. Once placed in 
a depository institution, illegal proceeds can be transferred instantly by wire or disguised by 
commingling with legitimate funds. A challenge currently faced by depository institutions 
includes money launderers concealing their identities and sources of income to open 
accounts and launder illegal proceeds. Additionally, the increasing use of the Internet to 
open or access accounts make it difficult for depository institutions to verify customers’ 
identification.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1610                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Money Services Businesses 
Money services businesses (MSBs) refer to non-depository financial service providers 
operating in one or more of the following capacities:  
• Currency exchangers;  
• Check cashers;  
• Issuers, sellers, or redeemers of traveler’s checks, money orders, or stored value;  
• The United States Postal Service; and  
• Money transmitters. 
 
MSBs offer an alternative to depository institutions for both financial services and money 
laundering. For this reason, an individual unable to transfer illegal funds into the U.S. 
banking system may turn to MSBs. In a ddition, most MSBs operate without federal 
regulatory supervision.  
 
Insurance Companies 
Due to the recent growth in the financial products offered by insurance agents and brokers 
(including savings products, investment products, and tax planning services), the insurance 
industry has become increasingly attractive to money launderers. According to the 2007 
National Money Laundering Strategy, this de velopment is occurring primarily because 
insurance “agents and brokers now offer a range of investment services featuring financial 
products that can be purchased and subsequently transferred, redeemed or sold, creating 
new opportunities for money laundering.” Generally, the independent brokers and agents 
who often sell insurance products do not work directly for the insurance companies. As a 
result, these intermediaries may lack the knowledge or incentive to screen clients or to 
question payment methods, and it is this factor that money launderers often exploit.  
 
Casinos 
Casinos operate in a high-volume cash-intensive industry and provide a broad range of 
financial services (such as deposit and credit accounts, funds transfers, check cashing, and 
currency exchange services) outside the traditional financial services system. As a result, 
casinos are susceptible to money laundering.  
 
According to the 2005 U.S. Money Laundering Threat Assessment, criminals typically 
launder money through casinos by exchanging illicit cash for casino chips and then either: 
• Holding the chips for a period of time and later cashing them in for a casino check or 
having the casino wire the money elsewhere; 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1611 
• Using the chips as currency to purchase narcotics, with the drug dealer later cashing in 
the chips; or, 
• Using the chips to gamble in hopes of generating certifiable winnings. 
 
Shell Companies 
Shell companies refer to non-publicly traded corporations, limited liability companies 
(LLCs), and trusts, which generally do not have any physical presence, other than a mailing 
address, and generate little to no independent economic value. In most situations, individuals 
and businesses form shell companies for legitimate reasons, such as holding the stock or 
intellectual property rights of another business entity, facilitating domestic and cross-border 
currency and asset transfers, or fostering domestic and cross-border currency corporate 
mergers. However, shell companies have become common tools for money laundering 
primarily because they have the ability to hide ownership and mask financial details and 
because money launderers can create them with minimal public disclosure of personal 
information regarding controlling interests and ownership. This lack of transparency 
prevents the discovery of suspicious transactions and impedes investigations and 
prosecutions.   
 
Other Common Methods of Money Laundering 
In the 2005 U.S. Money Laundering Threat Assessment, the U.S. government identified 
other common methods that criminals use to integrate illicit money into the financial system: 
(1) online payment systems; (2) bulk cash smuggling; and (3) trade-based money laundering. 
 
Online Payment Systems 
In response to market demand, online payment services, which accept funds in a variety of 
ways to transfer payment either to an individual or a merchant, are emerging. In addition, the 
increasing demand for new payment methods has led a growing number of online markets 
to embrace online payment systems, which set their own clearing and settlement terms and 
offer no consumer protection or financial regulation. Since most transactions through these 
service providers are considered final and provide no recourse to individuals who believe 
they have been defrauded, federal law enforcement agencies suggest that they have become a 
popular payment system for individuals perpetrating online fraud. 
 
Online payment systems are often vulnerable to money laundering because many of them 
function as international person-to-person payment systems, which cross jurisdictional 
boundaries, creating difficulties for authorities pursuing enforcement or legal actions. 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1612                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Furthermore, many service providers do not have effective customer identification or 
recordkeeping practices while others promote anonymous payments. 
 
Bulk Cash Smuggling 
Bulk cash smuggling, which is the smuggling cash out of the U.S. for deposit in foreign 
jurisdictions with lax financial institutions or to fund criminal enterprises, is also on the rise. 
The rise is bulk cash smuggling is due to the increasingly effective anti-money laundering 
policies and procedures at U.S. financial institutions. In typical bulk cash smuggling 
operations, smugglers hide cash in vehicles, luggage, express packages, commercial 
shipments, private aircrafts, or private boats. 
 
Trade-Based Money Laundering 
Trade-based money laundering is generally the most complex of the money laundering 
methods. This method encompasses a variety of schemes, which utilize international trade to 
disguise the transfers of illicit funds. The most common method of trade-based money 
laundering is the Black Market Peso Exchange (BMPE), a scheme where brokers purchase 
narcotics proceeds in the U.S. from the cartels and exchange them for clean pesos in 
Columbia. Other common trade-based money laundering methods include manipulating 
trade documents to over- and under-pay for imports and exports and using criminal 
proceeds to buy gems or precious metals.  
 
Calling in a Specialist 
Converting ill-gotten gains into cashier’s checks or money orders is not particularly difficult 
for even the most unsophisticated criminal. However because many launderers fear 
detection, they turn to more sophisticated specialists. Couriers  arrange for the transportation 
of money to a site where it is converted into another form of currency. For instance, drug 
traffickers will physically transport money to a foreign jurisdiction where it is deposited into 
a bank account or converted directly to checks or money orders. Since the courier has no 
apparent connection with the true owner of the funds, the money launderer retains  
his anonymity.  
 
White-collar professionals, such as attorneys, accountants, and brokers, might also serve to 
launder illegal funds. Through investments, trust accounts, fund transfers, and tax avoidance 
schemes these professionals can manipulate the financial, commercial, and legal systems to 
conceal the origin and ownership of assets. 
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1613 
Hawala Exchanges 
Although the theoretical workings of hawala have been around for at least a century, only 
recently has the United States publicly recognized it as a threat to homeland security. 
Hawala, often referred to as hundi, is an informal remittance system primarily exploited in 
Asia and the Middle East. Because the system is unregulated and leaves virtually no paper 
trail, it is ripe for money laundering.  
 
How It Works 
Hawala networks operate with the non-physical transfer of money. Typically, one who wants 
to send money abroad will call on a hawala dealer, known as a hawaladar. Hawala 
transactions are often disguised by legitimate businesses (e.g., travel agencies, cell phone 
companies, movie stores, convenience stores, and car washes). The hawaladar will contact 
another hawaladar in the country where the money is to be distributed, and with whom he 
has a familial relation or is a trustworthy connection. The hawaladars will discuss the 
transaction and arrange for delivery of the money to the recipient. Sometimes the hawaladar 
will give the giver a receipt, but with very little information. Information typically contained 
therein includes a code that the giver is to pass along to the recipient. Once hawaladars have 
exchanged the basic information of the transaction, the hawaladar for the recipient will 
locate and deliver the money to the recipient. The recipient will then use the code to verify 
his identification with the hawaladar who is distributing the money. The only records kept of 
the transaction are the amounts owed one hawaladar to another. Because most hawala 
transactions are disguised by legitimate businesses, records of such transactions are generally 
disguised as well. 
 
EXAMPLE 
1.  Ana in New York contacts and gives $5,000 in cash to Hawaladar A in New 
York to get $4,800 to Andy in Dubai. 
2.  Hawaladar A contacts Hawaladar B in Dubai and arranges the transfer; a code is 
exchanged. 
3.  Hawaladar A gives Ana a code to be communicated to Andy. 
4.  Ana communicates the code to Andy. 
5.  Hawaladar B and Andy make contact in Dubai. 
6.  Andy relates code to Hawaladar B and is then given the money. 
7.  Hawaladar A owes Hawaladar B $4,800 worth of “The Big Apple” t-shirts. 
Hawaladar A sends the merchandise from New York to Hawaladar B in Dubai. 
8.  Transaction is complete.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1614                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Often, hawaladars are business partners who do legitimate business with each other on a 
regular basis. Because it can be difficult to transfer large amounts of money between 
countries, a debt might be paid with merchandise or a favor (e.g., Hawaladar B owes 
Hawaladar A money from a past transaction, and in a new transaction pays the recipient, 
thereby relinquishing his debt to Hawaladar A from the former transaction).  
 
The hawala exchange is a tempting opportunity for many because it: 
• Doesn’t require formal identification;  
• Takes hours rather than days to transfer the money overseas;  
• Is cheaper than paying bank and shipping fees because hawaladars generally take a very 
small commission;  
• No currency conversion is necessary; and  
• Lacks a coherent paper trail. 
 
The Hawala Exchange and Money Laundering 
The very essence of hawala exchange bypasses regulation, such that money can be 
transferred independent of government and financial institution oversight. While many 
hawala exchanges are remittances free of mal-intent and therefore “legitimate” in some 
countries, (known as “white hawalas”), the system  lends itself to abuse. The use of a hawala 
exchange for illegal purposes such as money laundering, drug trafficking, or terrorism is 
referred to as a “black hawala.”   
 
Money laundering, specifically, is the disguising  of the existence, nature, source, ownership, 
location, and disposition of property derived from criminal activity. For hawaladars who 
operate storefront retail or service businesses in addition to their side hawala exchanges, 
bank deposits will rarely trigger investigation by a financial institution unless deposits are 
exceedingly high for the particular business. As always, such money can go undetected by 
using it towards personal and business expenses. (It is important to note that in the U.S. all 
cash transactions over $10,000 must be reported  to the federal government.) Hawala money 
can easily be layered because paper trails are meager at most. Furthermore, because most 
hawala exchanges are hidden behind business veils, money received from such transactions 
can unnoticeably be recouped into business accounts and thus integrated into bank accounts.  
 
Unfortunately, due to the “hidden” nature of the hawala business, much of this money is 
used to fund dangerous activities such as the importation of heroin and the purchase of 
unauthorized weapons. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1615 
Signs of a Hawala Exchange 
Red flags of money laundering could also indicate a hawala exchange. The following 
transactions could indicate money laundering via a hawala exchange. The list should be used 
to identify those transactions and customers, which might require further investigation: 
• Use of cash as payment for a transaction, which is typically handled by checks or other 
forms of payment. 
• Several check deposits from various ethnic communities. 
• Lump sum payments made by wire transfer or with foreign currency. 
• Reluctance to provide normal information when setting up a policy, account, or 
providing minimal information. 
• Purchase of investments in amounts considered beyond the customer’s apparent means. 
• Use of a letter of credit or other methods of trade finance to move money between 
countries where such trade is inconsistent with customer’s usual pattern. 
• Establishment of a large investment policy and within a short time period, customer 
requests cancellation of the policy and cash value paid to third-party. 
• Use of wire transfers to move large amounts of money to or from a financial haven 
country such as the Cayman Islands, Colombia, Hong Kong, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Monaco, Panama, or Switzerland. 
• Services provided internationally but paid for locally. 
 
 
Federal and State Law 
 
PATRIOT Act of 2001 
On October 26, 2001, Pre sident George W. Bush signed into law the Uniting and Strengthening 
America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act  (the 
PATRIOT Act). The PATRIOT Act was a response to the tragedies of September 11, 2001, 
and reflected Congressional concern with the money laundering activities of the terrorists 
who committed those attacks.  
 
Title III of the Act is entitled the International Money Laundering Abatement and Anti-
 Terrorist Financing Act of 2001. Title III creates significant requirements for financial 
institutions aimed at curtailing money laundering. The most significant anti-money 
laundering provisions of the law include the following:  
• Financial institutions are required to establish anti-money laundering programs.  
• Financial institutions are required to establish programs for identifying customers.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1616                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• U.S. banks are prohibited from maintaining correspondent accounts with foreign shell 
banks. 
• Securities broker-dealers are required to file suspicious activity reports.  
• Financial institutions are required to adopt special due diligence procedures for foreign 
correspondent accounts and private banking accounts. 
• Non-financial businesses are required to file currency transaction reports 
• Financial institutions have increased authority to share customer information relating to 
money laundering.  
• The government has greater power to obtain information from financial institutions. 
 
Anti-Money Laundering Programs  
Section 352 of the PATRIOT Act requires all financial institutions to establish anti-money 
laundering programs, which must include, at a minimum: 
• The development of internal policies, procedures, and controls to prevent money 
laundering. 
• The designation of a money laundering compliance officer. 
• An ongoing training program for awareness of money laundering. 
• An independent audit function to test the programs. 
 
The Act defines the term “financial institution” broadly to include not only insured and 
commercial banks, but also securities brokers and dealers, investment companies, currency 
exchanges, issuers of cashier’s checks and money orders, credit card companies, insurance 
companies, travel agencies, and a host of other businesses. The complete list can be found at 
31, U.S.C., § 312 (a)(2).  
 
Identification and Verification of Accountholders 
Section 326 of the Act expands the Bank Secrecy Act (discussed below) by requiring 
financial institutions to implement Customer Identification Programs (CIPs). These CIPs are 
to be incorporated into financial institutions’ money laundering programs, and at a 
minimum, they must include reasonable procedures for: 
• Verifying the identity of any person seeking to open an account to the extent reasonable 
and practicable;  
• Maintaining records of the information used to verify a person’s identity, including 
name, address, and other identifying information; and  
• Consulting lists of known or suspected terrorists or terrorist organizations to determine 
if the person seeking to open the account appears on any such list. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1617 
Prohibition Against Foreign Shell Bank Accounts  
Pursuant to sections 313 and 319 of the PATRIOT Act, the Treasury Department issued a 
far-reaching final regulation that applies to over 9,000 foreign financial institutions that have 
correspondent accounts in the United States. The rule prohibits foreign shell banks (those 
without a physical presence in any country) from maintaining correspondent accounts at any 
U.S. financial institution. It also requires U.S. financial intuitions to maintain the name and 
contact information of the owners of the foreign banks for whom they maintain 
correspondent accounts. The rule strongly encourages U.S. intuitions to obtain 
“certifications” from their foreign bank customer s. The certification can be used by the U.S. 
institution to help ensure that the customer is not a shell bank. (Although not required, 
obtaining the certifications and verifying the information can create a safe harbor from civil 
liability.)   
 
U.S. institutions are also required to take “reasonable steps” to ensure that correspondent 
accounts provided to foreign banks are not used to provide services indirectly to foreign 
shell banks. Foreign banks that have accounts in the U.S. are required to appoint someone in 
the U.S. to accept service of legal process. The rule also gives the Secretary of the Treasury 
and the Attorney General the authority to issue a summons or subpoena to any foreign bank 
that maintains a correspondent account here and to request records relating to that account. 
 
Suspicious Activity Reporting by Broker-Dealers 
Pursuant to section 356 of the Act, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) 
adopted rules requiring brokers and dealers in securities to report suspicious activity. 31, 
C.F.R. § 103.19(a)(2). This reporting requirement  will be discussed in more detail later in this 
section (see “Securities Broker-Dealers” un der “Suspicious Activity Reports” below). 
 
Special Due Diligence for Foreign Accounts 
Section 312 of the PATRIOT Act requires financ ial institutions to establish due diligence 
policies, procedures, and controls that are reasonably designed to detect and report instances 
of money laundering through certain accounts held by non-U.S. citizens or their 
representatives. This provision applies to two types of foreign accounts:  
• Private banking accounts  
• Correspondent accounts  
 
A private banking account is defined by the Act as an account (or combination of accounts) that 
(1) requires a minimum aggregate deposit of funds or other assets of at least $1 million; (2) is 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1618                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
established on behalf of one or more individuals who have a direct or beneficial ownership 
in the account; and (3) is assigned to or admini stered by an officer, employee, or agent of the 
financial institution acting as a liaison between the financial institution and the owner of the 
account. 
 
For private banking accounts held by non-U.S. persons, the Act requires at a minimum that 
financial institutions take reasonable steps to:  
• Ascertain the identity of the nominal and beneficial owners of the account, and the 
source of funds deposited into the account as needed to guard against money laundering 
and report any suspicious transactions; and  
• Conduct enhanced scrutiny of any such account that is requested or maintained by, or 
on behalf of, a senior foreign political figure (or an immediate family member or close 
associate of such) that is reasonably designed to detect and report transactions that may 
involve the proceeds of foreign corruption. 
 
A correspondent account is defined as an account established to receive deposits from or make 
payments on behalf of a foreign financial institution, or handle other financial transactions 
related to such an institution. Enhanced due diligence is required for correspondent accounts 
maintained by or on behalf of foreign banks that operate under off-shore banking licenses or 
for banks that are licensed by foreign countries that have either been designated as 
noncooperative with international anti-money laundering principles or that have been 
designated by the Secretary of the Treasury as warranting special measures due to money 
laundering concerns. Enhanced due diligence for these correspondent accounts consists of, 
at a minimum:  
• Ascertaining the identity of the owners of any foreign bank whose shares are not  
publicly traded; 
• Determining the nature and extent of each owner’s interest; 
• Conducting enhanced scrutiny of the account to guard against money laundering and 
report suspicious transactions; and 
• Ascertaining whether the foreign bank provides correspondent accounts to other  
foreign banks and, if so, the identity of those foreign banks and related due  
diligence information. 
 
Currency Reports by Non-Financial Businesses 
Section 365 of the PATRIOT Act requires persons engaged in any trade or business to file a 
report with FinCEN when, in the course of their business, they receive more than $10,000 in 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1619 
coins or currency. This reporting requirement is discussed in more detail later in this section 
under the reporting and recordkeeping provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act.  
 
Sharing Information Between Financial Institutions 
Pursuant to section 314(b) of the PATRIOT Act, the Treasury Department issued a rule 
allowing financial institutions to share customer information with one another. The term 
“financial institution” includes any entity that is required to have an anti-money laundering 
program under the Bank Secrecy Act (see above). In order to share information with another 
financial institution, the sharing institution must follow these steps: 
• File a prescribed notice form with FinCEN stating that it intends to share customer 
information with other financial institutions (the notice remains effective for one year); 
• The institution may then share the information with another institution provided that it 
has verified that the other institution has also filed a notice with FinCEN (FinCEN will 
periodically release a list of institutions who have submitted notices; if an institution is 
on the list, then the sharing institution will be considered to have fulfilled its 
“verification” duty); 
• The institution must ensure that the shared information is secure and not used for any 
purpose other than to identify and, where appropriate, report on money laundering or 
terrorist activities; determine whether to establish or maintain an account or conduct a 
transaction; or assist the other sharing institution with its compliance of BSA regulations;  
• The institution must also file a Suspicious Activity Report if, based on the shared 
information, the institution suspects that the individual or entity may be involved in 
money laundering or terrorist activity. 
 
Section 355 of the Act also permits insured depository institutions to share information in 
written employment references about known or suspected  unlawful activity of their current or 
former directors, officers, employees, agents, or other persons affiliated with the institution. 
This provision, which is codified at 12, U.S.C., § 1828(w) does not make it mandatory for 
banks to disclose this information, but it does protect them from liability if they voluntarily 
make such disclosures, as long as the disclosures are not made with malicious intent.  
 
Government Access to Financial Information 
On September 18, 2002, the Treasury Department issued regulations that provide federal law 
enforcement agencies with greater power to obtain financial information. The two-part 
regulation is an amendment to the Bank Secrecy Act regulations and was mandated by 
section 314 of the PATRIOT Act. 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1620                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If a federal agency provides FinCEN with a “written certification” that a person, entity, or 
organization about whom information is sought “is reasonably suspected based on credible 
information to be engaged in…, terrorist acti vity or money laundering.” FinCEN may then 
require any financial institution to search its records to determine if it “maintains or has 
maintained accounts for, or has engaged in transactions with” the subject. 
 
The information reported is limited to the name or account number of each cited person, 
entity, or organization; the number of the matching account or transaction; and the Social 
Security number, taxpayer ID, passport number, date of birth, or other identifying 
information the subject gave when opening the account or conducting the transaction. 
 
The institution may not disclose the information to anyone other than FinCEN or the 
requesting agency. The institution also cannot disclose that the information has been 
requested or provided. It may, however, use the information in the request to determine 
whether an account will be opened or a transaction conducted, and to comply with  
BSA regulations. 
 
The term “financial institution” is defined as it is under the BSA and includes banks, broker-dealers, 
insurance companies, money services businesses, as well as car and airplane dealers, 
travel agents, and pawnbrokers. 
 
Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) 
The Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is an office within the Depar tment of the 
Treasury charged with administering and enforcing U.S. sanction policies against targeted 
foreign organizations and individuals that sponsor terrorism, and international narcotics 
traffickers. OFAC maintains a list of individu als, governmental entities, companies, and 
merchant vessels around the world that are known or suspected to engage in illegal activities. 
Persons or entities on the list, known as Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons 
(“SDNs”), include foreign agents, front organizations, terrorists and terrorist organizations, 
and drug traffickers. The list contains over 5,000 variations on names of individuals, 
governmental entities, companies, and merchant vessels and is updated on a regular basis. 
On September 24, 2001, President George W. Bush issued an executive order imposing 
enhanced trade sanctions on 27 individuals and entities, including Osama bin Laden and Al 
Qaeda. The immediate effect of the order is to block all assets of these individuals and 
entities under U.S. control and ban all dealings with the listed parties.  
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1621 
On July 26, 2001, OFAC issued a bulletin specific to the insurance industry, including 
underwriters, brokers, agents, primary insurers, and reinsurers. The bulletin affirms that U.S. 
insurers may not insure SDNs or individuals or entities located in certain prohibited 
countries or make payments to beneficiaries who are designated as prohibited persons or 
entities. Examples of prohibited transactions include: (1) issuing an insurance policy or 
annuity contract to an SDN; (2) issuing a life insurance policy naming an SDN as a 
beneficiary; and (3) receiving premium payments for any such transactions.  
 
The Bank Secrecy Act 
The Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), which went into effect in 1970, was the first major piece of 
legislation aimed at detecting and preventing money laundering. The purpose of the law as 
stated in section 5311 is “to require certain re ports or records where they have a high degree 
of usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory investigations or proceedings.” The BSA sets 
forth a system of reporting and recordkeeping requirements designed to help track large or 
unusual financial transactions. 
 
The BSA consists of two titles. Title I contains provisions requiring that financial institutions 
and securities brokers and dealers keep extensive records of the transactions and accounts of 
their customers. It is codified in Title 12 of the United States Code (U.S.C.), sections 1829b 
and 1951–1959. Title II of the BSA (originally  entitled Currency and Foreign Transactions 
Reporting Act) requires banks, “financial institutions” (which include casinos, securities 
brokers and dealers, currency exchanges, and others), and, in some cases, individuals to 
report to the government certain transactions. Title II is codified at 31, U.S.C., §§ 5311–
 5330. 
 
For more information on the examination process and the compliance procedures financial 
institutions are required to follow, please review the Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money 
Laundering Examination Manual published by the Federal Financial Institutions 
Examination Council. It is available for viewing on their website (www.ffiec.gov). 
 
Title I — Recordkeeping 
The regulations governing recordkeeping are set forth in Chapter 31 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations at Part 103, Subpart C. Recordkeeping requirements are set forth for banks, 
nonbank financial institutions, securities brokers, casinos, and currency dealers and 
exchangers. All institutions are required to keep a record of any financial transaction of more 
than $10,000. 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1622                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
These regulations provide, in part, that banks must keep for five years an original, microfilm, 
or other copy of certain documents relating to demand deposits and checking and savings 
accounts. The records that must be retained include: 
• Signature cards. 
• Statements, ledger cards, or other records disclosing all transactions; that is, deposits and 
withdrawals. 
• Copies of both sides of customers’ checks, bank drafts, money orders, and cashier’s 
checks of more than $100 drawn on the bank, or issued and payable by it. 
• Identity of each purchaser of a certificate of deposit. 
• Each deposit slip or credit ticket reflecting a transaction in excess of $100. 
 
In addition to these requirements, financial institutions are required to capture, verify, and 
retain information on the identity of purchasers of monetary instruments (such as cashier’s 
checks) in amounts of $3,000 or more, or any transmittal or transfer of funds involving 
$3,000 or more. These records are also required to be kept for five years. 
 
Banks also must retain, for two years, all records necessary to reconstruct a customer’s 
checking account. These records must include copies of customers’ deposit tickets. They 
must also retain records necessary to trace and supply a description of a check deposited to a 
customer’s checking account. 
 
Although some of these requirements apply only to checks written or deposits made in 
excess of $100, most banks find it cheaper to microfilm all such items rather than sorting out 
those less than $100. The Bank Secrecy Act also  requires financial institutions to retain a 
record of any extension of credit more than $1 0,000 as well as each transfer of $10,000 or 
more outside the United States. 
 
The penalties for failure to comply with these recordkeeping requirements are severe. Any 
insured depository institution and any director, officer, or employee who willfully or through 
gross negligence violates any regulation can be subject to a $10,000 civil penalty. The statute 
further provides that a separate violation occurs for each day  the violation continues and at 
each office, branch, or place of business at which the violation occurs. If a violation is 
committed in furtherance of a felony crime, criminal penalties can be imposed of up to five 
years in prison and/or a fine of not more than $10,000. 
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1623 
Title II — Reporting and Recordkeeping 
Title II of the Bank Secrecy Act is codified as 31, U.S.C., §§ 5311–5330. The purpose of 
these sections is to require certain reports or records to be filed or kept by “financial 
institutions.” Section 5312(a)(2) defines “financial institution” very broadly to include not 
only banks, but also securities brokers; currency exchange houses; insurance companies; loan 
companies; travel agencies; telegraph companies; issuers or cashiers of checks or money 
orders; auto, boat, and airplane dealers; casinos; and persons involved in real estate closings 
and settlements. Only recently has the Treasury Department begun to reign in much of the 
non-financial institution transaction business in the U.S. by requiring registration of these 
diverse enterprises (see the “Money Services Business” excerpt below). 
 
The regulations promulgated by the U.S. Treasury Department are contained primarily in 
Chapter 31 of the Code of Federal Regulations at Part 103, Subpart B and require the 
following reports: 
 
CURRENCY TRANSACTION REPORT (CTR) — FINCEN FORM 104 
All banks, and certain other financial institutions, are required to fill out currency transaction 
reports (CTR) whenever there is a currency transaction (deposit, withdrawal, exchange, or 
cashing of checks) of $10,000 or more.  The easiest way to summarize the filing requirement is 
to remember: if currency in excess of $10,000 is brought into a financial institution to conduct 
a transaction, or if as the result of a transaction, $10,000 in currency leaves the financial 
institution, a CTR must be filed.  
 
FinCEN Form 104 (formerly named IRS Form 4789) is prepared by the financial institution 
and contains the name(s) of the individual(s) conducting the transaction(s) or the name(s) of 
the person(s) or organization(s) on whose behalf the transaction is being conducted, as well as 
all identifying data of these individuals or entities. It also requires the details of the transaction 
and identifying data of the financial institution preparing the form. For purposes of reporting, 
multiple transactions must be treated as a single transaction if the financial institution has 
knowledge that the transactions are by or on behalf of the same person and the amounts total 
more than $10,000 during any one business day. 
 
Under Title 31, U.S.C., section 5313, the Treasury Department publishes a “mandatory 
exemption” list that specifically identifies entities whose transactions with a financial 
institution are exempt from these reporting requirements. The exempted entities include 
banks, departments or agencies of state or federal government, and other businesses “whose 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1624                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
reports have little or no value for law enforcement purposes.” The exempt list must be 
published periodically in the Federal Register.  
 
The Treasury Department can also provide “discretionary exemptions” for “qualified business 
customers,” which are defined as businesses that  (1) maintain transaction accounts (as defined 
by the Federal Reserve Act) at the particular institution; (2) frequently engage in transactions 
with the institution that are subject to the reporting requirements; and (3) meet the guidelines 
and criteria established by the Treasury Department to ensure that the failure to file reports on 
these entities will not interfere with the purposes of the Act. 
 
A copy of Form 104 is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
CURRENCY REPORTS BY CASINOS — FINCEN FORM 102 
Form 102 (formerly named IRS Form 8362) is required to be filed by casinos licensed by 
state or local government and having an annual gross revenue in excess of $1,000,000. 
Nevada casinos are exempt from filing these forms because of a strict state law that requires 
reporting for currency transactions. The filing requirements and transaction details for this 
form are almost identical to Form 104. 
 
CURRENCY REPORTS BY NON-FINANCIAL BUSINESSES — IRS FORM 8300 
The PATRIOT Act created Title 31, section 5331, of the U.S. Code, which requires persons 
engaged in any trade or business to file a report with FinCEN when, in the course of their 
business, they receive more than $10,000 in coins or currency, either in one transaction or in 
two or more related transactions. For purposes of computing the amount of multiple related 
transactions, the recipient must aggregate all payments made within one year of the first 
payment. Transactions covered by this Section must be reported within 15 days of receipt of 
payments in excess of $10,000. The rules govern ing these reports are codified at 31, CFR, § 
103.30. 
 
This section does not apply to financial institutions, which are already covered by 31, U.S.C., 
§ 5313 as described above. It also does not apply to transactions occurring entirely outside 
the United States. In addition, the rules exempt certain loans, installment sales, and down 
payment plans.  
 
The information required to be reported under section 5331 is very similar to the 
information that was already required by the IRS under section 6050I of the Internal 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1625 
Revenue Code. Because of the similarity between the two statutes, the reports are to be 
made on the same Form 8300, which is filed jointly with FinCEN and the IRS. Essentially, 
the rule imposes no new record-keeping burden (since Form 8300 already had to be filed 
with the IRS). 
 
Under the Internal Revenue Code, there are both civil and criminal penalties for failure to 
file Form 8300 or filing a false form. Criminal sanctions include imprisonment of up to five 
years (for a willful failure to file) and fines of up to $500,000 (for organizations knowingly 
filing a false return). 
 
REPORTS OF INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORTATION OF CURRENCY OR MONETARY INSTRUMENT CUSTOMS (CMIR) — FINCEN FORM 105 
Pursuant to Title 31, U.S.C., § 5316, a person shall file a report if he transports or is about to 
transport monetary instruments of more than $10,000 into or out of the United States at one 
time or if he receives by transport, mail, or shipment monetary instruments in excess of 
$10,000 at one time transported into the United Sates from a place outside the United States. 
FinCEN Form 105 (formerly named Customs Form 4790) is to be filed at the time of 
transportation or within 15 days of receipt. 
 
For the purposes of this statute, the term “monetary instrument” means United States and 
foreign coin and currency; bearer instruments such as business, bank, or personal checks; 
money orders; promissory notes; bearer stocks; and bonds. 
 
There are exemptions from the CMIR filin g requirements that extend to banks for  
transfers of funds through normal banking procedures, the Federal Reserve, and certain 
common carriers. 
 
A copy of this form is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
REPORT OF FOREIGN BANK AND FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS (FBAR)—TREASURY FORM 90-22.1 
Treasury Department regulations require citizens of the United States and resident aliens to 
file a report when they maintain a financial interest or signature authority over a foreign bank 
account with a balance of more than $10,000 during the calendar year. Accounts in different 
foreign countries have to be aggregated. 
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1626                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
PENALTIES 
Section 5321 of the BSA sets forth the civil penalties for noncompliance with the Act. A 
covered entity (including its partners, directors, officers, or employees) that willfully violates 
the reporting requirements can be hit with a penalty of up to the amount of the transaction 
(not to exceed $100,000) or $ 25,000, whichever is greater. A separate penalty can be imposed 
for each day the violation continues and at each branch or office. Civil penalties of up to 
$500 are also authorized for a negligent violati on. If there is a pattern of negligent activity, 
the penalty limit increases to $50,000. This section also sets forth other penalties applicable 
to structured transactions and foreign financial agency transactions. 
 
Criminal penalties are set forth in section 5322, which provides that a person willfully 
violating the statute or regulations can be fined up to $250,000 and/or imprisoned for up to 
five years. If the violation occurs while violating another federal law or as a pattern of illegal 
activity involving more than $100,000, the maximum fine increases to $500,000 and the 
maximum prison time increases to 10 years. As with the civil penalties, a separate violation 
occurs each day the conduct continues and at each location. 
 
FORFEITURES 
Section 5317(c) provides criminal and civil forfeiture penalties for violations of the currency 
reporting requirements in § 5313 (reports on domestic transactions), § 5316 (reports on 
exporting and importing monetary instruments), and § 5324 (structuring transactions to 
evade reporting requirements). A person convicted of an offense under any of these statutes, 
or of a conspiracy to violate any of these statutes, can be ordered to forfeit all property that 
was involved in the offense and any property traceable thereto.  
 
Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs)   
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
The BSA also requires financial institutions to monitor suspicious activity and file suspicious 
activity reports (SARs) to disclose known or suspected criminal offenses or transactions that 
involve money laundering or violate the Act. For years, suspicious transactions were 
reported on the Currency Transaction Report (CTR). However, such activity is now reported 
using the Suspicious Activity Report (SAR). 
 
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), which charters, regulates, and 
supervises more than 2,500 national banks, adopted a requirement mandating that national 
banks file SARs with the appropriate federal law enforcement agencies and the Treasury 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1627 
Department, in accordance with the form’s instructions, by sending the reports to the 
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN). These reporting requirements are found 
in Title 12, Part 353 of the Code of Federal Regulations. This is an enormous improvement 
on the old reporting systems because it establishes a centralized reporting system that is 
shared throughout government agencies simultaneously. The DEA, for instance, can now 
access the same information as the IRS when working on a suspicious report. The reporting 
procedure has also been simplified for banks, making the information much easier for the 
Department of the Treasury to obtain.  
 
Financial institutions are also required to use SAR forms to report incidents of computer 
intrusion. The term “computer intrusion” is defined as gaining access to the computer 
system to remove, steal, or procure customers’  funds or other account information, or to 
access the institution’s computer system with the intention of damaging or disabling any 
critical computer systems. 
 
SARs are used to report a known or suspected criminal offense or a transaction that involves 
money laundering or violates the BSA. More specifically, a SAR must be filed with FinCEN 
in each of the following instances: 
• Any known or suspected criminal violation involving the financial institution when the 
institution has a substantial basis for identifying one of its directors, officers, employees, 
agents, or affiliated parties as having committed the act or aided in its commission. 
• Any known or suspected criminal violation involving the financial institution and 
aggregating $5,000 or more when the institution has a substantial basis for identifying a 
possible suspect or group of suspects. 
• Any known or suspected criminal violation involving the financial institution and 
aggregating $25,000 or more regardless of whether the institution has a substantial basis 
for identifying possible suspects. 
• Any transaction conducted or attempted to be conducted through the financial 
institution when the institution has reason to suspect that (1) the funds were derived 
from illegal activities, (2) the transaction is designed to evade any regulations under the 
Bank Secrecy Act, or (3) the transaction appears to have no business purposes or appears 
unusual in normal banking practice. 
 
When a financial institution reports a suspicious transaction to a government agency, the Act 
(18, U.S.C., § 5318(g)(2)) makes it illegal for the financial institution to notify any person 
involved in the suspicious transaction that such a report has been made.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1628                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Section 5318(g)(3) of the BSA also contains a safe harbor provision for financial institutions 
that report suspicious transactions or that make voluntary disclosures to a government 
agency of any other possible violation of a law or regulation. The Act provides that these 
financial institutions shall not be liable under any law, regulation, or contract to any person 
for making the report. Note that this safe harbor provision only applies to reports made to 
government agencies, not to self-regulatory organizations.  
 
A copy of the SAR report form is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
MONEY SERVICES BUSINESSES 
Even before the passage of the PATRIOT Act, the Treasury Department was in the process 
of expanding its reporting guidelines to include businesses that did not fall under the 
traditional definition of financial institutions but nevertheless perform a myriad of financial 
services. One of these categories included money services businesses (MSBs), which comprise 
various types of money transmitters, issuers of money orders and traveler’s checks, and 
check cashing businesses. MSBs have long been  required to file CTRs, but otherwise very 
little government regulation has been required.  
 
In August 1999, many of the reporting and registration obligations contained in the Bank 
Secrecy Act were extended to MS Bs. These businesses are now required to register with 
FinCEN under Chapter 31, C.F.R. part 103, subchapter D. Those that fail to register can 
incur substantial penalties.  
 
Under the rules (1) money transmitters, (2) issuers, sellers, and redeemers of money orders, 
(3) issuers, sellers, and redeemers of traveler’s checks, and (4) the U.S. Postal Service (except 
with regard to the sale of postage or philatelic products) are required to report certain classes 
of transactions that meet certain dollar thresholds to the Department of the Treasury after 
January 1, 2002.  
 
The reportable transactions include: 
• Transactions involving funds derived from illegal activity or intended or conducted in 
order to hide or disguise funds or assets derived from illegal activity; 
• Transactions designed, whether through structuring or other means, to evade the 
requirements of the BSA;  
• Transactions that appear to serve no business or apparent lawful purpose; and 
• Transactions that involve the use of a mutual fund to facilitate criminal activity. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1629 
The rule includes two different dollar thresholds depending on the stage and type of 
transaction involved: 
• For transactions conducted or attempted by, at, or through a money service business or 
its agent, a threshold of $2,000 applies; 
• For transactions identified by issuers of money orders or traveler’s checks from a review 
of clearance records or other similar records of instruments that have been sold or 
processed, a threshold of $5,000 applies. 
 
MSBs are given 30 days after becoming aware of a suspicious transaction to complete a 
Suspicious Activity Report by Money Services  Business (SAR-MSB; Form 109) and file it 
with FinCEN; in situations involving violations that require immediate attention, such as 
ongoing money laundering schemes, the MSB or MSBs are to notify the appropriate law 
enforcement authority immediately, by telephone, in addition to filing the required form. 
Supporting documentation relating to each SAR-MSB is to be collected and maintained by 
the reporting MSB for review as needed by law enforcement and regulatory agencies. 
Although the SAR-MSB form is not formatted for joint filing, MSBs may be included as 
joint filers with other reporting financial institutions. 
 
CURRENCY EXCHANGES 
In a rule issued February 10, 2003, U.S. currency exchanges are required to file Suspicious 
Activity Reports under the same rule that applies to money services businesses. 
 
MUTUAL FUNDS 
As part of the PATRIOT Act, mutual funds are also required to establish anti-money 
laundering programs. In May 2003, the Department of Treasury and the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) issued a regulation requiring mutual funds to implement 
“reasonable measures” to establish customer identification procedures and to verify whether 
customers appear on lists of any known or suspected terrorists.  
 
In May 2006, the Treasury Department issued fi nal approval to regulations that require 
mutual funds to report suspicious activities to FinCEN. Under these regulations, mutual 
funds are required to report suspicious currency and non-currency transactions (or 
attempted transactions) of $5,000 or more. The report would be filed on the “SAR-SF” 
(Suspicious Activity for Securities and Futures Industries) Form 101.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1630                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Rule states that four categories of transactions will require reporting. These are the same 
four categories that trigger reporting requirements for money service businesses and 
currency exchanges: 
• Transactions involving funds derived from criminal activity, or intended or conducted to 
hide or disguise funds from criminal activity; 
• Transactions designed to evade Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) requirements; 
• Transactions appearing to serve no business or apparent lawful purpose; or 
• Transactions involving the use of the mutual fund to facilitate criminal activity. 
 
SECURITIES BROKER-DEALERS 
In 2002, FinCEN announced a rule requiring brokers and dealers in securities to report 
suspicious activity via a Suspicious Activity Report by Securities and Futures Industries 
(SAR-SF; FinCEN Form 101). These firms are obligated to report suspicious transactions 
conducted or attempted by, at, or through a broker-dealer and involve or aggregate at least 
$5,000 in funds or assets. This requirement took effect December 31, 2002. 
 
Brokers and dealers in securities are required to report to FinCEN transactions that fall into 
one of the four categories below. Again, these categories are substantially similar to those 
that trigger reports by money service businesses and mutual funds (see above). 
• Transactions involving funds derived from illegal activity, or intended or conducted in 
order to hide or disguise funds derived from illegal activity; 
• Transactions designed, whether through structuring or other means, to evade the 
requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act; 
• Transactions that appear to serve no business or apparent lawful purpose or are not the 
sort of transactions in which the particular customer would be expected to engage, and 
for which the broker-dealer knows of no reasonable explanation after examining the 
available facts; or 
• Transactions that involve the use of the broker-dealer to facilitate criminal activity. 
 
Broker-dealers are also required to establish anti-money laundering programs that, among 
other things, are designed to detect suspicious transactions, under recently promulgated self-regulatory 
organization (SRO) rules. The SEC has the authority to examine broker-dealers 
for compliance with the rule, and it is expected that the SROs will also be reviewing 
compliance as part of the enforcement of their rules. 
 
A copy of SAR-SF is included at the end of the chapter. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1631 
CASINOS AND CARD CLUBS 
Effective March 25, 2003, casinos and card clubs with gross revenue over $1,000,000 must 
file suspicious activity reports on form SAR-C. Under the rule, casinos and card clubs must 
report suspicious activity if a transaction involves or aggregates at least $5,000 in funds and if 
it meets one of the four categories that generally trigger SARs. (See previous sections on 
Financial Institutions, Money Service Businesses, Mutual Funds, etc.) 
 
Some possible examples of suspicious activity, according to FinCEN, include: 
• Using wire transfers and cashier’s checks to deposit funds into casino accounts and using 
the money for little or no gaming activity before cashing out; and 
• Transferring chips to other individuals to cash out, or redeeming chips for casino checks 
that total “significantly more” than the amount deposited with “no apparent winnings to 
account for the excess amount.” 
 
Casinos are also required to file Currency Transaction Reports via FinCEN Form 102 or the 
Nevada state form (see above). 
 
INSURANCE COMPANIES 
Although insurance companies have always fallen under the definition of a “financial 
institution” under the BSA, the Treasury Department had never issued any rules pertaining 
to the industry. The PATRIOT Act, however, requires that all “financial institutions” 
establish anti-money laundering programs, and it gives the Secretary of the Treasury the 
discretion to determine which institutions would be required to file SARs. 
 
In November 2005, FinCEN published rules pertaining to insurance companies that sell 
certain types of insurance products. The rules apply only to companies that sell “covered 
products” that FinCEN deemed to be more at risk for money laundering activities than 
other types of insurance products. Companies that sell these covered products are required 
to file SARs and to implement anti-money laundering programs. The rules define “covered 
products” as any of the following: 
• A permanent life insurance policy (other than a group policy); 
• An annuity contract (other than a group annuity contract); or 
• Any other insurance product with cash value or investment features. 
 
Group insurance products, term life, property, casualty, health, and title insurance policies 
are not considered “covered products.” 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1632                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Also, insurance companies must report suspicious activities to FinCEN. FinCEN Form 
108—Suspicious Activity Report by Insurance Companies—has been proposed; however, 
until the Form is approved, insurance companies should use the Suspicious Activity 
Reporting Form used by the securities and futures industries (FinCEN Form 101) to report 
suspicious activities. 
 
DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, OR JEWELS 
Persons who deal in jewels, precious metals, and precious stones are required to establish 
anti-money laundering programs. “Dealers” are defined as persons who have purchased at 
least $50,000 and  sold more than $50,000 worth of jewels, stones, or metals during the 
preceding year. Additionally, the person must also be in the business of selling significant 
amounts of such items; therefore, the rule wo uld not apply to occasional sellers or hobbyists. 
Dealers, however, are not required to file SARs. FinCEN is developing a set of final rules to 
address in more detail who is covered under the rule and what procedures will be required. 
 
Other Federal Laws Related to Money Laundering 
The fraud examiner should be aware of the federal laws that are typically involved when 
prosecuting a money laundering transaction. Most such schemes will involve one or more of 
the following: 
 
Structuring Transaction to Evade Reporting Requirements, Title 31, U.S.C., § 5324 
If a person causes or attempts to cause a covered institution to fail to file a required report 
with the purpose of evading the reporting requirements, such person can be fined under the 
provisions of 18, U.S.C., § 3571 and/or imprisoned up to five years. If the violation occurs 
in the course of violating another federal law or as part of a pattern of illegal conduct 
involving more than $100,000 in a 12-month period, then the amount of the fine under § 
3571 can be doubled and the prison time increased to up to 10 years.  
 
Section 3571 of Title 18 provides for fines for individuals convicted of a felony of up to 
$250,000 and fines for organizations of up to $500,000. Alternatively, a fine can be imposed 
up to twice the amount of the ill-gotten gain to the criminal or twice the amount of the loss 
to the victim. 
 
Bulk Cash Smuggling Into or Out of the United States, Title 31, U.S.C., § 5332   
Section 5332, which was created by section 371 of the PATRIOT Act, makes it illegal for 
anyone to knowingly conceal more than $10,000 in currency or other monetary instruments 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1633 
and transport or attempt to transport such currency into or out of the United States with the 
intent to evade a currency reporting requirement under 18, U.S.C., § 1956 (see below). 
Violators of these sections may be imprisoned up to five years and may be required to forfeit 
any property involved in the offense, or any property traceable thereto. 
 
Money Laundering Statutes, Title 18, U.S.C., § 1956 and §  1957 
TRANSACTIONAL MONEY LAUNDERING 
Section 1956(a)(1) provides that anyone who knows that property involved in a  
financial transaction represents the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and conducts a 
financial transaction in any of the following ways:  
• With the intent to promote the carrying on of “specified unlawful activity” 
• With the intent to violate section 7201 (tax evasion) or 7206 (filing false return) of the 
Internal Revenue Code 
• Knowing that the transaction is designed to  conceal or disguise the nature, location, 
source, ownership, or control of the illegal proceeds 
• Knowing that the transaction is designed to avoid a reporting requirement 
 
Such individuals shall be fined up to $500,000 or twice the value of the monetary instrument 
or funds (whichever is greater) and/or imprisoned for not more than 20 years. “Specified 
unlawful activity” is defined in § 1956(c)(7) and includes a long list of federal crimes 
including RICO, fraud, embezzlement, theft, and false statements. Also, funds that are 
illegally transmitted in violation of this statute or any property traceable to those funds are 
subject to civil forfeiture under 18, U.S.C., § 981(a)(1)(A). 
 
INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORTATION AND LAUNDERING OF FUNDS 
Section 1956(a)(2) prohibits the transportation, transmission, or transfer of funds either into 
or out of the United States if the person knows the funds are the proceeds of unlawful 
activity and the transportation, transmission, or transfer is done with the intent to promote 
the carrying on of “specified unlawful conduct”; is done to conceal the nature, location, 
source, ownership, or control of the funds; or  is done to avoid reporting requirements. The 
penalties are the same as those set forth in subsection (a)(1). 
 
STING OPERATIONS 
Section 1956(a)(3) prohibits a person from engaging in financial transactions involving 
property the person believes  to be the proceeds of illegal activity. This is intended to cover 
“sting” operations in which a suspect engages in money laundering activity with funds he 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1634                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
believes to be illegally derived, even though the funds are actually supplied by government 
agents. The person can be imprisoned for up to 20 years and/or fined in accordance with 18, U.S.C., § 3571. 
 
ENGAGING IN MONETARY TRANSACTIONS WITH MONEY DERIVED FROM SPECIFIED UNLAWFUL ACTIVITY 
An offense occurs under section 1957 if a person knowingly engages or attempts to engage 
in a monetary transaction with criminally derived property that is greater than $10,000 and 
that is derived from “specified unlawful activity.” Section 1957 applies in situations where 
the offense takes place in the United States (or within its special maritime or territorial 
jurisdiction) or the offense takes place outside the U.S., but the defendant is a U.S. citizen or 
legal alien. 
 
Violations of this statute are punishable by a fine under 18, U.S.C., § 3571 and/or 10 years in 
prison. In addition, the illegally transmitted funds can be forfeited under 18, U.S.C., § 
981(a)(1)(A). 
 
CIVIL PENALTIES  
Section 1956(b) sets forth civil penalties for violations of sections 1956 and 1957. Under this 
section, those who violate either money laundering statute are liable to the United States for 
the value of the property, funds, or monetary instruments involved in the illegal transaction, 
or $10,000, whichever is greater.  
 
LONG-ARM JURISDICTION OVER FOREIGN MONEY LAUNDERERS 
Section 1956(b) also gives U.S. district courts jurisdiction over foreign persons or financial 
institutions when (1) the foreign person commits a money laundering offense under section 
1956(a) that occurs in whole or in part in the United States; (2) the foreign person converts 
to his own use property in which the United States has an ownership interest; or (3) the 
foreign financial institution maintains a bank account in the United States.  
 
Under section 1956(b)(3), a U.S. court can issue restraining orders to freeze the assets of 
foreign money launderers described above prior to trial to ensure that the defendant’s assets 
are available to satisfy a judgment. The court can also appoint a Federal Receiver to collect, 
marshal, and take control of the defendant’s assets to satisfy a civil or criminal judgment for 
money laundering, or a civil or criminal forfeiture judgment.  
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1635 
Prohibition of Illegal Money Transmitting Businesses—Title 18, U.S.C., § 1960 
This section prohibits the operation of a business that transfers funds by any means 
(whether by wire, check, or courier) if the business does not have the appropriate state 
license or fails to comply with the registration requirements established under Title 31 of the 
U.S. Code, section 5330. The offender can be fined under section 3571 of Title 18 and/or 
imprisoned not more than five years. Illegally transmitted funds can also be seized by the 
United States under 18, U.S.C., § 981(a)(1)(A). 
 
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO)—Title 18, U.S.C., §§ 1961–
 1968 
Violations of the money laundering crimes statutes (18, U.S.C., §§ 1956 and 1957) and 
certain violations of the Bank Secrecy Act are predicate offenses constituting “racketeering 
activity.” These acts can be prosecuted under the RICO statute, which includes criminal 
penalties of up to 20 years in prison and/or fines under section 3571 of Title 18. The statute 
also provides for a civil cause of action by “any person injured in his business or property” 
as a result of a violation of RICO. Remedies  include treble damages and attorney’s fees. 
 
Seizures and Forfeitures—Title 18, U.S.C., § 981, et seq. 
Section 981 provides for the civil seizure and forfeiture of property involved in certain 
crimes including money laundering. Section 982 deals with criminal forfeitures. Forfeiture may 
be defined as “the taking by the government of property that is illegally used or acquired, 
without compensating the owner.” These remedies are only available to the government and 
typically are used in connection with a criminal investigation and prosecution.  
 
When a piece of property is forfeited, all right, title, and interest in the property vests in the 
government; consequently, all the defendant’s ownership rights are extinguished. The 
transfer of rights dates back to the moment when the property became forfeitable; i.e., when 
the crime was committed. Any subsequent transfer by the defendant is of no effect. This is 
known as the relation back doctrine. In the eyes of the law, the subsequent judicial proceedings 
merely confirm that a forfeiture has, in theory, already taken place (although the government 
cannot claim any rights in the property until it receives a forfeiture judgment). Because the 
government’s right to the property and related proceeds dates back to when the crime was 
committed, the government is legally entitled to any gain accruing from the proceeds of the 
illegal activity.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1636                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Criminal forfeitures are conducted in conjunction with a criminal trial. The proof necessary 
to perfect the forfeiture is the same as required to convict the individual of the criminal 
charge, that is, proof beyond a reasonable doubt. The criminal forfeiture is an action in 
personam (against the person). In such a proceeding the government has the same burden of 
proof as it does in a criminal case. If the government sustains a conviction, the judge will 
forfeit the property at time of sentencing, at which time the property can be seized. 
Civil forfeitures are conducted independently from a criminal proceeding. A civil forfeiture is 
an action in rem  (against the property). In response to perceived abuses on the part of the 
government, Congress passed the Civil Asset Forfeiture Reform Act of 2000, which 
drastically amended the laws concerning civil forfeiture.  
 
Below are some of the highlights of the Act: 
• Sets forth notification requirements with respect to seized property and civil forfeiture 
proceedings, including a requirement that the government notify interested parties as 
soon as practicable but within 60 days after the date of the seizure. 
• Sets forth procedures for filing claims for seized property. After a claim is filed, the 
government has 90 days in which to file a complaint for forfeiture. If the government 
fails to do this, then it must return the property. In lieu of or in addition to filing a  
civil forfeiture complaint, the government may include a forfeiture allegation in a 
criminal indictment.  
• Provides that the court appoint counsel to represent anyone with an interest in the 
property if the person is financially unable to afford counsel. 
• Places the burden of proof on the government to establish, by a preponderance of the 
evidence, that the property is subject to forfeiture.  
• Provides that if the forfeiture action is being prosecuted because the property was used 
to commit or facilitate the commission of a criminal offense, or was involved in such 
commission, the government must establish that there was a substantial connection 
between the property and the offense.  
• Provides an “innocent owner’s” defense to the forfeiture action. The owner must prove 
his innocence by a preponderance of the evidence. 
• Authorizes a claimant to petition the court to determine whether a forfeiture was 
constitutionally excessive. Directs the court to compare the forfeiture to the gravity of 
the offense. Places upon the claimant the burden of establishing, by a preponderance of 
the evidence at a hearing conducted by the court without a jury, that the forfeiture is 
grossly disproportional to the offense upon the claimant.  
• Amends the Federal Tort Claims Act to allow claimants to sue the government for any 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1637 
damage or loss of property while in possession of the government. 
• Authorizes the use of forfeited property to pay restitution to any victim of the offense 
giving rise to the forfeiture, including, in the case of a money laundering offense, any 
offense constituting the underlying specified activity.  
• Directs that all civil forfeitures of real property and interests in real property proceed as 
judicial forfeitures. Prohibits (with exceptions) (1) real property that is the subject of a 
civil forfeiture from being seized before entry of a forfeiture order; and (2) the owners or 
occupants of the real property from being evicted from, or otherwise deprived of the use 
and enjoyment of, real property that is the subject of a pending forfeiture action.  
• Provides for the forfeiture of the proceeds of “specified unlawful activity” under the 
money laundering statutes.  
 
FORFEITURE OF FUNDS IN INTERBANK ACCOUNTS 
Section 319 of the PATRIOT Act amended 18, U.S.C., § 981, expanding the United States’ 
ability to seize the proceeds of money laundering activity by providing for forfeiture of funds 
held in United States interbank accounts. An interbank account is an account one financial 
institution holds at another financial institution.  
 
If funds involved in a money laundering transaction or the proceeds of any “specified 
unlawful activity” as defined by the money laundering statute are deposited in a foreign bank, 
and if that foreign bank has an interbank account in the United States, then the tainted funds 
will be deemed to have been deposited into the U.S. account. In other words, the funds in 
the foreign bank’s U.S. interbank account can be seized, even if the laundered money was 
not deposited in that account. The government does not have to trace the money in the U.S. 
interbank account to the money that was deposited in the foreign account. It is enough that 
the U.S. interbank account is held by the same financial institution in which the laundered 
money was deposited overseas.  
 
False Statements—Title 18, U.S.C., § 1001 
Persons who violate the Bank Secrecy Act and other reporting laws might also be guilty of 
violating of 18, U.S.C., § 1001, which is the prin cipal federal false statements statute. Because 
most of the obligations imposed by the BSA involve recordkeeping and reporting, many 
BSA violations might also constitute false statements. Section 1001 prohibits knowingly 
falsifying, concealing, covering up, or making a false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or 
representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of any U.S. department or agency. 
Violations of this section are often charged when  an individual is stopped at the border with 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1638                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
a large amount of unreported cash and responds falsely to the questions of customs officers 
or inspectors. It has been used to prosecute individuals for structuring a transaction so that it 
deceives a financial institution into filing a false report. 
 
Conspiracy to Defraud the United States — Title 18, U.S.C., § 371 
Although numerous federal statutes make conspiracy a crime, the most commonly used 
federal conspiracy statute is the general conspiracy statute under section 371 of Title 18, U.S. 
Code.  
 
Section 371 can be divided into two parts: (1) conspiracies to commit a crime against the 
United States, and (2) conspiracies to defraud the United States or its agencies. Several 
courts have upheld convictions based on the second prong of the statute solely for failure to 
file CTRs. Such prosecutions are based on the theory that the person deprived the IRS of 
accurate CTRs. In the case of United States v. Richter, 610 F.Supp. 480 (N.D. Ill. 1985), the 
court held that the division of large amounts of cash into smaller, nonreportable transactions 
by several individuals working as a team was a conspiracy to obstruct the government 
function of receiving CTRs. However, other courts have rejected this theory on the grounds 
that there is no duty on the part of the customer to inform the government or the bank of 
the nature of the transaction whether reportable or not. 
 
Travel Act — Title 18, U.S.C., § 1952 
The Travel Act is applicable if the offense involves the proceeds of illegal activity and 
interstate travel. The Act provides that it is an offense to travel in interstate or foreign 
commerce or use the mail with the intent to distribute the proceeds of any unlawful activity; 
commit any crime of violence to further unlawful activity; or otherwise establish, promote, 
or manage an establishment for the purposes of carrying on any unlawful activity. Unlawful 
activity  is defined to include the reporting requirements under 31, U.S.C., Chapter 53 as well 
as the Money Laundering Statutes (18, U.S. C., §§ 1956 and 1957). The fines established 
under § 3571 can be imposed and/or up to five years imprisonment. If a crime of violence is 
involved, the term of imprisonment increases to a maximum of 20 years or life if someone 
was killed. 
 
State Laws 
Approximately 30 states have enacted statutes that criminalize money laundering, most of 
which apply to businesspeople and professionals. Some of the state statutes are broader than 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1639 
the federal statutes, and they are often enforced more aggressively than their federal 
counterparts.  
 
Many states have criminalized attempted  money laundering with the same penalties as the 
completed crime. Some states contain a “sting provision,” which enables the prosecution of 
activity even though the laundered money is not actually derived from criminal activity, but 
rather supplied by government agents as part of a sting operation. Several states have also 
enacted legislation requiring financial institutions and businesses to file currency transaction 
reports that mirror the federal reports. Some require duplicate filing with the states; others 
are satisfied with the federal filing. 
 
 
International Anti-Money Laundering Efforts 
In the 1980s, the mounting global drug crisis led to the birth of international anti-money 
laundering (AML) efforts. As a result, international organizations began taking on initiatives 
to fight money laundering while others were created for that same purpose. The principal 
organizations include the United Nations (UN), the Financial Action Task Force on Money 
Laundering (FATF), and the Egmont Group. Fo llowing the events of September 11, 2001, 
however, the international community’s AML focus shifted from anti-drugs to anti-terrorism 
and many international organizations revised the AML framework to not only examine 
funds from illegal sources but to also examine funds whose purposes were illegitimate. 
 
The United Nations 
In 1988, the UN adopted the UN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances, a mandate to bring an end to money laundering. In response, the 
UN established the Global Programme against Money-Laundering (GPML), which provides 
member states with assistance in complying with international AML standards. In addition, 
the GPML, in participation with other international organizations, maintains the 
International Money Laundering Information Ne twork (IMoLIN), a website that provides 
the international community with information and tools concerning AML.   
 
The Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) 
In 1989, the Group of Seven (G-7) leading industrial nations established the Financial 
Action Task Force (FATF), a multilateral policy-making and standard-setting body designed 
to combat money laundering. The FATF developed a set of Forty Recommendations 
regarding the proper approach to combat money laundering through law enforcement 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1640                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
efforts, financial regulations, and international cooperation. In addition to observing the 
current FATF members carrying out these recommendations, the FATF also lobbies for 
other nations and territories to adopt them. The FATF also issues financial advisories that 
warn financial institutions against doing business in countries that seem to invite  
money laundering. 
 
The Egmont Group 
The Egmont Group is an informal international network of financial intelligence units 
(FIUs), national centers that collect information on suspicious or unusual financial activity, 
designed to fight money laundering by encouraging global cooperation and mutual exchange 
of information.  
 
 
Enforcement and Prevention Strategies 
Financial institutions, brokers, and insurance companies should be aware and should make 
their employees aware of situations that could indicate money laundering activity.  
 
Bank Secrecy Act Compliance Programs 
Most financial institutions are now required to have a Bank Secrecy Act compliance program 
in place. However, every business that has the potential for transactions dealing with 
significant amounts of cash should institute a compliance program and a money laundering 
awareness program. All employees should be made aware of the money laundering statutes 
and the serious implications of such laws on the institution and the employees. Employees 
should be educated to be aware of transactions that might suggest possible laundering 
activity. Procedures should be set out detailing what an employee should do if a customer or 
transaction appears suspicious. 
 
Minimum Standards 
Treasury regulations provide that, at a minimum, a written compliance program should be 
adopted that: 
• Establishes a system of internal controls to ensure ongoing BSA compliance. 
• Provides for independent testing of compliance by internal auditors and/or outside 
examiners. 
• Designates a compliance officer(s) to ensure day-to-day compliance with BSA. 
• Provides training on an ongoing basis for all personnel. 
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1641 
Compliance Officer 
A business should select a person or team responsible for the day-to-day monitoring of the 
compliance program. The compliance officer should be given broad authority to monitor all 
aspects of the institution’s compliance including the development and refinement of the 
program and the monitoring of employee training programs. Such individual should also 
have the authority to conduct regular and ad hoc audits to ensure that the program is 
functioning effectively and to hire outside consultants as necessary to investigate problems. 
 
Policy Statement 
All entities covered under the reporting and recordkeeping laws and regulations should have 
a written policy against handling the proceeds of drug trafficking or other criminal activity. 
The statement should provide that the institution requires its employees to operate with the 
highest moral and ethical principles. It should include a statement that the company refuses 
to do business with criminals and money launderers; a commitment to conduct business only 
with legitimate business organizations; a statem ent against doing business with organizations 
that fail to provide proper documentation of their identity and purpose; clear directions for 
referring all suspicious transactions to the appropriate department; and a commitment to 
comply with the provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act. 
 
“Know Your Customer” Programs 
Most financial institutions have “Know Your Customer” programs as part of their BSA 
compliance program. Such programs should provide for effective customer identification, 
account monitoring, and appropriate action in suspicious circumstances. Both the CTR 
reporting requirements and the recordkeeping requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act 
mandate the identification of customers using the institution’s services. 
 
NEW DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS 
For individual deposit accounts, minimum identification standards should be established. 
The information to be obtained should include:  
• Name 
• Address 
• Date of birth 
• Social Security number (or for non-U.S. citizens, a passport, visa, or alien registration 
number) 
• Current employer 
• Business and residence telephone numbers 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1642                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The customer should be required to submit some form of identification that includes a 
photo such as a driver’s license or passport, and a copy should be made and kept in the 
customer’s file. If there are any doubts or inconsistencies about the information provided, 
the employee should be instructed to notify the appropriate department. 
Minimum standards for new business accounts should include: 
• Business name and address 
• Telephone number 
• Taxpayer identification number 
• Documents establishing the formation of the business entity (articles of incorporation, 
partnership agreement, etc.) 
• Copies of all assumed name filings or DBAs (doing business as) 
• A full description of the operations of the business 
• Credit and banking references 
• The identity of the officers, directors, or other principals 
 
The account representative should also consider making a personal visit to the customer’s 
place of business. Besides promoting good customer relations, a personal visit will help 
identify whether the business is legitimate or simply a front. The representative can also use 
this opportunity to get to know the principals of the business. 
 
NEW LOAN ACCOUNTS 
An institution should perform due diligence in establishing a new loan account because if the 
customer is engaged in money laundering, there is a risk of forfeiture of collateral pledged on 
the loans. Real or personal property that is traceable to drug sales or that is purchased with 
laundered funds is subject to seizure by the government. If the property seized is pledged as 
collateral, the financial institution must prove that it was an innocent lienholder of the 
property and had no knowledge of the illegal activity. 
 
Minimum standards regarding the information to be gathered should include: 
• Reliable identifying information similar to that required for new deposit accounts. 
• Reliable financial information such as financial statements, W-2s, and copies of tax 
returns. 
• The purpose of the loan. 
• Credit history and prior banking references. 
• Verifiable, legitimate means of repayment. 
  
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1643 
• Assurance that the loan amount is consistent with the purpose of the loan and the nature 
of the business. 
 
SERVICES FOR NONACCOUNTHOLDERS 
Banks often issue cashier’s checks, money orders, and traveler’s checks and perform 
currency exchanges, wire transfers, or check cashing services. Strict identification 
requirements should be established for transactions with persons who are not regular bank 
customers. In fact, regulations require that in some instances banks keep a record of the 
identity of persons who are not established customers. Such regulations usually require at a 
minimum the person’s name and address, driver’s license number (or other number of 
identifying document produced), and Social Security number or employer identification 
number. 
 
MONITORING ACCOUNTS 
While identification of customers is important, it is equally important to monitor the activity 
of accounts. The institution should identify unusual transactions that might not be consistent 
with the normal business of the customer. Unusual and dramatic changes in wire transfer, 
monetary instrument, and check transactions are important to identify. If unusual 
transactions or activities are noted, the institution should take some action to protect itself. 
The appropriate action in some cases might be to discuss the changes with the customer to 
find out the reasons for said inconsistencies. Increased transactions might be the result of an 
increase in sales or the result of a promotional activity. However, if the discussion leads to a 
reasonable suspicion that the transactions are illegitimate, the institution might be required to 
notify the appropriate government agency and/or file a Suspicious Activity Report. 
 
 
Special Problems for Insurance Companies 
Although financial institutions such as banks are primarily associated with money laundering 
activities, insurance companies have become major targets of money laundering operations 
because of the variety of services and investment vehicles they offer that can be used to 
conceal the source of funds. 
 
The most common form of money laundering that insurance companies face involves single 
premium contracts or policies. Examples include purchases of annuities, lump sum top-ups 
to an existing life insurance contract, and lump sum contributions to personal pension 
contracts.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1644                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Insurance companies, like other financial institutions, should educate their employees to look 
out for transactions that appear to be inconsistent with a customer’s known legitimate 
business or personal activities or the normal transactions for that type of account. To that 
end, insurance companies should institute “Know Your Customer” programs such as those 
described above. 
 
Red Flags 
The following transactions might indicate money laundering is taking place. The list should be 
used to identify those transactions and customers that might require further investigation. 
• Large purchase of a lump sum contract when the customer typically purchases small, 
regular payment contracts. 
• Use of a third-party check to make a purchase or investment. 
• Lack of concern for the performance of an investment but great concern for the early 
cancellation of the contract. 
• Use of cash as payment for a transaction that is typically handled with checks or other 
forms of payment. 
• Lump sum payments made by wire transfer or with foreign currency. 
• Reluctance to provide normal information when setting up a policy or account or 
providing minimal information. 
• Purchase of investments in amounts considered beyond the customer’s apparent means. 
• Use of a letter of credit or other methods of trade finance to move money between 
countries where such trade is inconsistent with the customer’s usual pattern. 
• Establishment of a large investment policy and within a short time period, the customer 
requests cancellation of the policy and cash value paid to a third-party. 
• Use of wire transfers to move large amounts of money to or from a financial haven 
country such as the Cayman Islands, Colombia, Hong Kong, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Monaco, Panama, or Switzerland. 
• Request to borrow the maximum cash value of a single premium policy soon after 
paying for the policy. 
 
Detection 
Insurance companies must file all appropriate reports and follow all the requirements of the 
Bank Secrecy Act, including the implementation of an effective BSA compliance program.  
 
Certain other reports can help companies identify suspicious transactions. Incoming and 
outgoing wire transfer logs  can help companies identify possible patterns suggestive of money 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1645 
laundering. Account activity reports generally show weekly and/or monthly balances, deposits, 
and withdrawals. Review of these statements can identify those accounts with large increases 
in average balances and numbers of transactions. Policy cancellation reports should identify 
policies canceled within a specific time period. Report details should include the amount of 
the cash surrender value, the identity of the sales agent, and the actual term of the policy. 
 
The “Tracing Illicit Transactions” chapter in the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners  
Manual provides more information about techniques for detecting illicit income and 
payments. Included in that chapter are details on analyzing financial records, financial and 
behavioral profiles, and net worth analysis.  
  
Currency Transaction Report
 OMB No. 1506-0004
 FINCEN Form   104
 (Formerly Form 4789)
 (Eff. December 2003)
 (Complete all parts that apply--See Instructions)
 1     Check all box(es) that apply:
 Section A--Person(s) on Whose Behalf Transaction(s) Is Conducted
 5    Doing business as (DBA)
 4  Middle initial3  First name2    Individual’s last name or entity’s name
 6  SSN or EIN
 7    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 Department of the Treasury
 FinCEN
 9     City 10  State 11  ZIP code 12  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 13  Occupation, profession, or business
 25    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 Section B -- Individual(s) Conducting Transaction(s) (if other than above).
 If Section B is left blank or incomplete, check the box(es) below to indicate the reason(s)
 14    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 44  Title of approving official
 47  Type or print preparer’s name
 45   Signature of approving official
 48  Type or print name of person to contact 49  Telephone number
 18    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 17  Middle initial16  First name15    Individual’s last name
 19  SSN
 20     City 21  State 22  ZIP code 23  Country code
        (If not U.S.)
 40    City
 38    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 Enter Regulator or BSA
 Examiner code number
       (see instructions)
 37   Name of financial institution
 42   ZIP code 43  Routing (MICR) number41  State
 26     Total cash in $ .00
 Cat. No. 37683N FinCEN Form 104 (Formerly Form 4789) (Rev. 8-03)
 Previous editions will not be accepted after August 31, 2004.
 Please type or print.
 Person(s) Involved in Transaction(s)Part  I
 b          Mail Deposit or Shipment c          Night Deposit or Automated Teller Machine d          Multiple Transactionsa          Armored Car Service
 8  Date of birth
 ___/__ /_______
 MM DD YYYY
 24  Date of birth
 ___/__ /_______
 MM DD YYYY
 b           Passport c           Alien registration
 d          Other f    Number:
 Part  II Amount and Type of Transaction(s).  Check all boxes that apply.
 28  Date of  transaction
 ___/ __/______
 MM  DD YYYY
 26a   Foreign cash in .00
 27     Total cash out $                 .00
 27a    Foreign cash out .00
 30          Wire Transfer(s) 31           Negotiable Instrument(s) Purchased
 34           Deposit(s)/Withdrawal(s)
 35           Account Number(s) Affected (if any): 36           Other (specify)
 Part  III Financial Institution Where Transaction(s) Takes Place
 39   EIN or SSN
 For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
 Sign
 Here
 ___/__ /_______
 MM DD YYYY
 ( )
 46   Date of signature
  a        Amends prior report         b        Multiple persons        c        Multiple transactions
 e   Issued by:
 33          Currency Exchange(s)
 d          Other
 b          Passport c           Alien registrationa          Driver’s license/State I.D.
 f    Number:e   Issued by:
 e          Conducted On Own Behalf
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D.
  (see instructions, page 3)
 32           Negotiable Instrument(s) Cashed
 29           Foreign Country
  (see instructions, page 3)
Section A--Person(s) on Whose Behalf Transaction(s) Is Conducted
 5    Doing business as (DBA)
 4  Middle initial3  First name2    Individual’s last name or entity’s name
 6  SSN or EIN
 7    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 9     City 10  State 11  ZIP code 12  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 25    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 Section B--Individual(s) Conducting Transaction(s) (if other than above).
 14    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 f    Number:e   Issued by:
 18    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 17  Middle initial16  First name15    Individual’s last name
 19  SSN
 20     City 21  State 22  ZIP code 23  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 Person(s) Involved in Transaction(s)Part  I
 8  Date of birth
 ____/__ /_______
 MM  DD  YYYY
 24  Date of birth
 ___/__ /_____
 MM  DD  YYYY
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D. b           Passport c           Alien registration
 d          Other e   Issued by: f  Number:
 Multiple Persons
 Complete applicable parts below if box 1b on page 1 is checked
 FinCEN Form 104 (formerly Form 4789) (Rev. 8-03) Page 2
 Section A--Person(s) on Whose Behalf Transaction(s) Is Conducted
 5    Doing business as (DBA)
 4  Middle initial3  First name2    Individual’s last name or entity’s name
 6  SSN or EIN
 7    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 9     City 10  State 11  ZIP code 12  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 25    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 Section B--Individual(s) Conducting Transaction(s) (if other than above).
 14    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 f    Number:
 18    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 17  Middle initial16  First name15    Individual’s last name
 19  SSN
 20     City 21  State 22  ZIP code 23  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 Person(s) Involved in Transaction(s)Part  I
 8  Date of birth
 ____/____/___ 
MM  DD  YYYY
 24  Date of birth
 ___/_ _______
 MM DD YYYY
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D. b           Passport c           Alien registration
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D. b          Passport c           Alien registration
 d          Other
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D. b          Passport c           Alien registration
 e   Issued by:
 d          Other
 f    Number:e   Issued by:d          Other
 13  Occupation, profession, or business
 13  Occupation, profession, or business
FinCEN Form 104 (Formerly Form 4789 (Rev. 8-03) Page 3
 Suspicious Transactions
 This Currency Transaction Report (CTR) should NOT be
 filed for suspicious transactions involving $10,000 or less
 in currency OR to note that a transaction of more than
 $10,000 is suspicious.  Any suspicious or unusual activity
 should be reported by a financial institution in the
 manner prescribed by its appropriate federal regulator
 or BSA examiner. (See the instructions for Item 37.) If a
 transaction is suspicious and in excess of $10,000 in
 currency, then both a CTR and the appropriate
 Suspicious Activity Report form must be filed.
 Should the suspicious activity require immediate
 attention, financial institutions should telephone
 1-800-800-CTRS. An Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
 employee will direct the call to the local office of the
 IRS Criminal Investigation Division (CI). This toll-free
 number is operational Monday through Friday, from
 approximately 9:00 am to 6:00 pm Eastern Standard
 Time.  If an emergency, consult directory assistance for
 the local IRS CID Office.
 General Instructions
 Who Must File.  Each financial institution (other than a
 casino, which instead must file FinCEN Form 103, and
 the U.S. Postal Service for which there are separate rules)
 must file FinCEN Form 104 (formerly 4789) (CTR) for
 each deposit, withdrawal, exchange of currency, or other
 payment or transfer, by, through, or to the financial
 institution which involves a transaction in currency of
 more than $10,000.  Multiple transactions must be
 treated as a single transaction if the financial institution
 has knowledge that (1) they are by or on behalf of the
 same person, and (2) they result in either currency
 received (Cash In) or currency disbursed (Cash Out) by
 the financial institution totaling more than $10,000
 during any one business day.  For a bank, a business day
 is the day on which transactions are routinely posted to
 customers’ accounts, as normally communicated to
 depository customers.  For all other financial institutions,
 a business day is a calendar day.
 Generally, financial institutions are defined as banks,
 other types of depository institutions, brokers or dealers
 in securities, money transmitters, currency exchangers,
 check cashers, and issuers and sellers of money orders
 and traveler’s checks.  Should you have questions, see
 the definitions in 31 CFR Part 103.
 When and Where To File.  File this CTR by the 15th
 calendar day after the day of the transaction with the:
 IRS Detroit Computing Center
 ATTN: CTR
 P.O. Box 33604
 Detroit, MI 48232-5604
 Keep a copy of each CTR for five years from the date
 filed.
 A financial institution may apply to file the CTRs
 magnetically. To obtain an application to file magnetically,
 write to the:
 IRS Detroit Computing Center
 ATTN: CTR Magnetic Media Coordinator
 P.O. Box 33604
 Detroit, MI 48232-5604
 Identification Requirements.  All individuals (except
 employees of armored car services) conducting a
 reportable transaction(s) for themselves or for another
 person, must be identified by means of an official
 document(s). Acceptable forms of identification include
 a driver’s license, military and military/dependent
 identification cards, passport, state issued identification
 card, cedular card (foreign), non-resident alien
 identification cards, or any other identification document
 or documents, which contain name and preferably
 address   and a photograph and are normally acceptable
 by financial institutions as a means of identification when
 cashing checks for persons other than established
 customers.
 Acceptable identification information obtained
 previously and maintained in the financial institution’s
 records may be used.  For example, if documents
 verifying an individual’s identity were examined and
 recorded on a signature card when an account was
 opened, the financial institution may rely on that
 information. In completing the CTR, the financial
 institution must indicate on the form the method, type,
 and number of the identification. Statements such as
 “known customer” or “signature card on file” are not
 sufficient for form completion.
 Penalties.  Civil and criminal penalties are provided for
 failure to file a CTR or to supply information or for filing
 a false or fraudulent CTR.  See 31 U.S.C. 5321, 5322
 and 5324.
 For purposes of this CTR, the terms below have the
 following meanings:
 Currency.  The coin and paper money of the United
 States or any other country, which is circulated and
 customarily used and accepted as money.
 Person.  An individual, corporation, partnership, trust
 or estate, joint stock company, association, syndicate,
 joint venture or other unincorporated organization or
 group.
 Organization.  Entity other than an individual.
 Transaction in Currency.  The physical transfer of
 currency from one person to another.  This does not
 include a transfer of funds by means of bank check, bank
 draft, wire transfer or other written order that does not
 involve the physical transfer of currency.
 Negotiable Instruments.  All checks and drafts (including
 business, personal, bank, cashier’s and third-party),
 money orders, and promissory notes. For purposes of
 this CTR, all traveler’s checks shall also be considered
 negotiable instruments whether or not they are in bearer
 form.
 Foreign exchange rates. If completing items 26a/27a,
 use the exchange rate in effect for the business day of
 the transaction. The source of the exchange rate that is
 used will be determined by the reporting institution.
 Specific Instructions
 Because of the limited space on the front and back of
 the CTR, it may be necessary to submit additional
 information on attached sheets. Submit this additional
 information on plain paper attached to the CTR. Be sure
 to put the individual’s or entity’s name and identifying
 number (items 2, 3, 4, and 6 of the CTR) on any
 additional sheets so that if it becomes separated, it may
 be associated with the CTR.
 Item 1a. Amends Prior Report. If this CTR is being
 filed because it  amends a report  filed previously, check
 Item 1a.  Staple a copy of the original CTR to the
 amended one, complete Part III fully and only those other
 entries which are being amended.
 Item 1b. Multiple Persons.  If this transaction is being
 conducted by more than one person or on behalf of
 more than one person, check Item 1b. Enter information
 in Part I for one of the persons and provide information
 on any other persons on the back of the CTR.
 Item 1c. Multiple Transactions.  If the financial
 institution has knowledge that there are multiple
 transactions, check Item 1c.
 PART I - Person(s) Involved in Transaction(s)
 Section A must be completed.  If an individual conducts
 a transaction on his own behalf, complete Section A and
 leave Section “B” BLANK.  If an individual conducts a
 transaction on his own behalf and on behalf of another
 person(s), complete Section “A” for each person and leave
 Section “B” BLANK.  If an individual conducts a
 transaction on behalf of another person(s), complete
 Section “B” for the individual conducting the transaction,
 and complete Section “A” for each person on whose
 behalf the transaction is conducted of whom the financial
 institution has knowledge.
 Section A. Person(s) on Whose Behalf Transaction(s)
 Is Conducted.  See instructions above.
 Items 2, 3, and 4. Individual/Organization Name.  If
 the person on whose behalf the transaction(s) is
 conducted is an individual, put his/her last name in Item
 2, first name in Item 3, and middle initial in Item 4.  If
 there is no middle initial, leave item 4 BLANK. If the
 transaction is conducted on behalf of an entity, put its
 name in Item 2 and leave Items 3 and 4 BLANK.
 Item 5. Doing Business As (DBA).  If the financial
 institution has knowledge of a separate “doing business
 as” name, enter it in Item 5. For example, Smith
 Enterprise DBA MJ’s Pizza.
 Item 6. SSN/ITIN or EIN.  Enter the Social Security
 Number (SSN) or Individual Taxpayer Identification
 Number (ITIN) or Employer Identification Number (EIN)
 of the person or entity identified in Item 2.  If none,
 write NONE.
 Items 7, 9, 10, 11, and 12.  Address.  Enter the
 permanent address including ZIP Code of the person
 identified in Item 2.  Use the U.S. Postal Service’s two
 letter state abbreviation code.  A P. O. Box should not
 be used by itself, and may only be used if there is no
 street address.  If a P. O. Box is used, the name of the
 apartment or suite number, road or route number where
 the person resides must also be provided.  If the address
 is outside the U.S., provide the street address, city,
 province or state, postal code (if known), and the two
 letter country code. For country code list go to
 www.fincen.gov/reg_bsaforms.html or telephone
 1-800-949-2732 and select option number 5. If U.S.,
 leave item 12 blank.
 Item 8. Date of Birth.  Enter the date of birth.  Eight
 numerals must be inserted for each date.  The first two
 will reflect the month, the second two the day, and the
 last four the year.  A zero (0) should precede any single
 digit number.  For example, if an individual’s birth date
 is April 3 1948, Item 8 should read 04 03 1948.
 Item 13. Occupation, Profession, or Business.  Identify
 the occupation, profession, or business of the person on
 whose behalf the transaction was conducted.  For
 example: secretary, shoe salesman, carpenter, attorney,
 housewife, restaurant, liquor store,etc.  Do not use non-
 specific terms such as merchant, self-employed,
 businessman, etc.
 Item 14. If an Individual, Describe Method Used To
 Verify Identity.  If an individual conducts the
 transaction(s) on his/her own behalf, his/her identity must
 be verified by examination of an acceptable document
 (see General Instructions). For example, check box a if
 a driver’s license is used to verify an individual’s identity,
 and enter the state that issued the license and the number
 in items e and f. If the transaction is conducted by an
 individual on behalf of another individual not present
 or on behalf of an entity, enter N/A in Item 14.
 Section B. Individual(s) Conducting Transaction(s)
 (if other than above).  Financial institutions should enter
 as much information as is available.
FinCEN Form 104 (Formerly 4789 (Rev. 8-03) Page 4
 However, there may be instances in which Items 15-25
 may be left BLANK or incomplete. If Items 15-25 are
 left BLANK or incomplete, check one or more of the
 boxes provided to indicate the reasons.
 Example: If there are multiple transactions that, if only
 when aggregated, the financial institution has knowledge
 the transactions exceed the reporting threshold, and
 therefore, did not identify the transactor(s), check box d
 for Multiple Transactions.
 Items 15, 16, and 17. Individual’s Name. Complete
 these items if an individual conducts a transaction(s) on
 behalf of another person.  For example, if John Doe, an
 employee of XYZ Grocery Store, makes a deposit to the
 store’s account, XYZ Grocery Store should be identified
 in Section A and John Doe should be identified in section
 B.
 Items 18, 20, 21, 22, and 23. Address. Enter the
 permanent street address including ZIP Code of the
 individual.  (See the instructions for Items 7 and 9 through
 12.) Enter country code if not U.S. (Reference item 12).
 Item 19. SSN/ITIN.  If the individual has a Social Security
 Number, or Individual Taxpayer Indentifcation Number,
 enter it in Item 19.  If the individual does not have an
 SSN/ITIN, enter NONE.
 Item 24. Date of Birth.  Enter the individual’s date of
 birth.  (See the instructions for Item 8.)
 Item 25. If an Individual, Describe Method Used To
 Verify Identity.  Enter the method used to identify the
 individual’s identity. (See General Instructions and the
 instructions for Item 14.)
 PART II - Amount and Type of Transaction(s)
 Complete Part II to identify the type of transaction(s)
 and the amount(s) involved.
 Items 26 and 27. Total Cash In/Total Cash Out.  In the
 spaces provided, enter the total amount of currency
 received (Total Cash In) or total currency disbursed (Total
 Cash Out) by the financial institution. If foreign currency
 is exchanged, use the U.S. dollar equivalent on the day
 of the transaction (See “Foreign exchange rates”), and
 complete item 26a or 27a, whichever is appropriate.
 If less than a full dollar amount is involved, increase
 that figure to the next highest dollar.  For example, if the
 currency totals $20,000.05, show the total as
 $20,001.00.
 Items 26a and 27a. Foreign cash in/Foreign cash out.
 If foreign currency is exchanged, enter the amount of
 foreign currency in items 26a and 27a. Report country
 of origin in item 29.
 Item 28. Date of Transaction.  Insert eight numerals for
 each date. (See instructions for Item 8.)
 Item 29. Foreign Country.  If items 26a and/or 27a are
 completed indicating that foreign currency is involved,
 check Item 29 and identify the country.  If multiple
 foreign currencies are involved, check box 36 and
 identify the additional country(s) and/or currency(s)
 involved.
 Determining Whether Transactions Meet the
 Reporting Threshold.
 Only cash transactions that, if alone or when
 aggregated, exceed $10,000 should be reported on the
 CTR.  Transactions shall not be offset against one another.
 If there are both Cash In and Cash Out transactions
 that are reportable, the amounts should be considered
 separately and not aggregated.  However, they may be
 reported on a single CTR.
 If there is a currency exchange, it should be aggregated
 separately with each of the Cash In and Cash Out totals.
 Example 1: A person deposits $11,000 in currency to
 his savings account and withdraws $3,000 in currency
 from his checking account. The CTR should be
 completed as follows:
 Cash In $11,000 and no entry for Cash Out.  This is
 because the $3,000 transaction does not meet the
 reporting threshold.
 Example 2: A person deposits $11,000 in currency to
 his savings account and withdraws $12,000 in currency
 from his checking account. The CTR should be
 completed as follows:
 Cash In $11,000, Cash Out $12,000.  This is because
 there are two reportable transactions.  However, one
 CTR may be filed to reflect both.
 Example 3: A person deposits $6,000 in currency to his
 savings account and withdraws $4,000 in currency from
 his checking account. Further, he presents $5,000 in
 currency to be exchanged for the equivalent in French
 Francs. The CTR should be completed as follows:
 Cash In $11,000 and no entry for Cash Out.  This is
 because in determining whether the transactions are
 reportable, the currency exchange is aggregated with
 each of the Cash In and Cash Out amounts. The result is
 a reportable $11,000 Cash In transaction.  The total Cash
 Out amount is $9,000, which does not meet the
 reporting threshold.  Therefore, it is not entered on the
 CTR.
 Example 4: A person deposits $6,000 in currency to his
 savings account and withdraws $7,000 in currency from
 his checking account.  Further, he presents $5,000 in
 currency to be exchanged for the equivalent in French
 francs. The CTR should be completed as follows:
 Cash In $11,000, Cash Out $12,000.  This is because
 in determining whether the transactions are reportable,
 the currency exchange is aggregated with each of the
 Cash In and Cash Out amounts.  In this example, each
 of the Cash In and Cash Out totals exceed $10,000 and
 must be reflected on the CTR.
 Items 30-33.  Check the appropriate item(s) to identify
 the following type of transaction(s):
 30. Wire Transfer(s)
 31. Negotiable Instrument(s) Purchased
 32. Negotiable Instrument(s) Cashed
 33. Currency Exchange(s)
 Item 34. Deposits/Withdrawals.  Check this item to
 identify deposits to or withdrawals from  accounts, e.g.
 demand deposit accounts, savings accounts, time
 deposits, mutual fund accounts, or any other account
 held at the financial institution.  Enter the account
 number(s) in Item 35.
 Item 35. Account Numbers Affected (if any).  Enter
 the account numbers of any accounts affected by the
 transactions that are maintained at the financial
 institution conducting the transaction(s).  If necessary,
 use additional sheets of paper to indicate all of the
 affected accounts.
 Example 1:  If a person cashes a check drawn on an
 account held at the financial institution, the CTR should
 be completed as follows:
 Indicate negotiable instrument(s) cashed and provide
 the account number of the check.
 If the transaction does not affect an account, make no
 entry.
 Example 2: A person cashes a check drawn on another
 financial institution.  In this instance, negotiable
 instrument(s) cashed would be indicated, but no account
 at the financial institution has been affected.  Therefore,
 Item 35 should be left BLANK.
 Item 36. Other (specify).  If a transaction is not identified
 in Items 30-34, check Item 36 and provide an additional
 description.  For example, a person presents a check to
 purchase “foreign currency.” Also list multiple foreign
 currencies from item 29.
 PART III - Financial Institution Where Transaction(s) Take
 Place
 Item 37. Name of Financial Institution and Identity of
 Regulator or BSA Examiner.  Enter the financial institution’s
 full legal name and identify the regulator  or BSA examiner,
 using the following codes:
 Regulator or BSA Examiner                                              CODE
 Comptroller of the Currency (OCC).........................1
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)........2
 Federal Reserve System (FRS)...........................................3
 Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS)......................................4
 National Credit Union Administration (NCUA)........5
 Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).............6
 Internal Revenue Service (IRS).........................................7
 U.S. Postal Service (USPS).................................................8
 Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)...............9
 State Regulator.................................................................10
 Items 38, 40, 41, and 42. Address.  Enter the street address,
 city, state, and ZIP Code of the financial institution where
 the transaction occurred.  If there are multiple transactions,
 provide information of the office or branch where any one
 of the transactions has occurred.
 Item 39. EIN or SSN.  Enter the financial institution’s EIN.
 If the financial institution does not have an EIN, enter the
 SSN of the financial institution’s principal owner.
 Item 43. Routing (MICR) Number.  If a depository
 institution, enter the routing (Magnetic Ink Character
 Recognition (MICR)) number.
 SIGNATURE
 Items 44 and 45. Title and signature of Approving
 Official.  The official who reviews and approves the CTR
 must indicate his/her title and sign the CTR.
 Item 46. Date of Signature.  The approving official must
 enter the date the CTR is signed. (See the instructions for
 Item 8.)
 Item 47. Preparer’s Name.  Type or print the full name of
 the individual preparing the CTR. The preparer and the
 approving official may not necessarily be the same
 individual.
 Items 48 and 49. Contact Person/Telephone Number.
 Type or print the name and telephone number of an
 individual to contact concerning questions about the CTR.
 Paperwork Reduction Act Notice.  The requested
 information is useful in criminal, tax, and regulatory
 investigations and proceedings.  Financial institutions are
 required to provide the information under 31 U.S.C.
 5313 and 31 CFR Part 103, commonly referred to as the
 Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). The BSA is administered by the
 U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Financial Crimes
 Enforcement Network (FinCEN).  You are not required
 to provide the requested information unless a form
 displays a valid OMB control number.
 The time needed to complete this form will vary
 depending on individual circumstances. The estimated
 average time is 19 minutes.  If you have comments
 concerning the accuracy of this time estimate or
 suggestions for making this form simpler, you may write
 to the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, P. O.
 Box 39, Vienna, VA 22183. Do not send this form to
 this office. Instead, see When and Where to File in the
 instructions.
Report of Cash Payments Over $10,000
 Received in a Trade or Business
  
 IRS
 Form
  
8300 
OMB No. 1545-0892 
(Rev. March 2008) 
' See instructions for definition of cash. 
Department of the Treasury
 Internal Revenue Service
  
For Privacy Act and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 5. 
Suspicious transaction.
  
b
  
Amends prior report;
  
a
  
Check appropriate box(es) if:
  
1
  Identity of Individual From Whom the Cash Was Received 
If more than one individual is involved, check here and see instructions '
  
2
  Taxpayer identification number
  
6
  
M.I.
  
5
  
First name
  
4
  
Last name
  
3
  
Occupation, profession, or business
  
13
  
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
  
7
  
Date of birth '
  
8
  
Country (if not U.S.)
  
12
  
ZIP code
  
11
  
State
  
10
  
City
  
9
  
Describe ID '
  
a
  
Identifying
 document (ID)
  
14
  c
  Person on Whose Behalf This Transaction Was Conducted 
If this transaction was conducted on behalf of more than one person, check here and see instructions '
  
15
  19
  
M.I.
  
18
  
First name
  
17
  
Individual’s last name or Organization’s name
  
16
  
Employer identification number
  
Occupation, profession, or business
  
22
  
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
  
21
  
Country (if not U.S.)
  
26
  
ZIP code
  
25
  
State
  
24
  
City
  
23
  
Description of Transaction and Method of Payment 
Business services provided
  
d
  
Personal property purchased
  
a
  
Intangible property purchased
  
e
  
Real property purchased
  
b
  Personal services provided
  
c
  
32
  
Date cash received
  
28
  
.00
  
$
  
Business That Received Cash 
Employer identification number
  
36
  
Name of business that received cash
  
35
  
Social security number
  
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
  
37
  
Nature of your business
  
41
  
ZIP code
  
40
  
State
  
39
  
City
  
38
  
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that to the best of my knowledge the information I have furnished above is true, correct,
 and complete.
  
42
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
Cat. No. 62133S
  
Part IV
  
Part I
  
Part II
  
Part III
  
U.S. currency
  b
  
Foreign currency
  
20
  
Doing business as (DBA) name (see instructions)
  
Total cash received
  
29
  
$ .00
  
If cash was received in
 more than one payment,
 check here '
  
30
  
Total price if different from
 item 29
  
31
  
$ .00
  Amount of cash received (in U.S. dollar equivalent) (must equal item 29) (see instructions):
  
a
  .00
  .00
  .00
  .00
  .00
  
c
  
Cashier’s check(s)
  d
  
Money order(s)
  e
  
Bank draft(s)
  f
  
Traveler’s check(s)
  
(Amount in $100 bills or higher $ )
  (Country ' )
  
.00
  
Type of transaction
  
33
  
Exchange of cash
  
g
  Escrow or trust funds
  
h
  
Other (specify in item 34) '
  
j
  
Debt obligations paid
  
f
  
Specific description of property or service shown in
 33. Give serial or registration number, address, docket
 number, etc. '
  
34
  
 
 
Issuer’s name(s) and serial number(s) of the monetary instrument(s) '
  
 
 
% 
(see instructions)
Taxpayer identification number
Bail received by court clerks
Signature
Title
Date of
 signature
Type or print name of contact person
Contact telephone number
' Use this form for transactions occurring after March 31, 2008. Do not use prior versions after this date. 
FinCEN
 Form
  
8300 
OMB No. 1506-0018 
(Rev. March 2008) 
Department of the Treasury
 Financial Crimes
 Enforcement Network
  
Authorized official
  
' ' 
IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
b
  
Issued by '
  Number '
  
Describe ID '
Alien
 identification (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
  
Continued — Complete if box 2 on page 1 is checked 
Continued — Complete if box 15 on page 1 is checked 
Part I
  
Part II
  
IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
Page 2
  Multiple Parties
  (Complete applicable parts below if box 2 or 15 on page 1 is checked)
  
Taxpayer identification number
M.I.
First name
Last name
Occupation, profession, or business
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
Date of birth '
Country (if not U.S.)
ZIP code
State
City
Taxpayer identification number
M.I.
First name
Last name
Occupation, profession, or business
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
Date of birth '
Country (if not U.S.)
ZIP code
State
City
First name
Individual’s last name or Organization’s name
Employer identification number
Occupation, profession, or business
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
Country (if not U.S.)
ZIP code
State
City
Doing business as (DBA) name (see instructions)
Taxpayer identification number
M.I.
First name
Individual’s last name or Organization’s name
Employer identification number
Occupation, profession, or business
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
Country (if not U.S.)
ZIP code
State
City
Doing business as (DBA) name (see instructions)
Taxpayer identification number
IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
Describe ID '
Identifying
 document (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
Describe ID '
Alien
 identification (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
Describe ID '
Identifying
 document (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
Describe ID '
Alien
 identification (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
Comments – Please use the lines provided below to comment on or clarify any information you entered on any line in Parts I, II, III, and IV
Page 3 IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Important Reminders
  
Clerks of federal or state courts must
 file Form 8300 if more than $10,000 in
 cash is received as bail for an
 individual(s) charged with certain criminal
 offenses. For these purposes, a clerk
 includes the clerk’s office or any other
 office, department, division, branch, or
 unit of the court that is authorized to
 receive bail. If a person receives bail on
 behalf of a clerk, the clerk is treated as
 receiving the bail. See the instructions
 for Item 33 on page 5.
  
General Instructions
  Who must file. Each person engaged in
 a trade or business who, in the course
 of that trade or business, receives more
 than $10,000 in cash in one transaction
 or in two or more related transactions,
 must file Form 8300. Any transactions
 conducted between a payer (or its
 agent) and the recipient in a 24-hour
 period are related transactions.
 Transactions are considered related
 even if they occur over a period of more
 than 24 hours if the recipient knows, or
 has reason to know, that each
 transaction is one of a series of
 connected transactions.
  
Exceptions. Cash is not required to be
 reported if it is received:
  
When to file. File Form 8300 by the
 15th day after the date the cash was
 received. If that date falls on a Saturday,
 Sunday, or legal holiday, file the form on
 the next business day.
  
Statement to be provided. You must
 give a written or electronic statement to
 each person named on a required Form
 8300 on or before January 31 of the
 year following the calendar year in which
 the cash is received. The statement
 must show the name, telephone number,
 and address of the information contact
 for the business, the aggregate amount
 of reportable cash received, and that the
 information was furnished to the IRS.
 Keep a copy of the statement for your
 records.
  Multiple payments. If you receive more
 than one cash payment for a single
 transaction or for related transactions,
 you must report the multiple payments
 any time you receive a total amount that
 exceeds $10,000 within any 12-month
 period. Submit the report within 15 days
 of the date you receive the payment that
  
Taxpayer identification number (TIN).
 You must furnish the correct TIN of the
 person or persons from whom you
 receive the cash and, if applicable, the
 person or persons on whose behalf the
 transaction is being conducted. You may
 be subject to penalties for an incorrect
 or missing TIN.
  
Penalties. You may be subject to
 penalties if you fail to file a correct and
 complete Form 8300 on time and you
 cannot show that the failure was due to
 reasonable cause. You may also be
 subject to penalties if you fail to furnish
 timely a correct and complete statement
 to each person named in a required
 report. A minimum penalty of $25,000
 may be imposed if the failure is due to
 an intentional or willful disregard of the
 cash reporting requirements.
  
c By a financial institution required to file
 Form 104, Currency Transaction Report.
  
c By a casino required to file (or exempt
 from filing) Form 103, Currency
 Transaction Report by Casinos, if the
 cash is received as part of its gaming
 business.
  
c By an agent who receives the cash
 from a principal, if the agent uses all of
 the cash within 15 days in a second
 transaction that is reportable on Form
 8300 or on Form 104, and discloses all
 the information necessary to complete
 Part II of Form 8300 or Form 104 to the
 recipient of the cash in the second
 transaction.
  
c In a transaction occurring entirely
 outside the United States. See
 Publication 1544, Reporting Cash
 Payments of Over $10,000 (Received in
 a Trade or Business), regarding
 transactions occurring in Puerto Rico
 and territories and possessions of the
 United States.
  
c In a transaction that is not in the
 course of a person’s trade or business.
  
If multiple payments are made in cash
 to satisfy bail and the initial payment
 does not exceed $10,000, the initial
 payment and subsequent payments
 must be aggregated and the information
 return must be filed by the 15th day
 after receipt of the payment that causes
 the aggregate amount to exceed
 $10,000 in cash. In such cases, the
 reporting requirement can be satisfied
 either by sending a single written
 statement with an aggregate amount
 listed or by furnishing a copy of each
 Form 8300 relating to that payer.
 Payments made to satisfy separate bail
 requirements are not required to be
 aggregated. See Treasury Regulations
 section 1.6050I-2.
  
Voluntary use of Form 8300. Form
 8300 may be filed voluntarily for any
 suspicious transaction (see Definitions
 on page 4) for use by FinCEN and the
 IRS, even if the total amount does not
 exceed $10,000.
  
If you have requested but are not able
 to get a TIN for one or more of the
 parties to a transaction within 15 days
 following the transaction, file the report
 and attach a statement explaining why
 the TIN is not included.
  Exception: You are not required to
 provide the TIN of a person who is a
 nonresident alien individual or a foreign
 organization if that person or foreign
 organization:
  
Keep a copy of each Form 8300 for 5
 years from the date you file it.
  
Where to file. File the form with the
 Internal Revenue Service, Detroit
 Computing Center, P.O. Box 32621,
 Detroit, Ml 48232.
  
The TIN for an individual (including a
 sole proprietorship) is the individual’s
 social security number (SSN). For certain
 resident aliens who are not eligible to
 get an SSN and nonresident aliens who
 are required to file tax returns, it is an
 IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification
 Number (ITIN). For other persons,
 including corporations, partnerships, and
 estates, it is the employer identification
 number (EIN).
  
Casinos must file Form 8300 for
 nongaming activities (restaurants, shops,
 etc.).
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Section references are to the Internal
 Revenue Code unless otherwise noted.
  
c Section 6050I (26 United States Code
 (U.S.C.) 6050I) and 31 U.S.C. 5331
 require that certain information be
 reported to the IRS and the Financial
 Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN).
 This information must be reported on
 IRS/FinCEN Form 8300.
  
c Item 33 box i is to be checked only by
 clerks of the court; box d is to be
 checked by bail bondsmen. See the
 instructions on page 5.
  
c The meaning of the word “currency” 
for purposes of 31 U.S.C. 5331 is the
 same as for the word “cash” (See Cash
 on page 4).
  
Penalties may also be imposed for
 causing, or attempting to cause, a trade
 or business to fail to file a required
  
causes the total amount to exceed
 $10,000. If more than one report is
 required within 15 days, you may file a
 combined report. File the combined
 report no later than the date the earliest
 report, if filed separately, would have to
 be filed.
  
c Does not have income effectively
 connected with the conduct of a U.S.
 trade or business;
  
c Does not have an office or place of
 business, or a fiscal or paying agent in
 the United States;
  
c Does not furnish a withholding
 certificate described in §1.1441-1(e)(2) or
 (3) or §1.1441-5(c)(2)(iv) or (3)(iii) to the
 extent required under §1.1441-1(e)(4)(vii);
 or
  
c Does not have to furnish a TIN on any
 return, statement, or other document as
 required by the income tax regulations
 under section 897 or 1445.
  
Page 4 IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Part I
  Item 2. If two or more individuals
 conducted the transaction you are
 reporting, check the box and complete
 Part I for any one of the individuals.
 Provide the same information for the
 other individual(s) on the back of the
 form. If more than three individuals are
 involved, provide the same information
 on additional sheets of paper and attach
 them to this form.
  Item 6. Enter the taxpayer identification
 number (TIN) of the individual named.
 See Taxpayer identification number (TIN)
 on page 3 for more information.
  Item 8. Enter eight numerals for the date
 of birth of the individual named. For
 example, if the individual’s birth date is
 July 6, 1960, enter 07 06 1960.
  
Item 13. Fully describe the nature of the
 occupation, profession, or business (for
 example, “plumber,” “attorney,” or
 “automobile dealer”). Do not use general
 or nondescriptive terms such as
 “businessman” or “self-employed.”
  Item 14. You must verify the name and
 address of the named individual(s).
 Verification must be made by
 examination of a document normally
 accepted as a means of identification
 when cashing checks (for example, a
 driver’s license, passport, alien
 registration card, or other official
 document). In item 14a, enter the type of
 document examined. In item 14b,
 identify the issuer of the document. In
 item 14c, enter the document’s number.
 For example, if the individual has a Utah
 driver’s license, enter “driver’s license” 
in item 14a, “Utah” in item 14b, and the
 number appearing on the license in item
 14c.
  
Part II
  Item 15. If the transaction is being
 conducted on behalf of more than one
 person (including husband and wife or
 parent and child), check the box and
 complete Part II for any one of the
 persons. Provide the same information
 for the other person(s) on the back of
 the form. If more than three persons are
 involved, provide the same information
 on additional sheets of paper and attach
 them to this form.
  
Specific Instructions
  You must complete all parts. However,
 you may skip Part II if the individual
 named in Part I is conducting the
 transaction on his or her behalf only. For
 voluntary reporting of suspicious
 transactions, see Item 1 below.
  Item 1. If you are amending a prior
 report, check box 1a. Complete the
 appropriate items with the correct or
 amended information only. Complete all
 of Part IV. Staple a copy of the original
 report to the amended report.
  To voluntarily report a suspicious
 transaction (see Suspicious transaction
 above), check box 1b. You may also
 telephone your local IRS Criminal
 Investigation Division or call
 1-866-556-3974.
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Note. You must complete all three items
 (a, b, and c) in this line to make sure
 that Form 8300 will be processed
 correctly.
  
Definitions
  Cash. The term “cash” means the
 following:
  
c U.S. and foreign coin and currency
 received in any transaction.
  
c A cashier’s check, money order, bank
 draft, or traveler’s check having a face
 amount of $10,000 or less that is
 received in a designated reporting
 transaction (defined below), or that is
 received in any transaction in which the
 recipient knows that the instrument is
 being used in an attempt to avoid the
 reporting of the transaction under either
 section 6050I or 31 U.S.C. 5331.
  
Designated reporting transaction. A
 retail sale (or the receipt of funds by a
 broker or other intermediary in
 connection with a retail sale) of a
 consumer durable, a collectible, or a
 travel or entertainment activity.
  Retail sale. Any sale (whether or not
 the sale is for resale or for any other
 purpose) made in the course of a trade
 or business if that trade or business
 principally consists of making sales to
 ultimate consumers.
  Consumer durable. An item of tangible
 personal property of a type that, under
 ordinary usage, can reasonably be
 expected to remain useful for at least 1
 year, and that has a sales price of more
 than $10,000.
  Collectible. Any work of art, rug,
 antique, metal, gem, stamp, coin, etc.
  Travel or entertainment activity. An
 item of travel or entertainment that
 pertains to a single trip or event if the
 combined sales price of the item and all
 other items relating to the same trip or
 event that are sold in the same
 transaction (or related transactions)
 exceeds $10,000.
  Exceptions. A cashier’s check, money
 order, bank draft, or traveler’s check is
 not considered received in a designated
 reporting transaction if it constitutes the
 proceeds of a bank loan or if it is
 received as a payment on certain
 promissory notes, installment sales
 contracts, or down payment plans. See
 Publication 1544 for more information.
  
Note. Cash does not include a check
 drawn on the payer’s own account, such
 as a personal check, regardless of the
 amount.
  
Person. An individual, corporation,
 partnership, trust, estate, association, or
 company.
  Recipient. The person receiving the
 cash. Each branch or other unit of a
 person’s trade or business is considered
 a separate recipient unless the branch
 receiving the cash (or a central office
 linking the branches), knows or has
 reason to know the identity of payers
 making cash payments to other
 branches.
  Transaction. Includes the purchase of
 property or services, the payment of
 debt, the exchange of a negotiable
 instrument for cash, and the receipt of
 cash to be held in escrow or trust. A
 single transaction may not be broken
 into multiple transactions to avoid
 reporting.
  Suspicious transaction. A suspicious
 transaction is a transaction in which it
 appears that a person is attempting to
 cause Form 8300 not to be filed, or to
 file a false or incomplete form.
  
report; for causing, or attempting to
 cause, a trade or business to file a
 required report containing a material
 omission or misstatement of fact; or for
 structuring, or attempting to structure,
 transactions to avoid the reporting
 requirements. These violations may also
 be subject to criminal prosecution which,
 upon conviction, may result in
 imprisonment of up to 5 years or fines of
 up to $250,000 for individuals and
 $500,000 for corporations or both.
  
Items 16 through 19. If the person on
 whose behalf the transaction is being
 conducted is an individual, complete
 items 16, 17, and 18. Enter his or her
 TIN in item 19. If the individual is a sole
 proprietor and has an employer
 identification number (EIN), you must
 enter both the SSN and EIN in item 19.
 If the person is an organization, put its
 name as shown on required tax filings in
 item 16 and its EIN in item 19.
  Item 20. If a sole proprietor or
 organization named in items 16 through
 18 is doing business under a name other
 than that entered in item 16 (for
 example, a “trade” or “doing business
 as (DBA)” name), enter it here.
  Item 27. If the person is not required to
 furnish a TIN, complete this item. See
 Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) on
 page 3. Enter a description of the type
 of official document issued to that
 person in item 27a (for example, a
 “passport”), the country that issued the
 document in item 27b, and the
 document’s number in item 27c.
  
Page 5 IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Item 31. Enter the total price of the
 property, services, amount of cash
 exchanged, etc. (for example, the total
 cost of a vehicle purchased, cost of
 catering service, exchange of currency) if
 different from the amount shown in item
 29.
  Item 32. Enter the dollar amount of each
 form of cash received. Show foreign
 currency amounts in U.S. dollar
 equivalent at a fair market rate of
 exchange available to the public. The
 sum of the amounts must equal item 29.
 For cashier’s check, money order, bank
 draft, or traveler’s check, provide the
 name of the issuer and the serial number
 of each instrument. Names of all issuers
 and all serial numbers involved must be
 provided. If necessary, provide this
 information on additional sheets of paper
 and attach them to this form.
  Item 33. Check the appropriate box(es)
 that describe the transaction. If the
 transaction is not specified in boxes a–i,
 check box j and briefly describe the
 transaction (for example, “car lease,” 
“boat lease,” “house lease,” or “aircraft
 rental”). If the transaction relates to the
 receipt of bail by a court clerk, check
 box i, “Bail received by court clerks.” 
This box is only for use by court clerks.
 If the transaction relates to cash
 received by a bail bondsman, check box
 d, “Business services provided.”
  
Part IV
  Item 36. If you are a sole proprietorship,
 you must enter your SSN. If your
 business also has an EIN, you must
 provide the EIN as well. All other
 business entities must enter an EIN.
  
Item 41. Fully describe the nature of
 your business, for example, “attorney” or
 “jewelry dealer.” Do not use general or
 nondescriptive terms such as “business” 
or “store.”
  
Privacy Act and Paperwork Reduction
 Act Notice. Except as otherwise noted,
 the information solicited on this form is
 required by the Internal Revenue Service
 (IRS) and the Financial Crimes
 Enforcement Network (FinCEN) in order
 to carry out the laws and regulations of
 the United States Department of the
 Treasury. Trades or businesses, except
 for clerks of criminal courts, are required
 to provide the information to the IRS and
 FinCEN under both section 6050I and 31
 U.S.C. 5331. Clerks of criminal courts
 are required to provide the information
 to the IRS under section 6050I. Section
 6109 and 31 U.S.C. 5331 require that
 you provide your social security number
 in order to adequately identify you and
 process your return and other papers.
 The principal purpose for collecting the
 information on this form is to maintain
 reports or records which have a high
 degree of usefulness in criminal, tax, or
 regulatory investigations or proceedings,
 or in the conduct of intelligence or
 counterintelligence activities, by directing
 the federal Government’s attention to
 unusual or questionable transactions.
  
Generally, tax returns and return
 information are confidential, as stated in
 section 6103. However, section 6103
 allows or requires the IRS to disclose or
 give the information requested on this
 form to others as described in the Code.
 For example, we may disclose your tax
 information to the Department of Justice,
 to enforce the tax laws, both civil and
 criminal, and to cities, states, the District
 of Columbia, to carry out their tax laws.
 We may disclose this information to
 other persons as necessary to obtain
 information which we cannot get in any
 other way. We may disclose this
 information to federal, state, and local
 child support agencies; and to other
 federal agencies for the purposes of
 determining entitlement for benefits or
 the eligibility for and the repayment of
 loans. We may also provide the records
 to appropriate state, local, and foreign
 criminal law enforcement and regulatory
 personnel in the performance of their
 official duties. We may also disclose this
 information to other countries under a
 tax treaty, or to federal and state
 agencies to enforce federal nontax
 criminal laws and to combat terrorism. In
 addition, FinCEN may provide the
 information to those officials if they are
 conducting intelligence or
 counter-intelligence activities to protect
 against international terrorism.
  
You are not required to provide
 information as to whether the reported
 transaction is deemed suspicious.
 Failure to provide all other requested
 information, or providing fraudulent
 information, may result in criminal
 prosecution and other penalties under
 Title 26 and Title 31 of the United States
 Code.
  
Item 42. This form must be signed by an
 individual who has been authorized to
 do so for the business that received the
 cash.
  
You are not required to provide the
 information requested on a form that is
 subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act
 unless the form displays a valid OMB
 control number. Books or records
 relating to a form or its instructions must
 be retained as long as their contents
 may become material in the
 administration of any law under Title 26
 or Title 31.
  The time needed to complete this
 form will vary depending on individual
 circumstances. The estimated average
 time is 21 minutes. If you have
 comments concerning the accuracy of
 this time estimate or suggestions for
 making this form simpler, you can write
 to the Internal Revenue Service, Tax
 Products Coordinating Committee,
 SE:W:CAR:MP:T:T:SP, 1111 Constitution
 Ave. NW, IR-6526, Washington, DC
 20224. Do not send Form 8300 to this
 address. Instead, see Where to File on
 page 3.
  
Comments
  Use this section to comment on or
 clarify anything you may have entered
 on any line in Parts I, II, III, and IV. For
 example, if you checked box b
 (Suspicious transaction) in line 1 above
 Part I, you may want to explain why you
 think that the cash transaction you are
 reporting on Form 8300 may be
 suspicious.
  
 
Part III
  Item 28. Enter the date you received the
 cash. If you received the cash in more
 than one payment, enter the date you
 received the payment that caused the
 combined amount to exceed $10,000.
 See Multiple payments on page 3 for
 more information.
  Item 30. Check this box if the amount
 shown in item 29 was received in more
 than one payment (for example, as
 installment payments or payments on
 related transactions).
  
Note. You must complete all three items
 (a, b, and c) in this line to make sure
 that Form 8300 will be processed
 correctly.
  
 REPORT OF INTERNATIONAL
 TRANSPORTATION OF CURRENCY
 OR MONETARY INSTRUMENTS
 OMB NO. 1506-0014
 To be filed with the Bureau of
 Customs and Border Protection
 AIRLINE/FLIGHT/VESSEL INSPECTOR (Name and Badge Number) LICENSE PLATE
 DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
 FINANCIAL CRIMES ENFORCEMENT NETWORK
 For Paperwork Reduction Act
 Notice and Privacy Act Notice,
 see back of form.
 2. IDENTIFICATION NO.  (See instructions) 3. DATE OF BIRTH (Mo./Day/Yr.)
 4. PERMANENT ADDRESS IN UNITED STATES OR ABROAD 5. YOUR COUNTRY OR COUNTRIES OF
      CITIZENSHIP
 10. IMMIGRATION ALIEN NO.
 FinCEN FORM 105
 7. PASSPORT NO. & COUNTRY
 9. PLACE UNITED STATES VISA WAS ISSUED
 31 U.S.C. 5316;  31 CFR 103.23 and 103.27
 (Formerly Customs Form 4790)
 CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION USE ONLY
 1. NAME (Last or family, first, and middle)
 8. U.S. VISA DATE (Mo./Day/Yr.)
 6. ADDRESS WHILE IN THE UNITED STATES
 Departed From: (U.S. Port/City in U.S.) Arrived At: (City in U.S.)
 11. IF CURRENCY OR MONETARY INSTRUMENT IS ACCOMPANIED BY A PERSON, COMPLETE 11a OR 11b
 B. IMPORTED INTO THE UNITED STATES
 CURRENCY AND MONETARY INSTRUMENT INFORMATION (SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE)(To be completed by everyone)
 A. EXPORTED FROM THE UNITED STATES
 12a. DATE  SHIPPED (Mo./Day/Yr.)
 12e. SHIPPED TO (Name and Address)
 15. TYPE OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY, OCCUPATION, OR PROFESSION
 12f. RECEIVED FROM (Name and Address)
 17. IF OTHER THAN U.S. CURRENCY
 IS INVOLVED, PLEASE COMPLETE
 BLOCKS A AND B.
 SIGNATURE OF PERSON COMPLETING THIS REPORT
 Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this report, and to the best of my knowledge and belief it is true, correct and complete.
 18. NAME AND TITLE (Print) 20. DATE OF REPORT (Mo./Day/Yr.)
 PART IV
 PART  I
 16. TYPE AND AMOUNT OF CURRENCY/MONETARY INSTRUMENTS
 (TOTAL)
 Other Monetary Instruments
 (Specify type, issuing entity and date, and serial or other identifying number.)
 Currency and Coins
 FOR A PERSON DEPARTING OR ENTERING THE UNITED STATES, OR A PERSON SHIPPING, MAILING, OR RECEIVING CURRENCY OR
 MONETARY INSTRUMENTS. (IF ACTING FOR  ANYONE ELSE, ALSO COMPLETE PART II BELOW.)
 19. SIGNATURE
 STATE/COUNTRY NUMBER
 DATE
 COUNT VERIFIED VOLUNTARY
 REPORT
 Yes           No Yes          No
 A. Currency Name
 B. Country
 PART  III
 PART  II
 Yes                         No
 15a. IS THE BUSINESS A BANK?
 INFORMATION ABOUT PERSON(S) OR BUSINESS ON WHOSE BEHALF IMPORTATION OR EXPORTATION WAS CONDUCTED
 13. NAME (Last or family, first, and middle or Business Name)
 14. PERMANENT ADDRESS IN UNITED STATES OR ABROAD
 FinCEN Form  105
  (Formerly Customs Form 4790)
               (Rev. July 2003)
 Department of the Treasury
 FinCEN
 Departed From: (Foreign City/Country)Arrived At: (Foreign City/Country)
 12. IF CURRENCY OR MONETARY INSTRUMENT WAS MAILED OR OTHERWISE SHIPPED, COMPLETE 12a THROUGH 12f
 12d. NAME OF CARRIER12b. DATE  RECEIVED (Mo./Day/Yr.) 12c. METHOD OF SHIPMENT (e.g. u.s. Mail, Public Carrier, etc.)
 Please type or print.
 GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
 This report is required by 31 U.S.C. 5316 and Treasury Department regulations (31 CFR
 103).
 WHO MUST FILE:
 (1) Each person who physically transports, mails, or ships, or causes to be physically
 transported, mailed, or shipped currency or other monetary instruments in an aggregate
 amount exceeding $10,000 at one time from the United States to any place outside the
 United States or into the United States from any place outside the United States, and
 (2) Each person who receives in the United States currency or other monetary
 instruments In an aggregate amount exceeding $10,000 at one time which have been
 transported, mailed, or shipped to the person from any place outside the United States.
 A TRANSFER OF FUNDS THROUGH NORMAL BANKING PROCEDURES, WHICH
 DOES NOT INVOLVE THE PHYSICAL TRANSPORTATION OF CURRENCY OR
 MONETARY INSTRUMENTS, IS NOT REQUIRED TO BE REPORTED.
 Exceptions: Reports are not required to be filed by:
 (1) a Federal Reserve bank,
 (2) a bank, a foreign bank, or a broker or dealer in securities in respect to currency
 or other monetary instruments mailed or shipped through the postal service or by common
 carrier,
 (3) a commercial bank or trust company organized under the laws of any State or of
 the United States with respect to overland shipments of currency or monetary instruments
 shipped to or received from an established customer maintaining a deposit relationship
 with the bank, in amounts which the bank may reasonably conclude do not exceed
 amounts commensurate with the customary conduct of the business, industry, or profession
 of the customer concerned,
 (4) a person who is not a citizen or resident of the United States in respect to
 currency or other monetary instruments mailed or shipped from abroad to a bank or
 broker or dealer in securities through the postal service or by common carrier,
 (5) a common carrier of passengers in respect to currency or other monetary
 instruments in the possession of its passengers,
 (6) a common carrier of goods in respect to shipments of currency or monetary
 instruments not declared to be such by the shipper,
 (7) a travelers’ check issuer or its agent in respect to the transportation of travelers’
 checks prior to their delivery to selling agents for eventual sale to the public,
 (8) a person with a restrictively endorsed traveler’s check that is in the collection
 and reconciliation process after the traveler’s check has been negotiated, nor by
 (9) a person engaged as a business in the transportation of currency, monetary
 instruments and other commercial papers with respect to the transportation of currency
 or other monetary instruments overland between established offices of banks or brokers
 or dealers in securities and foreign persons.
 WHEN AND WHERE TO FILE:
 A. Recipients — Each person who receives currency or other monetary instruments in the
 United States shall file FinCEN Form 105, within 15 days after receipt of the currency or
 monetary instruments, with the Customs officer in charge at any port of entry or departure
 or by mail with the Commissioner of Customs, Attention: Currency Transportation
 Reports, Washington DC 20229.
 B. Shippers or Mailers — If the currency or other monetary instrument does not accompany
 the person entering or departing the United States, FinCEN Form 105 may be filed by
 mail on or before the date of entry, departure, mailing, or shipping with the Commissioner
 of Customs, Attention: Currency Transportation Reports, Washington DC 20229.
 C. Travelers — Travelers carrying currency or other monetary instruments with them shall
 file FinCEN Form 105 at the time of entry into the United States or at the time of departure
 from the United States with the Customs officer in charge at any Customs port of entry or
 departure.
 An additional report of a particular transportation, mailing, or shipping of currency or
 the monetary instruments is not required if a complete and truthful report has already
 been filed. However, no person otherwise required to file a report shall be excused from
 liability for failure to do so if, in fact, a complete and truthful report has not been filed.
 Forms may be obtained from any Bureau of Customs and Border Protection office.
 PENALTIES: Civil and criminal penalties, including under certain circumstances a
 fine of not more than $500,000 and Imprisonment of not more than ten years, are
 provided for failure to file a report, filing a report containing a material omission or
 misstatement, or filing a false or fraudulent report. In addition, the currency or
 monetary instrument may be subject to seizure and forfeiture. See 31 U.S.C.5321
 and 31 CFR 103.57; 31 U.S.C. 5322 and 31 CFR 103.59; 31 U.S.C. 5317 and 31 CFR
 103.58, and U.S.C. 5332.
 DEFINITIONS:
 Bank — Each agent, agency, branch or office within the United States of any person doing
 business in one or more of the capacities listed: (1) a commercial bank or trust company
 organized under the laws of any State or of the United States; (2) a private bank; (3)
 asavings association, savings and loan association, and building and loan association
 organized under the laws of any State or of the United States; (4) an insured institution as
 defined in section 401 of the National Housing Act; (5) a savings bank, industrial bank or
 other thrift institution; (6) a credit union organized under the laws of any State or of the
 United States; (7) any other organization chartered under the banking laws of any State
 and subject to the supervision of the bank supervisory authorities of a State other than a
 money service business; (8) a bank organized under foreign law; and (9) any national
 banking association or corporation acting under the provisions of section 25A of the
 Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. Sections 611-632).
 Foreign Bank — A bank organized under foreign law, or an agency, branch or office located
 outside the United States of a bank. The term does not include an agent, agency, branch
 or office within the United States of a bank organized under foreign law.
 Broker or Dealer in Securities—A broker or dealer in securities, registered or required
 to be registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities
 Exchange Act of 1934.
 Identification Number — Individuals must enter their social security number, if any.
 However, aliens who do not have a social security number should enter passport or alien
 registration number. All others should enter their employer identification number.
 Monetary Instruments — (1) Coin or currency of the United States or of any other country,
 (2) traveler’s checks in any form, (3) negotiable instruments (including checks, promissory
 notes, and money orders) in bearer form, endorsed without restriction, made out to a
 fictitious payee, or otherwise in such form that title thereto passes upon delivery, (4)
 incomplete instruments (including checks, promissory notes, and money orders) that are
 signed but on which the name of the payee has been omitted, and (5) securities or stock
 in bearer form or otherwise in such form that title thereto passes upon delivery. Monetary
 instruments do not include (i) checks or money orders made payable to the order of a
 named person which have not been endorsed or which bear restrictive endorsements,
 (ii) warehouse receipts, or (iii) bills of lading.
 Person — An individual, a corporation, a partnership, a trust or estate, a joint stock
 company, an association, a syndicate, joint venture or other unincorporated organization
 or group, an Indian Tribe (as that term is defined in the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act),
 and all entities cognizable as legal personalities.
 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS
 You should complete each line that applies to you. PART II. -Block 13; provide the
 complete name of the shipper or recipient on whose behalf the exportation or importation
 was conducted. PART III. — Specify type of instrument, issuing entity, and date, serial or
 other identifying number, and payee (if any). PART IV. — Block 22A and 22B; enter the
 exact date you shipped or received currency or monetary instrument(s). Block 21, if
 currency or monetary instruments of more than one country is involved, attach a list
 showing each type, country or origin and amount.
 PRIVACY ACT AND PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT NOTICE:
 Pursuant to the requirements of Public law 93-579 (Privacy Act of 1974), notice is hereby
 given that the authority to collect information on Form 4790 in accordance with 5 U.S.C.
 552a(e)(3) is Public law 91-508; 31 U.S.C. 5316; 5 U.S.C. 301; Reorganization Plan
 No.1 of 1950; Treasury Department Order No. 165, revised, as amended; 31 CFR 103;
 and 44 U.S.C. 3501.
 The principal purpose for collecting the information is to assure maintenance of reports
 or records having a high degree of usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory investigations
 or proceedings. The information collected may be provided to those officers and
 employees of the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection and any other constituent
 unit of the Department of the Treasury who have a need for the records in the performance
 of their duties. The records may be referred to any other department or agency of the
 Federal Government upon the request of the head of such department or agency. The
 information collected may also be provided to appropriate state, local, and foreign criminal
 law enforcement and regulatory personnel in the performance of their official duties.
 Disclosure of this information is mandatory pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 5316 and 31 CFR Part
 103 (See Penalities).
 Disclosure of the social security number is mandatory. The authority to collect this number
 is 31 U.S.C. 5316(b) and 31 CFR 103.27(d). The social security number will be used as a
 means to identify the individual who files the record.
 An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a
 collection of information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number. The
 collection of this information is mandatory pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 5316.
 Statement required by 5 CFR 1320.8(b)(3)(iii): The estimated average burden associated
 with this collection of information is 11 minutes per respondent or record keeper
 depending on individual circumstances. Comments concerning the accuracy of this burden
 estimate and suggestions for reducing this burden should be directed to the Department
 of the Treasury, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, P.O. Box 39 Vienna, Virginia
 22183.  DO NOT send completed forms to this office—See When and Where To File
 above.
 FinCEN FORM 105
 (Formerly Customs Form 4790)
1  Check box below only if correcting a prior report.
 Corrects Prior Report (see instruction #3 under “How to Make a Report”)
 d
   31  Is the relationship an insider relationship?          a          Yes          b          No
  Closed?
          Yes        No
   Yes        No
 a
 b
 1Suspicious
 Activity Report
 July 2003
 Previous editions will not be accepted after December 31, 2003
 ALWAYS COMPLETE ENTIRE REPORT
 (see instructions)
 FRB: FR 2230 OMB No. 7100-0212
 FDIC: 6710/06 OMB No. 3064-0077
 OCC: 8010-9,8010-1 OMB No. 1557-0180
 OTS: 1601 OMB No. 1550-0003
 NCUA: 2362 OMB No. 3133-0094
 TREASURY: TD F 90-22.47 OMB No. 1506-0001
 Part I Reporting Financial Institution Information
 2  Name of Financial Institution
 4  Address of Financial Institution
 6  City
 11  State 12  Zip Code10  City
  9   Address of Branch Office(s) where activity occurred Multiple Branches (include information in narrative, Part V)
 14  Account number(s) affected, if any
 Part II Suspect Information
 15  Last Name or Name of Entity 16  First Name 17  Middle
 18   Address 19  SSN, EIN or TIN
 7  State 8  Zip Code
 20  City 21  State 22  Zip Code 23  Country
 27  Date of Birth
       _______ / _______ / _________
 24  Phone Number - Residence (include area code)
      (        )
 25  Phone Number - Work (include area code)
      (        )
 26  Occupation/Type of Business
 29  Forms of Identification for Suspect:
 a         Driver’s License/State ID          b         Passport          c           Alien Registration          d         Other ______________
            Number  __________________________              Issuing Authority  ______________________
    MM            DD                  YYYY
 c       Still employed at financial institution   e        Terminated
 d       Suspended                                         f         Resigned
 32  Date of Suspension, Termination, Resignation
       _______ / _______ / __________
           MM                DD                   YYYY
 c
 Suspect Information Unavailable
  Closed?
          Yes        No
   Yes        No
    MM       DD            YYYY
 3  EIN
 5   Primary Federal Regulator
    a Federal Reserve d OCC
    b FDIC e OTS
    c NCUA
 If Yes specify:
 13  If institution closed, date closed
         ____ / ____ / _______
 28  Admission/Confession?
       a     Yes       b          No
 30  Relationship to Financial Institution:
        a Accountant d Attorney g Customer j Officer
        b Agent e Borrower h Director k Shareholder
        c Appraiser f Broker i Employee l Other  ________________________________
37  Dollar amount of recovery (if applicable)
                                                                              .00
       f Computer Intrusion
       g Consumer Loan Fraud
       h Counterfeit Check
       i Counterfeit Credit/Debit Card
       j Counterfeit Instrument (other)
       k Credit Card Fraud
      (         )
 34  Total dollar amount involved in known or suspicious activity
       $                                                          .00
 40  Has any law enforcement agency already been advised by telephone, written communication, or otherwise?
 a DEA d Postal Inspection g Other Federal
 b FBI e Secret Service h State
 c IRS f U.S. Customs i Local
  j Agency Name (for g, h or i)
 2
 35  Summary characterization of suspicious activity:
       a Bank Secrecy Act/Structuring/
 Money Laundering
       b Bribery/Gratuity
       c Check Fraud
       d Check Kiting
       e Commercial Loan Fraud
       s Other
 Part III Suspicious Activity Information
 33  Date or date range of suspicious activity
 From   ____ / _____ / _______    To  ____ / _____ / _______
 36  Amount of loss prior to recovery
                                                                       .00
 38  Has the suspicious activity had a
       material impact on, or otherwise
       affected, the financial soundness
      of the institution?
      a Yes b          No
 51   Agency (if not filed by financial institution)
    MM       DD            YYYY    MM       DD            YYYY
 39  Has the institution’s bonding company been notified?
      a Yes b          No
 Part IV Contact for Assistance
 45  Last Name 46  First Name
 50  Date Prepared
       _______ / _______ /_________
 48  Title/Occupation
    MM            DD                  YYYY
 49 Phone Number (include area code)
       (          )
 47  Middle
        (type of activity)
 ,,,
 ,,
 $
  (if applicable)
 ,,
 $
 41  Name of person(s) contacted at Law Enforcement Agency 42  Phone Number (include area code)
 44  Phone Number (include area code)
       (         )
 43  Name of person(s) contacted at Law Enforcement Agency
       l Debit Card Fraud
       m Defalcation/Embezzlement
       n False Statement
       o Misuse of Position or Self Dealing
       p Mortgage Loan Fraud
       q Mysterious Disappearance
       r Wire Transfer Fraud
       t Terrorist Financing
       u  Identity Theft
3Part V Suspicious Activity Information Explanation/Description
 Explanation/description of known or suspected violation
 of law or suspicious activity.
 This section of the report is critical. The care with which it is
 written may make the difference in whether or not the described
 conduct and its possible criminal nature are clearly understood.
 Provide below a chronological and complete account of the
 possible violation of law, including what is unusual, irregular or
 suspicious about the transaction, using the following checklist as
 you prepare your account. If necessary, continue the
 narrative on a duplicate of this page.
 a Describe supporting documentation and retain for 5 years.
 b Explain who benefited, financially or otherwise, from the
 transaction, how much, and how.
 c Retain any confession, admission, or explanation of the
 transaction provided by the suspect and indicate to
 whom and when it was given.
 d Retain any confession, admission, or explanation of the
 transaction provided by any other person and indicate
 to whom and when it was given.
 e Retain any evidence of cover-up or evidence of an attempt
 to deceive federal or state examiners or others.
 f Indicate where the possible violation took place
 (e.g., main office, branch, other).
 g Indicate whether the possible violation is an isolated
 incident or relates to other transactions.
 h Indicate whether there is any related litigation; if so,
 specify.
 i Recommend any further investigation that might assist law
 enforcement authorities.
 j Indicate whether any information has been excluded from
 this report; if so, why?
 k If you are correcting a previously filed report, describe the
 changes that are being made.
 For Bank Secrecy Act/Structuring/Money Laundering reports,
 include the following additional information:
 l Indicate whether currency and/or monetary instruments
 were involved. If so, provide the amount and/or description
 of the instrument (for example, bank draft, letter of
 credit, domestic or international money order, stocks,
 bonds, traveler’s checks, wire transfers sent or received,
 cash, etc.).
 m Indicate any account number that may be involved
 or affected.
 Paperwork Reduction Act Notice:  The purpose of this form is to provide an effective and consistent means for financial institutions to notify appropriate law enforcement agencies of known
 or suspected criminal conduct or suspicious activities that take place at or were perpetrated against financial institutions. This report is required by law, pursuant to authority contained in
 the following statutes.  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System:  12 U.S.C. 324, 334, 611a, 1844(b) and (c), 3105(c) (2) and 3106(a).  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation:
 12 U.S.C. 93a, 1818, 1881-84, 3401-22.  Office of the Comptroller of the Currency:  12 U.S.C. 93a, 1818, 1881-84, 3401-22.  Office of Thrift Supervision:  12 U.S.C. 1463 and 1464.
 National Credit Union Administration:  12 U.S.C. 1766(a), 1786(q).  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network:  31 U.S.C. 5318(g).  Information collected on this report is confidential (5
 U.S.C. 552(b)(7) and 552a(k)(2), and 31 U.S.C. 5318(g)).  The Federal financial institutions’ regulatory agencies and the U.S. Departments of Justice and Treasury may use and share the information.
 Public reporting and recordkeeping burden for this information collection is estimated to average 30 minutes per response, and includes time to gather and maintain data in the required report, review
 the instructions, and complete the information collection.  Send comments regarding this burden estimate, including suggestions for reducing the burden, to the Office of Management and Budget,
 Paperwork Reduction Project, Washington, DC 20503 and, depending on your primary Federal regulatory agency, to Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC 20551;
 or Assistant Executive Secretary, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Washington, DC 20429; or Legislative and Regulatory Analysis Division, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Washington,
 DC 20219; or Office of Thrift Supervision, Enforcement Office, Washington, DC 20552; or National Credit Union Administration, 1775 Duke Street, Alexandria, VA 22314; or Office of the Director, Financial
 Crimes Enforcement Network, Department of the Treasury, 2070 Chain Bridge Road, Vienna, VA 22182.  The agencies may not conduct or sponsor, and an organization (or a person) is not required
 to respond to, a collection of information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number.
  Tips on SAR Form preparation and filing are available in the SAR Activity Review at www.fincen.gov/pub_reports.html
Suspicious Activity Report
 Instructions
  Safe Harbor  Federal law (31 U.S.C. 5318(g)(3)) provides complete protection from civil liability for all reports of suspicious
  transactions made to appropriate authorities, including supporting documentation, regardless of whether such reports are
  filed pursuant to this report’s instructions or are filed on a voluntary basis. Specifically, the law provides that a financial
  institution, and its directors, officers, employees and agents, that make a disclosure of any possible violation of law or
  regulation, including in connection with the preparation of suspicious activity reports, “shall not be liable to any person
  under any law or regulation of the United States, any constitution, law, or regulation of any State or political subdivision of
  any State, or under any contract or other legally  enforceable agreement (including any arbitration agreement), for such
  disclosure or for any failure to provide notice of such  disclosure to the person who is the subject of such disclosure or any
  other person identified in the disclosure”.
  Notification Prohibited Federal law (31 U.S.C. 5318(g)(2)) requires that a financial institution, and its directors, officers,
  employees and agents who, voluntarily or by means of a suspicious activity report, report suspected or known criminal
  violations or suspicious activities may not notify any person involved in the transaction that the transaction has been reported.
  In situations involving violations requiring immediate attention, such as when a reportable violation is ongoing, the
  financial institution shall immediately notify, by telephone, appropriate law enforcement and financial institution
  supervisory authorities in addition to filing a timely suspicious activity report.
 WHEN TO MAKE A REPORT:
 1. All financial institutions operating in the United States, including insured banks, savings associations, savings
 association service corporations, credit unions, bank holding companies, nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding
 companies, Edge and Agreement corporations, and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks, are re-
 quired to make this report following the discovery of:
 a. Insider abuse involving any amount. Whenever the financial institution detects any known or suspected
 Federal criminal violation, or pattern of criminal violations, committed or attempted against the financial
 institution or involving a transaction or transactions conducted through the financial institution, where the
 financial institution believes that it was either an actual or potential victim of a criminal violation, or series of
 criminal violations, or that the financial institution was used to facilitate a criminal transaction, and the
 financial institution has a substantial basis for identifying one of its directors, officers, employees, agents or
 other institution-affiliated parties as having committed or aided in the commission of a criminal act regardless
 of the amount involved in the violation.
 b. Violations aggregating $5,000 or more where a suspect can be identified. Whenever the financial
 institution detects any known or suspected Federal criminal violation, or pattern of criminal violations, com-
 mitted or attempted against the financial institution or involving a transaction or transactions conducted
 through the financial institution and involving or aggregating $5,000 or more in funds or other assets, where
 the financial institution believes that it was either an actual or potential victim of a criminal violation, or series
 of criminal violations, or that the financial institution was used to facilitate a criminal transaction, and the
 financial institution has a substantial basis for identifying a possible suspect or group of suspects. If it is
 determined prior to filing this report that the identified suspect or group of suspects has used an “alias,” then
 information regarding the true identity of the suspect or group of suspects, as well as alias identifiers, such
 as drivers’ licenses or social security numbers, addresses and telephone numbers, must be reported.
 c. Violations aggregating $25,000 or more regardless of a potential suspect. Whenever the financial
 institution detects any known or suspected Federal criminal violation, or pattern of criminal violations, com-
 mitted or attempted against the financial institution or involving a transaction or transactions conducted
 through the financial institution and involving or aggregating $25,000 or more in funds or other assets, where
 the financial institution believes that it was either an actual or potential victim of a criminal violation, or series
 of criminal violations, or that the financial institution was used to facilitate a criminal transaction, even though
 there is no substantial basis for identifying a possible suspect or group of suspects.
 d. Transactions aggregating $5,000 or more that involve potential money laundering or violations of the
 Bank Secrecy Act. Any transaction (which for purposes of this subsection means a deposit, withdrawal,
 transfer between accounts, exchange of currency, loan, extension of credit, purchase or sale of any stock,
 bond, certificate of deposit, or other monetary instrument or investment security, or any other payment, transfer,
 or delivery by, through, or to a financial institution, by whatever means effected) conducted or attempted by, at
or through the financial institution and involving or aggregating $5,000 or more in funds or other assets, if the financial
 institution knows, suspects, or has reason to suspect that:
           i.  The transaction involves funds derived from illegal activities or is intended or conducted in order to hide or
                disguise funds or assets derived from illegal activities (including, without limitation, the ownership, nature,
       source, location, or control of such funds or assets) as part of a plan to violate or evade any law or regulation or
       to avoid any transaction reporting requirement under Federal law;
 ii.  The transaction is designed to evade any regulations promulgated under the Bank Secrecy Act; or
 iii. The transaction has no business or apparent lawful purpose or is not the sort in which the particular customer
 would normally be expected to engage, and the financial institution knows of no reasonable explanation for the
 transaction after examining the available facts, including the background and possible purpose of the transaction.
       The Bank Secrecy Act requires all financial institutions to file currency transaction reports (CTRs) in accordance with
    the Department of the Treasury’s implementing regulations (31 CFR Part 103). These regulations require a financial
    institution to file a CTR whenever a currency transaction exceeds $10,000. If a currency transaction exceeds $10,000
    and is suspicious, the institution must file both a CTR (reporting the currency transaction) and a suspicious activity
    report (reporting the suspicious or criminal aspects of the transaction). If a currency transaction equals or is below
    $10,000 and is suspicious, the institution should only file a suspicious activity report.
   2. Computer Intrusion.  For purposes of this report, “computer intrusion” is defined as gaining access to a
    computer system of a financial institution to:
 a. Remove, steal, procure, or otherwise affect funds of the institution or the institution’s customers;
            b. Remove, steal, procure or otherwise affect critical information of the institution including customer account
          information; or
 c. Damage, disable or otherwise affect critical systems of the institution.
    For purposes of this reporting requirement, computer intrusion does not mean attempted intrusions of websites or
    other non-critical information systems of the institution that provide no access to institution or customer financial or
    other critical information.
   3. A financial institution is required to file a suspicious activity report no later than 30 calendar days after the date of
       initial detection of facts that may constitute a basis for filing a suspicious activity report. If no suspect was identified
    on the date of detection of the incident requiring the filing, a financial institution may delay filing a suspicious activity
    report for an additional 30 calendar days to identify a suspect. In no case shall reporting be delayed more than 60
    calendar days after the date of initial detection of a reportable transaction.
   4. This suspicious activity report does not need to be filed for those robberies and burglaries that are reported to local
    authorities, or (except for savings associations and service corporations) for lost, missing, counterfeit, or stolen
    securities that are reported pursuant to the requirements of 17 CFR 240.17f-1.
 HOW TO MAKE A REPORT:
   1. Send each completed suspicious activity report to:
 Detroit Computing Center, P.O. Box 33980, Detroit, Ml 48232-0980
   2. For items that do not apply or for which information is not available, leave blank.
   3. If you are correcting a previously filed report, check the box at the top of the report (line 1). Complete the report in its
   entirety and include the corrected information in the applicable boxes. Then describe the changes that are being made
   in Part V (Description of Suspicious Activity), line k.
   4. Do not include any supporting documentation with the suspicious activity report. Identify and retain a copy
   of the suspicious activity report and all original supporting documentation or business record equivalent for five (5)
   years from the date of the suspicious activity report. All supporting documentation must be made available to
   appropriate authorities upon request.
   5. If more space is needed to report additional suspects, attach copies of page 1 to provide the additional information. If
   more space is needed to report additional branch addresses, include this information in the narrative, Part V.
   6. Financial institutions are encouraged to provide copies of suspicious activity reports to state and local authorities,
   where appropriate.
*17 Government issued identification (If available)
   a Driver’s license/state ID   b Passport    c  Alien registration    d          Corporate/Partnership Resolution
   e Other ___________________________________________
   f    ID number            g  Issuing state or country (2 digit code)
 FinCEN
 Form 101
 Effective May 2004
 Suspicious Activity Report by the
 Securities and Futures Industries
    Please type or print. Always complete entire report. Items
 marked with an asterisk * are considered critical. (See instructions.) OMB No. 1506 - 0019
 Subject Information 2   Check box   a         if multiple subjects       box   b         subject information unavailablePart I
 *4 First name 5  Middle initial
 6  Also known as (AKA - individual), doing business as (DBA - entity)
 *3  Individual’s last name or entity’s full name
 7 Occupation or type of business
 16  Date of birth 
____/_____/_______ 
  MM        DD           YYYY
  *12
 *14 SSN/ITIN (individual), or EIN (entity)
  *8 Address
 *15  Account number(s) affected, if any. Indicate if closed.
 Part IIIPart III
 *21 Date or date range of suspicious activity
 18 Phone number - work
  23 Instrument type (Check all that apply)
 Suspicious Activity Information
 From  _____/_____/_________
              MM         DD            YYYY
 To  _____/_____/_________
         MM          DD             YYYY
 Part II
 20 Is individual/business associated/affiliated
 with the reporting institution? (See instructions)
        a         Yes           b         No
 13  E-mail address (If available)
 *9  City
   *11 ZIP code
 *30  Type of suspicious activity:
 o Significant wire or other transactions
               without economic purpose
 p Suspicious documents or ID presented
 q Terrorist financing
 r Wash or other fictitious trading
 s Wire fraud
 t Other (Describe in Part VI)
 24 CUSIP® number
 27 CUSIP® number
 25 CUSIP® number
 28 CUSIP® number
 26 CUSIP® number
 29 CUSIP® number
 Catalog No. 35349U
 Acc’t #
 ______________________
  yes      Acc’t #
 ______________________ 
yes
 Acc’t #______________________  yes      Acc’t #______________________ yes
     Country code (If not U.S.)
     (See instructions)
 a Bonds/Notes
 b Cash or equiv.
 c Commercial paper
 d Commodity futures contract
 e Money Market Mutual Fund
 f Mutual Fund
 g OTC Derivatives
 h Other derivatives
 q Commodity type ________________________
         
(Please identify)
 r Instrument description ___________________
 s Market where traded ____________________
 (Enter approprite three or four-letter code.)
 t Other (Explain in Part IV)
 i Commodity options
 j Security futures products
 k Stocks
 l Warrants
 m Other securities
 n Other non-securities
 o Foreign currency futures/options
 p Foreign currencies
 a Bribery/gratuity
 b Check fraud
 c Computer intrusion
 d Credit/debit card fraud
 e Embezzlement/theft
 f Commodity futures/options fraud
 g Forgery
 h Identity theft
 i Insider trading
 j Mail fraud
 k Market manipulation
 l Money laundering/Structuring
 m Prearranged or other non-competitive trading
 n Securities fraud
 1  Check the box if this report corrects a prior report (See instructions)
 *22  Total dollar amount involved in suspicious activity
 Rev. 05/22/04
 19 Phone number - home
 ( )( )
 $
          .00, ,,
   *10 State
Part VIPart IV
 *55  Title/Position
 *54 Middle initial*52  Last name of individual to be contacted regarding this report *53  First name
       _____/_____/_________
          MM         DD              YYYY
 *57 Date report prepared*56  Work phone number
 Contact For Assistance
 Reporting Financial Institution InformationPart IV
  Part V
    2
 31  If a law enforcement or regulatory authority has been contacted (excluding submission of a SAR) check the appropriate box.
 a DEA                           f           Secret Service    k    NYSE     p State securities regulator
  d  FBI                             i            NASD                  n     Other state/local
  e  ICE                             j            NFA                     o          Other SRO-securites (PHLX, PCX, CBOE, AMEX, etc.)
  b  U.S. Attorney (**32)    g           CFTC                   l     Other RFA      q  Foreign
 Law Enforcement or Regulatory Contact InformationPart III
  c  IRS                             h           SEC                    m      Other RE-futures (CME, CBOT, NYMEX, NYBOT)      r  Other (Explain in Part VI)
       _____/_____/_________
         MM         DD              YYYY
 32  Other authority contacted (for Item 31 l through r) ** List U.S. Attorney office here. 33  Name of individual contacted (for all of Item 31)
  35  Date contacted
 *36  Name of financial institution or sole proprietorship
  *39  City  *41  ZIP code
 *37  EIN / SSN / ITIN
   42  Additional branch address locations handling account, activity or customer.           43          Multiple locations (See instructions)
         *40 State
     *38 Address
  j I A
 k Investment company - mutual fund
 l Market maker
 m Municipal securities dealer
 n NFA
 o RE-futures
 p Other RFA
 q Securities broker - clearing
 r Securities broker - introducing
  51  Type of institution or individual- Check box(es) for functions that apply to this report
 s Securities dealer
 t Securities floor broker
 u Securities options broker-dealer
  v SRO-securities
 w Specialist
 x Subsidiary of bank
 y U.S. Government broker-dealer
 z U.S. Government interdealer broker
 aa          Other (Describe in Part VI)
        a       Agricultural trade option merchant
        b         Affiliate of bank holding company
        c         CPO
        d         CTA
        e         Direct participation program
        f          FCM
        g         Futures floor broker
        h         Futures floor trader
        i           IB-C
   44  City
 49  NFA  ID number
  47  Central Registration Depository number
   46  ZIP code45  State
      50  Has this reporting individual/entity coordinated this report with another reporting individual/entity?  Yes        (Provide details in Part VI)   No
 48 SEC ID number
 34  Telephone number of individual contacted (Item 33)
 ( )
 ( )
 Send completed reports to:
 Detroit Computing Center
 Attn: SAR-SF
 P.O. Box 33980
 Detroit, MI 48232
Suspicious Activity Information - Narrative *Part VI 3
 Explanation/description of suspicious activity(ies).  This section of the report is critical.  The care with which it is completed may determine whether
 or not the described activity and its possible criminal nature are clearly understood by investigators. Provide a clear, complete and chronological
 description (not exceeding this page and the next page) of the activity, including what is unusual, irregular or suspicious about the transaction(s), using
 the checklist below as a guide, as you prepare your account.
  a. Describe conduct that raised suspicion.
  b. Explain whether the transaction(s) was completed or only attempted.
  c. Describe supporting documentation (e.g. transaction records, new
 account information, tape recordings, E-mail messages, correspon-
 dence, etc.) and retain such documentation in your file for five years.
  d. Explain who benefited, financially or otherwise, from the
 transaction(s), how much, and how (if known).
  e. Describe and retain any admission or explanation of the transaction(s)
 provided by the subject(s) or other persons. Indicate to whom and
 when it was given.
  f. Describe and retain any evidence of cover-up or evidence of an
 attempt to deceive federal or state examiners, SRO, or others.
  g. Indicate where the possible violation of law(s) took place (e.g., main
 office, branch, other).
  h. Indicate whether the suspicious activity is an isolated incident or
 relates to another transaction.
  i. Indicate whether there is any related litigation. If so, specify the
 name of the litigation and the court where the action is pending.
  j. Recommend any further investigation that might assist law
 enforcement authorities.
 k. Indicate whether any information has been excluded from this report;
 if so, state reasons.
  l. Indicate whether U.S. or foreign currency and/or U.S. or foreign
 negotiable instrument(s) were involved.  If foreign, provide the
 amount, name of currency, and country of origin.
 m. Indicate “Market where traded” and “Wire transfer identifier”
 information when appropriate.
 n. Indicate whether funds or assets were recovered and, if so, enter the
 dollar value of the recovery in whole dollars only.
 o. Indicate any additional account number(s), and any foreign bank(s)
 account number(s) which may be involved.
 p. Indicate for a foreign national any available information on subject’s
 passport(s), visa(s), and/or identification card(s). Include date, country,
  city of issue, issuing authority, and nationality.
 q. Describe any suspicious activities that involve transfer of funds to or
 from a foreign country, or transactions in a foreign currency. Identify
 the country, sources and destinations of funds.
 r. Describe subject(s) position if employed by the financial institution.
 s. Indicate whether securities, futures, or options were involved.  If so,
 list the type, CUSIP® number or ISID® number, and amount.
 t. Indicate the type of institution filing this report, if this is not clear
 from Part IV. For example, an IA that is managing partner of a limited
 partnership that is acting as a hedge fund that detects suspicious activity
 tied in part to its hedge fund activities should note that it is operating as
 a hedge fund.
 u. Indicate, in instances when the subject or entity has a CRD or NFA
 number, what that number is.
 v. If correcting a prior report (box in Item 1 checked), complete the form
 in its entirety and note the corrected items here in Part VI
      Information already provided in earlier parts of this form need not necessarily be repeated if the meaning is clear.
    Supporting documentation should not be filed with this report. Maintain the information for your files.
  Tips on SAR form preparation and filing are available in the SAR Activity Review at www.fincen.gov/pub_reports.html
  Enter explanation/description in the space below. Continue on the next page if necessary.
Suspicious Activity Report Narrative (continued) 4
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1701 
CONSUMER FRAUD 
 
Complaints of consumer fraud can be found as far back as the first century when Pliny the 
Elder told of the adulterated honey being sold in Rome and the mixing of wine with gypsum, 
lime, pitch, rosin, wood ashes, salt, sulphur, and other artificial additives.  
 
Schemes against consumers range from home repair frauds to more sophisticated scams. In 
a nationwide solicitation, l00,000 people purchased light bulbs because they were persuaded 
that the profits were going to the disabled. They were, but the disabilities certified by doctors 
included such crippling disorders as acne, hay fever, nervousness, and obesity. Those 
“donating” paid about three times the going price for similar light bulbs.  
 
Sometimes fraud occurs when the immediate victim cannot fight back: a Tennessee funeral 
director was charged with burying people without caskets and throwing trash in on top of 
the corpses.  
 
Scandals involving the ministry, especially television evangelism, also have captured 
headlines. In l988, U.S. evangelist Jim Bakker was indicted on mail fraud charges stemming 
from the television sale of lifetime “partnerships” in a vacation hotel at the Heritage USA 
theme park. Prosecutors were able to document that Bakker and his wife, Tammy Fay, 
received about $3.5 million in “bonuses” from the scheme. Bakker received a 45-year prison 
sentence, which later was reduced. He is now out of prison. 
 
Fraud is notably common in the repair and service industries. Home repair fraud, frequently 
perpetrated against the elderly, ranges from the sale or use of substandard materials — such as 
roofing — to securing payment without doing any work at all. Automobile repairs often 
involve fraudulent acts. One study maintained that 53 cents of every “repair” dollar was 
wasted because of unnecessary work, overcharging, services never performed, or 
incompetence. A U.S. government survey concluded that American motorists are 
overcharged an average of $l50 a car each year.  
 
In Australia, John Braithwaite found that used car dealers rolled back odometers on a third 
of the cars they offer for sale. Interviews with the dealers in Australia illustrate the kind of 
reasoning that can buttress such illegal activity. One salesman said: “People pay too much 
attention to the mileage reading on a car. There might be a car with a low mileage reading 
but all sorts of faults, and another perfect car with a high mileage reading. It doesn’t matter 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1702                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
what the mileage reading is, but how good the car is. So if you turn the mileage reading back 
on a car in perfect order, you’re encouraging people to buy a good car.” There was no 
evidence, however, that it was only on “good” cars that the odometer was made to provide a 
lower reading. 
 
Another Australian dealer said: “They think because you are a used car dealer you are a liar. 
So they treat you like one and lie to you. Can you blame the dealer for lying back?” 1 
 
 
Con Schemes 
Confidence games involve a range of fraudulent conduct usually committed by professional 
“con artists” against unsuspecting victims. The victims can be organizations but more 
commonly are individuals. Con men usually act alone but they may group together for a 
particular complex endeavor.  
 
These are some of the many kinds of confidence schemes. Telemarketing schemes and 
pyramid schemes are discussed in more detail at the end of the chapter. 
 
Advance Fee Swindles and Debt Consolidation Schemes 
Advance fee swindles are structured to obtain an illegal gain by falsely promising the delivery 
of a product or a service. In some schemes, the product is marketed to a large number of 
customers and then the operation is shut down prior to the delivery stage.  
 
People who find themselves in debt sometimes turn to consolidation agencies for help. 
These agencies do not advance loans, but rather act as an intermediary between debtor and 
creditor. Some agencies are legitimate, many are not. 
 
In a typical scenario, the debtor contacts the agency, which compiles a list of the creditors 
and the amount of monthly payments. The agency usually writes letters to the creditors 
requesting a workout plan at lower monthly payments spread over a longer period of time. 
The creditors will often offer such an arrangement if they feel that the debt will thereby be 
paid or if the workout plan will forestall bankruptcy or default by the creditor. 
                                                          
1John Braithwaite, “An Exploratory Study of Used Car Fr aud,” in Paul R. Wilson and John Braithwaite (Eds.), 
Two Faces of Deviance. Brisbane: University of Queensland Press, 1978, pp. 101-122.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1703 
Unscrupulous debt consolidation schemes often involve the agency collecting the money 
from the debtor but not forwarding it to the creditors. In some instances, considerable time 
can pass before the debtor finds out that his money has been misappropriated. 
 
Another variation of the debt consolidation scheme occurs when a customer is guaranteed 
that he will receive a loan or a credit card regardless of his credit rating. Typically, the victims 
have been rejected by legitimate financial institutions because their credit ratings are poor. 
The victim must pay a processing fee for the application to be accepted. After the victim 
pays the fee, the con artist disappears.  
 
Directory Advertising Schemes 
The essence of directory advertising schemes is the sale of advertising in a non-existent 
magazine or directory. A fake (or in some cases a real) directory is shown to the potential 
victim. The victim contracts and pays for display or classified advertising that is to appear 
some months in the future. By that time, the fraudster has disappeared. 
  
Merchandising Schemes 
Merchandising schemes run a wide gamut. If you have ever paid for an item and received  
less than what was advertised, you have been the victim of a merchandising scheme.  
 
Personal Improvement Frauds 
These frauds prey upon the desire of people to improve their education or job skills; in some 
instances, they appeal to a person’s appearance.  
  
Diploma Mills 
For what is often a hefty fee, a diploma can be purchased by those who apply. The fraudster 
usually claims that the fee is for processing the application or for verifying the experience 
necessary for the degree to be awarded. The hallmark of the diploma mill is the ease with 
which the degree is obtained, though the degree, because the school is not accredited, is 
essentially worthless. 
 
Correspondence schools may also operate with the same modus operandi as diploma mills. 
Investigators have at times submitted the scribblings of their infant children to schools that 
advertise that they will provide art lessons to persons who demonstrate talent; usually the 
infants’ “drawings” are judged to show considerable ability, and the submitter is asked to 
send a fee to begin receiving the lessons. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1704                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Modeling Schools 
Modeling schools appeal to the vanity of some people. In the typical scheme, the modeling 
school representative tells the prospective student that he will prepare a portfolio of portraits 
to be sent to potential customers who may employ the victim as a model. The victim is then 
charged an inflated price for the pictures. Con game modeling schools often claim —
 inaccurately — connections to famous people and maintain that they have been instrumental 
in starting the careers of successful models. The schools sometimes target parents and 
grandparents with lures of the money that can be earned by their “exceptionally pretty” 
infant children or grandchildren. 
 
Direct Debit from Checking Accounts     
When a customer decides to purchase an item (from a catalog or over the phone), he is told 
he can purchase it rapidly and simply by giving his bank’s name and his checking account 
number for a direct debit from his account. This results in unauthorized withdrawals from 
the account. 
 
Equity-Skimming Schemes    
Falling for this scam can cost consumers their homes. Con men try to talk the mark out of 
the equity on their homes and may try to persuade them to borrow against their equity. 
 
Fundraising, Non-profits, and Religious Schemes    
Some groups use “cancer” or “AIDS” in their title to convince the consumer they are 
legitimate charitable organizations. Others o ffer a prize or award for the consumer as a 
reward for their contribution.  
 
Home-Based Businesses    
A popular fad today, many companies marketing home-based businesses require a person to 
buy materials for assembly-at-home products. The consumer is promised that the company 
will purchase the completed products, and when it does not, the consumer is left with a bad 
investment and a stock of cheap, worthless goods. 
 
Home Improvements    
A common scam involves phony repair people selling their services door-to-door. After 
paying them to fix a roof, window, or other item, the consumer is left with unfinished repair 
work and no workmen. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1705 
Money Manager or Financial Planner    
These scams involve convincing marks to invest in low-risk, high-return opportunities. Of 
course, consumers who invest in these opportunities see no returns at all. 
 
Phone Card Schemes    
The con artist calls, claiming to be with the consumer’s long distance company, and asks to 
confirm their card number. If the number is revealed, the consumer’s next long distance bill 
will contain some expensive calls he did not make.  
 
Scavenger or Revenge Scheme    
This involves the company that initially conned the consumer. Using a different company’s 
name, the outfit contacts the consumer again and asks if he would like to help put the 
unethical company out of business and get his money back. Naturally, an up-front fee is 
required to finance the investigation. 
 
Sweepstakes, Giveaways, and Prizes    
Many of these so-called “free gifts” require the consumer to pay a fee (usually labeled a 
“shipping” fee) before collecting. This fee actually covers the cost of the merchandise 
deemed “free.” 
 
College Scholarship Services    
This bogus service usually charges an up-front fee or advanced payment fee for finding a 
scholarship suitable for the applicant. 
 
Credit Repair    
Some of these firms may charge unnecessary fees to fix credit problems, knowing that the 
consumer could easily call the credit bureau and request a copy of his credit report himself. 
 
Other Con Schemes 
Block Hustle    
So-called because purveyors of cheap stereo equipment, jewelry, and watches usually hawk 
their goods on street corners or at traffic lights. The items for sale are generally either stolen 
or imitations of brand names. 
 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1706                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Pigeon Drop   
This is often used on middle-aged or elderly women who are likely to have a savings 
account. Pretending to find a wallet full of money, the con men convince their mark that 
they should divide the “discovered” money. As a show of good faith, each should withdraw 
a sum of money from their bank and turn it over to a lawyer or another third-party for 
safekeeping. They agree to place an ad in a newspaper for the lost wallet. If it is not claimed 
within a certain amount of time, they will split the money. Of course, when the designated 
time expires, the victim will find that the lawyer was part of the scam and that her money has 
vanished. 
 
Bank Examiner Swindle     
Bank examiner swindles are also perpetrated on older women, especially widows with access 
to their husbands’ life insurance policies. The con man impersonates a bank examiner 
investigating her bank. He asks her to withdraw a certain amount of cash from her account, 
place it in an envelope, and allow him to inspect the bills for counterfeits. Many con men use 
false IDs and dress to take on this role. 
 
Jamaican Handkerchief or Envelope Switch    
In this con, the criminal puts his money into an envelope with the mark’s money and then 
unobtrusively trades this parcel for another that looks like the same thing but is instead 
bulked up with worthless paper. 
 
The Obituary Hustle   
Capitalizing on a bereaved person’s grief, the con man, culling information from an obituary, 
poses as a delivery person collecting money for a package or other order the deceased 
supposedly made.  
 
Three-Card Monte    
An old card game that involves two people who fleece an unsuspecting onlooker into a 
rigged game. 
 
Poker Bunco    
This scam can involve poker, dice, pool, and other games. The con man is of course an 
expert and hustles the mark. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1707 
Missing-Heir Scheme    
In the modern version of this scam, the con man poses as a probate investigator or other 
genealogist, charging fees to distribute an inheritance. 
 
Gold Mine Swindle    
Here, the con man claims to own a productive mine but requires money to start operation. 
The scheme involves selling shares to the mine. 
 
Spanish Prisoner Game    
This con can be traced back to the Spanish Armada of the sixteenth century. A businessman 
receives a letter purportedly from a hostage held prisoner in some foreign land. He needs 
money to bribe his captors or pay a ransom. As collateral, a treasure map or other “valuable 
papers” are often enclosed. 
 
Murphy Game    
Also known as “Miss Murphy,” “paddy hustle,” or “carpet game,” the traditional con is 
played in places where prostitution occurs. The con artist plays a pimp but never delivers the 
prostitute. 
 
Badger Game    
A refined version of Miss Murphy, but in this con, the con woman or prostitute is in on the 
scam. The con artist robs the mark of his wallet through simple theft or pretense of 
blackmail. 
 
Goat Pasture Scam    
The mark receives a call from a person who says he’s from an oil and gas service that is 
sponsoring a lottery on mineral rights. If the consumer invests a certain tax deductible sum, 
they can receive a percentage of the income in royalty payments. 
 
Other common hustles occur in the privacy of one’s own home or through telephone 
solicitations (i.e., boiler rooms). 
 
 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1708                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Telemarkting Fraud 
Victims of telemarketing fraud are swindled out of more than $40 billion a year. According 
to one survey, 92 percent of U.S. adults say they have received postcards or letters promising 
they had “definitely” been awarded a “guaranteed” prize. Of those responding, 69 percent 
never received the promised prizes. Telemarketers select victims deliberately, targeting the 
elderly and the unemployed. Over 5.5 million Americans said they had bought items by 
telephone in the past two years and were exploited in the process. 
 
While the telephone, newspaper, and postal service used to be the key tools of telemarketers, 
the Internet has afforded fraudsters a more fast paced and anonymous method of carrying 
out their schemes. The number one scam to be currently found on the Internet, says the 
National Consumer League’s Fraud Watch (NCL), is the fake check scam, in which 
consumers are paid with a phony check for work or items sold and are instructed to wire 
money back. This has been the number one ranking telemarketing fraud for two years 
running. Advance fee scams and phishing also rank in the top 10 schemes on the World 
Wide Web. A discussion of some of the specific Internet schemes can be found in the 
“Computer and Internet Fraud” chapter in the Financial Transactions section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual. 
 
Telemarketing offenses are classified as consumer fraud, yet many businesses are affected by 
office supply and marketing services scams. The hit-and-run nature of phone rooms, the 
geographical distances between the crooks and their victims, and the resources and priorities 
of law enforcement agencies all make enforcement efforts difficult. Only about one in 100 
victims ever files a complaint. 
  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1709 
NCLs Top 10 Telemarketing Frauds 
 
2008 Top 10 Frauds  
 
2009 Top 10 Frauds  
 
Fake Check Scams 61% Fake Check Scams 52% 
Prizes/Sweepstakes 12% Prizes/Sweepstakes 21% 
Phishing 10.5% Phishing 13% 
Advance Fee Loans/Credit Arrangers 2% Internet: General Merchandise 3% 
Lotteries/Lottery Ticket Clubs 2% Scholarships/Educational Grants 1% 
Internet: General Merchandise 1.5% Advance Fee Loans/Credit Arrangers  1% 
Magazines 1.5% Magazine Sales 1 
Scholarships/Educational Grants 1% Lotteries/Lottery Ticket Clubs 1% 
Office: Ad Space/Directory List ings 1% Telephone : Cramming .5% 
Credit Card Issuing .5% Business Opportunities/Franchises .5% 
 
Telemarketing Terminology 
Terms in the scammer’s vocabulary include banging, or  nailing, the customer, in other words, 
closing the deal. A salesperson’s most effective skill is puffing, the ability to sound convincing 
while exaggerating the value of a business opportunity or gift. To make the puffing more 
persuasive, marketers hire singers or criers to tell potential victims what a great deal they are 
getting. Calls from angry customers who realize they have been swindled are known as heat 
calls. These are handled by someone claiming to be the company’s manager or vice-president. 
 
Boiler Room Staff 
Work in a boiler room is shared by fronters, closers, and verifiers.  
 
Fronters
The fronter calls victims and makes the initial pitch. This low-level worker is usually 
breaking into the business and reads from a script to the prospective customer. Fronters 
seldom see the merchandise or know the full extent of the operation. Keeping fronters in 
the dark, at least in theory, limits what they can tell investigators and protects them in the 
event of prosecution. 
  
Closers 
The closer is a veteran. Fronters pass an interested caller to their closer, identified as the 
firm’s “manager,” who convinces the person to buy.  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1710                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Verifiers 
Next, the caller is passed to a verifier, who reads some vague words about the deal and 
records the person’s agreement. These recordings are intentionally vague, leaving out the 
pitch and key details, essentially recording only the customer’s consent. Verifiers also stall 
customers who call back to complain (heat calls), finding reasons why a little more patience 
will solve the problem, and in some cases, convincing the person to send a little more money 
to help the process along. 
 
Staff Exploitation 
The customers of fraudulent telemarketing operations are not the only victims. Fronters are 
often poorly educated and easily taken advantage of by the career criminals who run the 
operations. Salespeople may face hidden costs in a work agreement, similar to the ones 
involved in the items they push on unsuspecting customers. For example, boiler room 
operators hold back parts of their phone lists and sell them to crew members as “hot leads.” 
Telescam veterans know how to operate a gift sting that bilks both the customer and the 
salesperson. Operators overstate the retail value of the gifts, so the customers get less than 
they paid for; then, by giving agents an inflated wholesale cost, the operators can pay these 
workers less commission, which is figured on the “profit margin” between wholesale  
and retail.  
 
The salespeople in boiler rooms are sometimes as desperate as their victims. Most are 
unemployed, with little education or marketable skills. Telemarketing promises easy work 
and big pay without any experience. Many pe ople who start out as fronters, however, are 
serving an apprenticeship in their criminal careers. They are wooed with cars, cellular 
phones, and other perks. Former workers have reported that supervisors sprinkled lines of 
cocaine along the phone bank table, and threw handfuls of money into the air, promising the 
proceeds to whoever made the next sale. 
 
Naturally, there are no Social Security or payroll taxes deducted from paychecks, so 
employees can owe big tax bills at the end of the year. Fronters’ commission payments are 
often shorted, or withheld. Paychecks frequently fail to clear the bank. Owners promise big 
profit shares for a month or two, then shut down the business. They tell the workers that 
their assets have been frozen by creditors or regulators. Workers lose their jobs and usually 
their last weeks’ commissions. For the last few months, however, the owners have been 
taking in $25,000 to $30,000 a week. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1711 
Telemarketing Suppliers 
The telemarketing industry relies on a number of sources to supply its phone scripts, mailing 
lists, merchandise, phone banks, and autodialers. Mailing lists and phone lists are sold for a 
few cents per name. Lists of people who have been stung before or who have bad credit 
records fetch between 10 and fifteen cents per name. By supplying telemarketers with the 
tools of their trade, these companies make telescamming possible. Many of the suppliers are 
aware of telemarketers’ criminal intentions and choose to ignore them.  
 
Turnkeys 
Turnkeys comprise an industry of their own by providing the collateral a telemarketing scam 
needs: turnkeys launder credit card receipts and checks, sell autodialers and phone lists, and 
provide the merchandise portrayed as valuable prizes.  
 
Legitimate businesses, however, are routinely implicated in this scurrilous industry. The U.S. 
Postal Service, for instance, carries tons of telemarketing ads. In the early days of the 
industry, telemarketers used the Postal Service to deliver merchandise C.O.D., but when the 
postal service mounted an aggressive campaign against fraud, companies turned to credit 
card billings to avoid the scrutiny. They also use parcel delivery services or overnighters, 
which are not subject to federal mail fraud laws. By keeping the value of the merchandise 
just below $300, telemarketers avoid the minimum amount at which postal inspectors are 
required to investigate fraud. 
 
Independent Service Organizations 
Telemarketers often have difficulty securing credit card services from reputable institutions. 
Many banks will not open credit-processing a ccounts for businesses who do a substantial 
amount of their business in phone sales because these accounts typically incur a high rate of 
chargebacks. Federal law gives consumers 60 days to protest charges to their cards, and if 
successful, the issuer has to absorb the loss. MasterCard and Visa estimate their losses from 
phone fraud at $300 million a year.  
 
Telemarketing operations have learned the difficulties they face when dealing directly with 
banks. To circumvent this obstacle, phone sales companies hire “independent service 
organizations,” which approach banks on the telemarketer’s behalf. The service company 
agrees with the bank to cover any chargebacks from the operation. The telemarketer is 
required to post a large bond to cover potential losses, so the service organization is also 
protected from loss. However, even with a half-million dollar bond, the reserve funds can be 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1712                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
quickly depleted when customers start to realize they have been swindled, leaving the service 
company and/or the bank with enormous losses.  
 
Factoring Companies 
Telemarketing operations also commonly engage factoring companies. These groups buy 
credit card receipts from telemarketing concerns at a discount, then use their merchant bank 
accounts to convert the receipts into cash. Some factors charge as much as 30 percent of the 
receipts’ gross value to launder the slips. Factoring is illegal in some states, though crooks 
find ways to slip through loopholes or disguise their alliances.  
 
International Factoring Companies 
Factoring through Asian and European merchants is becoming increasingly common. 
Factoring companies in these countries tend to charge a lower price for their services than 
some other countries—between nine and 10 percent of the gross. Regardless of their locale, 
factors have the opportunity to make a great profit. They also, however, face the risk that 
banks will freeze their accounts or sue them for excessive chargebacks. In response to the 
losses suffered at the hands of dishonest telemarketers, banks and credit card companies 
have started reviewing their accounts to locate those businesses with inordinate numbers of 
chargebacks. The financial institution closes these accounts, and may file suit if the account 
holder can be located. 
 
Check-Cashing Establishments 
Another convenient tool at the telemarketer’s disposal is the check-cashing store. If a boiler 
room operation wishes to avoid the risks of setting up a bank account that might be traced 
or seized, customers’ personal checks are taken to a company that cashes them for a small 
fee. These establishments rarely require any identification to cash the checks. Customers may 
complain and try to stop payment on their checks, but they are ordinarily too late.  
 
Common Telemarketing Scams 
Senior Scams 
Older people are the favorite prey of telescammers.  In the U.S., they make up 11 percent of 
the population but constitute 32 percent of the victims of consumer fraud and 50 percent of 
all phone scam victims. Forty-five percent of senior citizens have been offered investments 
by a person unknown to them. Seniors own more than half of all financial assets in the U.S. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1713 
Fred Schulte, author of Fleeced!, relates the pitch delivered to an elderly woman in 
Philadelphia by Tim O’Neil. The woman told detectives about the more than $10,000 for 
which O’Neil and his lieutenants swindled her. O’Neil’s call to mollify the woman’s protests 
was recorded by the FBI. On the line, he insists the “collectibles” the woman bought, 
including “actual bullets excavated from the Civil War,” are genuine and valuable.  
 
Do you wear pendants? This is a beautiful, is a diamond … I’m not gonna ask you to 
spend a penny … 
  
How old are you? God bless you … 89 … 
  
We’re gonna get that out to you … Look for it  in the middle of next week, and then give 
us a call and then let us know how you like it … 
 
Well I hope I put a little sunshine in your day. Okay, honey and God bless you. Oh don’t 
cry now, we’re here to take care of you … We’ll  be here and if you need to talk to anybody 
at any time you give us a call okay? Bye, bye, and God bless you. 
 
Telemarketers usually call in the evening. Nighttime calls find people of every age in more 
impulsive moods. Seniors may be more vulnerable to pitches promising them extra money 
and luxury goods because many live on fixed incomes. These lottery-style gambits can seem 
like an easy way for the elderly to improve their financial status.  
 
Targeting the Unemployed 
The unemployed are another favorite target for sweepstakes pitches and job search services. 
Whereas “the system” has left the jobless without hope, the telemarketer offers a way 
around official channels. People with bad credit pay telemarketers to “repair” their credit 
record or get a major card. Instead, they get a list of banks that offer credit cards, commonly 
published in newspapers, or an application for a card that requires a security deposit for 
activation, usually several hundred or a thousand dollars. These people are also targeted by 
advance-fee loan scams, which promise loans in exchange for a fee. 
 
Affinity Fraud 
Affinity fraud targets groups of people who have some social connection. Neighborhoods 
chiefly populated by racial minorities, especially immigrant groups, are often the site of 
affinity frauds. Religious and professional ties are often exploited. Marketing technology has 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1714                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
made it possible for a company to buy targeted lists, not just by location, but according to 
buying habits, leisure time activities, and club memberships. The most expensive lists carry 
the names of people who have already fallen for a telemarketing scam. This is called reloading.  
 
Chief among telescammers’ tricks is obfuscation. Salespeople read off lists of prizes, 
emphasizing big-ticket items like jewelry and cars, not mentioning that the odds of actually 
winning anything besides a trinket are astronomical. Schulte relates an incident in which 
victims were told they had won a Winnebago. Victims were asked to pay a handling fee of 
$2,900, a fraction of the cost of a new travel home. About two months later, victims found a 
delivery driver at their door with a Winnebago tent.  
 
Some operations actually encourage their marks to call and check with the Better Business 
Bureau (BBB) and with former customers, giving out the numbers for the person to call. 
These numbers ring at phony lines set up by the scammers, who give out a glowing 
recommendation. Phone rooms have been known to set up reference arms with titles like 
“The Better Business Bureau of America” or “International Better Business Bureau” to 
recommend their ventures. If a potential victim does reach the Better Business Bureau, 
chances are the report will contain little or nothing of use. The information in these files is 
usually ambiguous and out of date. 
 
Consolation 
When irate customers call telemarketers back to complain, their calls are routed to 
professionals who placate the caller with more promises and obfuscations. Some boiler 
rooms have a prearranged communication route for leading complaints through four or five 
different “departments.” This tactic causes many callers to eventually hang up without 
having spoken to anyone. In some instances, telemarketers confronted with furious callers 
threatening legal action do award something of value to the customer, though the item is 
usually worth far less than the person has paid. 
 
If obfuscation and consolation prizes fail to appease the caller, the con turns to threats and 
intimidation. This is a favorite method for dealing with senior citizens, especially elderly 
women. Threats are used not just to keep customers from filing complaints, but to cajole 
more money out of them. Some telemarketers have actually threatened callers’ personal 
safety if they refused to pay. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1715 
The odds in favor of catching a boiler room operation in progress are usually poor. 
Operations can select a town, set up a room, make their haul, and leave again in a matter of 
weeks or months. When authorities raid a boiler room, the operation has typically already 
moved on. If the company owners registered with state regulators, they probably did so 
under an alias. By the time police arrive, the perpetrators have moved on and the chances of 
finding them are slim.  
 
800 Numbers 
Toll-free 800 numbers (or other toll-free prefixes, such as 866, 877, or 888) offered by 
phone service companies are used by some operations. The scam is a toll-free line, 
advertised in mailers, fliers, and newspaper ads, to lure victims into making the call 
themselves. The toll-free number usually carries a recording that directs customers to a 900 
number that charges the caller between $3 and $10 a minute to hear recorded messages. A 
favorite device of sellers is to insist that the offer being made is good for less than 48 hours. 
To secure the opportunity, the customer hands over a cashier’s check to an overnight-delivery 
service. Even if the victim does have second thoughts, he will be unable to stop 
payment on a cashier’s check.  
 
Automatic Debits 
The personal checking account is one of the most convenient tools for defrauding 
telemarketing customers, thanks to advances in electronic banking technology. Using 
computerized transfers, businesses can set up an automatic debit to the buyer’s account. 
Telemarketing operations use this device to obtain payment before victims can change their 
minds about their purchases. Worse, telemarketers can simply use the information to drain 
the victim’s account. This information is usua lly obtained by telling the victim that the 
account numbers are needed to verify eligibility for a giveaway or business opportunity. 
Banks are not responsible for any losses customers suffer in this way, so there are no 
chargebacks and little recourse for the swindled customer besides filing a complaint. Even if 
an investigation of the complaint brings the scammer to court, the chances that the victim 
will receive restitution are poor. 
 
Business Opportunities (Biz Ops) 
Many telemarketing frauds are aimed at people starting their own businesses. Regulators put 
losses in fraudulent business opportunities at over $100 million a year, and most observers 
think the number is far higher.  
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1716                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Work-at-Home Schemes 
Besides franchise offers and other miscellaneous business scams, the most prevalent frauds 
involve work-at-home schemes and FCC-related investments. Victims of these phony 
offerings do not see themselves as part of the telemarketer’s prey. They believe they are 
making a legitimate business investment. 
 
Biz op promoters often use a team approach in their enterprises. The victim usually sees an 
ad and calls a fronter, who makes the introductory pitch and then passes the victim to a 
higher-up. Next, the caller is put through to a crier who endorses the opportunity and tells 
the victim of the profits he made. Finally, a closer seals the deal and gets the payment secured 
as quickly as possible.  
 
Telemarketers use business-related terms such as exclusive territory, annual gross revenues, and 
emerging markets in these calls. This helps convince the mark that the biz op is legitimate. A 
Louis Harris poll found that 1 in 33 cold calls for investments were successful. 
 
Some business-pitch operations are complete fabrications. They offer envelope stuffing or 
book-review enterprises that do not really exist. Scammers mail out postcards or buy cheap 
ads in magazines and newspapers. Some may not even take any phone calls. The ads 
convince the victims to send money to a mailbox. Unlike the U.S. Postal Service, which 
requires identification from renters and divulges this information to anyone who inquires, 
private companies will rent mail-drops to anyone for a few dollars a month and can refuse to 
say who paid for the box.  
 
Fly and Buy 
Some scams involve ventures such as vending machines, pay phones, and merchandise 
display racks. They often gain credibility by setting up a front operation and inviting 
investors for tours. This part of the ruse is known as the “fly and buy.” For example, the 
Securities Division of the State of Washington prosecuted a case on behalf of a woman who 
traveled to Colorado and met with a promoter. The promoter offered to let her in on a deal 
for video pool and video bowling games. Thrilled with the demonstration and her tour 
guide’s promises of quick profits, she paid $13,000 for machines that broke down in less 
than three months. When the woman complained to the promoter about the shoddiness of 
the machines, she was sent two new ones along with a bill. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1717 
Shoddy merchandise is a familiar element of the biz op scam. The scams are tailored for the 
targeted audience. A Maryland ring ran advertisements in Income Plus magazine and other 
investor-oriented publications for a solar-powered car battery recharger. “In seconds, you’re 
off and running,” the ad claimed. The offer stated that distributors were making over 
$200,000 a year with the revolutionary devices. But the machines were worthless. One 
investor took the recharger to an electrician, and was told it could recharge a battery but that 
it would take a few weeks.  
 
Vending Machine and Pay Phone Scams 
Buyers are promised exclusive territories, but find the same area has been sold to many 
people. Often, the machines do not work or they simply do not make any money. Sooner or 
later, the ruse is exposed. But in the short term, the operators can make substantial proceeds.  
 
Entrepreneurial Enterprises 
Telemarketers deal not only in machinery-oriented scams like those above. The raising of 
exotic animals like ostriches and emus for luxury items and for slaughter has been a popular 
scam for a while, including weekend retreats to a model farm for would-be ranchers. In the 
last 10 years, the 900 telephone number service has been used to swindle those who set out 
to be swindlers themselves. People are convinced they can make a fortune charging between 
$3 and $10 a minute for recorded messages providing entertainment, psychic readings, or 
information available for free from other sources. 
 
Scams involving computer technology are usually successful due to the layman’s lack of 
knowledge in that field. Although around 80 percent of American households own some 
type of computer, few actually understand the intricate details of how computers function. 
Whatever the nature of the opportunity, there are signs that indicate that it is not legitimate. 
Among the most common: 
• Classified ads urging the prospect to call an 800 number. 
• Wild, unsubstantiated claims about potential earnings. 
• Promises about exclusive territories, assurances about good locations, or the assistance 
of a professional locator. 
• References specified by the company. 
  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1718                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The lack of a complete disclosure document containing information about the 
promoter’s experience, lawsuit history, audited financial statements, and substantiation 
for earnings assertions. 
 
Inventions Schemes 
In order to crack down on operations that offer fraudulent invention promotions, the FTC 
recently launched “Project Mousetrap.” Using ads, these operations solicit inventors to 
submit their product ideas to the promotions firm, which supposedly specializes in bringing 
new products to the market. Inventions are supposedly evaluated and appraised, and nearly 
always endorsed. The firm offers to submit the product to manufacturers for a fee.  
 
The U.S. Federal Trade Commission charged the American Institute for Research and 
Development, Inc. (AIRD) and its predecessor, American Inventors Corporation (AIC), 
with running a deceptive inventions-promotion scheme that bilked consumers nationwide 
out of thousands of dollars each over a 20-year time span. Promoters used print ads, in-
 person, and telephone sales presentations to offer two basic services: (1) a “feasibility 
report,” priced from $250 to $495, to evaluate the patentability and marketability of the 
inventor’s product, and (2) a “representation ag reement” that promised to prepare, file, and 
prosecute a patent application, and to promote the product to industry representatives. The 
representation agreement cost from $5,490 to $11,990. The complaint alleged that the firms 
obtained design patents, which have little or no commercial value, instead of the utility 
patents they promised. Furthermore, people were told that only a select few inventions were 
accepted, when virtually every person who applied was brought into the program. AIRD and 
AIC also encouraged their customers to expect huge financial gains when, the Trade 
Commission charged, “in 20 years of business, perhaps no more than 13 customers have 
realized any financial gain at all” as a result of the companies’ services. 
 
Victims received a useless recommendation for their product and a coding from the U.S. 
Bureau of Standard Industrial Code (SIC). The code generates a list of manufacturers who 
make products similar to the inventors,’ but regulators say the “lists of manufacturers that 
come from classifying your idea with the SIC usually are of limited value.” Some victims 
thought they were securing a patent in their promotions deal, but instead received only a 
Disclosure Document from the U.S. Patent Office, available to the general public for $10. 
The document is not a patent but a statement of “evidence of the date of conception of the 
invention” and does not guarantee rights to any future products. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1719 
Employment Services 
The phony employment service is similar in nature to the biz op. Preying on the 
unemployed, these scams promise good jobs, many of them overseas with the added 
enticement of tax-free wages. Victims pay bet ween $250 and $1,000 for the service. Some 
get lists of government jobs, which are usually available for free, or listings from classified 
ads. Most get nothing.  
 
Credit Services 
The simplest credit scam promises that the company will secure a loan for the applicant, 
regardless of credit history and references, if the person pays an upfront fee, usually between 
$35 and $75. Checking account debits are a favorite payment method, as are 900 numbers, 
which charge by the minute (up to $40 or $50 per call) to hear information widely available 
that provides no help in swaying a loan for the listener. Usually there are few or no loans 
made. Occasionally, loan information and applications may be mailed out to the victim, but 
usually, after the fee has been paid, the operators are not heard from again.  
 
Credit Repair Scams 
Similar to loan scams are those that promise to repair credit. Pitch men like to say they can 
“wipe away” or “doctor” or “cosmeticize” blotches on credit, insinuating they have ways of 
changing or disguising a person’s credit history. Despite the fact that there is really no way to 
erase bad credit, many people fall for this scam, paying hundreds of dollars to expunge  
their records.  
 
Prime-Rate Credit Cards 
In this scam, telemarketing companies assure customers they can get major cards for a small 
fee even if their credit report is poor. Victims receive an application for a MasterCard, which 
they could obtain in any department store. Telemarketers also push secured cards, which 
require a cash deposit (usually a $250–$300 minimum) to the issuer’s bank to activate  
the card. 
 
Gold Cards  
A relatively new credit card sting on the Internet touts “gold card” status for customers, 
regardless of credit history. The advertisement claims applicants will be processed for a 
major credit card. In actuality, applicants are merely assisted in filing an application for a 
major credit card, a worthless service since applications are quite simple to complete and 
submit. For a large up-front fee, participants receive a “catalog card,” which is only 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1720                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
redeemable if the holder buys the company’s over-priced, low-quality merchandise listed in 
the catalog as discounted for cardholders. Even then, an actual purchase may require paying 
additional fees or cash deposits before the customer is allowed to charge the remainder. 
Since the issuers do not report payment activity to any of the credit reporting bureaus, using 
the card does not improve the customer’s credit rating. 
 
Lotteries/Lottery Clubs 
Consumers receive a false claim that they have won, or can get help to win, a lottery, often in 
a foreign country. Most lottery scams are perpetrated by con artists in other countries, 
sometimes using U.S. addresses to disguise their real locations. Sometimes the lottery 
actually exists, but invitations to play don’t come from governments that operate legitimate 
lotteries or anyone connected to them. The consumer has no way of assuring that they will 
receive the tickets that they pay for or, in the unlikely event that they do win, will ever be 
able to collect their money. Potential victims need to remember that it is illegal to use the 
mail or telephone to play lotteries across borders; U.S. law prohibits it, not only across 
national borders but state lines as well. The consumer could be accused of illegal activities 
just by participating. Differences in legal systems, difficulties of conducting investigations in 
other countries, and expenses and other complications involved in pursuing cross-border 
fraud make the chances of a consumer getting his money back very, very slim. 
 
Buyers Clubs 
This scheme involves membership in discount buying clubs that consumers never agreed to 
join or were signed up for through free-trial offers. Consumers should beware of 
advertisements for products at incredibly cheap prices or free if the consumer pays for 
shipping, these offers may be designed to lure the consumer into a buyer’s club membership. 
Another way to avoid being a victim of a buyer’s club scheme is to understand how a “trial-
 offer” works. In many cases, the consumer will automatically be charged for a membership 
when the free-trial expires unless they contact the club to cancel. The consumer should  
ask for the details of all membership offers in writing before they agree to join. If 
unauthorized charges or debits are noticed on monthly statements, the consumer should 
contact their credit card issuer or bank and ask for their account to be credited for these 
unauthorized charges. 
 
Travel/Vacation Schemes 
Offers of free or discount travel that never materializes. Consumers need to be skeptical of 
offers for “free” trips. Airlines and other well-known companies sometimes operate contests 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1721 
for travel prizes; however, there are also companies that offer “free” trips to try to lure 
people into buying their products or services. Consumers also need to know what is included 
with the trip; a “free” or incredibly cheap trip may have hidden costs. For instance, the 
cruise may be free, but the consumer has to pay to fly to the departure point and stay in a 
hotel at their own expense. Or they may have to endure a long, high-pressure sales pitch for 
a timeshare or travel club membership as part of the trip. Often the best travel deals are only 
available for off-peak times, not during school vacations, holidays, or other popular  
travel dates.  
 
To avoid being victims of travel/vacation schemes, consumers should confirm all travel 
arrangements. If transportation and hotel are included in the travel package, ask how to 
contact those companies and confirm with them directly that the reservations have been 
made. Consumers should do their own travel research; it’s easy to get information from a 
local travel agent or other sources such as newspapers, books, and the Internet. When 
making travel arrangements, it is advisable to pay with a credit card. Fraudulent travel 
operators can take a consumer’s money and run and even legitimate companies can go out 
of business. Paying with a credit card allows the consumer to dispute the charges if the 
promises that are made are not kept. 
 
Slamming 
Slamming occurs when a consumer’s telephone or electric service is switched from their 
current company to another one without their permission. Long distance is the most 
common target of telephone slamming, but it can also happen with local or local-toll service. 
Consumers should read the fine print on all contest entry forms, coupons, and other 
promotional materials as these might include an agreement to switch phone service. Federal 
law requires that written agreements to change phone service must be separate documents, 
not part of a prize package or other materials. If the company offers a check for the 
consumer to switch, the check must clearly state on the front and on the back, in the 
signature area, that the consumer is agreeing to change their service.  
 
Consumers should always check their phone bills carefully. If the consumer notices a new 
company name, he should call the number that’s  listed on that portion of the bill and ask for 
an explanation. If he has been slammed, he should inform the company that he did not agree 
to use its service. He should then contact his original phone company and ask to be 
reinstated to his old calling plan. Under federal law, the consumer can switch back for free 
and they don’t have to pay for the first 30 days of service from the slammer. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1722                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Real Estate 
Real estate scams are easily recognized. There is almost always an element of time pressure, 
with the victims being convinced they are participating in a “once-in-a-lifetime, now-or-
 never” deal. The investors are led to believe there is no time to investigate the venture, and 
that if they hesitate, they will miss the opportunity to make a fortune. Promises of big profits 
for little or no involvement are the norm in real estate scams. The investor is also misled into 
assuming they are being let in on a special offer or an exclusive deal by the promoter. 
 
Since the 1920s, when thousands of Americans bought swampland in Florida, real estate has 
served as a conduit for fraud. A modern-day variation has dispensed with the actual land 
entirely and simply sells information. Companies tout the riches available in real estate 
through seminars and books that claim to offer secret ways to cash in. The customer pays 
for the secret info and gets worthless tips in return.  
 
Timeshares 
Another scam sells timeshares in condominiums for vacationers. Telemarketers pass 
themselves off as brokers to condominium owners and purport to specialize in selling 
timeshares.  
 
OPTIONS 
Ads in the real estate section of newspapers coax investors into buying “options” on 
property. Supposedly, the option locks in a present-day price on behalf of the purchaser, 
who can exercise the option later if he wishes to buy the land or to sell it at a profit. 
Sometimes the investor has bought nothing but a piece of paper — the “agent” has no 
authority to make deals on the property. Occasionally, the option is only valid for a few 
months, or is too vaguely worded to be enforceable. Usually there is an actual plot of land, 
but in most instances it is undevelopable due to location or zoning restrictions, and is 
therefore worthless. 
  
DEVELOPED PROPERTY  
The General Development Corporation of Florida ran a legendary land fraud scam in which 
potential investors were shown lots and houses guaranteed to make them rich. In this 
rendering of the “buy-and-fly” sham, victims were shepherded, and their contracts restricted, 
until they signed a deal for a lot. The scam continued for approximately six years and cost 
victims millions. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1723 
Art/Rare Items 
Land deals prey on the public’s reverence for real estate. The con who deals in art objects 
preys on a similar impulse — the reverence for the rare. Paintings worth little more than their 
canvas and oil are tagged as “masterpieces” sure to grow in value. The victims who fall for 
these scams are art novices who seem to unquestioningly believe the “dealer’s” appraisal of 
the objet d’art. 
 
This sort of willing victim will buy lithographic prints, mass-produced by the thousands, 
thinking they are purchasing a “limited edition.” Any anxieties the victims may develop are 
calmed by a promised 30-day no obligation trial and with “certificates of authenticity.” 
According to the FTC, the most popular artists to counterfeit are Salvador Dali, Pablo 
Picasso, Marc Chagall, and Joan Miro. 
  
Collectibles and Memorabilia 
Collectibles and household decorative items such as vases, bric-a-brac, and figurines are also 
commonly hawked by telemarketers. Again, these supposedly valuable objects are nothing 
more than cheap, shoddy merchandise. War memorabilia is especially popular, particularly 
items related to the World War II. Documents and keepsakes from any bygone era are on 
the fraudulent telemarketer’s best-seller list. Stamps are sold as rare when they are in  
fact worthless.  
 
Coins are another prime money-maker for telemarketers. “Certificates of authenticity” and 
“appraisals” are included with the merchandise to reassure customers, but needless to  
say these documents are usually produced by the sales company, or doctored from a 
legitimate original. 
 
Precious Stones 
Gems are generally regarded as items that will not lose their value. Telescammers exploit this 
mindset by offering “high-quality” gems for wholesale prices. Customers are told they are 
being offered a special deal due to fluctuations in the market or because their names are on 
an industry list.  
 
The risk is minimal, victims are told. By acquiring the stones wholesale, the individual 
minimizes the investment exposure. The company even offers its own “brokerage” services, 
which can liquidate the stones at a moment’s notice should the investor need the cash back 
quickly. The stones not only have a grading certificate and appraisal documents, but are also 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1724                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
sealed in a plastic wrapper to guarantee that their condition remains flawless. The real 
purpose of the seal — which victims are told must not be broken if the gems are ever to be 
offered for sale — is to keep buyers from making a genuine inspection of the article.  
 
Once a victim makes a buy, a company spokesperson calls a second time, saying that if the 
person buys more stones, his “gemstone portfo lio” will be more attractive to prospective 
buyers and at auctions advertised in company literature. If the victim buys additional items, a 
company broker will inevitably call with “good news.” The brokerage will have found a 
buyer for the victim’s holdings, but before the transaction can go through, the customer 
must pay some “minor fees.” These may be passed off as finders’ fees, brokers’ 
commissions, examination fees, international duties, or taxes. There may be a provision 
requiring the victim to buy more stones before making the sale. 
 
A variation on the scheme targets those who have already bought gems from telemarketers 
and whose names are taken from insider lists. The caller claims to be a broker representing 
an “overseas buyer” ready to purchase the listener’s portfolio. But, invariably, the buyer must 
have a few more stones in the portfolio—which the caller offers to supply—in order to 
make the sale, and there are fees and commissions to be paid. 
  
Precious Metals 
The precious metals market has traditionally been one of wide variances. Prices fluctuate 
constantly and even experts have trouble deciding what the next trend will be. Telemarketing 
operations play on this instability with offerings of gold, silver, and platinum. Once again, 
victims are told prices will never be this good again and that if they hesitate, they will miss a 
singular opportunity to make a fortune. 
 
900 Numbers/800 Numbers/International Calls 
900 numbers are usually associated with psychic hotlines, phone sex lines, and other dubious 
enterprises. Using 900 numbers, customers can “dial a prayer” or even listen to the Easter 
Bunny. Some callers insist they did not know they were being charged for the service. By 
using a toll-free 800 number that then links the caller to the per-minute charges, promoters 
are able to surreptitiously begin charging customers for calls. 800 numbers are often used as 
a front in telemarketing operations to lead consumers to think that a call is free, when in fact 
there are hidden charges everywhere. A particularly vicious combination uses a toll-free 
number to make a presentation about communication services. Once the caller dials in, the 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1725 
computerized service automatically puts a monthly charge, sometimes labeled “voicemail,” 
on the caller’s phone bill.  
  
Many operations familiar to law enforcement as  traditional boiler rooms moved into the toll 
numbers when they became widely available in the 1980s. Victims dial in, thinking they will 
receive information on claiming funds from abandoned bank accounts or inheritances from 
long lost relatives. Credit repair offers and advance-fee loan services use 900 numbers 
extensively. Sweepstakes and prize give-aways are promoted this way, as are employment 
services, real estate education, information on government programs and auctions, and biz 
ops of every kind. The latest ruse uses a 900 number to convince people to invest in the 900 
number business.  
 
International Calls 
An off-shore version of the 900 number scam uses international phone companies to reap 
big dollars. Callers believe they are dialing an international number for free information, 
usually about travel contests, discount fares, or overseas jobs. But the phone numbers, in 
Guyana and the Caribbean, charge up to $2.30 per minute for a recorded message that runs 
for 15 minutes. The promoters get a kickback from the phone company; in one case, 37 
cents per minute went to the scammers.  
 
Selling Free Information 
Companies involved in this kind of scheme take out ads in newspapers and magazines, or 
buy spots on talk radio, promising they can locate government jobs, get deals on liquidated 
equipment, or find student loans. All this information is available cheaply or free to the 
public, through government offices, on the Internet, and from other sources. One need only 
know where to look.  
  
Scholarship Services 
Maybe the most widely broadcast offering in the info racket is the college scholarship locator 
service. Student Aid Inc., a New York city firm, provides an example. SAI guaranteed 
students and their parents that for a $97 fee they would receive at least $1,000 in 
scholarships or grants. “In reality,” government  prosecutors showed, “the defendants almost 
never obtained scholarship money for consumers.” SAI used a common clause in its 
contracts to keep from paying refunds “requiring students [to] produce letters of rejection 
from every scholarship on their search list even though the list included scholarships whose 
deadlines had passed or for which the students did not qualify.”  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1726                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Whatever information scholarship services do provide is available for little or nothing (at 
most, a $5 or $10 fee) from legitimate institutions. The perpetrators imply that they have 
insider connections, or that they actually administer the dispersal of monies, when in reality 
they merely provide lists of scholarships offered by foundations and universities. 
  
In most cases, information scams sell freely available material. There is also a version that 
does offer the information for free but sticks a charge on anyway. The International Call 
scam promises “free information” on travel contests and discount fares. The information 
itself does not cost anything, but the call to get it costs from $3 to $6 a minute for a 15-
 minute call.  
 
Charity Fronts  
An increasing number of groups calling themselves non-profit, charitable concerns are not 
what they appear. Very little or no money goes to the advertised cause. Police and firemen’s 
associations have in some cases lent their names to telemarketing fund drives that only give 
about 35 percent of their collections to the group. Some boiler room operators claim to call 
for these groups—or for drives against a dise ase or underprivileged children—when they are 
in no way affiliated with the charity.  
  
A twist to this scam is the impersonation of handicapped workers by boiler room operators. 
Phone pros call victims, claiming to be handicapped or disabled, and attempt to sell light 
bulbs and other household products. The merchandise is priced at three times its actual 
value. The money is, of course, pocketed by the operators. 
 
Door-to-Door Promotions 
Sweepstakes promoters using a charity front offer the possibility of new cars and cash prizes 
to contributors. The raffle approach — tying the number of “chances” to a set amount —
helps drive up how much the victim is willing to give. A favored device of phony charities is 
to send school-age children door-to-door, saying they are raising money for antidrug 
programs or for a group that takes underprivileged kids on trips. Some of the children repeat 
what they are told in exchange for a few dollars. Others believe they will receive rewards and 
free trips when in fact they, too, are being scammed.  
 
Prizes, Sweepstakes, Discount Services 
The most common give-away is known as the “1-in-5.” A postcard arrives in the mail telling 
the receiver they have already won a prize. A new luxury vehicle tops the list, along with 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1727 
$5,000 in cash, a diamond necklace, a living room set, and $500 in gift certificates for 
clothing and household furnishings. The odds of winning any of the prizes are astronomical. 
Victims are given trinkets or coupons redeemable only for the company’s own  
shoddy merchandise. 
 
Winners who call back are often asked to stipulate how they intend to spend their winnings 
for the company’s “records,” or for “publicity materials.” Then they will be asked to pay a 
processing fee or to prepay the taxes on their winnings. Sometimes winners pay immediately 
by dialing a 900 number that charges them for a 10-minute call even if they hang up 
immediately. This practice is a further violation of telemarketing laws, which require a toll 
number to disconnect within 30 seconds after the caller hangs up.  
 
Magazine Subscriptions 
A productive front for prize hawkers is the magazine subscription service. Prepaid 
subscription offers extract money from customers through credit cards and bank debits, 
then never deliver the publication. In other instances, the processing fees far exceed the 
actual value of the subscriptions.  
  
Office and Household Supplies 
A scam that has recently become prevalent involves copy machine toner. An invoice for 
toner is sent to a company. The cons have usually called beforehand, gotten the name of the 
employee in charge of supplies, and addressed the invoice to that person. Although the 
office never ordered or received any toner, the con men are relying on poor communication 
to cover their ruse. The invoice will most likely be sent to the accounting department and 
paid. If the proper controls are in place at every level of business operations, this scheme 
should be detected. Too many businesses, however, are vulnerable to this kind of scam. 
 
The caller may get the company’s representative to accept a trial or promotional shipping of 
the product. He may claim to be a supplier for the company or a new salesman from a 
regular supplier. The product arrives and an invoice follows a couple of weeks later. If the 
company tries to send the product back, it is returned to them. To avoid further 
complications, the company will normally pay the bill just to put an end to the situation. 
 
Any sort of office supply, from paper to shelving to cleaning products, can be part of a 
scam. Medical supplies shipped to doctor’s offices and clinics are pushed in a similar fashion. 
Individual households can be the target of these ploys, as well. Water purifiers are often used 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1728                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
in tandem with giveaway offers; the victim buys a filtering device, at an inflated cost, in order 
to qualify for the giveaway. Pyramid-style operations often use household products and 
health-related merchandise, such as vitamins or skin cream, as part of their machinations. 
 
Phishing 
Phishing is a popular scheme that involves tricking businesses or individuals into providing 
passwords, account numbers, or other sensitive data by claiming to be from an actual 
company the victim does business with. A solicitation for information appears to come from 
a legitimate business and can occur over the phone (such as a call from the victim’s “bank” 
saying their account has been compromised and requesting PIN numbers, account numbers, 
or passwords), or via e-mail (which is the most common technique). An individual receives 
an e-mail that appears to come from eBay, PayPal, or a financial institution. The e-mail states 
that the customer must immediately log into his account in order to update his information. 
The link directs the individual to a fake site that captures his identifying information such as 
Social Security numbers and PIN, mothers’ maiden name, and financial account numbers. 
 
It is crucial for people to recognize phishing so that they don’t fall victim to it:  
• Phishing occurs mostly by e-mail. As described above, the sender of the e-mail pretends 
to be a legitimate bank, government agency, or retailer and asks the recipient to confirm 
his personal information for any of these or other made-up reasons: the person’s 
account will be closed if they don’t give the information, an order has been placed in 
their name, or their information has been lost because of a computer glitch. Don’t ever 
respond to these e-mails. Legitimate banks, government agencies, and retailers would not 
e-mail you for your password of other identifying information.  
• Do not click on any link in an e-mail that asks for your personal information. The links 
included in the e-mails sent by phishers will take you to a phony website that looks just 
like the website of the real company or agency. If you followed the instructions, you 
would enter your personal information, which would go straight into the hands of 
identity thieves.  
• Ironically, phishers may even say that they are from the fraud departments of popular 
companies and ask you to verify your information because they suspect you may be a 
victim of identity theft. Other tactics include the phisher claiming to be from a state 
lottery commission who requests people’s banking information to deposit their 
“winnings” in their accounts. Again, never disclose any personal information via e-mail. 
• Phishing can also happen by phone. Verify caller’s identity and contact their company 
for legitimacy. Instead of fraudsters sending spam, they might call you and pretend to be 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1729 
from a company or government agency, making the same kinds of false claims and 
asking for your personal information. If someone contacts you and says that you have 
been a victim of fraud, verify the person’s identity before you provide any personal 
information. Legitimate credit card issuers and other companies may contact you if there 
is an unusual pattern indicating that someone else might be using one of your accounts. 
However, they only ask if you made particular transactions; they don’t request your 
account number or other personal information. Law enforcement agencies might also 
contact you if you’ve been the victim of fraud. To be on the safe side, ask for the 
person’s name, the name of the agency or  company, the telephone number, and the 
address. Then get the main number and call to find out if the person is legitimate. 
• Phishers also target people who list themselves on job search sites. They pretend to be 
potential employers and ask for your Social Security number and other personal 
information. Before giving anyone your personal information, follow the above advice 
and make sure to verify the person’s identity. 
• Be suspicious if contacted unexpectedly and asked for your personal information. It is 
difficult to determine a company’s legitimacy by  reading an e-mail, going to a website, or 
talking to someone on the phone. If you’re contacted unexpectedly and asked to give out 
your personal information, a red flag should go up that something is “phishy.” 
Legitimate companies and agencies do not operate this way. 
• Act immediately if you’ve been hooked by a phisher. If you provided account numbers, 
PINs, or passwords to a phisher, notify the companies with whom you have the 
accounts right away. For information about how to put a “fraud alert” on your files at 
the credit reporting bureaus and other advice for ID theft victims, contact the Federal 
Trade Commission’s ID Theft Clearinghouse, www.consumer.gov/idtheft or toll-free, 
877-438-4338.  
 
SMiShing or Tishing  
SMiShing is a hybrid of phishing and short message service, commonly known as text 
messaging. It uses much the same approach of phishing but delivers an alarming message via 
SMS (the protocol used to used transmit text mess ages via cellular devices) instead of e-mail. 
Criminal activity such as SMiShing can be seen  as the prelude to online frauds targeting 
mobile device users. As these devices continue to evolve, cyber criminals will take  
advantage of functionalities to obtain information as well as delivering mobile malware to 
mobile devices. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1730                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Voice Phishing or Vishing 
Vishing is a form of phishing attack where e-mails, for one reason or another, direct 
recipients to dial a 1-800 number, where an automated recording requests that callers enter 
personal information using a touch-tone phone.  
 
Pharming
Pharming is an attack in which a user is fooled into entering sensitive data (such as a 
password or credit card number) into a malicious website that impersonates a legitimate 
website. It is different from phishing in that the attacker does not have to rely on having the 
user click on a link in the e-mail to direct him to the fake website. Pharming actually exploits 
a vulnerability in the DNS server software that allows a hacker to acquire the domain name 
for a site and redirect the website traffic from a legitimate site to a false one. So even though 
the user types in the correct website address, the pharming program sends the user to an 
illegitimate site that looks like the real thing. Unknowingly, the user is then providing 
passwords and information directly to the hacker. 
 
Recovery Rooms 
Recovery room operations target those who have already lost money to a telemarketing 
scam. Posing as a consumer advocacy group or a law firm, telemarketers offer victims a 
chance to recover any funds they may have lost and bring the perpetrators to justice. Once 
the victim agrees, legal, investigative, and other fees will begin to emerge.  
 
 
Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes 
 
Definition 
A Ponzi scheme is generally defined as an illegal business practice in which new investors’ 
money is used to make payments to earlier investors. A simple investment scam rakes in as 
much money as possible and then disappears. A Ponzi stays in business by turning some of 
the money back into the game. A few conspicuous rewards early on will whip up interest, the 
business will grow, and then, if they’re smart and lucky, the operators will split. 
 
Everyone involved pretends to mount a legitimate organization, but little or no commercial 
activity takes place. Payoffs are made from the pool of investor funds; the rest is siphoned 
into operators’ pockets. Schemes may run for at least a year. Some Ponzis have flourished 
for a decade or more.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1731 
In accounting terms, money paid to Ponzi investors, described as income, is actually  
distribution of capital. It’s like giving away the store. Instead of sharing profits, you’re sharing 
cash reserves. 
 
Approaching this crime analytically we can see into the mechanics of the fraud. Illegal cash is 
hidden in securities or other financial instruments. Promoters use phony accounts, phony 
books, and phony names. Successful prosecutions have to uncover these guises and track the 
funds. Plus, the inner workings of a Ponzi operation have to be summarized for a jury, 
whose members are probably not mathematicians or accountants.  
 
Madoff and Stanford: Ponzi Rises Again 
In early 2009, Ponzi schemes became headline news when Bernard “Bernie” Madoff pleaded 
guilty to a $50 billion Ponzi scheme, the largest in U.S. history, and R. Allen Stanford was 
charged with running an $8 billion dollar Ponzi:  
 
 
Bernard “Bernie” Madoff 
 
Introduction 
On December 11, 2008, Federal Bureau of Investigation agents arrested Bernard 
“Bernie” Madoff, a 70-year-old businessman and former chairman of the NASDAQ 
stock market, and charged him on a single count of securities fraud. According to the 
charging document, the arrest came after Madoff told two senior employees — later identified 
as his sons — that his investment advisory business was “basically, a giant Ponzi scheme,” 
estimating that investors lost approximately $50 billion in his fraud. Federal prosecutors, 
however, put the amount at $64.8 billion.  
 
Background 
Before his arrest, Madoff enjoyed a sterling reputation, recognized as a financial 
mastermind. In 1960, Madoff founded his investment company, Bernard L. Madoff 
Investment Securities LLC, with $5,000 he earned from his jobs as a lifeguard and a 
sprinkler installer. The business eventually became one of the five broker/dealers that 
helped create the NASDAQ stock exchange, which Madoff later chaired, and established 
itself as one of the top market maker businesses on Wall Street (the sixth largest in 2008).  
Madoff was also a widely respected philanthropist, devoting his time and wealth to 
numerous charitable causes. He not only established his own multimillion-dollar private 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1732                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
foundation that donated money to educational, cultural, and health charities, he also served 
on the boards of several nonprofit institutions. 
 
Madoff’s Investment Scheme 
Even though it is not clear when Madoff’s investment fraud began (federal investigators 
believe the fraud may have begun in the 1970s while Madoff himself stated that it began in 
the 1990s), it is clear that Madoff’s unusually consistent returns, showing annualized 
returns from eight to twelve percent, were not the result of his investment strategy.    
 
Before his confession, Madoff claimed that he generated the steady returns by employing a 
“split-strike conversion” investment strategy, which is a fairly common approach that 
involves a combination of stocks and options. Under this strategy, an investor attempts to 
generate predicable returns and reduce volatility by holding a portfolio of stocks closely 
correlated to an index while concurrently selling options on a stock index and buying put 
options on the same index. 
 
In reality, however, Madoff did not invest any of his clients’ money. According to Irving 
Picard, the trustee overseeing the liquidation of Madoff’s assets, there was “no evidence to 
indicate securities were purchased for customer accounts.” Instead, Madoff simply deposited 
his clients’ money into his business account, which he then used to pay  clients who requested 
withdrawals. In other words, Madoff was running a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Unfortunately for Madoff, his scheme began to unravel in December 2008, when the 
financial crisis caused an increasing demand of cash withdrawals from his clients. The 
increase in redemptions caused his scheme to collapse when there were not enough funds from 
new investments to pay them off.   
 
How Madoff Made It Happen 
Unlike most Ponzi schemes, which collapse in a few years as withdrawals exceed deposits, 
Madoff’s con lasted longer, spread farther, and caused more losses than any similar scheme 
in history. Understandably, the Madoff case raises the question, “How did Madoff fool so 
many people for so long?” Of course, there is  no single answer to explain the success of 
Madoff’s scheme, but there are several factors that contributed to its unusual prosperity, 
including his ability to attract new investors, maintain stability, and avoid detection. These 
are explored in the following sections. 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1733 
Attracted New Investors  
Madoff’s ability to attract new investors is one reason for his scheme’s success. For years, 
Madoff’s scheme did not collapse because he successfully raised enough money from new 
investors to keep paying returns. Several factors contributed to Madoff ’s ability to entice 
new investors. Most significantly, reports of solid, long-term, and low-risk returns, 
regardless of the market environment, lured new investors through a false sense of security. 
Unlike most Ponzi schemes, Madoff did not promise extraordinary returns. Instead, he 
promised stability and long-term profits. In other words, Madoff attracted new investors by 
avoiding the appearance of risk.  
 
Similarly, his reputation and professional stature provided comfort to his investors. As a 
major figure in NASDAQ, a pioneering market maker, and a government advisor on 
market issues, Madoff’s résumé was exceptional. Madoff also enjoyed a longstanding 
reputation as a modest and humble individual, a man who put his family first and donated 
much of his time and money to several charitable causes. 
 
Moreover, Madoff lured new investors by promoting secrecy and exploiting the complexities 
inherent to the industry. Madoff emphasized secrecy by keeping his investors and investment 
strategies from the general public, which created a sense of exclusivity and an enigmatic 
enticement in his investment accounts. Additionally, Madoff understood that the complex 
and cryptic nature of the securities industry caused investors to feel that it is a discipline for 
people who are much smarter, and he exploited this by marketing his split-strike conversion 
investment method as “too complicated for outsiders to understand.” These characteristics 
allowed Madoff to shift investors’ fears from the risk of losing money to the risk that they 
might miss out on making money, creating an environment ripe for fraudulent practices. 
 
Maintained Stability  
In addition to attracting new investors, some experts suggest that Madoff successfully 
avoided large, unexpected withdrawals that would lead to the collapse of his scheme by 
targeting wealthy individuals and charities. Since the wealthy feel any economic downturn 
last and least, such investors provided Madoff with the money he needed to keep his scheme 
going. Similarly, Professor Mitchell Zuckoff, author of Ponzi’s Scheme: The True Story of 
a Financial Legend, argues that “[b]y targeting charities, Madoff could avoid the threat of 
sudden or unexpected withdrawals.” Zuckoff says that charitable foundations are legally 
required to spend only five percent of their funds each year and that this low rate of 
withdrawals allowed Madoff’s scheme to avoid detection as long as he attracted new 
investors.  
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1734                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A voided Detection  
Despite multiple SEC investigations and allegations of fraud beginning as early as 1999, 
Madoff’s investment scheme continued without detection. There are several reasons for this. 
In particular, he constructed his investment business to avoid most regulatory oversight and 
other checks and balances. Although private investment pools, such as hedge funds, are 
subject to limited oversight, Madoff’s firm was a different kind of entity. Unlike private 
investment pools, which use an outside brokerage firm to execute their trades, Madoff’s firm 
was a broker/dealer with an asset-management division, allowing the firm to process all of 
its own trades. Similarly, while most private investment pools typically keep their client 
funds or securities with an external custodian, Madoff’s firm kept its funds in-house. 
Essentially, these practices helped keep his activities hidden from view.  
 
Madoff also avoided the obligation to use a PCAOB-registered auditor by structuring his 
firm as a privately held broker/dealer. This allowed his firm to use an unknown auditing 
firm with only three employees (one of whom was a 78-year-old living in Florida) and no 
other large Wall Street clients.  
 
Equally important is that Madoff avoided filing required disclosures of his firm’s holdings 
with the SEC. Madoff did this by saying that his firm sold all of its holdings for cash at 
the end of every reporting period.  
 
In addition to operating his business on the outskirts of regulation, Madoff avoided 
detection by discouraging the use of prudent investor tools like due diligence, audit 
statements, and understanding of investment strategy. Notably, evidence shows that Madoff 
kicked some investors out of his funds for asking too many questions. Likewise, Madoff 
reportedly shunned questions from investment media about his strategy, and, as noted 
above, Madoff conducted his investment business with great secrecy and even refused to 
provide clients with online access to their accounts.  
 
Red Flags 
With the benefit of hindsight it is easier to see the red flags in Madoff’s investment advisory 
business, and if nothing else, the Madoff saga can provide some simple lessons to help 
identify and prevent similar Ponzi schemes. The most apparent red flags are discussed 
below.  
 
Steady Returns  
The most obvious red flag was that Madoff’s firm generated consistently steady, positive 
returns during his seventeen-year track record, with no down year and very few negative 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1735 
months, regardless of market conditions. And even though Madoff attributed this to his 
split-strike conversion investment strategy, a technique that can generate profits over many 
years, this type of strategy will generate some down months and exhibit more volatility than 
Madoff’s reported returns. In other words, Madoff’s profits were too good to be true. 
 
Extreme Secrecy and Lack of Transparency  
Madoff’s secrecy and lack of transparency in the operations of his business and investment 
process provided yet another red flag. As disc ussed above, reports indicate that Madoff was 
extremely secretive regarding his investment strategy. Specifically, Madoff never clearly 
defined his split-strike conversion strategy, which other traders could not duplicate, and he 
refused to answer questions ab out his investment strategies. In addition, Madoff did not 
provide his clients with a high level of detail  in their monthly statements and refused to 
provide online access to their accounts. 
 
Madoff also kept information from other employees at his firm. According to a senior 
employee, Madoff “kept the financial statements for the firm under lock and key” and was 
“cryptic” about his investment advisory busin ess, which he operated from a separate floor, 
when discussing it with other employees. 
 
Lack of Job Segregation  
The lack of job segregation was another red flag that should have raised concerns about 
Madoff’s operations. Unlike typical hedge funds that use a network of third-party service 
providers to perform certain functions, Madoff’s firm performed these operations internally 
and with no third-party oversight. A hedge fund’s network of third-party service providers 
typically includes an investment manager to manage the assets, a broker (or brokers) to 
manage the trades, a fund administrator, and a custodian/prime broker. These third 
parties provide essential checks and balances necessary to protect individuals and 
institutions. Madoff’s firm, on the other hand, performed these functions internally. Madoff 
not only traded his managed accounts in-house by operating as a broker/dealer, he also 
maintained custody of his clients’ assets, indicating that there was no independent custodian 
to verify the existence of assets.  
 
Small Accounting Firm  
One of the most significant red flags was the firm’s unknown auditor, Friehling & 
Horowitz, a firm that employed  only three people. Clearly, it seems inconceivable that a 
three-person operation could adequately audit a firm of Madoff’s size and complexity. 
Furthermore, the accounting firm had only one active accountant, David Friehling, who 
had not registered with the PCAOB, an independent agency that was created under the 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1736                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sarbanes-Oxley Act to help detect fraud. Similarly, the firm was not peer reviewed, a 
process in which audit organizations assess each other for internal quality control. 
According to the AICPA, the accounting firm was not required to participate in any peer 
reviews because Friehling informed the group that the firm had not conducted audits for 15 
years.   
 
On March 18, 2009, Friehling became the second person charged in the fraud scandal. 
According to federal prosecutors, Friehling was charged with securities fraud, aiding and 
abetting investment-advisor fraud, and for filing false audit reports to the SEC.   
 
Unusual Fee Structure  
The structure of the firm’s compensation also raised red flags. Unlike most hedge funds, 
which charge management and performance fees, Madoff’s firm earned commissions on each 
trade. This unusual fee structure raised many  questions. Why would the firm not act like a 
hedge fund and profit from big gains? Why would it let third-party distributors get these 
fees? 
 
Tips from More than One Source  
Finally, outside analysts raised critical questions about Madoff’s firm for years. For 
example, in 2001, an article that appeared on the MARHedge website, titled “Madoff 
Tops Charts: Skeptics Ask How,” seriously  questioned Madoff’s ability to deliver 
incredibly consistent returns. A subsequent Barron’s article titled “Don’t Ask, Don’t 
Tell” raised the same concerns, noting that  “some on Wall Street remain skeptical about 
how Madoff achieves such stunning double-digit returns.”  
 
Still, the most notable critique came from independent fraud investigator Harry 
Markopolos, CFE, CFA. In 1999, Markopolos started a campaign to persuade the 
SEC that Madoff’s returns could not be legally generated using the investment strategies 
that he claimed to use. Despite receiving little attention, Markopolos continued to send 
SEC officials information about Madoff, and, in 2005, Markopolos presented the SEC 
with a 17-page memo titled “The world’s largest hedge fund is a fraud.” In the memo, 
Markopolos outlined 29 red flags in Madoff’s business dealings and argued that Madoff 
was either front-running client orders or operating “the world’s largest Ponzi scheme.” This 
time, the SEC responded to Markopolos’s tips and initiated an investigation. 
Unfortunately, the investigation did not uncover any evidence of a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Finally, several financial institutions, including Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and Credit 
Suisse Group AG, either refused to do business with Madoff or advised their customers 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1737 
against it. In fact, Goldman Sachs blacklisted Madoff’s firm after it failed to pass their 
standards of due diligence.  
 
Conclusion 
In 2009, Madoff pleaded guilty to eleven felonies, including one count of securities fraud, 
one count of wire fraud, one count of mail fraud, and three counts of money laundering. He 
was sentenced to 150 years in prison. He has also been ordered to forfeit $170 billion 
dollars (the amount prosecutors say flowed through his business). Given the size, scope, and 
complexities involved in the fraud, the process of unraveling Madoff’s web of financial 
dealings could take years, and the full extent of the damage caused by his scheme may never 
be known.  
 
 
Securities and Exchange Commission v. Stanford International Bank, et al. 
R. Allen Stanford, a prominent financier, philanthropist, and sponsor of sports teams, had 
been on the radar of regulators for years thanks to the oddly stable and generous returns 
offered by his firm’s certificates of deposit. But recently, the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC), perhaps inspired by Madoff’s alleged $50 billion Ponzi scheme, took 
a renewed interest in Stanford and his operations. On February 27, 2009, the SEC filed 
a complaint alleging that Stanford, three of his companies, and two of his executives carried 
out a “massive Ponzi scheme” for at least a decade, involving billions of dollars of investor 
funds. 
 
The Parties  
Plaintiff  
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
 
Defendants  
Stanford International Bank, Ltd. (SIB) 
Stanford Group Company (SGC)—Investment adviser to SIB 
Stanford Capital Management, LLC ( SCG)—Investment adviser to SIB 
R. Allen Stanford (Stanford)—Chairman, chief executive officer, and sole shareholder of 
the Stanford operations 
James M. Davis (Davis)—Director and chief financial officer of SFG and SIB 
Laura Pendergest-Holt (Pendergest-Holt)—C hief investment officer of SFG and a 
member of SIB’s investment committee 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1738                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Relief Defendants  
Stanford Financial Group (SFG) 
The Stanford Financial Gr oup Bldg Inc. (SFGB) 
 
The Allegations 
The Securities and Exchange Commission filed a number of allegations against the 
defendants in its First Amended Complaint filed on February 27, 2009 with the U.S. 
District Court for the Northern District of Texas, Dallas Division. These allegations 
include: 
 
• Stanford and Davis misappropriated billions of dollars of investor funds and 
falsified SIB’s financial statements in an effort to conceal their Ponzi scheme. 
• Pendergest-Holt facilitated the scheme by misrepresenting to investors that she 
managed SIB’s multi-billion investment portfolio of assets and employed a sizable 
team of analysts to monitor the portfolio. 
• SIB sold approximately $8 billion of certificates of deposit (CDs) through 
deceiving investors about the security of the CDs and the assets in which the bank 
was investing. 
• Stanford and Davis “invested” an undetermined amount of investor funds in 
speculative, unprofitable private businesses controlled by Stanford. 
• Stanford and Davis fabricated the performance of SIB’s investment portfolio in 
order to cover up their scheme and to keep investor funds flowing in; the fabricated 
financial information in no way revealed the true performance of the bank’s 
investment portfolio. 
• SGC and SCM advisers used materially false and misleading historical 
performance data to sell more than $1 billion of a proprietary mutual fund wrap 
program, generating fees for SGC and SCM in excess of $25 million. 
• The Defendants violated or aided and abetted violations of the Securities Act of 
1933, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Investment Advisors Act of 
1940, and the Investment Company Act of 1940. 
 
The Red Flags 
Despite being such an opaque operation, operating in a minimally regulated jurisdiction, 
and offering suspiciously stable returns on its investments, SIB did an excellent job of 
attracting investors and fielding regulators for quite some time. And whether or not 
Stanford is guilty of running the alleged $8 billion Ponzi scheme remains to be seen. But 
regardless of the outcome of the case, one cannot deny the existence of a number of warning 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1739 
signs indicative of a Ponzi scheme or other investment fraud. The red flags discussed below 
should have had investors and regulators intrigued, if not downright apprehensive. 
 
Impressive, Yet Oddly Stable, Returns  
SIB purported to achieve double-digit returns on its investments for the past 15 years. Not 
only were the returns oddly stable, but they were quite impressive, especially for such a 
“liquid” investment, often more than double the returns offered by big banks. For example, 
the interest rate offered by SIB in February 2009 on a one-year CD (requiring a $50,000 
minimum investment in the United States) was approximately 4.5%, according to the 
bank’s website, while Bankrate.com reported the average interest rate offered by U.S. 
banks to be about 2%. Even more interesting is that despite massive losses in the stock 
market and hedge funds in 2008, SIB claimed to experience a loss of only 1.3% for that 
period and continued to pay out above-average returns.  
 
Opaque Investment Strategy  
There was a stunning lack of transparency into the investment strategy used by SIB. The 
bank claimed to generate its impressive returns by investing the CD money largely in 
corporate stocks, real estate, hedge funds, and precious metals, but offered few specifics, even 
in its annual report. SIB’s strategy is a bit unusual, as most issuers of CDs invest CD 
money in higher-yielding U.S. Treasury bonds or similarly conservative instruments. 
Marketing materials claimed that the bank was able to offer substantially higher returns as 
a result of investing in a “well-diversified portfolio of highly marketable securities issued by 
stable governments, strong multinational companies, and major international banks,” and 
also as a result of Antigua’s low taxes and moderate overhead costs. 
 
Incredibly Small Auditing Firm  
The 14-person Antigua-based accounting firm, C.A.S. Hewlett & Co., seemed grossly 
inadequate to audit the books of a bank that claims to manage and advise $50 billion in 
investor funds — but that’s who Stanford relied upon for his auditing needs. 
 
Inbred Governance Structure  
The independence and objectivity of the bank’s board of directors were questionable given 
that the seven-member board was dominated by Stanford insiders, family, and friends. 
 
Very High Level of Spending  
Although selling CDs is typically a low-margin business, Stanford was able to offer much 
higher than average compensation to brokers, including large bonuses, luxury cars, and 
expensive vacations. Stanford’s empire was also known to spend vast sums of money on its 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1740                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
many offices. Additionally, Stanford’s companies were a big corporate sponsor of 
professional sports teams and charitable causes, and they contributed heavily to political 
campaigns.  
 
Unusual Background of Chief Investment Officer  
The qualifications of Pendergest-Holt, the chief investment officer of SFG and a member of 
SIB’s investment committee, are insufficient to explain her meteoric rise to the top of 
Stanford’s empire. She did not have a business school degree, nor did she have any 
experience as an analyst at a Wall Street firm or large mutual fund company. All of her 
training was received on the job while working for Stanford. 
 
Concerns Voiced by a Number of Former Brokers/Employees  
Over the years, there have been a number of  grievances (including lawsuits and public 
arbitration cases) aired against SFG and SIB by former employees and brokers, including 
claims that the firms were running a Ponzi or pyramid scheme, claims that 
employees/brokers were dismissed for objecting to and raising concerns about the legality of 
the firms’ practices, claims that the firms used  investor money to finance its brokerage arm, 
and claims that the firms misled investors by offering artificially high yields on their CDs.  
 
Revocation of Banking License in Montserrat  
Prior to Stanford International Bank, Stanford operated Guardian International Bank 
(which also issued questionable CDs) in the British territory of Montserrat in the 
Caribbean. But in 1991, after the local government moved to revoke Guardian’s banking 
license under hazy circumstances, Stanford relocated to Antigua and renamed his bank 
Stanford International Bank.  
 
At the time of this writing, the only charges against Stanford and Davis were civil fraud 
charges. Pendergest-Holt, however, had been arrested by federal prosecutors and charged 
with criminal obstruction of justice (to which she pleaded innocent) for giving misleading 
statements to SEC investigators. Perhaps prosecutors hope to secure a quick guilty plea 
from her, so that, with a plea deal in hand, they can use her as a witness against Stanford 
and Davis. Regardless of the outcome of the case, investors should be wary any time they 
come across a yield far higher than average with no clear, plausible, and legal explanation. 
 
Illegal Pyramid or Ponzi Scheme? 
What’s the difference between an illegal pyramid scheme and a Ponzi scheme? They both 
use new investors’ money to make payoffs. But they’re run very differently by their 
promoters, and legally they’re prosecuted under different laws. 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1741 
First we’ll distinguish between legal and illegal pyramid schemes. Then we’ll show how a 
Ponzi scheme and an illegal pyramid are the same thing, only different. 
 
Pyramid Schemes, Legal and Illegal 
 
Illegal pyramids generate revenue by continually recruiting new members. These operations 
may offer merchandise or services for sale, but the only significant revenues come from 
recruitment. 
 
Some legitimate merchandising companies use a pyramid structure to rank their employee-owners 
and to determine those people’s compensation. But a pyramid structure becomes a 
pyramid scheme when the company makes its money by recruiting people. Instead of selling 
a product or service, the group deals primarily in new memberships. Joining the group allows 
the new member to profit by signing up new members. The process continues until the 
available pool of new members is drained, which happens sooner than one might think.  
 
Usually there’s a product or a cause that fronts the illegal pyramid scheme as a legitimate 
enterprise. Promoters shill beeswax supplements, or claim they’re working to prevent youth 
crime. A favorite product front offers “courses” in areas like “investor education” or “self 
esteem.” These materials usually convey very little pertinent information; in fact, they’re 
nothing more than motivational tracts designed to make the victim a more enthusiastic 
participant in the pyramid.  
 
In any case, regardless of the product front, an illegal pyramid emphasizes recruiting first and 
foremost. The product or service takes a back seat to getting new suckers signed up. 
 
As a rule of thumb most courts apply the 70 Percent Rule. This requires that at least 70 
percent of distributor’s profits come from retail sales. Of course this figure can be hard to 
verify. Distributors routinely sign falsified compliance statements because if they don’t, 
promoters warn, the authorities will shut the whole thing down and everyone loses. 
 
In the final assessment, legality rests on what the operators emphasize. If the company 
emphasizes the recruitment of new members over the sales of products, and if the only way 
to recognize promised riches is through recruitment, then the operation will likely be 
classified as an illegal pyramid. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1742                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
What’s the Difference Between an Illegal Pyramid and a Ponzi Scheme? 
 
Illegal pyramids are promoted as pyramids. Ponzi schemes are promoted as investment 
opportunities. 
 
The key element in a Ponzi scheme is that initial investors are paid with subsequent 
investors’ money. There is litle or no legitimate commerce.  
 
The same thing occurs in an illegal pyramid. Nobody’s selling the beeswax supplements; 
they’re all coaxing new people to put up money. The original members of the pyramid get 
rich on subsequent investors’ money. So, a pyramid is a Ponzi scheme.  
 
How about the obverse? Is a Ponzi scheme a pyramid? The distinguishing factor of the 
illegal pyramid is the continual need for new investors. Each new member recruits two 
members, who each recruit two, and so forth.  
 
Ponzi schemes, like pyramids, require a steady march of new investor funds to pay 
dividends. This ever-growing pile of loot might look like a pyramid when graphed. So, in the 
sense that it requires exponential growth to avoid collapse, a Ponzi scheme is a pyramid scheme.  
 
The difference between a Ponzi and a pyramid lies in how the operation is promoted.  
 
Illegal pyramids announce themselves as pyramids: they hype levels or stages in their literature. 
The pyramidal structure helps draw new players, each believing that they will rise through 
the ranks of the pyramid to become “golden,” or “fully vested”—whatever hokey titles the 
scammers have concocted. 
 
A Ponzi scheme, on the other hand, masquerades as some type of investment — in financial 
instruments, mineral rights, or some other form of speculation. The participants believe 
they’re buying mortgage-backed securities, or partial interest in an oil well. They have no idea 
they’re funneling money into a bottomless pit.  Certainly no one suggests moving on to the 
next level of the pyramid, because the pyramid isn’t part of the pitch. 
 
When an enterprise—Nu-Skin International, for example — promotes itself as an 
organization with levels or stages, and the only way to rise through the levels is to recruit 
new members, the promoters are running an illegal pyramid scheme. Before Tim and 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1743 
Melinda Rommel sued Nu-Skin, they were true believers, sprinkling Nu-Skin products across 
their bathrooms and kitchens, serving Splash, Nu-Skin’s answer to Tang, for breakfast every 
day, and even redecorating their house at the behest of Nu-Skin consultants, all for the 
purpose of snaring new recruits. The Rommels sued because they were misled about their 
opportunities inside the organization. They knew all along they were joining a pyramid, they 
just thought it was a legal one. 
 
When an enterprise promotes an investment opportunity that invests little or none of the 
participants’ money and that uses new investment dollars to make dividend payments, the 
promoters are running a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Distinguishing between Ponzis and pyramids seems a bit academic. But the differences 
become significant when perpetrators are brought to justice. To prosecute an illegal pyramid, 
the enforcement team needs to show that the offenders generated revenue mainly through 
recruitment—the company’s pyramidal structure is an element of the charge. Pyramid 
schemes are sometimes charged as illegal lotteries because, prosecutors have successfully 
argued, the participants are totally dependent on the actions of others for any compensation.  
 
In another prosecution strategy, operators are charged with falsely representing potential 
earnings, since the mathematical limits of the pyramid make the promised $10,000 a month 
impossible or extremely against the odds. Again, the pyramidal structure itself is an issue in 
the case. 
 
In summary: 
 
If operators make the bulk of participants’ earnings dependent on recruiting, and 
emphasize levels and stages in their promotions, we call this an illegal pyramid. 
 
If operators claim they’re offering an investment opportunity, but conduct little or no 
commercial activity, we call this a Ponzi scheme. 
 
Categories of Ponzi Schemes 
Ponzi schemes are classified according to the front used in their promotion. The categories 
are pure cash (which includes endless chain schemes and fill-and-split games) and product fronts  
(which includes financial instruments, MLMs, and speculations).  
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1744                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Pure Cash Schemes 
There are two general types of pure cash schemes: endless chains and fill-and-split games. 
 
ENDLESS CHAINS 
The most outrageous pyramid scams don’t bother to hide their stripes. They don’t use 
services or products to establish their legitimacy. Instead they use the “chain letter” 
approach. The recipient of the letter sends a sum of money ($5, $50, $100, the amount varies 
but isn’t usually very large) to the person who mailed them the letter, then passes the letter 
on to three or four others.  
 
Probability studies have shown that 93 to 95 percent of the players in a pyramid (everyone 
but those at the earliest initiation) will lose most of their money. Fully half can expect to lose 
everything they put in.  
 
Some Internet chains have become known as “administered” pyramid schemes — every 
exchange in the chain is monitored by a central administrator, who makes sure everybody’s 
playing (and paying) along. The administrator takes a cut of each transaction.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1745 
FILL-AND-SPLIT GAMES 
The best way to launch a pure cash pyramid is to jazz it up with gaming elements, some kind 
of hook to keep players’ attention focused on their riches and not how stupid their latest 
“opportunity” really is. These are sometimes called “fill-and-split games.” A popular version 
of this approach has been known as “Airplane.” Each player buys a seat on a fictitious 
airplane, paying from $200 to $2,000 a seat, depending on the scale of the game. Initial 
players help recruit new “passengers” and move up through the ranks of “crew,” “copilot,” 
and “pilot.” When a flight is fully booked — with something like six passengers, four crew 
members, a copilot, and a pilot — the plane takes off, the pilots and crew are paid for the 
flight, and everybody moves up the ranks. Just like a real airline, a plane’s investors are 
constantly looking to fill their seats.  
 
Another variation of the fill-and-split game tries to capitalize on the phenomenal profits 
yielded over the last 15 years by the American stock market. Called “Financial Networking,” 
“Market Climb,” or another financial-sounding name, these pure cash pyramids use a business 
metaphor in their pitch. A typical operation spreads 15 people over four levels. Eight investors 
buy into the network as “vice-presidents”; above them are four “presidents,” just below two 
“cochairman” positions; at the top, sitting pretty, is the “chairman.” Every time the eight slots 
at the bottom are filled (average price $1,500 to $2,000), the pyramid splits. The chairman gets 
out of the game with a “golden parachute” and everyone moves up the corporate ladder, 
anxiously scanning for new recruits.  
 
These games are usually predicated on what’s become known as affinity fraud. New players 
are recruited by their affinity with existing participants. People comb religious groups or 
community associations for fresh leads. Affinities may be racial or cultural. Financial 
networking, for example, has targeted a number of African-American communities. 
Churches, synagogues, and other religious organizations offer fertile hunting grounds and 
great cover from promoters—an endorsement from a clergyperson is as good as gold, and 
law enforcement authorities are often reluctant to meddle in religious affairs. Affinity frauds 
may also prey on social groups or professional organizations.  
 
Product Fronts 
The category of product fronts is subdivided into financial instruments, MLMs, and 
speculations. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1746                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS 
Financial instruments — such as stocks, borrower’s certificates, currency exchanges, loan 
scams, and investment pools—are perfect tools for the Ponzi artist. Charles Ponzi’s victims 
in 1920 thought they were investing in postal reply coupons that, Ponzi assured everyone, 
yielded whopping profits by playing off the exchange rates of international currency. In our 
own time, as legal tender in Mexico, Brazil, and Asia roller-coasters from one extreme to the 
next, the currency exchange still makes an ideal Ponzi front.  
 
A stock market that gains 25 to 30 percent a year (and individual stocks quadrupling, 
sometimes in a matter of months) encourages the impression that all anyone has to do is put 
down their money and wait by the mailbox. Unscrupulous promoters like to tout new items 
like Internet stocks and biotechnology startups, but any product will do. Even in this wired 
age, commodities futures—from soybeans to pork bellies—are still numbered among the 
most common bait for Ponzi schemes. 
 
Financial instruments are especially effective fronts because most people don’t understand 
how legitimate financial operations take place. When Wall Street is set a-fluttering by 
derivatives of futures contracts, and hedge funds are betting that the market will rise at the 
same time they’re betting it will fall, how is  an average investor with $20,000 supposed to 
understand his options?  
 
MULTILEVEL MARKETING 
When most people hear about a pyramid scheme, they think multilevel marketing, or MLM 
as it’s often abbreviated. These organizations hawk nutrition supplements, household goods, 
cosmetics, television antennas, insurance, long distance phone service, everything from 
antiques to zinc. Also among the offerings might be copies of How to Make a Million Dollars in 
an MLM. One of the industry’s monster money makers is a string of “training materials” 
designed to pump the sales force into ever higher feats of huckstership.  
 
Math remains the great enemy, as well as the prime tool, of MLMs. Promoters scratch 
matrices (never pyramids) on a chalkboard, and compute what 20 people mailing money to a 
distributor’s house every month would amount to in a year’s time. These shillers ignore 
other aspects of the equation. First, the market for any product outside those owned by large 
national brands is extremely small. Cashing in on a submarket requires an excess of savvy, 
finance, and luck, which most MLM-ers lack in spades. Then there’s pyramidal 
mathematics — after a couple of levels, you ru n out of people willing to hear your spiel 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1747 
(which was already less than 5 percent of any area’s population). In fact, between 90 and 95 
percent of MLM operations fail in their first two years (compared to a 70-80 percent failure 
rate for small businesses in general).  
 
As a rule of thumb, any organization that recruits distributors into a pyramid-style 
compensation plan, offers big payoffs for recruiting (say, more than $100 per recruit), and 
spends more time trumpeting its distributor levels than its product lines, is probably illegal.  
 
SPECULATIONS 
For the purpose of this course, the term speculation describes any investment proposition not 
covered as financial instruments or MLMs. This includes franchise offerings and business 
opportunities in general, work-at-home promotions, and investments in areas like real estate 
or mineral rights. These are good old-fashioned investments, except when they’re Ponzi 
schemes. 
 
Franchise scams hawk such opportunities as pay phone businesses or vending machines. By 
their nature, such businesses are spread out geographically and don’t involve much direct 
contact with the promoter and the franchise holder.  
 
Work-at-home promotions are also favorite tools of the franchise scammer. Computer 
technology is a popular front, since thousands of people really are setting up businesses from 
their homes. A few early dividend checks, per the Ponzi playbook, are often enough to 
overcome a client’s hesitation and provoke a more sizeable investment. Then the promoters 
can fold up and move to another state, or another coast.  
 
Big-money speculations often base their high-flown claims in the ground beneath our feet. 
Land, and the minerals drawn from it like gold, coal, and oil, has anciently been regarded as 
the ultimate commodity. The ground is the fundament of every human endeavor so, perhaps 
the land swindle is also the fundament of fraud. Someone, somewhere, it seems, has always 
been selling flooded lots to homesteaders, salting gold mines with chunks of pyrite, or 
assuring a rich merchant the new aqueduct will cut across the thousand acres of desert he 
just bought for a song. 
 
Obviously, a commercial environment that thrives on speculation is ripe for Ponzi fraud. 
Remember, the Ponzi element in a Ponzi scheme is only a technique — giving back a few 
dollars to sweeten the pot. Anything that can coax people to part with their money, from 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1748                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
emu farms to underwater land developments, can be run as a Ponzi. All the name Ponzi 
really means is that a few marks get paid. This lends a competitive element to an otherwise 
run-of-the-mill fraud. Instead of everyone losing, some lucky players do make money. 
 
Speculations frauds don’t always start out as cons, but when their rollercoaster dips, many 
speculators find it too tempting to hang on and ride — they figure they can phony their way 
through the crisis, and pick up again later. Again, it’s math that usually dooms these players. 
They simply can’t make money fast enough to feed the deficits. They need a payoff so big 
nothing short of a miracle — or more fraud — will suffice. 
 
Speculators can quickly get caught in a chain reaction, where each fraud demands more 
fraud. By the time these organizations are shut down, they’re spending half of their resources 
or more just covering up their criminal acts.  
 
Spotting Pyramid Schemes 
Almost everyone knows what a pyramid scheme is. People see them exposed on television 
and read about them constantly in magazines and newspapers. So, if everyone is so well 
informed about the pyramid, how does it survive? 
 
It could be that familiarity has lulled the public into a false sense of security. Pyramiders have 
several strong weapons at their disposal: 
• They do pay off. Unlike a simple con game in which the fraudster throws the ruse, grabs 
the cash, and exits, pyramiding builds up the take by paying initial investors. This makes 
for excellent testimonials. Early players circulate the word and bring in new marks. Initial 
payoffs also keep early players coming back. Payoffs make the enterprise look legitimate 
and fuel the expansion process. Charles Phillip Elliot ran his investment business 
pyramid-style for 16 years, taking in more than $60 million from 1,100 investors. When 
Elliot was busted, a business associate quipped, “Elliot paid like a slot machine. He lulled 
everyone to sleep.” 2   
• They operate mainly through preexisting affiliations. Community groups, religious 
organizations, and social clubs all make enticing targets for pyramiders. Any pyramid 
requires a healthy pool of participants, so a large group already gathered together is ideal. 
Besides that, pyramiders know how to manipulate the trust that people place in these 
groups.  
                                                          
2 Holzman, Todd. Business Dateline. October 1987. Pages 16ff.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1749 
• They use ingenuity and false logic in their pitches. The product fronts available for 
pyramiding are myriad, from bath soap to electronics. Fronts in financial instruments 
and real estate are especially effective because most people don’t understand how those 
businesses work anyway. Pure cash games find clever metaphors—like a conceptual 
airplane, or a business executives’ hierarchy — to make themselves attractive.  
 
Pyramiders of every stripe use a seductive, though false, logic in their pitch: “Everybody has 
friends and associates; you only have to sign up three or four people below you.” Of course 
the laws of mathematics spell doom to this logic. There simply aren’t enough players to keep 
even a small pyramid running. Three people, each finding three people, will quickly play out 
their available friends and associates — if not mathematically, then socially. There’s also a 
reasonable limit on how quickly money can grow. 
 
The pyramid, then, is built to overcome people’s most common misgivings about investing. 
Promoters offer far more than an “undertaking of great advantage, nobody to know what it 
is.” They are very specific in their prospectus.  The offer sounds good and (within its own 
logic) makes sense. The “opportunity” is usually pitched by someone familiar to the victim, 
or at least by someone with an affinity the victim trusts. Most importantly, the pyramid does 
return people’s money, with the incredible profits attached as promised.  
 
Speed is another potent weapon in the pyramid arsenal. Cons say, “Get in now, or regret it 
forever.” They don’t have time — because of market demand, or commitments elsewhere —
 for the person to check out the deal. That’s because a moderate amount of due diligence 
research will expose the deal as a scheme.  
 
The final factor is greed. A recent poll quoted in Charles Whitlock’s Easy Money, revealed 
that when people received telephone calls from a bogus investment company, one in twenty 
took the bait. The victims had no prior contact with the salesperson or the company, but 
still, five percent of them bought. But there was a catch. The poll also reported that, 
considering all those stung by a telephone fraud, only two percent of those calling 
themselves trusting, and just two percent of those who called themselves open-minded, had 
been the victims of fraud. Simply put, persons with healthy lives, strong family ties, and an 
honest work ethic are not as likely to get burned as people who are lonely, desperate, and out 
to make a quick buck. Of course, as our examples have shown, the range of people caught in 
pyramid schemes has no bounds. Plenty of victims are experienced, careful professionals 
who have either let down their guard or become ensnared by the cleverest of shams.  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1750                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Franchise Fraud   
Franchising is part of the American Dream. A gateway to business ownership for millions of 
Americans, franchising is estimated to account for more than 40 percent of all retail sales in 
the United States — a percentage that is expected to reach 50 percent in a few short years 
according to a report issued by the House Committee on Small Business. But the dream of 
business ownership can be easily shattered by fraud.  
  
Franchise Regulation 
In 1978, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) entered the realm of franchise regulation 
by enacting “Disclosure Requirements and Prohibitions Concerning Franchising And 
Business Opportunity Ventures”—the “FTC Rule” (16 C.F.R. Part 436). As stated by the 
FTC, “the Rule is designed to enable potential franchisees to protect themselves before 
investing by providing them with information essential to an assessment of the potential 
risks and benefits, to meaningful comparisons with other investments, and to further 
investigation of the franchise opportunity.” As this mission statement suggests, the FTC rule 
addresses the disclosures made by franchisers to potential franchisees, as opposed to ongoing 
issues in the relationship  between franchisers and franchisees and other issues that arise in the 
termination  of franchise relationships.  
 
But the 1978 enactment of the FTC rule did not lead to the eradication of fraud claims in 
franchising relationships—among the rule’s deficiencies, it does not create a private civil 
action. Many state legislatures have enacted laws that supplement the FTC Rule. Illinois is a 
good example of a progressive state in franchisee law. The rule, however, preempts any 
inconsistent state disclosure laws.  
 
The FTC Franchise Rule 
The FTC Franchise Rule prohibits fraud in the initial sale of a franchise in which the 
franchise affects interstate commerce. Under the rule, franchisors must furnish potential 
franchisees with written disclosures providing important information about the franchisor, 
the franchised business and the franchise relationship, and give them at least 10 business 
days to review it before investing. 
 
                                                          
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1751 
Franchisors may make the required disclosures by following either the Rule’s disclosure 
format or the Uniform Franchise Offering Circular (UFOC) Guidelines prepared by state 
franchise law officials. 
 
The Rule imposes six different requirements in connection with the “advertising, offering, 
licensing, contracting, sale, or other promotion” of a franchise in or affecting commerce:  
• The Rule requires franchisors to give potential investors a basic disclosure document at 
the earlier of the first face-to-face meeting or 10 business days before any money is paid 
or an agreement is signed in connection with the investment. 
• If a franchisor makes earnings claims, whether historical or forecasted, they must have a 
reasonable basis, and prescribed substantiating disclosures must be given to a potential 
investor in writing at the same time as the basic disclosures.  
• The Rule affects only ads that include an earnings claim. Such ads must disclose the 
number and percentage of existing franchisees who have achieved the claimed results, 
along with cautionary language. Their use triggers required compliance with the Rule’s 
earnings claim disclosure requirements.  
• The franchisor must give investors a copy of its standard-form franchise and related 
agreements at the same time as the basic disclosures, and final copies intended to be 
executed at least five business days before signing.  
• The Rule requires franchisors to make refunds of deposits and initial payments to 
potential investors, subject to any conditions on refundability stated in the disclosure 
document.  
 
While franchisors are free to provide investors with any promotional or other materials they 
wish, no written or oral claims may contradict information provided in the required 
disclosure document.  
 
The FTC alone has jurisdiction to enforce the rule. However, any misrepresentations in a 
UFOC certainly could be used to support claims for fraud under state statutory and/or 
common law. The FTC rule preempts inconsistent state laws. As a practical matter, it creates 
a minimum disclosure standard, which many states have equaled or enhanced by statute. 
 
State Laws 
More than half of the states have enacted either general franchise disclosure laws or business 
opportunity laws, or both. Approximately 15 states have enacted franchise disclosure laws 
that create a cause of action for failure to register a franchise with the designated state 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1752                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
agency and/or failure to provide the appropriate disclosure to the prospective franchisee in a 
timely manner. Those states include California, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, Michigan, 
Minnesota, New York, North Dakota, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Virginia, 
Washington, and Wisconsin. These state laws give franchise purchasers important legal 
rights, including the right to bring private lawsuits for violations of the state disclosure 
requirements. The state statutes provide damages or rescission as the remedies available to 
the successful franchisee. 
 
About 25 states have adopted laws that regulate the offer and sale of a business opportunity 
and such legislation might be applicable franchise agreements. Those states include Alaska, 
California, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, 
Maine, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Ohio, 
Oklahoma, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Virgina, and Washington.  
  
Other Remedies  
COMMON LAW FRAUD 
The failure of the FTC to outlaw fraud in franchising specifically beyond the disclosure 
phase does not leave a defrauded franchisee without remedies. Common law fraud is 
applicable. In general, a common law fraud action requires proof of a knowing or recklessly 
false representation or omission of material fact, reliance, and injury.  
 
Additionally, a contract may be voidable for fraud in the inducement, which occurs when one 
party enters into a contract based on the other party’s fraud. For example, if one party 
deliberately misrepresented material facts to the other, the contract will be unenforceable at 
the option of the aggrieved party. But claims of fraud in the inducement (disclosure fraud) 
are often defeated by carefully drafted language in the franchise agreement.  
 
RICO 
The Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), 18, U.S.C., § 1961 et seq., 
is the most powerful anti-fraud statute available to civil litigants because it provides for 
automatic trebling (tripling) of damages plus attorneys’ fees and costs—and RICO is highly 
relevant to franchising. There have been several cases where class action plaintiffs have 
established RICO claims based on the ongoing, system-wide fraud that had occurred 
concerning the advertising funds. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1753 
Overview of Franchising   
Under the FTC rule, as well as the statutory and/or common law of all or almost all of the 
states, there are three prerequisites to apply the rule to a business format or product 
franchise: trademark, significant control or assistance, and required payment.  
 
Trademark
The franchiser offers the right to distribute goods or services that bear the franchiser’s 
trademark, service mark, trade name, advertising, or other commercial symbol. 
 
Significant Control or Assistance 
The franchiser exercises significant control over, and/or offers substantial assistance to the 
franchisee in the operation of the franchised business. 
 
Required Payment 
The franchisee is required to pay the franchiser. These payments usually include initial 
franchise fees and ongoing royalties that are calculated as a percentage of sales, net of sales 
tax. Another typical fee is a transfer fee that is applicable on the sale of a franchise. 
 
Fraud in franchising may occur at each stage of the franchise relationship, creating 
disclosure, relationship, and termination issues. 
 
Disclosure Issues 
“Disclosure issues” arise when the franchiser fails to communicate material information or 
discloses false information to induce the franchisee to purchase a franchise that he would 
not have otherwise purchased. Two prime examples of potentially misleading information 
are earnings claims and success rates. 
 
Earnings Claims 
Assume that a prospective franchisee relies upon earnings claims published by the franchiser as 
a key factor in his decision to buy the franchise, but those earnings claims are materially 
misleading, or even blatantly false. This is a prime example of disclosure fraud in connection 
with the franchiser’s inducement of potential franchisees to buy the franchise.  
 
Disclosure fraud historically has been the primary target of franchiser regulations. The FTC 
reported that from 1989 to 1992, 100 percent of its franchise enforcement cases were based 
on allegations that the franchiser had provided fraudulent or misleading earnings claims. But 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1754                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
surprisingly, the FTC does not require franchisers to disclose earnings. The FTC rule 
provides for the disclosure of earnings claims regarding actual or potential sales. Income, 
costs, or profits of either existing or prospective franchisees is optional. But if a franchiser 
elects to make earnings claims, it must have a “reasonable” basis for those claims. 
 
Absent published earnings claims, the prospective franchisee is vulnerable to non-written, 
boastful earnings claims made by franchise salespeople who make their living selling 
franchises instead of selling the underlying goods or services. Those non-written claims may 
turn out to be false but the franchiser may try to protect itself by including in the written 
franchise agreement a “no reliance” or “integration” clause that states in effect: 
 
Franchisee acknowledges that this Agreement is the entire agreement of the parties, and 
that in entering into this Agreement, he or she is not relying upon any statements or 
representations that may have been made on or before the date of this Agreement, which are 
not expressly made a part of this Agreement.  
 
Clauses similar to this one often have been used to defeat claims of fraud submitted by 
franchisees who were induced to sign a contract based upon the franchiser’s verbal 
representations. 
 
Success Rates 
Another important disclosure issue is a franchiser’s claim that “X” percent (usually a high 
percentage) of its stores have been successful; in other words, they have remained in 
continuous operation from opening day to the present. But the franchise salesperson may 
not have told the franchisee that a number of stores were sold many times and in each sale 
the old franchisee sold the store back to the franchiser who re-sold it to a new franchisee. 
Would that additional information be material to the prospective franchisee? Would failure 
to disclose that information amount to fraud?  
 
The FTC rule does not require franchisers to disclose re-sales or turnovers from one 
franchisee to the next.  
 
Relationship Issues 
Fraud in franchising is not limited to disclosure fraud. Once the franchising relationship is 
established, the franchiser and franchisee stand in a business relationship that typically 
involves the transaction of funds at several levels under a series of contracts:  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1755 
• The payment of royalties under the franchise or license agreement for the right to use 
the franchiser’s trademark, trade name, and business system. 
• The payment of rent under a lease or sub-lease of real property and/or equipment. 
• Contributions to an advertising fund. 
 
All of these financial transactions may be subject to claims for breach of contract, fraud, or 
breach of a fiduciary duty. Of course, to determine the exact claims, you must consult the 
exact language in the franchise agreement.  
Numerous issues also may arise in the course of the franchise relationship, each of which 
reflects an inherent tension between the interests of franchiser and franchisee: 
• Training and support.  Has the franchiser provided the level of training and technical 
support that was promised? 
• Control. What degree of control is the franchiser en titled to exercise over the franchisee’s 
products, suppliers, and pricing? To what extent may the franchiser derive profit from 
the franchisee’s supplier relationships? 
• New products.  To what extent does the franchiser have a duty to introduce new products 
to keep ahead of the competition? Once the decision to introduce new products is made, 
is the franchiser held to any “standard of care” to ensure that the product is successful? 
• Expansion or contraction of the system.  Does the franchiser’s natural desire to expand the 
franchise system conflict with a franchisee’s de sire to maximize profits at his location? 
Conversely, what duties, if any, does a franchiser owe to franchisees in a particular 
market if the franchiser plans to withdraw from that market? 
• Encroachment. To what extent does the franchiser have a duty to refrain from opening 
new outlets “too close” to existing units? How close is “too close” if the license 
agreement is silent?  
• Expansion by the franchisee. To what extent is an individual franchisee’s desire to expand in 
conflict with what is best for the system as a whole?  
• Reinvestment. May a franchiser require a franchisee to reinvest a portion of his revenue 
back into the business? Does it depend on whether the franchisee owns or leases the  
real estate? 
 
Termination Issues 
The end of a franchise relationship also may provide grounds for litigation: 
• Renewal.  Does a franchiser have a duty to renew a franchisee beyond the initial term of 
his license agreement? 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1756                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Early termination. Under what circumstances may a franchiser terminate a franchise before 
the expiration of his contractual term? 
• Sale of a franchise. Under what circumstances may a franchiser veto a franchisee’s 
proposed sale of his franchise to a third-party? 
• Post-termination restrictions on competition.  To what extent may the franchiser restrict the 
franchisee’s right to compete after termination? Even if a franchisee is allowed to 
compete after the franchise relationship is ended, the franchiser may sometimes validly 
demand that the franchisee leave his business telephone number to the franchiser as it 
departs the system. 
 
 
Identity Theft 
Identity theft is an increasingly frequent type of fraud that is non-discriminatory in nature. 
Anyone can be targeted; the victim might be a college student, a retiree, a schoolteacher, or a 
successful attorney. Even corporations are susceptible to identity theft.  
 
2010 Identity Fraud Survey Report 
According to the 2010 Identity Fraud Survey Report conducted by Javelin Strategy & Research, 
the number of identity fraud victims in the U.S. has increased to 11 million from 10 million 
reported in the 2009 report. Although the total annual fraud amount increased by 12.5 
percent over the previous year to $54 billion, the report found that detection and resolution 
efforts are working well.  
 
Some of the key findings of the survey were: 
• The mean consumer cost of identity fraud decreased 25 percent, from $496 per incident 
in 2008 to $373 per incident in 2009, as a result of faster detection, lower fraud amounts, 
and quicker resolution times.  
• Social networking fraud and potential threats will likely escalate in the upcoming years.  
One of the dangers of social networking sites is the public display of personal 
information. Personal pages and account profiles can expose sensitive, personally 
identifiable information, and hints on how to easily find it. Criminals can harvest this 
information to take over accounts or open fraudulent accounts. 
• Contrary to prior years’ data, online identity theft methods constituted 42 percent of 
fraud cases in 2009. The other significant group of known cases occur through 
traditional methods when a criminal can make direct contact with the consumer’s 
personal information. The common methods of access included: 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1757 
- Obtained from a lost or stolen wallet, checkbook, credit card, or other physical 
document 
- Accessed while conducting a purchase or transactionAccessed by friends, 
acquaintances, relatives, or in-home employees 
- Stolen from a company that handles your financial data 
- Stolen paper mail 
 
Although there is no universal definition of identity theft, the Department of Justice offers 
the following definition: 
 
Identity theft and fraud are crimes in which someone wrongfully obtains and uses another 
person’s personal data in some way that involves fraud or deception, typically for economic 
gain.  
 
Personal identification data includes name, address, Social Security number, date of birth, 
mother’s maiden name, or other identifying information. The perpetrator exploits this 
information by opening bank or credit card accounts, taking over existing accounts, 
obtaining loans, leasing cars or apartments, or applying for wireless telephone and utilities 
services in the victim’s name without his knowledge.  
 
Technological advancements that facilitate the electronic transfer of personal information 
and the transmission of financial transactions have greatly contributed to the recent increase 
in occurrences of identity theft. As such technologies continue to develop, this type of fraud 
will likely remain a serious problem that affects many people. 
 
The Profile 
Unlike some fraudsters who steal as the result of a perceived need, most identity thieves 
make a living stealing identities for profit or at the very least, to supplement their incomes 
generously. Although it can be an employee, friend, or relative, generally the fraudster usually 
falls into one or more profiles: 
• Been convicted, served time in prison, wishes to conceal his identity  
• Been convicted, served time in prison and looking for a “safer” way to commit a crime 
and stay out of prison 
• College student looking for an “easy” way to work his way through school 
• Landlord 
• Rental car agents 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1758                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Illegal aliens needing an identity 
• Illegal telemarketers 
 
Common Ways of Obtaining Information 
While you might think that you are careful with your personal information, in reality, a lot of 
information can be easily found and acquired by identity thieves without you even realizing 
it. An innocent inquiry for the most basic of information, such as verifying an address or 
mother’s maiden name for a banker’s files, can be the start of a financial nightmare. The 
most common ways information is obtained are: 
• Sorting through discarded trash 
• Shoulder surfing 
• Rifling through coworker’s desk drawers 
• Theft of mail — incoming or outgoing 
• Using an accomplice within the organization  
• Soliciting identifiers through false job application schemes 
• Telephone companies, health clubs, and schools 
• Certifications and licenses placed on workplace walls  
• Using pretext, ruse, or gag calls  
• Rental and loan applications  
• Public records  
• The Internet 
 
Sorting Through Discarded Trash 
Most people do not destroy their personal financial data; they simply throw it away with the 
rest of their trash for pick-up by the garbage collectors on their regularly scheduled day. 
Solicitations for pre-approved credit cards are some of the most valuable pieces of trash that 
an identity thief can steal. Additionally, “dumpster diving” as it is more popularly known as, 
can yield checks, credit card and bank statements, or other records that bear your name, 
address, and telephone number. In addition to targeting an individual’s trash, dumpster 
divers target the trash at banks, insurance companies, hospitals, and other businesses—
 locations that an individual has no control over. 
 
Shoulder Surfing 
Shoulder surfing is another popular way that the identity thief obtains information. The 
person watches from a nearby location and listens to someone’s telephone conversation or 
watches the numbers being punched for a calling card or credit card, thus obtaining enough 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1759 
information to use or procure a credit card. Identity thieves also watch potential victims as 
they fill out bank deposit slips thus getting account information. 
 
Rifling Through Coworker’s Desk Drawers 
When people leave for break, go to lunch, or take vacation or sick leave, many if not most, 
do not lock up their desks or offices. Many people also leave personal items in their desk 
drawers, such as bank statements, monthly credit card statements, or mortgage coupon 
books — all of which have useful information for an identity thief. 
 
Theft of Mail — Incoming or Outgoing 
Theft of mail in either direction provides useful information to the fraudster. Outgoing 
checks left for the mail carrier to pick up provide bank account numbers and other 
information that can be used for illegal purposes. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Using just a driver’s license number and bank account number, a thief was able to 
withdraw more than $30,000 from a security guard’s checking account. In this case, the 
thief used the drive-through at the security guard’s bank to deposit a series of stolen money 
orders and simultaneously make large withdrawals.  
 
Using an Accomplice Within the Organization  
Sometimes the identity thief is able to compromise someone within an organization and 
obtain enough information where credit can be obtained. It may be a bank employee who 
has access to Social Security numbers and bank balances or an insurance clerk who has 
access to personal information such as name, address, Social Security numbers, and medical 
information — all useful when assuming someone’s identity. 
 
Soliciting Identifiers Through False Job Application Schemes 
Filling out a job application might also be the source of information to identity thieves. 
People believe that they are filling out a job application, when in reality they are only 
supplying personal information to a thief. 
 
Utility Companies, Health Clubs, and Schools 
Utility companies, health clubs, and schools all carry identifiers that a fraudster can make use 
of. Once again, the Social Security number is used on many applications and is a key to 
obtaining other information. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1760                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A California woman used a stolen Social Security number to obtain thousands of dollars 
in credit and then filed for bankruptcy in the name of her victim. She was sentenced to 16 
months in federal prison. In addition to the prison term, she was ordered to pay restitution 
in the amount of $13,928 and pay a $5,000 criminal fine.  
 
She admitted that she assumed the identity of another woman with a similar name in order 
to obtain loans that she was not qualified to receive. The FBI began investigating the case 
after it was contacted by the victim, an English professor at a university in Georgia. The 
professor had graduated from a college in Arizona that the defendant also briefly attended, 
and both women had received student loans that were administered through the same 
company.  
 
Due to a computer mix-up, documents belonging to the professor — which included her 
Social Security number — were sent to the defendant. Shortly thereafter, the professor began 
receiving telephone calls from companies that she had never heard of claiming she owed them 
large sums of money. 
 
Certifications, Diplomas, Licenses Placed On Workplace Walls 
Something as innocent as a diploma, professional certification, or license can be the 
identifying information that a fraudster uses to obtain a false identity. In the case of a 
professional license, some states require that it be displayed in a prominent place. 
Consequently, information such as the name, address, and license number is readily available 
to the thief. 
 
Using Pretext, Ruse, or Gag Calls  
Using pretext, ruse, or gag calls claiming to be a person to whom personal information 
would normally be released is common in an identity theft. Since there is no way to verify 
the person on the end of a phone line with photo identification, having only a small amount 
of information can yield the additional data the fraudster seeks. 
 
For example, a number of individuals have reported being called by people claiming to be 
court personnel. The caller states that there is an outstanding warrant for the individual due 
to unpaid tickets or failure to appear for jury duty. When the individual protests his 
innocence, the caller says that it must be a mistake, and asks the individual to provide his 
driver’s license number, Social Security number, and birth date so that the caller can confirm 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1761 
that a mistake has been made. The caller now has all the information needed to steal the 
individual’s identity. 
 
Rental and Loan Applications 
Almost without exception, rental and loan applications yield enough information that can be 
used to establish a false identity. An applicant’s name, Social Security number, previous 
address(es), employment history, telephone numbers, and credit history are required to 
complete the application. Once the thief gets a hold of that information, it is usually quite 
easy to establish an identity. 
 
Public Records  
Public records yield a wealth of personal data for the identity thief. Real estate records, tax 
liens, licenses, litigation records, and, in some states, drivers license numbers, all reveal 
enough information that can be used to steal a person’s identity or least provide a start for 
the fraudster. 
 
The Internet 
The Internet offers many opportunities to the identity thief. It has made much information 
available to more people at a small cost. It has also been an attractive place for identity 
thieves to find their victim. Once you have logged on, information you thought was private 
might now be traced by anyone who is interested in finding personal information about you. 
Identifying information such as passwords, credit card numbers, and in some cases, banking 
information has been made available via the Internet. Spam, or unsolicited e-mail, is 
frequently responded to by many people who are unaware that the sole purpose of the e-
 mail is to obtain personal information.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A Midwestern woman was accused of trying to get a $25,000 loan through an Illinois 
bank using personal information she found on the Internet. The victim, a college professor, 
called police when the bank sent the completed application to her home rather than to the 
home of the accused. The same woman reportedly obtained a MasterCard under another 
professor’s name and ran up almost $3,000 in charges.  
 
In addition, some database companies sell information — your personal information — online 
to persons or organizations that you might not want to have that information, thus 
increasing the chance for fraud and abuse. For example, information you provide by 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1762                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
responding to a questionnaire online might be collected and sold to insurance and drug 
companies without your knowledge. The same can be true when applying for a low-interest 
credit card or consumer loans. Do you know who is actually receiving the information that 
you provide online? There is no physical address to check out in most cases. 
 
The Internet also is a source for “information brokering.” For a fee, information brokers will 
reveal the most personal aspects of your life — from financial information to medical 
information. For fees as low as $40 per search, they will disclose everything from non-published 
telephone numbers to the location of your safety deposit box. Some of it is legal 
and can be found in public records, but some of it is illegal.  
 
Tracking Down the Thief 
There are many ways that the fraud examiner can track down an identity thief. Some require 
the assistance of law enforcement, while others do not. Examples of techniques that have 
been successfully used to catch an identity thief are: 
• Establish surveillance of the address in question. 
• Have overnight delivery services “flag” the address in question. 
• Subpoena telephone records for the telephone(s) being used by the perpetrator. 
• Contact credit bureaus and have them “fl ag” the true account holder’s file. 
• Contact the Social Security Administration to determine if the number is listed twice in 
the system. 
• Obtain videos from retailers showing the perpetrator making purchases using the 
victim’s identity. 
• Obtain a copy of the perpetrator’s picture on the fictitious driver’s license. 
• Track down addresses and telephone numbers that do not belong to the victim but show 
up in their file. 
• Have the victim notify the fraud examiner when further breaches occur. 
• Report the fraud to law enforcement. 
 
Confronting the Fraudster 
If the fraudster has been identified and is to be confronted, the fraud examiner should keep 
the following in mind: 
• On initial contact, call the fraudster by the wrong name; generally he will then produce 
identification in the name of the victim. 
• Try to establish the fraudster’s true identity. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1763 
• For safety reasons, use caution when confronting the thief; never forget that the 
fraudster could be a convicted felon who does not want to go back to prison. 
 
Federal Identity Theft Statutes 
There are two primary federal laws that address identity theft: the Identity Theft and 
Assumption Deterrence Act and the Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act. 
 
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act 
In October 1998, Congress passed the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act 
(Identity Theft Act) to address the problem of identity theft. Specifically, the Act outlaws the 
intentional and unauthorized use of another individual’s identification, with the intent to 
commit a crime.  
 
It carries a maximum term of 15 years’ imprisonment, a fine, and criminal forfeiture of any 
personal property used or intended to be used to commit the offense. (The penalty is 
increased to a maximum of 30 years imprisonment if the offense is committed to facilitate 
an act of terrorism.) Identity theft schemes may also involve other violations such as mail 
fraud, wire fraud, credit card fraud, or financial institution fraud. 
 
Violations of the Act are investigated by federal investigative agencies such as the U.S. Secret 
Service, the FBI, and the U.S. Postal Inspection Service and are prosecuted by the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act 
In August 2004, Congress passed the Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act (18, U.S.C., § 
1028A). This Act strengthens federal law on identity theft by creating a crime of “aggravated 
identity theft.” Aggravated identity theft occurs when an individual uses a stolen identity to 
commit other crimes. Specifically, this law provides that where one “knowingly transfers, 
possesses, or uses, without lawful authority, a means of identification of another” during and 
in relation to any felony violation of/or relating to fraud, embezzlement, false statements, 
and the like, an additional term of imprisonment of two years will be imposed on the 
individual. In April 2005, the United States Sentencing Commission went an extra step to 
impose consecutive mandatory minimum sentences of two and five years depending on the 
underlying offense of misusing a stolen identification. The guideline became effective 
November 1, 2005. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1764                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
See the chapter on “The Law Related to Fraud” in the Legal Section for more information 
about this Act. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Wisconsin man was sentenced to 21 months imprisonment and three years supervised 
release after pleading guilty to identity theft. The defendant was also ordered to pay 
restitution totaling $62,850. 
 
The perpetrator pled guilty to using another man’s identity to obtain employment with a 
cleaning company, then using that employment to commit a burglary. 
  
Through his job at the cleaning company, the fraudster gained access to the offices of the 
Wisconsin Supreme Court where he took six computer monitors owned by the State of 
Wisconsin. The monitors were recovered almost immediately following the burglary after the 
thief abandoned the vehicle that he was driving.  
 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, which protects customers’ financial information held by 
banks working in personal finance, creates privacy obligations for financial institutions. 
Specifically, financial institutions have privacy obligations under the Act’s Financial Privacy 
Rule and Safeguards Rule. The Financial Privacy Rule requires financial institutions to 
provide their customers with privacy notices explaining the institution’s policies for 
collecting and sharing personal financial information. Conversely, the Safeguards Rule 
requires all financial institutions to design, implement, and maintain safeguards to protect the 
confidentiality and integrity of customers’ personal information. 
 
Additionally, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act includes a provision that prohibits “pretexting.” 
This statute makes it illegal for anyone to obtain customer information from financial 
institutions by impersonating someone else or making false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statements. It also prohibits soliciting someone else to engage in pretexting. Violations of 
this provision can result in a fine, imprisonment of up to 5 years, or both.  
 
More information about other provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act can be found in 
the “Sources of Information” chapter in the Investigation Section of the Fraud Examiners  
Manual. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1765 
Red Flag Rules 
On January 1, 2008, the Identity Theft Red Flag regulations (Red Flag Rules), which update 
sections of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, became effective. Issued 
by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and five Federal bank regulatory agencies, the Red 
Flag Rules require financial institutions and creditors (i.e., banking institutions, retailers, 
utilities, car dealers, etc.) to develop and implement a written identity theft prevention 
program to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft for both new and existing 
accounts in numerous industries, including financial services, utilities, health care, and 
telecommunications.  
 
The agencies also issued guidelines to assist financial institutions and creditors in developing 
and implementing a program, including a supplement that provides 26 examples of identity 
theft red flags. 
 
More information about the Red Flag Rules can be found in the “Financial Institution 
Fraud” chapter above. 
 
State Laws 
States have also passed laws related to identity theft. Below is a list of U.S. states and 
territories that have passed such laws. Other states may be considering legislation in their 
next legislative session. In addition, where specific laws on identity theft have not been 
passed, there may be remedies under other state laws.  
 
Alabama Alabama Code § 13A-8-192 
Alaska Alaska Stat § 11.46.565, 570 
Arizona Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 13-2008 
Arkansas Ark. Code Ann. § 5-37-227 
California Cal. Penal Code § 530.5-8 
Colorado Colo. Rev. Stat. § 18-5-902 
Connecticut Conn. Stat. § 53a-129 (criminal) 
Conn. Stat. § 52-571h (civil) 
Delaware Del. Code Ann., tit. 5 § 854 
District of Columbia D.C. Official Code § 22-3227.02-04 
Florida Fla. Stat. Ann. § 817.568 
Georgia Ga. Code Ann. § 16-9-120 through 128 
Guam 9 Guam Code Ann. § 46.80 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1766                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Hawaii HI Rev. Stat. § 708-839.6-8 
Idaho Idaho Code § 18-3126 (criminal) 
Illinois 720 Ill. Comp. Stat. 5/16G-13 
Indiana Ind. Code § 35-43-5-3.5 
Iowa Iowa Code § 715A.8 (criminal)  
Kansas Kan. Stat. Ann. § 21-4018 
Kentucky Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. §  514.160 
Louisiana La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 14:67.16 
Maine ME Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 17-A §905-A 
Maryland Md. Code Ann. art. 27 § 231 
Massachusetts Mass. Gen. Laws § 397-37E 
Michigan Mich. Comp. Laws § 445.65 
Minnesota Minn. Stat. Ann. §  609.527 
Mississippi  Miss. Code Ann. § 97-19-85 
Missouri Mo. Rev. Stat. § 570.223 
Montana Mon. Code Ann § 45-6-332 
Nebraska NE Rev. Stat. § 28-608, 620 
Nevada Nev. Rev. State. § 205.463-465 
New Hampshire  N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 638:26 
New Jersey  N.J. Stat. Ann. § 2C:21-17 
New Mexico N.M. Stat. Ann. § 30-16-24.1 
New York N.Y. CLS Penal § 190.77-190.84 
North Carolina N.C. Gen. Stat. § 14-113.20-23 
North Dakota N.D.C.C. § 12.1-23-11 
Ohio Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 2913.49 
Oklahoma Okla. Stat. tit. 21, § 1533.1 
Oregon Or. Rev. Stat. § 165.800 
Pennsylvania 18 Pa. Cons. Stat. § 4120 
Rhode Island R.I. Gen. Laws § 11-49.1-1-4 
South Carolina S.C. Code Ann. § 16-13-510-530 
South Dakota S.D. Codified Laws § 22-30A-3.1. 
Tennessee TCA § 39-14-150 (criminal) 
TCA § 47-18-2101-2103, 2105 (civil)  
Texas  Tex. Penal Code § 32.51 
Utah Utah Code Ann. § 76-6-1101 -1104 
Vermont Vermont Code § 13.2030 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1767 
Virginia Va. Code Ann. § 18.2-186.3 
Washington Wash. Rev. Code § 9.35.020 
West Virginia W. Va. Code § 61-3-54 
Wisconsin Wis. Stat. § 943.201 
Wyoming Wyo. Stat. Ann. § 6-3-901 
U.S. Virgin Islands 14 VI Code Ann. §§ 3003  
 
Preventing False Identity Fraud 
Identity Theft Prevention and Identity Management Standards Panel 
In September 2006, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the Better 
Business Bureau (BBB) established the Identity Theft Prevention and Identity Management Standards 
Panel (IDSP) 4 as a cross-sector initiative to catalog existing standards related to identity theft 
prevention and to identify areas where additional standards and best practices are needed to 
help businesses and other organizations further prevent identity fraud. In January 2008, the 
IDSP released a two-volume report providing a detailed inventory of standards and best 
practices that can be used to prevent identity theft and a number of recommendations for 
security enhancements around the issuance of identity credentials and the exchange and 
maintenance of identity data. The ANSI-BBB IDSP Report, available for downloading at no 
charge at www.ansi.org/idsp, is a useful tool for businesses, government agencies, and other 
organizations that wish to evaluate and augment their current identity theft prevention and 
identity management practices. 
 
Consumer Protection Measures 
How do you protect yourself and your clients from identity theft? Some of the useful 
methods are: 
• Before providing personal information, make sure the individual or business requesting 
it has a valid reason for requiring the information. 
• Never write your credit card numbers or Social Security number on checks or on the 
outside of envelopes. 
• Don’t give account numbers over the telephone or to persons/companies you are not 
familiar with. 
                                                          
4 Report Summary: Excerpts from Final Report – Volume 1: Findings and Recommendations. Published by 
the ANSI-BBB Identity Theft Prevention and Identity Management Standards Panel, January 31, 2008. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1768                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Don’t use cordless or cellular telephones or e-mail to transmit financial or private 
personal information. 
• Keep all financial documents in a secure place. 
• If you have your driver’s license information pre-printed on your checks, shred canceled 
checks before discarding them. 
• Check your financial information regularly looking for what should and shouldn’t  
be there. 
• Obtain a copy of your credit report on a regular basis. 
• Tear up or shred pre-approved credit applications. 
• Have yourself taken off of “pre-screened lists.” 
• Mail bills from the post office or your business location 
• Consider having your name and telephone number removed from the telephone 
directory or having the address removed. 
• Don’t provide personal information over the telephone unless you initiated the call and 
know who you are speaking with. 
• If telemarketing companies call, tell them: “Under the federal Telephone Consumer 
Protection Act, I want to be on your ‘do not call’ list.” 
• Keep your birth certificate in a safe place. 
• Choose passwords that will be difficult to crack and use different passwords for  
all accounts. 
• Change passwords and PIN codes often. 
• Don’t put your Social Security number on any document that you aren’t legally  
required to. 
• Shred any papers with financial information and identifiers rather than simply throwing 
them in the trash. 
 
In addition, insurance companies are now offering insurance for identity theft. For an annual 
fee, the policy covers the cost of clearing the policyholder’s name and correcting their 
financial records including legal expenses, loan re-application fees, telephone and certified 
mailing charges, notary expenses, and lost wages for the time it takes to deal with the fraud. 
 
What to Do If Your Identity Is Stolen 
• Start keeping detailed records. 
• File a police report with your local law enforcement agency and keep a copy of that 
report. Many banks and credit agencies require such a report before they will 
acknowledge that a theft has occurred.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1769 
• If your wallet or purse is stolen, immediately cancel your credit and debit cards and get 
replacements. Put a “stop payment” on all lost or stolen checks. 
• Report unauthorized charges and accounts to the appropriate credit issuers and credit 
bureaus immediately by phone and in writing. Change account numbers or close all 
accounts that are affected by the fraudulent activity. 
• Check for and repair further breaches of your identity. 
• Notify law enforcement agencies: 
? Federal Trade Commission (www.ftc.gov) 
? Federal Bureau of Investigation (www.fbi.gov) 
? Local and state agencies 
• Contact the three primary credit reporting bureaus to have a security alert or freeze 
placed on your report, and request a copy of your credit report and review it for 
unauthorized account activity: 
? Equifax (800) 525-6285 or (888) 766-0008 
? Experian (formerly TRW) (888) 397-3742 
? Trans Union (800) 680-7289 
 
For further information on identify theft, please visit the Federal Trade Commission’s 
information page at www.consumer.gov/idtheft/. 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1801 
COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD 
 
Over the last four decades, computer systems have improved dramatically. They are more 
powerful, smaller, cheaper, and more user-friendly. As they have advanced, computers have 
proliferated in our society, our businesses, and our personal lives. Most modern businesses 
and governments depend on their computer systems to support their operations, from 
personnel to financial management and everything in between.  
 
Initially, computers used to support business and government processes were backed up 
with hard copies. If the computer went down, the hard copies were used and everyone went 
back to manual forms and processes. However, in today’s environment, most businesses and 
government processes could not survive without the computer — there are few hard  
copy backups.  
 
Computers have become the mainstay of business and government processes. Without 
today’s computers, entire businesses and government operations would almost cease to 
function. Imagine trying to manually process tax returns, use robotics, compile budgets, 
build automobiles, build weapons systems, check law enforcement files, or get cash from 
automated teller machines (ATM) without the aid of computers.  
 
The proliferation of cheap, powerful, user-friendly computers has enabled more and more 
people to use them and more importantly, rely on them as part of their normal way of life. 
As businesses, government agencies, and individuals come to increasingly depend on 
computers as a necessary tool, so do the criminals. They use computers to support their 
illegal operations. Computer crimes and frauds are increasing and will no doubt continue to 
increase as more computers are networked internationally, thus giving global access to 
computer criminals. 
 
The following results were derived from the 2009 Computer Crime and Security Survey, 
conducted by the Computer Security Institute: 
• Respondents reported big jumps in incidence of password sniffing, financial fraud, and 
malware infection. 
• One-third of respondents’ organizations were fraudulently represented as the sender of a 
phishing message. 
• Average losses due to security incidents were down from $289,000 per respondent to 
$234,244 per respondent. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1802                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Twenty-five percent of respondents felt that over 60 percent of their financial losses 
were due to non-malicious actions by insiders. 
• Respondents were satisfied, though not overjoyed, with all security technologies. 
• Most respondents felt their investment in end-user security awareness training was 
inadequate, but most felt their investments in other components of their security 
program were adequate. 
• When asked what actions were taken following a security incident, 22 percent of 
respondents stated that they notified individuals whose personal information was 
breached and 17 percent stated that they provided new security services to users or 
customers. 
• When asked what security solutions ranked highest on their wishlists, many respondents 
named tools that would improve their visibility, such as better log management, security 
information and event management, security data visualization, and security dashboards. 
• Respondents generally said that regulatory compliance efforts have had a positive effect 
on their organization's security programs. 
  
The CSI figures also included data about the occurrence of threats to cyber-security in 2009 
compared to those in 2008: 
• 64.3 percent of respondents experienced malware infection, compared to 2008’s 50 
percent. 
• 29.2 percent experienced denial-of-service attacks, compared to 2008’s 21 percent. 
• 17.3 percent experienced password sniffing, compared to 9 percent in 2008. 
• 13.5 percent experienced Web site defacement, compared to 2008’s 6 percent. 
• 7.6 percent experienced instant messaging abuse, down from 21 percent in 2008.  
 
Unlike traditional fraud cases, computer fraud cases can be difficult for the fraud examiner 
because they: 
• Lack a traditional paper audit trail. 
• Require an understanding of the technology used to commit the crime. 
• Usually require an understanding of the technology of the victim computer. 
• Very often require the use of one or more specialists to assist the fraud examiner, even 
when the fraud examiner is computer literate. 
 
Before exploring the specifics of high tech crime however, let us clarify the computer’s 
function in the commission of these schemes. Computer crime is most often thought of as a 
crime that is committed with the aid of a computer. Yet the computer has various roles in 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1803 
high tech crime, both as tool and target. According to Donn B. Parker, a cybercrime 
authority and author, the function of the computer in crime is fourfold. In Fighting  
Computer Crime, Mr. Parker describes how the computer serves as an object, a subject, a tool, 
and a symbol. 
• The computer as an object — Computers and network systems are themselves often objects or 
targets of crime, subject to physical sabotage, theft, or destruction of information. 
• The computer as a subject — According to Parker, computers are the direct subjects of crime 
“when they are the environment in which technologists commit crimes.” This category 
includes virus attacks.  
• The computer as a tool — Computers are used as the means to commit crime, whether 
embezzlement, theft of proprietary information, or hacking. 
• The computer as a symbol — Computers lend fraudsters an air of credibility and are often 
used to deceive victims into investment and pyramid schemes. 
 
In these four capacities, common computer crimes include: 
• Data alteration 
• Unauthorized access and entry to systems and information 
• Reading another’s e-mail without permission 
• Data destruction and sabotage 
• Internet consumer fraud 
• Sale of proprietary data 
• Desktop counterfeiting 
• Data extortion 
• Disclosure of confidential data 
• Identity theft 
• Electronic letter bombing 
• Software piracy 
• PBX fraud 
• Voicemail fraud 
• Cellular telephone fraud 
• Stolen long-distance calling cards 
 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1804                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Computer Fraud Versus Computer Crime 
A line that should be drawn is that between computer fraud and computer crime, terms that 
are commonly used interchangeably with little distinction made between the two. Some 
substantial differences exist between them, however, as we shall see. 
 
Computer Fraud 
A general definition of computer fraud is: 
 
Any defalcation or embezzlement accomplished by tampering with computer programs, data 
files, operations, equipment, or media, and resulting in losses sustained by the organization 
whose computer system was manipulated. 
 
The distinguishing characteristic of computer fraud is that access occurs with the intent to 
execute a fraudulent scheme. Computer fraud statutes have established two very important 
principles:  
• First, the statutes contain definitions of computer-related terms. These statutes allow the 
prosecutor to sidestep having to explain to the jury technical “computer speak” and its 
cumbersome fit with common law terminology. 
• Second, the statutes create an offense based on proof of access with a particular intent. 
Success in carrying away property (money) does not have to be proven. Tracing the flow 
of proceeds is likely to be difficult without paper records and access might be the only 
provable event. 
 
Most states have defined computer fraud as an attempt crime. By viewing the computer as a 
protected asset, the protection is independent of the actual loss to the owner as a result of 
the intrusion. 
 
Computer Crime 
Computer crime  differs from computer fraud in two major ways. Employees who, as a part of 
their normal duties, have access to the computers are deemed to have authorized access and 
thus do not come under the law against access. Manipulation (alteration) or destruction of 
data (including computer software) is independent of fraudulent or other schemes. Such 
action does not fit into the normal vandalism crimes because the data is intangible. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1805 
Computer-Assisted Crime 
It is sometimes said that most computer fraud is not “computer crime” but involves the use 
of computers instead of other means to break the law. In some cases these traditionally 
illegal acts can yield more loot by recourse to the high speed of the computer. These are in 
reality computer-assisted crimes and the existing criminal statutes can be appropriately 
applied to them. However, where detection and proof problems are exacerbated by the 
involvement of electronic media, computer fraud laws are invaluable for  
effective prosecution. 
 
Information Crime 
In some cases, the computer is an active weapon. These kinds of cases are termed information 
crimes; the crime would not be possible without computer technology. Examples of 
information crimes include the theft of computer time, software, and data. 
 
 
Computer Hacking 
As the number of computers and computer users increases, so does the number and types of 
hackers. A 2007 study by the University of Ma ryland’s A. James Clark School of Engineering 
reported that hackers attack computers with Internet connections every 39 seconds, or about 
2,244 times a day. In addition, a 2007 research report conducted by WhiteHat, a website 
security services provider, showed that as many as 90 percent of all websites remain 
vulnerable to some form of computer hack.  
 
Although the term hacker was originally used to describe a computer enthusiast, the term has 
now evolved to mean someone seeking unauthorized access to computer systems and the 
information contained therein. It includes organizations’ employees, members of hacker 
gangs, and hackers for profit. Motives vary according to the targeted system, information 
desired, and the perpetrator. While hacking was once commonly thought of as a precocious 
teenager’s hobby, it has changed dramatically in the last twenty years to encompass a large 
and diverse group. 
 
Definition 
Hacking is basically breaking into computers and telecommunications systems by learning 
the vulnerabilities of various hardware and software, and using a computer to systematically 
“guess” the user’s system identification and password.  
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1806                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Hackers use various “rogue” software applications to penetrate a system, or sometimes they 
enlist the help of the user surreptitiously by installing a program that is downloaded via an e-
 mail or by visiting a website. These programs operate in the background of the infected 
computer and can disable security settings and capture information that is sent back to  
the hacker. 
 
But, the most direct way of gaining access to a computer is to use someone else’s password 
or generate (without authorization) a password of one’s own. Passwords are designed to 
keep computers safe. If you don’t know the password, the machine will not run. However, 
most users choose passwords that, while not easy to crack, follow certain patterns. People 
usually pick something familiar and easy as their password. A deep-sea fisherman uses 
“marlin”; the man’s secretary, who received a mug about “soaring with the eagles and 
working with turkeys” from her boss last Christmas, uses “turkey” as her password. There 
are lists circulated among hackers of the most likely passwords.  
 
If the hacker knows or can learn something about his target, his job is even easier. That 
fisherman, for example, probably has a huge marlin mounted on his wall. It’s located directly 
in the man’s line of sight as he logs on each morning; it’s a good guess this guy will have 
“marlin” or “reel” or something else fishy in his password. A simple lesson here: real-word 
passwords, even in variation, are not secure. The safest passwords combine letters, numbers, 
and other special characters, such as punctuation. 
 
Social Engineering 
Another means of gaining access to a system involves simple deception. The hacker uses his 
verbal skills to deceive victims into disclosing information they ought not to divulge, or 
convinces victims to commit acts that facilitate the hacker’s scheme. Often posing as an 
employee or someone hired by the organization, the hacker easily deceives real employees 
into revealing information. In order to research his scheme, he may avail himself of 
documents in the company dumpster, such as internal telephone directories and 
correspondence. 
 
The hacker may assume a number of different guises to accomplish this deception. He may 
pose as a new or temporary worker and ask information systems employees for a password 
so that he can begin work. He may also pose as someone in a position of authority and 
intimidate employees into revealing confidential information.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1807 
Sometimes overt deception is not required. In large corporations, hackers can take advantage 
of the anonymity among employees. By donning office attire, they can blend into the crowd 
and thus peruse the premises, perhaps gaining a password written down at an employee’s 
desk in the process. 
 
Hacker Computer Manipulation  
Trojan Horse 
A Trojan horse is the covert placement of instructions in a program that causes the 
computer to perform unauthorized functions but usually still allows the program to perform 
its intended purpose. This method is one of the most commonly used techniques in 
computer-based frauds and sabotage. 
 
Spyware 
Spyware is a type of malware (short for malicious software) that is installed on computers and 
collects little bits of information at a time about users without their knowledge. The presence 
of spyware is typically hidden from the user and can be difficult to detect. The most 
common use of spyware for fraud is the theft of personal information (including financial 
information such as credit card numbers), 
 
Trap Doors 
When developing large programs, programmers insert instructions for additional code and 
intermediate output capabilities. The design of computer operating systems attempts to 
prevent this from happening. Therefore, programmers insert instructions that allow them to 
circumvent these controls. Hackers take advantage of these trap doors. 
 
Salami Techniques 
Salami techniques involve the execution of unauthorized programs used to steal small 
amounts of assets from a large number of sources without noticeably reducing the whole. 
For example, in a banking system, the amount of interest to be credited to an account is 
typically rounded off. A fraudster might set up the system so that instead of rounding off the 
number, that fraction of it is credited to a special account owned by the perpetrator. 
 
Logic Bombs 
A logic bomb is a computer program executed at a specific time period or when a specific 
event occurs. For example, a programmer can write a program to instruct the computer to 
delete all personnel and payroll files if his name were ever removed from the file. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1808                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Data Diddling 
Data diddling is the changing of data before or during entry into the computer system. 
Examples include forging or counterfeiting documents used for data entry and exchanging 
valid disks and tapes with modified replacements. 
 
Scavenging and Dumpster Diving 
Scavenging involves obtaining information left around a computer system, in the computer 
room trash cans, and so on. Dumpster diving refers to gleaning sensitive information from 
an organization’s trash receptacles and dumpsters.  
 
Data Leakage 
Data leakage is the removing of information by smuggling it out as part of a printed 
document, encoding the information to look like something different, and removing it from 
the facility. 
 
Piggybacking/Impersonation 
Piggybacking and impersonation are frequently used to gain access to restricted areas. 
Examples include following someone in through a door with a badge reader, electronically 
using another’s user identification and password to gain computer access, and tapping into 
the terminal link of a user to cause the computer to believe that both terminals are the same 
person. 
 
Simulation and Modeling 
Simulation and modeling is a computer manipulation technique using the computer as a tool 
or instrument to plan or control a criminal act. 
 
Wire Tapping 
Wire tapping into a computer’s communications  links is another technique used by hackers. 
This method enables perpetrators to read the information being transmitted between 
computers, or between computers and terminals. 
 
Network Weaving 
This technique, more commonly known as looping, involves using numerous networks in an 
attempt to avoid detection. For example, a hacker might dial into Company A’s PBX system 
to obtain an outside line that can be used to dial into Company B’s network. If Company B 
can track the origin of the hacker’s call, it w ill lead them to Company A, not to the hacker. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1809 
The above is a relatively simple example. Hackers have been known to “loop” through 15 or 
20 different networks before arriving at their final destination. Network weaving can make it 
extremely difficult for an investigator or fraud examiner to trace the point of origin for a 
specific telephone call or data transmission. 
 
Altering the Way a System Generates Passwords 
Not all passwords are supplied by users. Some are generated by a computer system’s 
“randomizer” function. For example, many Internet Service Providers (ISPs) give first-time 
users a randomly generated password (and sometimes a random user name as well), which 
gets the person online. Then the user changes the log-in information to their  
own preference.  
 
By learning how a certain system’s randomizer works, the hacker can imitate the generation 
of valid passwords, or alter how the system operates. For example, with some tinkering, the 
randomizer can be set to give every new user the same, seemingly random, password: 
EVBDCL8. But that won’t work for long. It’s better to have the machine make a password 
built off some information about the user that is publicly available. Using a relatively simple 
set of algorithms, a hacker can convert a user name, such as “halbfish” into an obscure 
looking string like “rueavzhr” (letters are read as numbers by computers speaking ASCII 
code, so the algorithms are using sine values to convert the ASCII values into a new set  
of numbers).  
 
Here’s a good example of how manipulating a randomizer works. Dennis Ritchie, who 
helped develop UNIX technology, reported how a hacker attacked one company’s system. 
Computer officials at the company had their system generate passwords, each eight 
characters long, mixing letters and digits. In a brute force attack, it should have taken 112 
years to crack the nearly 3 trillion possibilities. However, the randomizer on the company 
system could only take 32,768 seeds for passwords. The hacker used his own machine to 
generate and test each of those combinations, using, according to Ritchie, “a total of only 
about one minute of machine time.” In less time than the average commercial break runs on 
television, the hacker breached a seemingly impenetrable system. 
 
Buffer Overflow Exploits 
Buffer overflow exploits are one of the largest problems in computer security today. In all 
application programs, there are buffers that hold data. These buffers have a fixed size. If an 
attacker sends too much data into one of these buffers, the buffer overflows. The server 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1810                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
then executes the data that “overflowed” as a program. This program may do any number of 
things, like sending passwords to Russia, altering system files, or installing 
backdoors, depending on what data the attacker sent to the buffer. 
 
Privilege Escalation Exploits 
Privilege escalation exploits grant administrator or root-level access to users who previously 
did not have such access. For example, an account exists on all Windows NT and 2000 
servers called “Guest.” This account, by default, has no password. Anyone can log-in to the 
server using this “Guest” account and then use a common privilege escalation exploit called 
“GetAdmin” to gain administrator-level access to the system. Many other privilege escalation 
exploits exist, such as HackDLL and others. These exploits are very useful, since they allow 
anyone who has any level of access to a system to easily elevate their privilege level and 
perform any activities they desire. 
 
Backdoors 
When attackers obtain root-level access to a server (using a buffer overflow exploit or a 
privilege escalation exploit, for example) they will want to do two things: 
• Install a backdoor  
• Cover their tracks  
 
Backdoors allow attackers to remotely access a system again in the future. For example, the 
attacker may have used a particular security hole to get root-level access to a computer. 
However, over time, that particular security hole may be closed, preventing the attacker from 
accessing the system again. In order to avoid being shut out in the future, attackers install 
backdoors. These backdoors take different forms, but all allow an attacker to access the 
server again without going through the standard log-in procedures and without having to 
repeat the attack that gave them access in the first place. Many worms install backdoors as a 
part of their malicious payload. Code Red II, for example, installed a backdoor that provided 
access to the C and D drives of the compromised Web server from anywhere on the 
Internet. Other common backdoor programs are Netbus and BackOrifice, which allow 
attackers to remotely control a compromised server. Once a backdoor is established, the 
hacker retreats and covers his tracks to keep the initial attack unnoticed.  
 
HTTP Exploits 
HTTP exploits involve using the Web server application to perform malicious activities. 
These attacks are very common and are growing in popularity because firewalls typically 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1811 
block most traffic from the Internet to keep it away from corporate servers. However, 
HTTP traffic, used for Web browsing, is almost always allowed to pass through firewalls 
unhindered. Thus, attackers have a direct line to the Web server. If they can coerce the Web 
server into performing malicious activities, they can access resources that would otherwise 
be unavailable. 
 
Anti-Hacker Measures 
Because hackers require dial-in capability to gain access, the best prevention strategy is to 
eliminate as many dial-in ports as possible. Unfortunately, the trend today is to install more, 
not fewer, dial-in capabilities because telecommuting and customer connectivity are driving 
the demand for more dial-in capability. The following are some preventive measures that can 
be implemented: 
• Welcome screens are usually proudly displayed at sign-in with a message such as: 
 
Welcome to the XYZ Corporation Computer network. 
 
To discourage unauthorized use, such a screen might be replaced with one that informs 
the user that he is about to access a proprietary network. Additionally, the screen should 
warn that unauthorized access is prohibited and will be prosecuted under the law. The 
screen should not identify either the organization or the network. 
• Security policies should be established and disseminated throughout the organization. 
These policies should include training for all employees, customers (who will appreciate 
the additional security), and others who have a need to access the network. 
• Call-back modems should be used wherever practical. These modems will answer an 
incoming call and require the sender to enter a password. Once the caller has identified 
himself, the modem will terminate the connection, and dial a previously established 
phone number. When the prearranged number is called, the sender must again perform 
the sign-on procedure.  
• Security software packages should be secured to the highest level possible. Most major 
software companies today have to release updates and patches to their software every so 
often. Check your software vendor’s websites on a regular basis for new security patches 
or use the new automated patching features that some companies offer. 
• Passwords should be used in accordance with sound security practices. For example: 
? Passwords should be changed periodically (every 90 days is suggested). 
? Passwords should be of sufficient length to deter guessing (a minimum of 8 
characters is suggested). 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1812                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Passwords of transferred or terminated employees should be changed immediately. 
• Most purchased software comes with a ve ndor supplied password that is used for 
installation and then deleted. All packages should be audited to ensure that these default 
passwords (which are widely known) have been changed. 
• Encryption should be considered for sensitive data files, password files, and sensitive 
computer programs. 
• Communications software should terminate any connection (whether dial-in or direct 
connect) after: 
? A reasonable number of unsuccessful attempts to enter a valid password (usually no 
more than three). 
? A terminal (direct connect or dial-in) has been connected for a period of time with 
no activity. This is called “timing-out.”  
The terminated connection will require redialing into the network and/or re-performing 
the log-in and verification process. Some companies require the data security officer to 
issue a new password before the user can log-in again. 
• Hacker publications and communications should be reviewed to learn the current jargon 
and hacker “handles,” which are the names that hackers use for their online personas. 
Hackers have used the Internet quite efficiently to communicate with each other, while 
producing a significant amount of hacking documentation and programs. Almost any 
hacker website will contain a large number of text files that explain “how to hack,” or 
how various systems operate. Many of these files will also explain the standard 
vulnerabilities of the systems, and the best methods to penetrate their security. 
 
Hacker Detection Measures 
An adequate hacker detection program contains three primary components: 
• Almost all communication systems maintain a log file that records all successful and 
unsuccessful system access attempts. These also allow for the printing of reports 
containing sign-on and sign-off activity. These reports should be printed out regularly and 
reviewed by the data security officer. Where possible, special reports should be printed 
on the number of unsuccessful access attempts. These attempts at logging into the 
system should be followed up by data security to determine their cause.  
• The data security function should have sufficient resources and staff to administer 
passwords, maintain the security software, review system activity reports, and follow up 
on all potential security violations.  
  
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1813 
• Finally, periodic reviews of telecommunications security should be performed by 
consultants and/or internal or external auditors, if the latter have the necessary 
experience and qualifications. 
 
Hacking Insurance 
During the past three years, a handful of cyber-insurers have begun offering coverage 
specifically designed to address new forms of information age exposure. These e-commerce 
risks can include theft, damage or disclosure of data, denial of service attacks, theft of 
intellectual property, unauthorized access, loss of revenue, infringement of copyright and 
trademark, and the consequent damage to business reputation. These types of e-commerce 
risks are covered by what is known as first-party coverage. 
 
Third-party coverage covers the company if it is being sued for problems caused by 
technology product errors and omissions; the pilfering, public release, or misuse of sensitive 
or confidential information; the unwitting spread of disruptive viruses; hacker tampering to 
the information and advertising carried on websites; e-mail-facilitated sexual harassment; and 
privacy infringement. 
 
Many businesses believe that their traditional business coverage will suffice, or failing that, 
their Web host or ISP will cover damages caused by any of the above. In both cases, they are 
probably wrong. Unless your business insurance policy or Internet service level agreement 
specifically includes language addressing e-commerce liability, any damages will probably not 
be covered. 
 
 
Electronic Mail  
E-mail has revolutionized the ability of businesses to interact swiftly and, indeed, global 
business has embraced the e-mail system wholeheartedly. Few organizations do not provide 
some form of internal electronic communications. Due to the speed at which businesses can 
now interact and conduct business, as well as the relative cost advantage e-mail enjoys over 
other means of communication, the number of new e-mail users will no doubt continue  
to boom.  
 
E-mail does, however, also give organizations a degree of vulnerability. Aside from 
employees using it for personal correspondence, e-mail can be used to sabotage and crash 
organizations’ networks. Forwarding viruses or even simple virus hoaxes are often enough to 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1814                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
overload a system. Using e-mail through such systems as the Internet endows senders with 
identity protection—the original sender of the message can be disguised or obscured. 
Therefore, because a sender’s identity can be concealed, sensitive business information can 
be safely forwarded to an unauthorized address. 
 
Consider: 
• Company employees now possess the ability to quickly disclose sensitive company 
materials to outside parties, increasing the opportunity for corporate espionage. 
• Companies that employ a company-wide e-mail system can now be held responsible for 
any unethical or illegal activities conducted by employees on the e-mail system. 
• Companies must now be concerned with the repercussions of the actions of any 
disgruntled or rash employees. The speed with which an e-mail can be “fired off” creates 
the opportunity for ill-advised communications. 
• Once an e-mail message has left a company’s system, it may travel through any number 
of “foreign” e-mail systems before reaching its destination. An e-mail transmission can 
quite easily be intercepted or compromised without the use of encryption software.  
• Without a security-enhanced e-mail system, the receiver of an e-mail message has little 
assurance that the e-mail is authentic. E-mail addresses can be easily “spoofed” or cloned 
by a knowledgeable user. 
 
E-mail can be delivered almost instantaneously anywhere the networks, computers, and 
software exist to handle its transmission and reception. In fact, one of the emerging security 
problems concerning e-mail is the huge volume of space required to archive old messages. In 
some organizations, people are regularly asked to cull through their old e-mail messages and 
delete those no longer needed. In addition, some organizations will delete any old e-mail 
messages left on the mail server machines after a certain amount of time (e.g., one or two 
months). 
 
E-Mail Security Concerns 
Since e-mail has become a fact of life for most organizations, it is appropriate to discuss 
some e-mail security concerns from both a user-based and an organizational perspective. 
Organizations often fail to set boundaries for employees regarding e-mail and may later face 
legal ramifications as a result.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1815 
E-Mail Ownership 
Who owns e-mail messages on an organization’s system? This is the common question, but 
it is not necessarily the right question. An e-mail message that an employee wrote himself is a 
work of authorship and as such the rules of copyright apply. In general, if the employee 
wrote the message as part of his duties for his employer (i.e., “in the scope of your 
employment”) the employer owns the copyright. If the e-mail was not part of the employee’s 
duties (something personal or related to another activity, whether permitted by the employer 
or not), then the user has copyright, but the employer, as owner of the system on which it 
was created or passed through, may have some rights to the copy on the system. If an 
employee is forwarding a message written by someone else, the issue gets even more 
complicated. For instance, does the original author have the right or the intention to 
authorize any forwarding? 
 
Organizational Liability 
As with any communications media, legal issues of the Internet are emerging at a rapid rate, 
with a lot of discussion, but are of limited consensus so far. It can be said that employers do 
have some liability for how employees use a company’s e-mail system. The issues are similar 
to an employee’s use of the company telephone, the company postage meter, the company 
vehicle, and so on.  
 
The best general advice is to exercise some caution when dealing with an e-mail system. 
Within the company, e-mail can become a vehicle for sexual harassment, for creating a 
hostile work environment, or setting up gambling pools. Outside the company, employees 
can use e-mail to operate their own businesses or to send out fabricated messages in the 
name of other employees or their employer. Some employers monitor their e-mail systems, 
which presents legal issues, such as invasion of privacy. E-mail has also been used to gather 
evidence against employers or employees. Of course, there are no more dangers and pitfalls 
of e-mail than there are of any form of communications, whether inside or outside the 
organization. The telephone and postal systems are just as capable of such problems. 
 
As with any potential liability issue, employers must set guidelines for the proper internal and 
external use of e-mail, just as they would for the proper use of the company telephone, 
stationery and postage, vehicles, and so on. For instance, the organization should have a 
policy reminding employees in writing that e-mail must not be used to send inappropriate 
and unprofessional messages, including: 
• Harassing other users of the system. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1816                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Consuming unreasonable amounts of available resources. 
• Intentionally sending other users viruses. 
• Evading software licensing or copying mechanisms. 
• Crashing/disrupting system services. 
• Impersonating another user anywhere on the Internet. 
• Bypassing system security mechanisms. 
• Translating encrypted material without authorization. 
• Eavesdropping on other e-mail interactions. 
• Using the system for any personal gain either monetarily or politically unless permitted 
by the organization. 
 
A number of prominent liability law firms recommend some monitoring of e-mail, but this 
decision should not be taken lightly and not just because of employee’s privacy concerns. 
For instance, the fact that the company does try to monitor e-mail may be used against the 
company when something slips through that monitoring. 
 
Due to rapid growth of the Internet and e-mail, there is a great deal of uncertainty in the law. 
Organizations may want to seek legal counsel in establishing proper use guidelines and 
before taking disciplinary action against employees because of alleged abuses. 
 
 
Computer Viruses 
Viruses are hidden computer programs that use all the computer’s resources, thereby 
shutting down the system or slowing it down significantly. Computer viruses typically use 
the infected computer’s resources to replicate itself and spread the infection to other 
computer systems on a network or through the Internet via e-mail. Computer viruses range 
from the relatively harmless (displaying a message or greeting) to shut-downs of entire 
computer networks for extended periods. 
 
A computer virus is a program that contains instruction codes to attack software. The attack 
might erase data or display a message on the screen. The computer virus can copy itself to 
other programs. This copy ability can affect large networks. In recent years, viruses have 
disrupted large networks and caused the expenditure of millions of dollars in staff and 
machine hours to remove these viruses and restore normal operations. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1817 
Hoaxes 
A massive amount of media attention in recent years has focused on computer viruses. Many 
of the virus scares that occur, however, are hoaxes. While that is, on one hand, fortunate, 
these phony warnings cause harm of their own. They slow down transmission of 
information and have been known to cause overloads of organizational e-mail networks. 
Most of these fraudulent warnings urge recipients to “forward this to everyone you know.” 
Before forwarding a questionable warning, it is wise to consult a few of the authorities who 
track viruses. The following sites can be accessed to confirm or debunk virus notifications: 
• www.symantec.com/avcenter/hoax.html 
• www.vmyths.com 
• www.fsecure.com/virus-info/hoax/ 
• www.snopes.com 
 
Types and Terminology of Computer Viruses  
Macro Virus 
A macro is an instruction that carries out program commands automatically. Many common 
applications (e.g., word processing, spreadsheet, and slide presentation applications) make 
use of macros. Macro viruses are macros that self-replicate. If a user accesses a document 
containing a viral macro and unwittingly executes this macro virus, it can then copy itself 
into that application’s startup files. The computer is now infected — a copy of the macro 
virus resides on the machine. 
 
Any document on that machine that uses the same application can then become infected. If 
the infected computer is on a network, the infection is likely to spread rapidly to other 
machines on the network. Moreover, if a copy of an infected file is passed to anyone else 
(for example, by e-mail or CD), the virus can spread to the recipient’s computer. This 
process of infection will end only when the virus is noticed and all viral macros are 
eradicated.  
 
Macro viruses are the most common type of viruses, and are usually spread via e-mail 
messages containing infected attachments. Macro viruses can be written with very little 
specialist knowledge, and these viruses can spread to any platform on which the application 
is running. However, the main reason for their success is that documents are exchanged far 
more frequently than executables or disks, a direct result of e-mail’s popularity and Web use. 
Opening the e-mail attachment infects your ma chine; the virus overwrites certain files on 
your hard drive(s) and sends itself out to everyone in your e-mail address book. This 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1818                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
attachment will most likely come from someone you know. Consequently, the best 
protection against such viruses is to simply not open any attachment unless you are sure that 
it is virus free. If you’re unsure, ask for the sender to confirm that the attachment was 
intended for you.  
 
Boot Sector Viruses 
The boot sector is the first logical sector of a hard disk or floppy disk. Seventy-five to 90 
percent of viruses have been boot sector viruses. These viruses use system BIOS, replace the 
boot sector, and move the boot sector to another location. It then writes a copy of its own 
program code that will run every time the system is booted or when programs are being run. 
A boot sector cannot infect a computer if it is introduced after the machine is running the 
operating system. An example of a boot sector virus is Parity Boot. This virus’s payload 
displays the message “Parity Check” and fr eezes the operating system, rendering the 
computer useless. This virus message is taken from an actual error message that is displayed 
to users when a computer’s memory is faulty. As a result, a user whose computer is infected 
with the Parity Boot virus is led to believe that the machine has a memory fault rather than a 
disruptive virus infection. 
 
Parasitic Viruses 
Parasitic viruses attach themselves to programs known as executables. When a user launches 
a program that has a parasitic virus, the virus is surreptitiously launched first. To cloak its 
presence from the user, the virus then triggers the original program to open. The parasitic 
virus, because the operating system understands it to be part of the program, is given the 
same rights as the program to which the virus is attached. These rights allow the virus to 
replicate, install itself into memory, or release its payload. In the absence of antivirus 
software, only the payload might raise the normal user’s suspicions. A famous parasitic virus 
called Jerusalem has a payload of slowing down the sy stem and eventually deleting every 
program the user launches. 
 
TSRAM Viruses 
Terminate and Stay Resident (TSR) viruses usually hide in memory and cause system crashes, 
depending on their memory location. The TSR takes control of the operating system by 
passing its request to DOS each time DOS is executed. The virus Cascade B is a TSR virus 
that sometimes causes the system to crash. It also causes characters to fall down the screen. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1819 
Application Software Viruses 
These types of viruses copy their virus code to a program file and modify the program so the 
virus code gets executed first. The virus does this by writing over the existing code or 
attaching itself to the program file. The more sophisticated types replicate themselves with a 
.com extension each time the user accesses an executable program file. The virus Vienna is a 
type of application virus. It increases infected files by 648 bytes and destroys the system by 
making it reboot when running certain programs. 
 
Multi-Partite Viruses  
Multi-partite viruses share some of the characteristics of boot sector viruses and file viruses, 
which increases its ability to spread. They can infect .com and .exe files, and the boot sector 
of the computer’s hard drive. 
 
On a computer booted up with an infected diskette, a typical multi-partite virus will first 
reside in memory and then infect the boot sector of the hard drive. From there the virus can 
infect a PC’s entire environment. This type of virus accounts for a large number of 
infections. 
 
The Tequila virus is a type of multi-partite virus. Tequila is a memory resident master boot 
sector (partition table) and .exe file infector. It uses a complex encryption method and 
garbling to avoid detection. When a program infected with Tequila is executed, the virus will 
modify the hard disk master boot sector, if it is not already infected. The virus also copies 
itself to the last six sectors of the system hard disk. When the workstation is later rebooted 
from the system hard disk, Tequila will become memory resident. Once Tequila is memory 
resident, it infects .exe files when they are executed.  
 
The CHKDSK command will indicate the system has 3,072 fewer bytes of memory than 
what is installed. Infected .exe programs increase in size by 2,468 bytes, though the file 
length increase cannot be seen in the disk directory listing because the virus hides it.  
Tequila activates four months after the initial date of infection. At this time, and every 
month thereafter, the virus will display a graphic and the following message: “Execute: mov 
ax, FE03 / int 21. Key to go on.”  
 
Polymorphic Viruses 
Polymorphic viruses create varied (though fully functional) copies of themselves as a way to 
avoid detection by antivirus software. Some polymorphic viruses use different encryption 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1820                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
schemes and require different decryption routines. Thus, the same virus may look 
completely different on different systems or even within different files. Other polymorphic 
viruses vary instruction sequences and use false commands in the attempt to thwart antivirus 
software. One of the most advanced polymorphic viruses uses a mutation engine and 
random-number generators to change the virus code and its decryption routine. 
Spanska.4250  is a type of polymorphic virus. This virus infects program files (files with .exe 
and .com extensions). When one of the programs is infected, the virus hides in the 
computer’s memory. Spanska.4250 remains in memory on the lookout to infect programs 
executed by users. Once Spanska.4250 carries out its infection the size of the infected 
programs will increase by 4250 bytes (the virus size). Moreover, the following message will 
be displayed: “(c) Spanska 97.” This virus uses an anti-tracing technique to make it more 
difficult to detect. In addition, it uses the system date to encrypt itself so it will be possible to 
find up to 366 different variants of this virus. 
 
Stealth Viruses 
Stealth viruses are more sophisticated viruses. They constantly change their patterns in an 
effort to blend into the system. They attempt to avoid detection by bypassing DOS interrupt 
calls when they are installed, and remove their code from the infected files before the file is 
accessed by the requesting program. 
 
The 4096 virus is a type of stealth virus. It increases the file size by 4096 bytes and decreases 
the memory by approximately 6kb. The message “FRODO LIVES” might appear in the 
middle of the screen. If the infected file is run on September 21, it causes the system  
to crash. 
 
Mutation Engine Viruses 
This modern day virus uses a special language-driven algorithm generator that enables it to 
create an infinite variety of original encryption algorithms. It avoids the checksum detection 
method, like stealth viruses, by not changing the infected file size. Each time they replicate, 
they produce a new and different code. 
 
Network Viruses 
It was just a matter of time before network-specific viruses were developed to attack the 
increased number of Local Area Networks (LANs) and other types of networks coming 
online. These viruses are generally developed to attack the file servers.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1821 
The boot sector and partition table viruses infect the boot operation of the file server. This 
virus does not spread from the workstation to the file server. However, if you are using 
NetWare it can cause the software to lose the location of its partition table on the file server 
if the file server is booted with an infected disk. 
 
Viruses that infect programs seem to be limited to infecting files on the server. However, 
because the files are continuously being accessed by workstations, this type of virus is 
difficult to contain. 
 
At least two NetWare-specific viruses have been discovered in Europe. One is the GP1 (Get 
Password 1) virus. It was allegedly created to penetrate Novell security features and then 
spread throughout the network. The second, CZ2986  virus, in Czechoslovakia. This virus 
places itself in memory and intercepts NetWare function calls when the workstations log in to 
the server. After it collects 15 user name/password combinations, it saves them in an infected 
file and uses them to gain access to the network. 
 
Worms 
A worm is a self-replicating program that resides as a file on a system, executes an 
autonomous process, and deliberately moves from system to system. It looks for other 
nodes on the networks, copies itself to them, and causes the self-copy to execute on other 
nodes. These programs find network utilities showing node names, monitor network traffic, 
and randomly select network identification codes as well as other mischief. 
 
An example of a worm is the SQL Slammer, which raced across the globe and wreaked havoc 
on the Internet in January 2003. This worm doubled the number of computers it infected 
every 8.5 seconds in the first minute of its appearance. The worm, which exploited a flaw in 
Microsoft Corporation’s SQL Server database software, caused damage by rapidly replicating 
itself and clogging the pipelines of the global data network. The worm did not erase or cause 
damage to desktop computers, but was designed to replicate itself so fast and so effectively 
that no other traffic could get through networks. 
 
Virus Carriers 
Viruses can infect computer systems from many sources. Some of the more common virus 
carriers are: 
• Unknown or unchecked application software 
• Software or media brought in by employees 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1822                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Programs downloaded from modem bulletin boards 
• Unsolicited e-mails 
• Vendors and suppliers with infected software 
• Uncontrolled and shared program applications 
• Demonstration software 
• Freeware and shareware 
 
Virus Indicators 
The following are some of the indicators that a computer might exhibit suggesting that it 
might be infected: 
• A sudden and sometimes dramatic decrease of free space on your media. 
• The system suddenly, and for no apparent reason, slows down its command-response 
time. 
• An increase in the size of some files. 
• There has been a change in the length of executable files, a change in their content, or a 
change in their file date/time stamp. 
• An unexpected number of disk accesses, especially to particular file(s). 
• The operating system and/or other programs suddenly begin behaving in unpredictable 
ways. Sometimes disk files that should be there cannot be accessed or are suddenly 
erased with no warning. 
• Unusual messages and graphics. 
• Unable to boot-up the system. 
• Unable to access files. 
• Unexplained and repeated maintenance repairs. 
• System or data files disappear or become fragmented. 
• Unexplained changes in memory. 
• Unexplained changes in program sizes. 
• Resident antiviral software programs display messages that a virus has been encountered. 
Note that until the source of the virus has been identified and removed from the system, 
antiviral systems might continually inform the operator that a virus is being encountered 
and removed. 
 
Virus Protection 
Computer users should take measures to protect their computers against viruses. Some of 
the steps that can be taken are: 
• Do not use a disk to boot your system. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1823 
• If you must boot your system from a disk, make sure it is properly labeled and 
continuously protected. 
• Don’t install shareware or other untested programs on your system, but if you do, don’t 
put them in the root directory. 
• In a network environment, don’t place untested programs on the server. 
• If you are sharing information on disks, ensure they only contain information and no 
executable files. 
• Use current antivirus software to detect potential viruses. 
• Back up all programs and files. 
• Write virus-free warranties and indemnities into your purchase orders and contracts. 
• Always write-protect your systems and program disks. 
• Teach computer users about computer viruses so that they can recognize them. 
• Always use caution when opening e-mail attachments. 
 
Antivirus Software Operation 
Conventional Disk Scanners 
This is the standard virus check program. It is run when the user requests it, and it scans the 
contents of the disk, directories, or files that the user wants, for any boot sectors and/or files 
that contain viruses that it recognizes based on the virus description information in its virus 
definition files. Usually run manually by the user either as a preventative maintenance activity 
or when a virus is suspected, scanning can also be automated through the use of a program 
scheduler.  
 
Heuristic Scanners 
These scanners inspect executable files for code using algorithms to identify operations that 
would indicate an unknown virus. They might also examine macros to detect virus-like 
behavior. 
 
Behavior-Based Detection Scanners   
These applications run continuously, looking for behavior that might indicate virus activity 
(for example, instructions to format a hard drive.) 
 
Change Detection Scanners   
Change detection scanners generate a database of characteristics for executable files and 
check for changes to these files that might signify a virus attack. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1824                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inoculation 
This is a totally different approach to virus detection. Instead of looking for the viruses 
themselves, this technique looks for the changes that the viruses make to files and boot 
sectors. Starting with a clean system, the software “inoculates” each boot sector and 
program file by storing a snapshot of information about it based on its content and size. 
Then, periodically, it reexamines these files to see if anything has changed. If it has, then the 
utility will inform the user; if the user hasn’t made the change, the virus may have. 
 
The main advantage of this type of virus detection is that since it is looking at the effects of 
the virus, it doesn’t need to know what the virus itself is; this means it will detect even new 
viruses without requiring updated virus definition files all of the time. The disadvantage, and 
why it is not used that often, is that it generates a substantial amount of false positives.   
 
Investigating Virus Infections 
Virus infections can be investigated by taking the following action:  
• Isolate the system and all media 
• Run antivirus software 
• Document findings 
• Interview the system custodian and all users, and determine: 
? Symptoms 
? Damage 
? Prior clean-up conducted  
? Access controls in place and working 
? System malfunction 
? Personal media used 
? Unauthorized media used 
? Virus identification 
• Follow the audit trail of the infection 
• Determine the source of the virus—person, system, or media 
• Make users aware of protection policies and procedures 
• Ensure countermeasures are in place and working 
• Track costs of virus problems  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1825 
Internet Fraud 
A booming segment of computer fraud, Internet fraud has become a growing concern to the 
law enforcement community. This type of fraud has proliferated and will continue to 
proliferate because of the ripe conditions that exist on the World Wide Web for fraudulent 
activities. The Internet is still a developing technology for much of international business 
and thus has not been subjected to much litigation or policing. The laws that do currently 
apply to the Internet are difficult to enforce, since the Internet crosses virtually every 
international border on the planet. The lack of international laws and the difficulty enforcing 
those laws gives Internet fraudsters a better than average chance of avoiding capture  
and punishment.  
 
For consumers to retain their confidence in Internet transactions, the perception that the 
Internet is a safe way to shop and do business must be fostered. Consumer awareness of 
online fraud must be raised without causing a loss of consumer confidence. This difficult 
endeavor may require an unprecedented effort by the private sector in conjunction with law 
enforcement. Consequently, private investigative resources may be called upon in greater 
numbers than ever, given law enforcement’s deficiencies in the area of computer fraud.  
 
Internet Fraud Schemes 
According to the 2009 Internet Crime Report, the Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) 
received 336,665 complaints related to fraudulent and non-fraudulent issues on the Internet. 
The total dollar loss from all referred cases of fraud was $559.7 million, with a median dollar 
loss of $575 per complaint. All complaints received by IC3 are accessible to federal, state, 
and local law enforcement to support active investigations, trend analysis, and public 
outreach and awareness efforts. 
 
The top ten 2009 IC3 complaint categories are as follows: 
  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1826                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Internet Scheme Percentage of Complaints 
FBI Scams 16.6% 
Non-Delivery/Merchandise Scams 11.9% 
Advanced Fee 9.8% 
Identity Theft 8.2 
Overpayment Fraud 7.3% 
Miscellaneous Frauds 6.3 
Spam 6.2 
Credit Card Fraud 6.0% 
Auction Fraud 5.7% 
Computer Damage 4.5% 
 
The Internet presents fraudsters with myriad opportunities to multiply the devices at their 
disposal. Some fraudsters have even used reputations of charitable organizations to exploit 
the most benevolent of human impulses. Perhaps the best way to guard against Internet-
 facilitated scams is to simply stay informed. Keeping informed of the latest scams on the 
Internet may enable Internet users to recognize and report these scams instead of losing 
money to one of them. 
 
Modem Hijacking 
According to the Federal Trade Commission, this scheme is designed to exploit Internet 
users. While users are online, their computer modems are secretly disconnected from their 
ISP and reconnected to the Internet, only this time through an expensive international line. 
Victims have usually downloaded a special “viewer” program from a website offering free 
computer images. Once activated, the downloaded material began the hijacking 
disconnection and reconnection process. Long-distance charges continued to mount until 
victims shut down their computers, even if their Internet connection had already been 
terminated.  
 
Internet Commerce 
Much has been made in the national media about the dangers of providing credit card 
numbers to companies on the Internet. And it is understandable that many businesses and 
individuals have apprehensions concerning Internet commerce; the Internet is the most 
impersonal form of communication and it is also the least well known to most users. This 
concern, the feeling that a criminal might be “lurking in the shadows” of the Internet, scares 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1827 
many potential customers from making that initial transaction. There are some precautions 
to be taken before purchasing online items, but conducting business transactions on the 
Internet is ultimately as safe as making an order from a company via the telephone.  
 
Get Rich Quick  
Entering the phrase get rich quick in an Internet search engine results in sites with names like 
$50,000 First 10 Months, Secrets of the Millionaires, and Best Business Resource Center. These types 
of sites hawk everything from home businesses to investment opportunities. Some push 
home- and Internet-based businesses; others’ selling point is that telemarketers close all sales. 
The common denominator in these types of schemes is that consumers who spend money 
on them find themselves with worthless materials and information. 
 
The medium through which victims are snared lends the scam a false appearance of 
credibility. Glossy websites give the operations an official air. But, as with all get-rich-quick 
schemes, victims are sucked in through their desire to make easy money.  
 
Pyramid Schemes 
The tried-and-true pyramid has found a high-tech home on the Internet. As in most pyramid 
schemes, the initial participants of the scheme are rewarded handsomely, while the 
participants who join the scheme later are bilked out of their investment money.  
 
Foreign Trusts 
Information on this scheme is easily found on the Internet. The set-up caters to the desire to 
avoid taxes. For a fee, the company purports to be able to create a foreign trust to which 
taxpayers can transfer their assets. Since the trust is not within the taxpayer’s country, the 
logic goes, the assets are not subject to taxation. 
 
The logic is faulty for several reasons. First, if the taxpayer derives use from the funds in the 
trust, according to law those funds are considered taxable income. Thus, consumers who fall 
for this scam subject themselves to prosecution for tax evasion. 
 
That is, of course, only if the trust is set up at all. Some of the operators of this scheme 
simply take consumers’ money and disappear. And, sadly, those are the consumers who get 
off lightly. Others who have fallen for this pitch find that they have transferred all of their 
assets to a trust of which they are not the beneficiaries. Their assets then legally belong to 
another entity and getting them transferred back to their control is virtually impossible. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1828                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Chain Letters 
This fraud has once again become popular due to the Internet’s e-mail capabilities. Instead 
of sending numerous letters through the mail, as fraudsters were forced to do in the past, e-
 mail capabilities allow the fraudster to compose one letter and send thousands of copies to 
potential victims. The letter sent to unsuspecting targets generally forewarns of the grave 
dangers that await the target should he not reply to the letter. The letter asks for a small cash 
donation in exchange for the target’s piece of mind that no bad tidings will be spread, 
providing examples of some of the unfortunates who did not heed the letter. The money 
should be sent to a P.O. box, the e-mail often instructs.  
 
Investment and Securities Fraud 
Websites that offer investment or securities advice are not in short supply. Many of these 
sites are reputable, but an illicit cottage industry has been born on many of these sites. A 
fraudulent website will claim to have insider information about the value of a given stock, 
suggesting that something unexpected will soon happen to that company. When the 
unknowing stock investor takes the advice of the supposedly knowledgeable investment 
advisor, the advisor manipulates the stock price to his advantage. 
 
Spamming  
Spamming  involves sending e-mail to subscribers whose names appear on electronic versions 
of the phone list and posting ads to the plethora of discussion and chat groups using the 
Internet. These postings are often disguised to look like tips from individual citizens who 
 are supposedly engaged in a lawful enterprise, when in fact they are part of an Internet 
boiler room. 
 
Counterfeit Check Scams 
This scam has several variations but usually starts with the victim offering something for sale 
on the Internet. Usually it is a big ticket item. Somehow the fraudster has obtained a 
legitimate check from a person or company, scanned it, and altered it to support the scheme. 
The fraudster then contracts with the victim to buy the item but must supply a down 
payment first. The check is delivered by a highly recognized international carrier such as 
FedEx, further adding to the false impression that this is a legitimate deal. The victim 
deposits the check, but before it clears, the fraudster requests a refund and backs out of the 
deal offering to let the victim keep a portion of the funds for his trouble. The victim 
forwards part of the money back. Of course the victim later learns that his bank has reversed 
the deposit amount because the check was no good. The fraudsters usually claim to be in 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1829 
another country and must therefore use a “middle man” such as a lawyer to facilitate the 
transaction on their behalf. This is designed to create a sense of false security for the victim. 
 
Another variation on this scheme involves a seemingly chance meeting in a harmless chat 
room. Once the chat relationship develops the fr audster explains that they are in a foreign 
country and need some help. It seems that they are unable to cash certain traveler’s checks in 
their country and ask for the victim’s help to cash the checks for them in the United States 
and then send them a money order, less a small token of their appreciation. They usually 
invent some unfortunate circumstance or urgency for the request. The first time it occurs the 
checks are good and everything works out. In a second request, they ask for the victim’s help 
again, this time it’s a much larger amount and this time the checks are counterfeit. The 
victim unknowingly participates in a forgery by passing the counterfeit checks.  
 
Phishing 
Phishing scams are some of the fastest-growing threats on the Internet. According to the 
Gartner research firm, more than 5 million U.S. consumers lost money to phishing attacks in 
the 12 months ending in September 2008, an almost 40 percent increase over the 3.6 million 
who lost money in phishing attacks in the 12 months ending in August 2007. Although the 
number of consumers who lost money to phishing attacks increased in 2008, the average 
customer loss per incident in 2008 was $351, down 60 percent from 2007.  
 
The definition of phishing is to trick people into providing their personal and financial 
information by pretending to be from a legitimate company, agency, or organization. In this 
type of scam, phishers typically use e-mails to direct Internet users to websites that look like 
legitimate e-commerce sites, such as online banks, retailers, or government agencies. 
Phishers actually control these sites and use them to steal sensitive information, such as bank 
account details and passwords. Phishers can also use the phone to hunt for victims’ personal 
information. Some pose as employers and call people who have listed themselves on job 
search websites; others call pretending to be from a company or government agency, making 
the same kinds of false claims and asking for personal information. Phishers may also 
undertake technical subterfuge schemes to plant crimeware onto PCs to steal information 
directly, such as using key-logging systems to intercept customers’ online account user names 
and passwords. 
 
Opinions vary, but the amount of time it takes for an unprotected personal computer to 
become infected with a virus or malware can range from four to thirty-four minutes. To aid 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1830                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
in preventing phishing, computers should be armed with spam filters, anti-virus and anti-
 spyware software, and a firewall, and kept up to date. A spam filter can help reduce the 
number of phishing e-mails received. Anti-virus software, which scans incoming messages 
for troublesome files, and anti-spyware software, which looks for programs that have been 
installed on a computer and tracks a user’s online activities without their knowledge, can 
protect users against pharming and other techniques that phishers use. Firewalls prevent 
hackers and unauthorized communications from entering a user’s computer—which is 
especially important if one has a broadband connection because their computer is open to 
the Internet whenever it’s turned on. Look for programs that offer automatic updates and 
take advantage of free patches that manufacturers offer to fix newly discovered problems. 
 
In order to prevent identity theft through phishing e-mails, computer users should 
completely delete unsolicited e-mails from banks, credit unions, investment firms, and 
government agencies with which they do not have an established relationship. If the 
recipient does have an existing relationship with the supposed originator of the e-mail, the 
Better Business Bureau recommends calling the organization to confirm whether or not the 
e-mail is legitimate before taking any further action. Computer users on the go should be 
wary of entering passwords or sensitive information into a computer that isn’t theirs, such as 
at an Internet café, library, computer lab, or airport kiosk. Wi-Fi networks, either on the road 
or in the consumer’s own home, present even more opportunities for identity thieves. The 
easiest way to protect a Wi-Fi network at home is to not broadcast the Service Set Identifier. 
A safe rule of thumb is to avoid exchanging sensitive information over a Wi-Fi connection 
and wait until a safe network can be accessed.  
 
SPEAR PHISHING 
Spear phishing is a targeted attack generally focused on a corporate entity. The ruse is meant 
to fool the corporate employee into believing that the phishing e-mail originated not from a 
bank or financial institution but from their own IT or HR department. The goal is to obtain 
the employee’s user name and password to access the corporate network. 
 
VISHING 
Voice phishing, or Vishing, is the act of leveraging Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) 
technology in using the telephone system to falsely claim to be a legitimate enterprise in an 
attempt to scam users (both consumers and businesses) into disclosing personal information. 
Government, financial institutions, as well as online auctions and their payment services, can 
be targets of voice phishing. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1831 
A vishing scheme is generally transmitted as an incoming recorded telephone message that 
uses a spoofed (fraudulent) caller ID matching the identity of a misrepresented organization. 
The message uses an urgent pretext to direct unsuspecting users to another telephone 
number. The victim is invited to punch their personal information on their telephone 
keypad. The criminals capture the key tones and convert them back to numerical format. 
There are several types of information at risk from this type of scheme. This can include any 
numerical personal information: payment card information (numbers, expiration dates, and 
the last three digits printed on the signature panel), PIN (personal identification number), 
Social Security number, date of birth, bank account numbers, and passport number. 
 
Security experts have seen another variation of vishing where the criminals will leave a 
voicemail message or make telephone calls directing people to the bogus phone number. 
With Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) and other Internet-based telephone technology, 
criminals can now make calls inexpensively and can mask their identity and their location 
and even make it look like they are calling from a legitimate company on caller displays. 
 
Some potential uses of the personal information that is gathered from victims includes 
control of the victim’s financial accounts; opening new bank accounts; transferring bank 
balances; applying for loans, credit cards, and other goods/services; making luxury 
purchases; hiding criminal activities; receiving government benefits; and obtaining a 
passport. 
 
Another version of vishing involves the sending of text messages to cell phones claiming the 
recipient’s online bank account has expired. The message instructs the recipient to renew 
their online bank account by using the link provided. 
 
SMISHING OR TISHING 
SMiShing is a hybrid of phishing and short message service, commonly known as text 
messaging. It uses much the same approach of phishing but delivers an alarming message 
via SMS (the protocol used to transmit text messages via cellular devices) instead of e-mail. 
Criminal activity such as SMiShing can be seen as the prelude to online frauds targeting 
mobile device users. As these devices continue to evolve, cyber criminals will take 
advantage of functionalities to obtain information as well as delivering mobile malware to 
mobile devices. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1832                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ROCK PHISHING 
One type of phishing attack has been particularly effective — the rock phish. It’s estimated 
that rock phishing accounts for roughly half of all phishing attacks (as measured by the 
number of unique URLs). Rock phishers have targeted national and regional banks 
throughout the U.S., Europe, and Latin America. Toward the end of 2007 they broadened 
their scope to include online brokerages, information services, treasury management 
companies, and even social networking sites. 
 
Like most phishers, rock phishers use botnets to send massive amounts of phishing e-mails 
to huge volumes of Internet users. The e-mails contain a message from a financial 
institution, hopefully enticing users to click on a fraudulent URL. There is some indication 
that they cycle through multiple e-mail lists and attempt to reach the Internet users most 
likely to use the brands that they are targeting. Unlike most phishers, they don’t compromise 
a Web server and install a phishing site. Instead, an elaborate process is implemented 
whereby multiple domain names are registered at multiple registrars — often with less known 
country-code based top-level domains. Multiple DNS (domain name system) servers are also 
set up, which provide names to IP services for the pool of domain names. The IP addresses 
used — and there may be upwards of 100 at a time — point to multiple compromised servers 
that simply forward Web connections to the real phish sites. These proxy servers typically 
handle connections for multiple targets at a time.  
 
It is interesting to note that before these bogus domains are identified and blocked, 
fraudsters have already done the damage. Looking at a rock phish URL one sees random 
numbers with a few alphabet characters in it — these are alphanumeric figures. These figures 
are used to make the URL string unique, complex, and difficult to differentiate from a 
legitimate one. 
 
Rock phishers have an advanced grasp of technology, using fast flux architecture to change 
name servers and site location in an instant, automating proxy servers to such an extent that 
if one is downed, it automatically switches to the next. Therefore, they are able to lengthen 
the life span of rock phish URLs and make them stealthier. 
 
One of the best ways to combat rock phishing is to implement a sender policy framework 
(SPF) or Domain Keys on your e-mail system. More and more, ISPs are rejecting, or at least 
sending to the spam folder, e-mail that fails SPF or Domain Key authentication.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1833 
Pharming 
Pharming  is an attack in which a user is fooled into entering sensitive data (such as a password 
or credit card number) into a malicious website that impersonates a legitimate website. It is 
different from phishing in that the attacker does not have to rely on having the user click on 
a link in the e-mail to direct him to the fake website. Pharming actually exploits a 
vulnerability in the DNS server software that allows a hacker to acquire the domain name for 
a site and redirect the website traffic from a legitimate site to a false one. So even though the 
user types in the correct website address, the pharming program sends the user to an 
illegitimate site that looks like the real thing. Unknowingly, the user is then providing 
passwords and information directly to the hacker. 
 
Combating Internet Fraud 
Conducting business on the Internet is generally a safe proposition that can be made even 
more so through a few additional safety precautions.  
• Encryption — Any confidential information or credit card numbers should be encrypted in 
their entirety. An encryption system is made up of a cryptographic function, which 
scrambles an electronic transmission, and an inverse decrypt function, which restores the 
transmission to its original state. Encryption hardware and software can be used to 
scramble any communication by utilizing a complex mathematical formula. The only way 
to unscramble an encrypted message is to provide the unique answer key, thus unlocking 
the message. Encryption is the best method to stymie would-be interceptors of company 
transactions. 
• Customer validation — Because the Internet offers users an additional layer of anonymity, 
businesses should install some form of a customer validation safeguard in their Internet 
purchasing system. This may include a customer code or password that the customer can 
identify himself with before purchasing a product. As well, the business should 
distinguish itself to the customer, ensuring that no one else can falsely assume the 
company’s identity. 
• Internal network security — Organizations that conduct business on the Web should never, 
under any circumstances, keep their financial information database on their Web server. 
A knowledgeable computer hacker can sometimes penetrate Internet websites, and 
financial information is the primary target of these hackers, for obvious reasons. 
Therefore, the database that maintains a company’s financial information should be a 
completely internal system, untouchable from the Internet. This safeguard will help 
ensure that sensitive information is not compromised in any way. 
• Firewalls — Firewalls are advanced software programs that effectively “lock up” access to 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1834                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
an Internet site or e-mail transmission. Firewalls are designed to control the interface 
between a network and the Internet. This technology surveys incoming and outgoing 
transmissions between the network and the Internet, stopping any questionable 
transmission attempt to access a sensitive area. While firewalls are not foolproof, they do 
provide an additional layer of protection against Internet attacks or breaches of security. 
 
More information about scams perpetrated agai nst businesses and individuals can be found 
in the previous chapter, “Consumer Fraud.”  
 
 
Electronic Commerce  
Electronic commerce, or e-commerce, is becoming a major form of retailing, marketing, 
advertising, and inter-personal communications. The hardware infrastructure required for 
high-speed data, voice, and video transmission to and from private homes is being 
introduced to residential streets everywhere.  
 
We have all heard people talk about their fears about putting their credit card numbers, 
personal identification numbers (PINs), street addresses, phone numbers, and other personal 
information out on the Internet. In reality, there is very little difference between securing 
electronic commerce and securing any other kind of information system resource. 
 
In addition to these traditional goals of information systems security, confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability, there are a few that are more directly related to networked 
transactions, which is exactly what e-commerce consists of: 
• Authentication. This requirement addresses the problem of identifying the parties of an 
e-commerce transaction to each other. We want to make sure that we can determine 
with whom we (or our computers) are communicating. 
• Non-repudiation. Non-repudiation can help ensure that no party to an e-commerce 
transaction can later deny that the transaction occurred. We need some way to be able to 
recognize a “signature” between e-commerce parties just as we rely on written signatures 
on paper documents. 
 
While recent years have seen an increase in the number of consumers and businesses willing 
to conduct transactions, online there still exists some hesitancy to fully embrace e-commerce 
technology. It is cases like the one described below that cause consumers to lose confidence 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1835 
in e-commerce. In the following example, a hacker crafted a sophisticated scam that hurt 
millions of consumers. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Albert Gonzales had already been caught hacking into the Indian government’s website 
and trafficking a million credit/debt card numbers before he was caught stealing many 
more credit/debit card numbers from TJX Companies, the company that operates retails 
stores such as TJ Maxx and Marshall’s. After two years worth of sensitive data and 45.6 
million credit card and debit card numbers were compromised, TJX Companies notified the 
authorities of their data leakage.  
Starting in 2005, Albert found non-secure wireless networks on TJX Companies' systems 
and worked with others to identify vulnerable servers to attack, infiltrate, and later use to 
jumpbox into other more secure servers. From there, he and his conspirators were able to 
install malware used to steal data and sniffing software onto the networks of TJX and all 
the stores operating under them, even outside of the United States. TJX discovered the 
breach in December of 2006 and was under the belief that they had only been losing data 
for six to seven months. After further investigation, however, they found that they had been 
losing sensitive data since 2005. But by the time TJX had even started discovering the 
extent of their security breach, Albert had already moved on to bigger and better operations. 
In 2008, Albert was arrested on charges related to hacking into other companies’ 
networks, and he now faces 15–25 years in prison. 
  
ISP messages are also used to sneak Trojan horse programs onto a user’s computer. The 
user is tempted with free pornographic pictures, or software that will boost their computer’s 
performance. When the attached file is opened, it triggers a program that surreptitiously 
collects the subscriber’s account name and password, which are then relayed to the hacker 
who sent the message. 
 
Many experts say that it is currently possible to have secure transactions over the Internet 
because the latest encryption technologies and security protocols allow for this. However, 
fully realized standards are not yet in place for all business-to-business or business-to-customer 
transactions. Some current security protocols do not permit non-repudiation of 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1836                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
data, which is required if firms seriously want to conduct business over the Internet. 
However, the arrival of standards for using smart card technology will transform Internet 
business and commerce as a whole. Smart card technology offers a solution to the major 
secure transactions requirements, namely data integrity, user authentication, and non-
 repudiation of data. Smart card technology also involves the application of third-party trust 
relationships to the Internet. 
 
Applying Encryption to E-Commerce Security 
Generally speaking, the solutions offered by conventional and public-key encryption 
technologies are usually adequate to ensure that e-commerce transactions are as secure as the 
value of transactions requires.  
 
The vast majority of transmissions over the Internet and the World Wide Web are not 
encrypted in any way. If there is no need to hide the contents of a message or 
communication, there is little need to expend resources on the encryption of such traffic and 
the decryption at the other end. Encryption can be an expensive solution, whether in terms 
of actual monetary cost or the cost in increased computational load on the users’ machines. 
The needs of the organization to keep confidential transmissions secret should be weighed 
against the effort and cost of encryption. 
 
Smart Cards 
The cost and inefficiency of manually applying encryption techniques could prevent some 
organizations from fully engaging in e-commerce activities. Fortunately, a relatively 
inexpensive solution is available in the use of smart card technology. 
 
A smart card is a credit-card sized plastic card embedded with an integrated circuit chip that 
makes it “smart.” This marriage between a convenient plastic card and a microprocessor 
allows an immense amount of information to be stored, accessed, and processed either 
online or offline. Smart cards can store several hundred times more data than a conventional 
card with a magnetic stripe. The information or application stored in the IC chip is 
transferred through an electronic module that interconnects with a terminal or a card reader. 
A contactless smart card has an antenna coil that communicates with a receiving antenna to 
transfer information. Depending on the type of the embedded chip, smart cards can be 
either memory cards or processor cards. 
• Memory cards. Any plastic card is made “smart” by including an IC chip. But the chip 
may simply be a memory storage device. Memory cards can hold thousands of times 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1837 
more memory than a magnetic stripe card. Nevertheless, its functions are limited to basic 
applications such as phone cards. 
• Processor cards.  Smart cards with a full-fledged microprocessor on board can function 
as a processor device that offers multiple functions such as encryption, advanced security 
mechanisms, local data processing, complex calculation, and other interactive processes. 
Most stored-value cards integrated with identification, security, and information 
purposes are processor cards. Only processor cards are truly smart enough to offer the 
flexibility and multifunctionality desired in e-commerce. 
 
The top three international markets in smart card production are (1) miniature subscriber 
identity modules (SIMs) that fit inside mobile phones, (2) banking cards, and (3) 
identification cards, specifically those used by governments and large corporations. 
 
Most smart cards issued today are memory cards with limited processing capabilities; 
however, modern technology is constantly making advances toward increasing these 
capabilities. 
 
 
Insider Threats 
By far the greatest threat to information systems in terms of computer crime comes from 
employees inside an organization. It is not uncommon for operators, media librarians, 
hardware technicians, and other staff members to find themselves in positions of 
extraordinary privilege in relation to the key functions and assets of their organizations. A 
consequence of this situation is the probability that such individuals are frequently exposed 
to temptation. 
 
A further complication is the tendency on the part of management to tolerate less stringent 
supervisory controls over information system personnel. The premise is that the work is not 
only highly technical and specialized but difficult to understand and control. As an example, 
systems software support is often entrusted to a single programmer who generates the 
version of the operating system in use, establishes password or other control lists, and 
determines the logging and accounting features to be used. In addition, such personnel are 
often permitted, and sometimes encouraged, to perform these duties during non-prime shift 
periods, when demands on computer time are light. As a result, many of the most critical 
software development and maintenance functions are performed in an unsupervised 
environment. It is also clear that operators, librarians, and technicians often enjoy a degree 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1838                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of freedom quite different from that which would be considered normal in a more 
traditional employment area.  
 
Insiders are typically aware of the holes in the system of internal controls and often exploit 
weaknesses just to see if they can get away with it. The most prevalent method of 
committing computer fraud is probably alteration or falsification of input transactions 
(and/or documents), including: 
• Alteration of input 
• Alteration of output 
• Data file manipulation 
• Communications systems 
• Operating systems 
• Computer operations 
 
Characteristics 
The characteristics of the traditional inside computer fraudster are very similar to those of 
the hacker or other computer criminal: intelligent, hard working, seldom takes time off, 
bored with the routine of the job, and has a very large ego. Many computer technicians have 
demonstrated a greater loyalty to the technology than to the organization for which they 
work. This technology loyalty can create an attitude that any behavior is acceptable if it is in 
the name of technology.  
 
The following are indicators of insider computer fraud: 
• Access privileges beyond those required to perform assigned job functions. 
• Exception reports not reviewed and resolved. 
• Access logs not reviewed. 
• Production programs run at unusual hours. 
• Lack of separation of duties in the data center. 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1839 
Computer Security 
 
Effective Security  
Effective computer security ensures the availability of accurate data in time to meet an 
organization’s needs at a cost that is commen surate with the risks involved. Key elements 
are: 
• Protecting data and programs from intentional or inadvertent unauthorized alteration or 
destruction. 
• Maintaining the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data. 
• Protecting the data center from physical threats such as fire, flood, and intentional 
destruction.  
• Having the capability to restore data center operations in case of complete destruction. 
 
The most important step is to obtain management support for effective security. Without 
such support, any security plan will falter. 
 
Securing the Communications Network 
Some communications networks are very large, very complex, and technically demanding. 
The task of effectively securing these networks is demanding and requires the close 
cooperation of both network and security administration. The objective of data and voice 
networks is to provide connectivity with acceptable response times, user-friendly access, and 
a secure mode at an acceptable cost to the organization.  
 
Passwords 
Passwords are the predominant form of authenticating valid users. Effective password 
administration is essential for maintaining security. Passwords should be of sufficient length 
(usually a minimum of eight characters) and a combination of letters, numbers, and other 
characters, such as punctuation marks to avoid guessing. Group passwords and sharing of 
passwords should be prohibited so as to maintain individual accountability. Passwords of all 
terminated employees should be revoked immediately. Security administration often 
coordinates the notification of terminated employees with the personnel function. 
Employees who have changed job functions or transferred should have their old passwords 
canceled and new ones issued, if appropriate.  
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1840                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Other Network Security 
Securing a computer network by means of logical controls is a difficult but necessary 
requirement for ensuring the safety of a computer system from attacks by outsiders. Logical 
controls include management security policies, user authentication systems, data access 
controls, network firewalls, security awareness training, encryption algorithms, penetration 
testing, intrusion detection software, and incident response plans.  
 
Network security can also be provided by a combination of design, hardware devices, and 
software. Data encryption is carried out by a combination of hardware and software. 
Encrypted data is scrambled by a formula using a unique key and can only be unscrambled 
with the same formula and key at the receiving end. The decision to use encryption should be 
made in light of the risks and after a cost-benefit analysis. Drawbacks to encryption are the 
cost of the hardware and software, the cost of the administration, and the inherent delays 
incurred by the extra steps required for processing. 
 
Digital signatures are becoming more common, in part because Congress and many states 
have passed legislation to legitimize the electronic “signing” of documents. In 2000 the 
Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (E-SIGN Act) became 
effective. This federal statute basically provides a mechanism whereby any document that is 
required to be signed, can be signed “electr onically.” The E-SIGN Act does not require a 
party to use or accept electronic signatures, electronic contracts or electronic records, but 
rather seeks to facilitate the use of electronic signatures and documents by upholding their 
legal effect regardless of the type or method selected by the parties. The E-SIGN Act is also 
technology-neutral and does not require a specific type or method that businesses and 
consumers must use or accept in order to conduct their electronic transaction. The Act 
regulates any transactions involving interstate or foreign commerce. However, many states 
have enacted their own digital signature laws, which regulate purely intrastate transactions. 
Additionally, many state and federal agencies, including the Internal Revenue Service and the 
Securities and Exchange Commission, are encouraging the use of electronic filing and digital 
signatures as a means to speed up the collection and processing of information. 
 
Biological access verification, long the favorite stuff of movie makers, is now available.  
This verification technique includes fingerprints, palm prints, voice prints, signatures, and 
retina scans. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1841 
Profiling software authenticates users by monitoring their statistical characteristics, such as 
typing speed and keystroke touch. Smart card access devices are similar to an ATM card; like 
ATM cards, they are susceptible to loss and forgery. 
 
The most effective components of internal security are education, reporting facilities, and 
vigorous disciplinary action for offenders, including prosecution of illegal acts. An 
enterprise-wide employee awareness program should be combined with formal training in 
the area of information security. For employees to fulfill their security responsibilities they 
should know what information needs to be kept confidential, how to recognize threats to 
security, and how to use backups and other aids for their desktop machines. Giving 
employees incentives such as bonuses to follow security guidelines, however, will be the 
most effective motivator. 
 
Protecting the network from external threats requires some additional considerations. The 
less an external perpetrator knows about the technology environment (for example, type of 
hardware and software packages used), the harder it is to obtain fraudulent access. Part of 
the security policy should address how much and what kind of information regarding the 
technology of an organization should be made public.  
 
Organizations should guard against providing too much access to third parties. There is 
pressure to establish connectivity by marketing, purchasing, research, and other branches. 
Connectivity should be granted only after it has been established that the benefits outweigh 
the risks and costs. 
 
The Risk Assessment Process 
As organizations grow, their information technology and data change both in type and 
quantity. Assumptions made about security need to be updated. The vehicle for updating is 
the risk assessment. This is a zero-based process that should be performed periodically. A 
risk assessment is an analysis of the security objectives of confidentiality, integrity,  
and availability. 
 
Each data element should be examined to determine the impact if it is disclosed, lost, or 
entered incorrectly. Once this information is collected, the security measures in place should 
be reviewed to determine whether they provide necessary safeguards. The risk assessment 
process is a time-consuming process to undertake and many organizations employ outside 
security consultants to reduce its impact on day-to-day operations.  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1842                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Internal Controls in the Data Center 
In most instances, computer-related crimes are very difficult to detect. An intruder may be 
able to gain unauthorized access to a network or computer system, perpetrate whatever 
criminal activity was planned, and retreat without anyone being aware of the intrusion, much 
less the criminal activity that has taken place. So how does an organization become aware 
that its information resources have been compromised by someone — either inside or outside 
of the organization — with criminal intent? A few possibilities include: 
• A strong set of policies and standards to define for employees and management what the 
company deems as unacceptable or unauthorized activities. 
• Strong physical security to thwart those intent upon the theft of physical assets of the 
organization. 
• Central Systems access control and data object protection. 
• Strong security for the organization’s application programs. 
• Intrusion detection hardware and software for network and communications resources. 
• Auditing of system and violation logs.  
 
All of these mechanisms, if used correctly, will alert the organization of inappropriate 
actions. This all assumes, of course, that someone is keeping an eye out for exceptions and 
violations. All of the security policies and standards, the intrusion detection software, the 
violation logs, and the access controls will mean absolutely nothing if the organization is not 
committed to applying them properly and maintaining them adequately. 
 
General controls over a data center are relevant for all applications. The general control 
categories include system maintenance, implementation of new systems (including 
development), computer operations, system software (including security and 
telecommunications software), and data files. 
 
Systems Maintenance 
All program and system changes should be approved in writing. Programmers should not 
have access to the production library, but only to “test” libraries. All programs that are to be 
modified should be moved into a test library by someone other than a programmer. All 
completed program changes should be tested and the results approved by both data center 
and user personnel before being placed into production. Adequate program documentation 
should be approved for all program changes. User personnel should be notified when 
modified programs will be placed into production. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1843 
Implementation Controls 
Implementation controls are those controls over the development of, or purchase of, a new 
application. All new system requests should be made in writing. A system development life-
 cycle methodology should be used for developing and implementing in-house or purchased 
packages. All new systems requests should be approved by the appropriate management 
level. Users should be involved in the project from design through final testing. All test 
results should be approved by both data center management and user personnel. There 
should be an implementation plan for placing the new system into production. 
 
Computer Operations 
Computer operations controls are controls that govern the day-to-day operation of the 
computer system. There should be an approved schedule for all production runs. All system 
activity should be reviewed by data center management. Any unusual program executions 
should be investigated and resolved. A log of unusual events, such as abends  (abnormal 
terminations of a program execution) or reruns should be kept by operations staff and also 
should be reviewed by data center management. Access to the computer room should be 
restricted to authorized personnel. All third parties, such as technicians, should be 
accompanied by a data center employee. Doors to the data center should be secured. 
 
System Software 
Controls over system software include those that govern the installation of the computer 
system, the communications software, and the security software. Data center management 
should approve the system software selection as well as the chosen options and parameters. 
System software should be tested before implementation in a production environment. 
(Note that this might not be possible for the operating system itself.)  
 
Data Files 
Controls over data files ensure that correct files are used for each production job and that 
adequate backup files exist. Data-file label bypass options should be disabled. A data file 
management system should be used to record and locate all data files. Data file backup 
copies should be made and stored in a secure facility. Off-site backup file copies should be 
maintained in case of a disaster in the data center. Utilities that can modify data files should 
be removed from the system and used only under management supervision. Live data files 
should not be used for testing. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1844                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Access and Telecommunication Controls 
In the 1960s and 1970s, access controls meant ensuring that there was a lock on the 
computer room door. As online systems were implemented, the definition of access evolved 
to include logical access in addition to physical access. Logical access refers to any location 
where someone can sign on to the system. That sign-on access can be a direct connection or 
a dial-up. In today’s, online, real-time, and in terconnected world, it is easy to forget physical 
guards over computer equipment. Computer equipment must be physically secured. This 
should include network servers, telephone system computers, communications controllers, 
and personal computers with sensitive data. 
 
Access and telecommunications controls should achieve the following objectives: 
• Provide physical security over equipment, users, and information. 
• Protect critical data from loss, damage, or unauthorized disclosure. 
• Ensure network reliability by using appropriate hardware and software. 
• Prevent unauthorized access and use of the network. 
• Ensure system availability. 
• Meet user requirements. 
 
Separation of Duties 
Separation of duties is a key element in a well-designed internal control system. It is also 
fundamental to detecting and preventing fraud. Programmers should not operate the 
computer, have unsupervised access to production programs, or have access to production 
data sets (data files). Users should not have access to the production program code. 
Computer operators should not perform computer programming. Adequate supervision 
should be provided by personnel who do not actually perform the work. 
 
Logs and History Files 
Computer systems maintain a variety of history files or logs. These logs record activity in the 
following areas: 
• Mainframe activity 
? Programs executed 
? Data files accessed 
? Date, time, and duration 
? User IDs that initiated a particular action 
? Error messages 
? Equipment malfunctions 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1845 
• Communications activity 
? User ID 
? Terminal identifier 
? Dial-in port identifier 
? Date, time, and duration 
? Error messages 
? Equipment malfunctions 
• Security software activity 
? User ID 
? Unsuccessful log-in attempts 
? Modifications to the password files and access capability 
 
These logs were originally designed to help in troubleshooting the system and correcting 
errors. These files contain a very valuable audit and fraud examination trail of system 
activity, and are now used for internal control functions. The logs should be reviewed by a 
responsible data center official and evidence should exist of this review. Many of the history 
files have a limited capacity and can be forced into wrapping if not printed periodically. 
Wrapping forces the software to record at the beginning of the file if the file is full and not 
printed out.  
 
Security Software 
There are a number of good security software packages on the market for all mainframes 
and most minicomputers. Security packages available for PCs are less numerous. Local area 
networks have some security packages available, but still rely primarily on the individual user 
in a stand-alone mode or the mainframe security in a connected mode. The purchase and 
installation of a security package might provide a false sense of security. Most of these 
packages are designed to be installed in a phased approach because of the complexity of  
the task.  
 
These options and decisions about security software should be reviewed by management. 
For example, most mainframe security packages allow a minimum of three levels of security. 
Log mode merely logs all system access to defined programs and data files. Warn mode tells the 
user if he is accessing a program or file that is not authorized for the password he has 
employed. Activity is also logged. Fail mode will not allow a user to access defined data files 
and programs without the proper password. This is the highest level of security and the only 
one that provides adequate protection. Another very important consideration involves the 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1846                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
manual supervision of data provided by security packages, usually in the form of access logs. 
A security package needs consistent review to protect against possible violations. 
 
Internal Controls in Computer Applications 
Internal controls establish checks and balances to prevent one person from controlling the 
entire financial transaction. Competent and trustworthy employees are obviously a necessary 
element of a good internal control system. No employee with a known history of dishonesty 
should be hired.  
 
Assets and records, which can be easily appropriated or destroyed, should be physically 
safeguarded. They should be safeguarded by locks, physical security, and other methods to 
ensure that they will not be misappropriated. All accounting systems rely on proper 
documentation. Missing documentation should be  regarded as a red flag of possible fraud. 
Someone independent of the transaction must check the accounting controls. The 
knowledge that all work is checked is a powerful fraud deterrent. The elements of sound 
internal control do not change in a computerized environment. Objectives do not change, 
but techniques do. 
 
Control Techniques 
Control techniques commonly used in computerized systems are listed below. 
• One-for-one checking consists of checking each source document against a detailed list 
processed by the computer. This technique is normally used for low-volume input 
because of the cost and time involved. 
• Batch/control totals involve manually grouping transactions at the input stage and 
manually establishing a control total over the entire group. The methods used include 
document counts, item or line counts, dollar totals, and cash totals. 
• In computer sequence checking, the computer verifies the preassigned serial numbers of 
input transactions and reports missing or duplicate numbers. 
• Computer matching consists of the computer matching the input data to information 
held on the master file or suspense files. Unmatched items are reported for investigation.  
• Programmed edit checks are computer program procedures that edit data. Examples 
include: 
? Reasonableness 
? Dependency 
? Existence 
? Format 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1847 
? Mathematical accuracy 
? Range 
? Digit verification 
? Prior data matching 
• Prerecorded input is used to reduce errors during data entry.  
 
Control Objectives 
Well-designed computer applications have built-in controls for all functions. The major 
control objective is completeness of input. 
  
Input completeness  control techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control totals, computer 
sequence check, and computer matching. Input accuracy controls ensure that data is initially 
recorded correctly and converted correctly to machine-readable form. Input accuracy control 
techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control totals, computer matching, programmed 
edits, and prerecorded input. 
 
Update accuracy ensures that the correct master file account is updated correctly with the 
correct transaction. Update accuracy control techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control 
totals, computer matching, and programmed checks. Update control completeness ensures that all 
data entered and accepted by the system updates the master file once and only once. Update 
control completeness techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control totals, computer sequence 
checks, and computer matching. 
 
Authorization controls ensure that only valid transactions are processed, that all transactions 
processed are authorized by management, and that transactions represent events that actually 
occurred. Authorization techniques used are one-for-one checking and programmed checks. 
 
Maintenance controls provide that data is kept up-to-date or identify unusual data requiring 
further action. They also ensure that data stored on file is not changed except through the 
normal processing cycle. Maintenance control techniques are used for one-for-one checking, 
batch control totals, and programmed checks. 
 
Evaluating Application Controls 
Evaluating internal controls in an application system requires a thorough understanding of 
the system. The first phase, information gathering, consists of collecting information about 
the industry and the risks associated with that industry; conducting ratio analysis and peer 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1848                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
comparisons to identify aberrations; understanding how management runs the business; and 
determining if there are strong budget-to-actual controls in the organization. 
 
Evaluation is the second phase and consists of the use of questionnaires and/or matrices to 
evaluate the internal controls and to identify internal control weaknesses. Analyzing the 
results is necessary to determine if a weakness exists and/or the extent of any weaknesses. A 
results report should be prepared that includes recommendations. 
 
End-User Computing Internal Control 
End-user computing, or distributed processing, has emerged since the advent of micro-computers 
and provides end-users with equipment (such as PCs) and processing capability. 
Examples include microcomputer development tools such as spreadsheets, database 
programs, and downloading part of an application and its associated files for processing on a 
local area network either connected to the mainframe or in a stand-alone mode. 
 
Several control concerns have been identified as a result of end-user computing. 
• Data center controls over the equipment itself (backups, access controls, local password 
administration, etc.) might not be implemented by the end users. 
• Locally developed spreadsheet or database applications might not have all the controls 
typically found in mainframe systems. 
• Access can be compromised by the end users by installing a modem and phone line 
connected to a local area network or stand-alone PC and not informing data security 
about the arrangement. 
 
 
Conducting an Investigation Regarding Computer Crimes 
Once an organization has received an indication that a possible criminal violation has 
occurred by means of its information system resources, a preliminary investigation into the 
allegation should be conducted to achieve the following goals: 
 
1. Determine if indeed a crime has been committed. This is the critical step in the 
internal investigation. The organization must be careful to differentiate between 
inadvertent computer misuse and deliberate criminal intent. The company’s internal 
auditors, physical and information security specialists, and senior management 
should be involved in making this type of decision. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1849 
2. Determine the status of the crime. When did the incident begin? Where did the 
intrusion come from? Internal or external? Is the incident still occurring? If not still 
occurring, when did it stop? 
 
3. Review the organization security and audit policies and procedures to determine the 
best method for continuing the investigation. 
 
4. Determine the need for law enforcement assistance. The organization will have to 
decide if the violation is serious enough to call in the police or other law 
enforcement entities. Most computer crimes are not reported to law enforcement 
due to several factors, including the organization’s desire to keep its flaws and 
weaknesses from being exposed to its customers and stockholders. This is a difficult 
decision for the company to make. However, as we also mentioned earlier, if 
companies don’t report computer crimes, then law enforcement will be powerless to 
help prevent and solve them and computer criminals will feel they have a free hand 
to continue their activities. 
 
Handling the Evidence 
One of the major differences between investigating computer-related crimes and 
conventional criminal activities is the volatility of the evidence that resides in the computers 
themselves. Indeed, the evidence of a computer intrusion might be erased or altered as part 
of the intrusion itself. It is therefore very important for the organization and/or law 
enforcement personnel to deal quickly and decisively with evidence of suspected computer-
 related criminal activities. 
 
The admissibility of evidence obtained from computers in a court case is really no different 
from the admissibility of any other type of evidence. The evidence must be: 
• Relevant  
• Supported by a foundation for its introduction into court 
• Legally obtained 
• Properly identified 
• Properly preserved 
 
In the handling of computer data in criminal investigations, the examiner or investigators 
must be aware of some of the vulnerabilities of computer evidence: 
• The investigator must ensure that turning off power to computer equipment will not 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1850                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
destroy or erase evidence that is required for the investigation. 
• The read/write heads of hard disk drives must be parked in a retracted position so that 
powering down the disk drive will not cause the read/write head to contact the surface 
of the disk platter. 
• Be aware that magnetic storage media are vulnerable to magnetic fields and that evidence 
might be erased without the investigator being aware of the erasure if the media are 
brought close to a source of a magnetic field. 
• Be aware that other equipment attached to the computer might be needed to complete 
the investigation into the data that resides in the computer. 
• The investigator should write-protect all diskettes that are being used in the investigation 
so that they cannot be written upon inadvertently. 
 
Integrity of Evidence 
There are certain issues that must be considered when processing computer evidence. These 
areas should be considered regardless of whether the incident will be processed as a criminal 
offense for prosecution or possible civil litigation. Even if the organization decides to take 
no action at all, how a computer fraud examination is conducted might have potential civil 
liability implications for both the organization and/or the fraud examiner.  
 
Should the fraud examiner discover evidence on a computer system, he must be able to state 
unequivocally that the evidence was not changed in any way by their actions. This requires 
that strict forensic methodologies be followed to satisfy the stringent evidentiary standards 
necessary to ensure the integrity of the evidence “beyond a reasonable doubt” for possible 
court presentation. Therefore, fraud examiners must be aware of the following issues that 
relate to the gathering of computer evidence. 
 
Search & Seizure — Expectation of Privacy 
The first question that should be asked in a computer fraud examination pertains to the 
expectation of privacy for any employee or outsider who might be involved in the incident.  
 
For example, in one incident an employee was caught using a company computer for 
personal use. The company had never established computer use policies. The employee had 
never been formally notified that personal use of the computer was prohibited and that the 
company had the right to inspect the contents of the computer at any time. Therefore, when 
a supervisor discovered inappropriate personal files on the employee’s computer, the 
employee protested the act as an invasion of his privacy. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1851 
This demonstrates that appropriate policies can be critical. In the above circumstances the 
company might have created a situation where they would actually need to obtain a court 
order or a search warrant through a law enforcement agency just to examine the contents of 
their own computers. 
 
There is specific wording that should be used in the construction of a search warrant 
involving either computers or telecommunications equipment. How the equipment and 
magnetic media are described will be critical to the success of the court case. 
 
Pre-Search Preparation 
Obtaining as much intelligence as possible regard ing the location of the potential evidence is 
very desirable before writing the search warrant affidavit. Questions that fraud examiners 
should consider might include: 
• Determine the type of computer systems that will be involved in the search. What 
operating system is used? Are the computers networked together? 
• Determine how many people will be needed to conduct the search. In one case, 
approximately 17 networked file servers were involved, with multiple routers and dial-up 
modems. A team of only two investigators would need at least four to six hours to 
complete a seizure of this magnitude.  
• If expert witnesses with a specific expertise are required during the search, identify and 
clear them before the search warrant is written. Depending on the circumstances, their 
credentials should possibly be included in the warrant affidavit before they are approved 
by the magistrate issuing the search warrant. The time to discover that an “expert 
witness” has a criminal conviction is before the search warrant affidavit has even been 
written, not when the witness takes the stand to testify in a criminal proceeding. 
• Determine the resources that will be required to successfully conduct the search. If a 
great deal of equipment is to be seized, consider how the equipment will be transported 
from the location. Obtain sufficient boxes, labels, bags, and other supplies at this time. 
• Consider the timing of the search. In another case, an assistant district attorney 
requested assistance in the execution of a search warrant. When detectives arrived, they 
discovered that the DA wanted them to seize more than 30 computers, including 3 file 
servers. This was at 3 p.m., and the DA then told the detectives that the authority to 
execute the search warrant expired at 5 p.m. Naturally, the detectives could not possibly 
have conducted the seizure within that time frame and in this case, the evidence was lost. 
A better strategy would have been to time the execution of the search warrant for 5 p.m.  
  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1852                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
on a Friday afternoon. This would give the entire weekend to conduct the search, if 
necessary. 
 
Search Warrant Affidavit Construction 
The construction of search warrants has been affected by both advancements in technology 
and the evolving nature of criminal law. Fraud examiners must now consider several 
problems not encountered before. For example, the fraud examiner must know how to write 
a warrant to seize tangible property that contains intangible evidence. Further, the fraud 
examiner must be allowed to convert that evidence into a human-readable form (i.e., 
computer storage devices such as disks or CD-ROMs, which contain information that 
cannot be viewed without the aid of some electronic device).  
 
The warrant must allow for such contingencies as the ability to seize data files pertinent to 
the case that are mixed with data files that have nothing to do with the case but reside on the 
same storage device. The warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizure of 
all computer evidence relevant to the investigation, but narrow enough to exclude all 
material that is not. This can be an extremely difficult standard to meet at times and might 
depend on the magistrate to whom the affidavit is presented. 
 
To satisfy the “particularity” requirements of the Fourth Amendment, the fraud examiner 
must be able to justify each and every item that might contain evidence. For example, stating 
that “all printers” should be seized might be considered to be overly broad unless the fraud 
examiner can justify the need for each specific printer. 
 
However, with some thought fraud examiners should be able to justify the search and 
seizure for everything that they need to complete the search for evidence. Items to be seized 
might contain any or all of the following, depending upon the nature of the fraud case: 
• Computers 
• Computer components 
• Computer peripherals 
• Word processing equipment 
• Modems 
• Monitors 
• Printers 
• Plotters 
• Optical scanners 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1853 
• Data storage devices 
? Magnetic 
? Laser 
? Optical 
? Tape 
? PCMCIA 
? ZIP or JAZ drives 
• Cables, wiring, cords 
• Storage media 
? Floppy disks 
? Hard disks 
? Magnetic tape (reels) 
? PCMCIA RAM cards 
? CD-ROM 
? Magnetic/Optical disks 
? Digital Audio Tape (DAT) 
? Personal data managers 
? Flash RAM cards (consider digital camera storage) 
? USB thumb drives 
• Computer programs 
? Operating systems 
? Application software 
? Utility programs 
? Compilers 
? Interpreters 
• Documents 
• Manuals 
• Printouts 
• File listings 
 
All related documentation should be covered by the wording of the search warrant and 
seized along with the computer system. This documentation could be critical in the analysis 
of the system hardware and software. Documents could indicate changes that have been 
made to the system that will help the fraud examiner avoid damaging the system. The fact 
that access control products have been added to the system might be a helpful piece of 
information for the fraud examiner. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1854                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Processing Evidence for Removal 
The search for and seizure of technical equipment requires specific procedures that must be 
followed by fraud examiners to guarantee the integrity of evidence, and to protect both the 
organization and the individual fraud examiner from civil litigation. These guidelines are 
written to satisfy the evidentiary requirements for criminal prosecution, and each step in the 
process is there for a reason. Fraud examiners who deviate from these guidelines should be 
able to justify their actions if called into question later. 
 
1.  If possible, before executing a search warrant where computer equipment and/or 
magnetic storage media is to be seized, try to make sure that someone will be present 
who is familiar with computer equipment to assist in the identification of the various 
components. 
 
2.  It is critical that anyone not involved in the investigation be kept away from any 
computer equipment, and not be allowed to touch any of the equipment. This 
includes any person not directly involved in handling the computer and related 
equipment. It is possible for a suspect or any person touching only one key of a 
system keyboard (when a computer is operational) to destroy evidence. Limit the 
number of personnel responsible for processing computer-related evidence to 
maintain the integrity of this evidence.  
 
 
3.  If the person seizing the system has the appropriate training and expertise, it might be 
useful to observe the video display of the system. Information might be displayed that 
will be of value in the case. If this occurs, document with a close-up photograph of the 
video screen. (Take care if using a camera with a flash that the flash does not reflect 
back into the camera lens.) 
 
4.  If a computer or peripheral is not covered by the respective search warrant, leave it 
alone until a supplemental warrant can be obtained. 
 
5.  If the computer is to be removed from the location, do not enter anything via the 
system keyboard or attempt to read information from the system or any associated 
magnetic media. 
 
6.  Do not move the computer any more than is necessary until it is properly secured. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1855 
Even then, extreme care should be taken, as sudden motion could cause the 
destruction of data or damage to the equipment itself. 
 
7.  Photograph the overall view of the computer system (wide view). Move the equipment 
as little as possible before taking this photograph to indicate how the equipment was 
originally positioned. Consider videotaping the confiscation procedure for complete 
documentation of all actions performed. However, caution is advised, since the video 
will capture everything that is said and done. Speculative statements or levity should be 
restricted.  
 
8.  Document the state of the computer when first observed (was it operational, what was 
displayed on the monitor screen, etc.). 
 
9.  Depending on the experience of the person seizing the system, it might be advisable to 
unplug the power from the Central Processing Unit (CPU) before taking any further 
action. Unplug the power at the wall outlet, if accessible. Even though this action will 
lose any data in Random Access Memory, it might prevent the computer from deleting 
or changing other data. N O TE: This applies to sta nd alone microcomputers only, 
and does not include computers connected to a Local Area Network (LAN). 
 
10.  Turn off the power to all other components and/or pieces of peripheral equipment 
(such as printers, video display CRTs, or monitors, etc.). Be aware that many 
peripherals utilize Random Access Memory, which can contain evidence that will be 
lost when power is removed. 
 
11.  If possible, photograph all cable connections (usually in the rear of the system), before 
disconnecting. 
 
12.  Disconnect all components that are attached to an external power supply only (e.g., 
from an electrical wall socket, etc.). 
 
13.  Never connect or disconnect any of the cables of the system when the computer is 
operating. This could result in physical damage to the system components and/or 
peripheral equipment. 
 
14.  Label all cable connections, including any telephone cables that are connected to the 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1856                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
system so that the system can be reconstructed at a later time for analysis. 
 
15.  Again, photograph all cable connections. Before photographing, try to arrange the 
cable connector labels in such a way that they will be visible in the photographs. 
 
16.  Label each item of equipment that will be confiscated. This includes the CPU, 
monitor, printers, etc. Each item that has a removable exterior case should be sealed 
with a tamperproof evidence tape (especially the CPU case). This will help to prevent 
later allegations that components were removed or altered. 
 
17.  Consideration should be given to separate close-up isolation photographs for each 
item to be seized. These close-up shots will serve the purpose of providing more 
specific identification of seized items, and responding to possible future allegations of 
physical damage to a seized item. 
 
18.  Document the location of all items seized (which room, specific location in the room, 
reference to photographs, the person who seized the item, serial numbers, special 
identification markings, etc.). 
 
19.  Check all disk drives to determine if they contain a disk. If so, remove the disk from 
the drive and place it in a disk sleeve. Write-protect the disk immediately. Label the 
particular disk drive to show which drive the disk came from, and then label a paper 
bag to indicate that the disk was taken from the labeled drive. Place the disk in the 
paper bag and seal it. 
 
20.  Place a cardboard insert or a “throwaway” disk  into the disk drive and secure the drive 
door shut to secure the drive heads for transportation. Cardboard inserts are specially 
made for this purpose. If none are available, a disk of the particular size that contains 
no data might be used (preferably a new, unused disk). 
 
21.  Check any other removable storage media drives, remove any storage media they 
contain, and label the media for identification purposes. (This includes components 
such as optical drives, external tape drives, IOMEGA drives, CD-ROM, etc.) 
 
22.  If there is any uncertainty as to what a piece of equipment is, do not speculate, just 
label the equipment with a unique identifying number and secure the item for later 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1857 
analysis. However, be prepared to justify the seizure of a component that might or 
might not be covered in the search warrant. 
 
23.  When all components and cables have been labeled and documented, disconnect the 
cables from their respective component and secure the cables.  
 
24.  If covered in the search warrant, confiscate all related manuals and other 
documentation, and all magnetic media. Also confiscate any other items that might be 
evidence in the case and that are covered by the terms of the search warrant. 
 
25.  If at all possible, after all equipment and magnetic media have been labeled and 
inventoried, each item should be stored in a paper bag or a cardboard box and sealed 
(to keep out dust). Large items, such as the CPU and/or printers could be stored in 
large paper bags or large boxes. Smaller items, such as disks and CDs, could be stored 
in sandwich-bag sized paper bags. This practice will protect these items from 
unnecessary exposure to dust. An additional label should be attached to the bag 
identifying the contents of the bag, along with any identifying numbers, such as the 
number of an evidence tag. Note: Plastic bags (such as garbage and sandwich 
bags) should not be used to store evidence.  
 
26.  Ensure that adequate support is given to all items when they are being moved. 
 
27.  Thoroughly document the inventory of everything to be removed from the location. 
This will be required for the search warrant return (if applicable), but also serves to 
provide a measure of liability protection for the person seizing the system.  
 
Basic computer procedures are essential when processing evidence. These precautions must 
be followed explicitly when working with computers: 
• Do not eat, drink, or smoke close to the computer system or near any of the storage 
media (such as disks or CDs). Crumbs, liquid, and/or smoke particles could all 
potentially damage the equipment or stored data. If this happens, it becomes very 
difficult, if not impossible, to recover the data (and evidence). 
• Do not fold or bend disks, or touch the magnetic media inside the disk cover. 
• Do not write on a disk, on a label of a disk, or on a bag that contains a disk. Write on a 
label and then place the label on the disk. If it is necessary to write on a disk, use a soft 
felt-tip pen. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1858                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Do not  place magnetic media near magnetic fields, as this could cause damage. Magnetic 
fields strong enough to damage data are more common than you might think. 
• Do not expose magnetic media to either extreme heat or cold. Temperatures outside of 
the range from 40-90 degrees Fahrenheit can damage the data. 
• Do not fingerprint magnetic media. The particles of fingerprint powder are almost 
impossible to remove from the media surface, and the drive will not be able to read the 
data contained on the media. Permanent damage to the drive equipment could  
also result. 
 
Evidence Storage 
After a computer system has been seized, most criminal justice agencies have a central 
evidence storage facility where the equipment is transported and stored until it is either 
processed further or needed in court. In the majority of cases, the special storage 
requirements of computer systems are not addressed. 
 
The storage environment should be in a location that is: 
• Relatively dust-free 
• Both temperature and humidity controlled 
• Free of magnetic and electronic fields 
 
Possible Threats to Magnetic Media 
• Telephones 
• Radio speakers 
• Radio transmitters 
• Copy machines 
• Plastic garbage or sandwich bags  
• Degaussing equipment 
• Electric fans 
• Under-shelf lighting (heat) 
• Leaving media in vehicle trunk during ex treme temperatures (either hot or cold) 
• Magnets 
• Proximity to a radiator or an open heating vent 
 
Evidence Analysis 
The primary concern during the analysis of electronic evidence is to maintain the integrity of 
the evidence. This means that procedures must be developed to ensure that no allegations 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1859 
can be raised in court that the methodology used during analysis could have damaged or 
altered the hardware, media, or data that constitutes the evidence. 
 
Currently, there are no specialized evidence analysis laboratories available to most criminal 
justice agencies to analyze computer, electronic, or magnetic evidence. The U.S. Secret 
Service and the FBI both have such capabilities, but unless the case is of critical importance 
these laboratories process only cases investigated by those agencies. 
 
Understanding the Terms 
To effectively analyze the data stored within a computer the fraud examiner must have a 
practical understanding of the basic operations of a computer and how it stores information. 
The fraud examiner must also have the expertise to access the data at the most basic level. 
Without this knowledge, information could be hidden from view or stored within other files 
or locations not usually accessed by the computer. 
 
Each new development in technology brings with it new concepts and a new vocabulary. 
The modern fraud examiner must stay current on the terms used to describe technological 
developments, tools, and practices, as he may be asked to explain such concepts as part of 
the engagement, in the resulting report, or as an expert witness during consequent 
legal proceedings.  
 
Fraud examiners must also be educated in the use of the various software utilities that will 
enable them to analyze the electronic data. Utilities such as Norton Utilities will be of great 
assistance in investigations involving personal computers. There are several utility 
applications that automate a great deal of the evidence analysis process. However, you 
should not use these programs unless you have been properly trained.  
 
Evidence Inventory 
Many times computers seized as evidence are only inventoried according to the information 
available on the outside of the CPU case — namely the make, model, and serial number of 
the particular unit. The components inside the CPU case are never examined. Fraud 
examiners must consider that there could literally be thousands of dollars of equipment 
inside this case. Inadequate inventories of computer equipment leave the organization, and 
possibly the fraud examiner, in a precarious liability position should any of this equipment be 
damaged or lost. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1860                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In analyzing and searching magnetic or optical media for potential evidence, the fraud 
examiner should consider the following: 
• Mirror copies 
• Virus detection 
• Keyword search 
• Hidden and deleted files 
• File slack area 
• File signatures 
• Encrypted files 
 
“Mirror” Copies 
If possible, the fraud examiner should make an exact duplicate, or “mirror” copy, of any 
media that is to be analyzed. This will ensure that no changes or damage occurs to the 
original evidence. This will not be possible in all cases due to a lack of equipment or other 
resources, but should be considered as the “ideal” procedure. 
 
When there is no alternative but to analyze the original of the seized evidence, consideration 
should be given to using utility software to “lock” the disk so that no information can be 
written to the disk. This will protect the integrity of the original evidence, and prevent 
inadvertent alteration of the original data. 
 
Virus Detection 
All data storage media should be examined for computer viruses. This will serve not only to 
protect the fraud examiner’s own equipment, but also will protect the fraud examiner from 
possible allegations that he infected the seized media with a computer virus. 
 
Keyword Search 
Due to the tremendous storage capacity of contemporary computer media, it might be more 
cost effective for the fraud examiner to conduct a “keyword search” of the media, searching 
for key words, names, dates, account numbers, etc. that are material to the fraud case. This 
will minimize the amount of time used to complete the analysis, and also protects the fraud 
examiner from possible allegations that their search was overly broad. 
 
“Hidden” and “Deleted” Files 
Most computer operating systems allow files to be designated as “hidden” files. When so 
designated, the files might not be visible to normal search procedures, such as displaying a 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1861 
disk directory. Utility programs exist to show these “hidden” files. Fraud examiners should 
inspect these files to determine if they were intentionally hidden because they contain 
evidence. 
 
In addition, many computer users do not realize that an initial command to “delete” a file 
does not necessarily mean that the file contents have been destroyed. With the appropriate 
utility programs, erased files can be “unerased” and reviewed by the fraud examiner. 
 
File Slack Area 
There is a difference in most operating systems between the “logical” size of a file and the 
“physical” size of the file. The logical size pertains to the size in the number of “bytes” that 
the file occupies. In a directory listing, this is the number that is displayed for “file size.”   
 
The physical size of a file depends on how the operating system stores files. In most 
operating systems, the disk is organized into designated blocks called clusters. Files occupy a 
whole number of clusters, even if the logical size of the file is smaller than the cluster size. In 
these cases, difference in space between the physical file space and the logical file space is 
called the file slack area. This area might contain data from previously-erased files that could 
contain evidence. Unless the fraud examiner has a special utility to identify and investigate 
the file slack area, potential evidence possibly located there could be missed. 
 
File Signatures 
When reviewing a directory listing in a file manager such as Windows Explorer, the “type” 
of file is one of the options that might display. This information might indicate that the file 
is an “application,” or that it is a “Word Document,” or some other type. However, this 
designation is usually based on the “extension” of the file, and might not be an accurate 
indication of the file contents.  
 
For example, if a file were created in Microsoft Word, and saved with the file name of 
“Murder Confession.doc,” the directory listing would correctly indicate that this file was a 
“Word Document.” However, if the file were renamed as “Angel.exe,” the directory listing 
would mistakenly indicate that the file was an “application,” even though the contents of the 
file itself have not changed. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1862                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inspecting each and every file on seized media would be tremendously tedious and very 
time-consuming. However, there are utility programs that can automate this process and 
report any discrepancies such as the one described above. 
 
Encrypted Files 
Should the fraud examiner come across files that have been encrypted during the analysis of 
seized computer media, several considerations arise. 
 
First of all, utility programs exist to decrypt documents encrypted by many of the more 
common business software applications, such as Microsoft Word and WordPerfect. There 
are also several companies who specialize in this type of decryption. 
 
Secondly, there is precedent for forcing the suspect to divulge the decryption code through a 
court order. Consider once again that the computer is only a container and that the 
encryption is an additional “lock” that is prohibiting the fraud examiner from reviewing the 
contents for potential evidence. If a valid search warrant exists authorizing the examination 
of the data, this would be no different than a court ordering a suspect to unlock a file cabinet 
to allow the inspection of its contents. 
 
 
Computer Crime Laws 
 
International Law 
With a global communications network such as the Internet, the odds have dramatically 
increased that a crime may have been perpetrated in a foreign nation, or that records related 
to a portion of the communications transmission may have passed through another country. 
This can cause tremendous complications for a fraud examiner attempting to pursue his 
investigation. 
 
Victims of scams originating overseas usually find themselves with virtually no recourse. 
Recent computer equipment and software scam operations in former communist nations 
have specifically targeted U.S. users. Language, communication, and distance obstacles are 
nearly insurmountable in working with foreign law enforcement officials to resolve such 
cases. In the future, greater international cooperation will be necessary to combat 
international high tech crime.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1863 
Recently, however, the U.S. has taken two substantial steps to combat the inconsistency in 
international laws pertaining to computer fraud. First, on September 29, 2006, the United 
States became a party to the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime, which “is the 
only legally binding multilateral instrument specifically addressing computer-related crime, 
helping protect citizens against computer hacking and Internet fraud, as well as crimes 
involving electronic evidence.” Parties to the Convention are committed to harmonizing 
national laws, to improving investigative techniques, and to increasing cooperation.  
 
Second, the U.S. is an active participant in the Subgroup on High-Tech Crime at G8’s Lyon 
Group, which was created “to enhance the abilities of G8 countries to prevent, investigate, 
and prosecute crimes involving computers, networked communications, and other new 
technologies.” One significant accomplishment of the Subgroup was the creation of a 
network that allows law enforcement authorities of member nations to receive rapid 
cooperation in investigating computer crime. 
 
Federal Laws 
There are many laws that can be used to prosecute computer crimes and frauds. In the 
United States, the basic laws used to prosecute computer and other high tech crimes are 
divided into the federal laws and state laws.  
 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1030) 
Most computer crimes are prosecuted under traditional fraud, theft, and embezzlement 
statutes. A statute enacted in 1984, Title 18, U.S. Code, section 1030, makes certain 
computer-related activity a specific federal offense. More information on section 1030 is set 
out in the “Law Related to Fraud” chapter in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual. 
 
In brief, section 1030(a) prohibits seven acts involving “protected computers.”  
 
A protected computer, under this section, includes: 
• A computer that is used exclusively by a financial institution or the United States 
government. 
• Any computer the use of which affects a computer used by a financial institution or the 
federal government. 
• A computer that is used in interstate or foreign commerce or communication. 
 
Briefly, section 1030(a) prohibits using a protected computer:  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1864                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• To commit espionage (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(1));  
• To obtain, without authorization, certain government, financial institution, or 
commercial information (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(2)); 
• To access, without authorization, a government computer (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(3)); 
• To commit fraud ((18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(4));  
• To transmit a program, code, or command to damage a protected computer or to access 
a protected computer that results in damage (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(5)) 
• For trafficking in passwords (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(6)); 
• To transmit extortionate threats (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(7).  
 
Sections 1030(a)(5) and 1030(a)(4) are discussed in further detail below.  
 
COMPUTER FRAUD (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTION 1030(a)(4)) 
As noted above, section 1030(a)(4) outlaws fraud involving protected computers. There are 
three elements of the crime, which include: 
• Knowingly accessing a protected computer without authorization (or exceeding 
authorization); 
• With the intent to defraud; and  
• Thereby obtaining anything of value (more than $5,000 over the course of a year). 
 
CAUSING COMPUTER DAMAGE (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE SECTION 1030(a)(5)) 
Section 1030(a)(5), which applies to computers used in interstate or foreign commerce or 
communication, outlaws causing computer damage. But it contains two categories of 
offense, depending on intent. The first category provides that it is illegal to knowingly 
transmit a program, code, or command that intentionally causes damage a protected 
computer. This offense applies even if the individual had authorization to access the 
computer.  
 
The second category provides that it is illegal to access a protected computer, without 
authorization, that results in damage. Unlike the first category, this offense does not require 
intent to damage, only the intent to access the information.  
 
Unlawful actions under the first category of section 1030(a)(5) violations include 
imprisonment up to one year and/or a fine. Violators under the second category of section 
1030(a)(5) may receive up to five years imprisonment (not more than 10 years for repeat 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1865 
offenders) and/or a fine. Both categories provide a civil remedy for any person who suffers 
damage as a result of a violation of section 1030(a)(5).  
 
To apply, section 1030(a)(5) requires that the defendant’s conduct “cause” damage to a 
computer. Due to its broadness, the definition allows section 1030(a)(5) to apply in various 
situations, including instances where an act causes information to be deleted or changed, 
where an intruder alters the way a computer operates, or where an act makes information 
unavailable. Even if an intruder did not make any alterations and the computer system works 
as it did before, some courts have ruled that accessing and copying private data from 
protected computers may cause damage to the data under section 1035(a)(5).  
 
PENALTIES   
The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act provides both criminal and civil liability. Section 1030 
includes criminal punishment provisions; however, it provides different penalties, depending 
on the specific conduct. The Act also provides civil remedies for individuals that suffered 
damages resulting from section 1030 violations. 
 
Can-Spam Act (Title 18, U.S. Code Section 1037) 
The Can-Spam Act, or the Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and 
Marketing Act, attempts to reduce the amount of unsolicited commercial e-mail, which is 
also known as spam, by establishing national standards for sending e-mail solicitations. To 
reduce the amount of spam, the Can-Spam Act provides several provisions that apply to 
individuals or companies sending spam. More specifically, the Act prohibits several 
deceptive and/or fraudulent practices commonly used in spam, including the prohibition of 
using deceptive subject lines, using deceptive header information, and requiring sender 
identification. Penalties under the Can-Spam Act include punishment by a fine and/or 
imprisonment for not more than five years.  
 
Access Device Fraud (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1029) 
Title 18, U.S. Code, section 1029, criminalizes the production, use, trafficking, or possession 
of unauthorized or counterfeit access devices. Access devices are devices that allow access to 
account funds. Most importantly, section 1029 proh ibits the fraudulent use of credit cards. 
However, because Congress broadly defined the term “access devices,” section 1029 also 
applies to crimes using other access device numbers, including debit cards, ATM cards, 
personal identification numbers (PINs), computer passwords, “or any other thing of value, 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1866                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
or that can be used to initiate a transfer of funds (other than a transfer originated solely by 
paper instrument).” 
 
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1028) 
As discussed in the Consumer Fraud section, the growth of identity theft led Congress to 
pass the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act, which makes identity theft a federal 
crime. This Act outlaws the intentional and unauthorized use of another individual’s 
identification, with the intent to commit a crime. The Identity Theft and Assumption 
Deterrence Act carries a maximum term of 15 years’ imprisonment, a fine, and criminal 
forfeiture of any personal property used or intended to be used to commit the offense. The 
penalty is increased to imprisonment of up to 30 years if the offense is committed to 
facilitate an act of terrorism.  
 
Interstate Transportation of Stolen Property (ITSP) (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 2314) 
The ITSP statute prohibits the transportation, transmittal, or transfer of fraudulently 
received goods, wares, merchandise, securities, or money in interstate or foreign commerce, 
when valued at $5,000 or more. Prosecutors of ten use the ITSP statute in fraud prosecutions 
in conjunction with mail fraud counts, wire fraud counts, or to provide federal jurisdiction in 
their absence. To apply, the ITSP statute requires that an individual transport the proceeds, 
which must value at least $5,000, across state lin es. Defendants also violate the statute if they 
induce their victim(s) to travel in interstate commerce as part of the scheme to defraud. 
Courts may aggregate items valued at less than $5,000 as part of the same scheme to meet 
the value requirement. 
 
Additionally, it is clear that section 2314 applies when defendants steal tangible items, which 
qualify as goods, wares, or merchandise, that contains intellectual property. However, courts 
have had varying opinions on the characterization of intellectual property as “goods, wares, 
merchandise, securities, or money” when an individual steals intangible property through 
intangible means.  
 
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986  
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA), codified at 18 U.S.C. §§ 
2510–2521, 2701–2710, 3121–3126, governs the illegal interception of electronic 
communication and the unauthorized access of electronically stored data. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1867 
The ECPA is divided into three parts: the Wiretap Act, the Stored Communications Act, and 
the Pen Register Act, which regulates pen registers and trap and trace devices. This section, 
however, focuses on the Wiretap Act and the Stored Communications Act. 
 
THE WIRETAP ACT (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTIONS 2510-2521) 
In response to privacy breaches, Congress enacted the Wiretap Act, which prohibits anyone 
from intentionally intercepting or attempting to intercept any wire, oral, or electronic 
communication. 
  
Focusing on its applicability to computer fraud, the Wiretap Act prohibits the intentional 
interception of certain electronic communications, including e-mail; it does not govern 
stored communications. Under the Wiretap Act, an interception occurs by the acquisition of 
the contents of any electronic communication through the use of any device. Most courts 
have held that interception occurs only when the protected communications are obtained 
contemporaneously with their transmission.  
 
Additionally, most courts agree that interception does not occur when an individual obtains 
access to an electronically stored copy of the communication, “whether such storage occurs 
pre- or post-delivery, and even if the storage lasts only a few milliseconds.” As a result, the 
Wiretap Act is often inadequate to protect electronic communications sent over the Internet.  
 
The Wiretap Act also contains several exceptions to prosecution, including the consent 
exception, which provides that parties to the communication may authorize others to 
intercept the transmission.  
 
Remedies for violating the Wiretap Act include criminal sanctions and civil relief. A criminal 
violation under the Act is a felony and is punishable by up to five years imprisonment 
and/or fines. Under a private cause of action, a court may award the plaintiff equitable relief, 
actual damages, punitive damages, and attorneys’ fees.  
  
STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTION 2701) 
As part of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, Congress enacted the Stored 
Communications Act (SCA) to protect stored electronic communications, such as e-mail, 
and voicemail by prohibiting the unauthorized access of such communications that are in 
storage. More specifically, the SCA prohibits unlawful access to a facility, which provides an 
electronic communication service, and, then, obtaining, altering, or preventing authorized 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1868                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
access to a wire or electronic communication while it is electronically stored in such  
a system.  
 
Unlike interception under the Wiretap Act, an electronic communication falls under the SCA 
once a system receives and stores it. However, like the Wiretap Act, the SCA includes a 
consent exception. Under this exception, a service provider may disclose electronic 
communications with the lawful consent of the originator, an addressee, or the intended 
recipient.  
 
The SCA includes both civil and criminal penalties. Concerning civil penalties, the SCA 
provides a private right of action and allows appropriate relief, including equitable relief, 
damages, and attorneys fees. Regarding criminal penalties, the SCA provides that if the first 
offense is committed for purposes of commercial advantage, malicious destruction, or 
damage or private commercial gain, punishment may include a fine and/or imprisonment for 
up to five years. For any subsequent offense, penalties include a fine and/or imprisonment 
for not more than 10 years. In any other case, where it is a first offense, courts may impose a 
fine or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. For all subsequent convictions, 
courts may impose a fine and/or imprisonment for up to 10 years. 
 
Mail and Wire Fraud (Title 18, U. S. Code, Sections 1341 and 1343) 
As discussed above, a computer may be the tool used to commit traditional crimes, including 
mail and wire fraud. Due to the broad reach of the mail and wire fraud statutes, prosecutors 
may use these traditional criminal statutes to prosecute computer fraud. In basic terms, the 
laws prohibit the use of mails or wires, including the Internet, in furtherance of a fraudulent 
scheme designed to obtain money or property.  
 
Several cases have held that the federal mail and wire fraud statues apply to computer fraud. 
Furthermore, prosecutors may use these statutes in addition to or in lieu of cases that 
implicate trade secrets; counterfeit or illicit labels; counterfeit documentation or packaging; 
or counterfeit trademarks, service marks, or certification marks. However, courts disagree on 
whether the mail and wire fraud statutes reach criminal copyright infringement.  
 
Penalties under the mail and wire fraud statues include fines, imprisonment up to five years, 
or both. However, if the violation affects a financial institution, the violator may receive 
fines up to $1,000,000, imprisonment up to thirty years, or both.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1869 
False Statements (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1001) 
Prosecutors most often use section 1001 to prosecute false statements made to law 
enforcement or regulatory officials, not made under oath, in the course of an official 
investigation, or on an application for such things as federal employment, credit, and visa 
applications. Prosecutors may also use section 1001 in lieu of the misdemeanor provisions of 
the IRS Code for filing false documents with tax returns.  
 
Section 1001 violations may implicate other federal laws, including computer fraud (18 
U.S.C. 1030(a)(4) and Internet Fraud (e.g., auction fraud or “phishing”) by making false 
statements in any matter within the jurisdiction of the government. 
 
The Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (Title 18, U.S. Code, Sections 1831-183 9) 
The Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (EEA) makes the theft of trade secrets a federal 
criminal offense. The EEA outlaws two types of trade secret misappropriation: section 1831 
criminalizes economic espionage, which is the theft of a trade secret to benefit a foreign 
government, instrumentality, or agent; and section 1832 criminalizes the theft of commercial 
trade secrets to obtain an economic advantage.  
 
Sections 1831 and 1832 provide significant penalties for trade secret violations. If done to 
benefit a foreign government, the theft of trade secrets is punishable by up to fifteen years 
imprisonment and up to a $500,000 fine. Trade secret theft for commercial benefit is 
punishable by up to 10 years imprisonment and up to a $250,000 fine. The EEA, however, 
does not provide any civil remedies. 
 
Additionally, prosecutors can apply the EEA to a wide variety of misconduct because it 
criminalizes attempts and conspiracies to violate the EEA. The same penalties apply to these 
offenses with increased penalties if the trade secret misappropriation benefits a foreign 
government, foreign instrumentality, or a foreign agent.  
 
Moreover, the EEA authorizes the Attorney General to commence a civil action seeking 
injunctive relief to prevent further disclosure of a trade secret by the defendant or third 
parties.   
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1870                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Criminal Infringement of a Copyright (Title 17, U.S. Code, Section 506 and Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 2319) 
Title 17, U.S. Code, section 506, criminalizes willful copyright infringement and defines what 
conduct is prohibited, while Title 18, U.S. Code, section 2319, imposes the criminal 
punishment for a copyright infringement conviction, which is to be added to any other 
penalties imposed by other provisions or laws. 
 
Copyright law grants copyright holders six exclusive rights to their works, including the right 
to reproduction. Generally, infringement occurs if an individual exercises any one of the 
copyright holder’s exclusive rights without authorization or other legal authority. However, 
not all infringements are criminal offenses. Instead, section 506 provides that copyright 
infringement is criminal if an individual willfully reproduces or distributes, for commercial 
advantage or private financial gain, one or more copies of copyrighted works totaling in 
retail value $1,000 or more.  
 
Section 2319 imposes punishment for both felony and misdemeanor crimes. Felony 
penalties attach when the infringement consists of the reproduction or distribution of 10 or 
more copies of copyrighted works within 180 days that, taken together, are worth more than 
$2,500, or when the violation involves distribution of a “work being prepared for 
commercial distribution” over “a computer network accessible to members of the public.” 
Alternatively, misdemeanor crimes attach when the infringement consisted of any of  
the following: 
• Infringement of reproduction or distribution rights for private financial gain or 
commercial advantage, regardless of the exact volume or value of the infringement;  
• Infringement of reproduction or distribution rights of one or more copies of 
copyrighted works within 180 days that are worth a total retail value of $1,000 or more, 
and it does not involve private financial gain or commercial advantage; or  
• Infringement of rights other than reproduction or distribution for private financial gain 
or commercial advantage 
 
In 1997, President Clinton signed The No Electronic Theft Act into law, which amended the 
copyright laws to prohibit electronic infringements and extended the copyright infringement 
to include acts that do not necessarily give rise to a profit.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1871 
Limitations on Exclusive Rights: Computer Programs (Title 17, U.S. Code, Section 117) 
Although copyright laws provide copyright holders the exclusive right to reproduction, this 
right is subject to a number of limitations, including section 117, which allows the copying of 
copyrighted software in limited circumstances. Under section 117, the owner of a copy of a 
computer program is allowed to make additional copies of such program in two instances. 
First, owners may copy a computer program if it is necessary for the use of the computer 
program. Second, users may make a copy for archival purposes to prevent loss due to hard 
drive failures and the like.  
 
Even though the law authorizes copies made under section 117’s limitations, there are 
restrictions. All copies must be destroyed when the possession of a computer program 
ceases to be deemed rightful. Furthermore, any copies made in accordance with this section 
may be transferred but must be accompanied by the original program from which copies 
were made and with all rights in the program. 
 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (Title 17, U.S. Code, Sections 1201-1205) 
The advent of the Internet and digital media has led to an increase in intellectual copyright 
infringement. In response to this development, Congress enacted the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act of 1998 (DMCA). The DMCA outlaws the use of computers (and other 
electronic devices) to infringe against copyright holders’ exclusive rights. To further this goal, 
the DMCA provides liability limitations for transmitting copyrighted material online. The 
DMCA also provides criminal penalties for circumventing copyright protection systems, 
which are set forth in section 1201, and for compromising the integrity of copyright 
management information pursuant to section 1202.  
 
Violations under either section 1201 or 1202  are subject to a maximum of five years 
imprisonment, up to $500,000 fine, or both. Subsequent offenses are subject to a maximum 
of 10 years, a maximum fine of $1,000,000, or both. 
 
Electronic Fund Transfers: Criminal Liability (Title 15, U.S. Code, Section 1693n) 
Congress designed this legislation to allow consumers the ease and benefit of electronic fund 
transfer, while defining the rights and liabilities of the parties involved in such transactions. 
Section 1693n applies to paperless money transfers between accounts, including ATM 
transactions, debit and credit card transactions, point-of-sale (POS) debit transactions, 
telephone transfers, and, according to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1872                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
any “other electronic banking transactions that can result in the withdrawal of cash from 
your bank account.” 
 
In particular, this statute attaches criminal liability to the acts of: 
• Giving false or inaccurate information under the banking laws and regulations; or 
• Failing to provide information required under the banking laws and regulations. 
 
It also prohibits certain actions affecting commerce, including: 
• Using, attempting to use, or conspiring to use any fraudulently obtained debit 
instrument, with knowledge of fraudulent character, to obtain anything with an 
aggregating value of at least $1,000 within a one-year period; or 
• Transporting, attempting to transport, or conspiring to transport a fraudulent debit 
instrument with unlawful or fraudulent intent, and knowledge; or 
• Selling or transporting in interstate or foreign commerce of any fraudulent debit 
instrument, with knowledge; or 
• Receiving, concealing, using, or transporting anything that is proceeds from a fraudulent 
activity and that has a value exceeding $1,000 within any one-year period; or  
• Receiving, concealing, using, selling, or transporting of one or more tickets for interstate 
or foreign transportation that have a value aggregating $500 or more and were obtained 
by use of a fraudulent debit instrument; or 
• Furnishing money, property, services, or anything else of value, aggregating  
$1,000 or more within a one-year period, in  conjunction with the use of a fraudulent 
debit instrument.  
 
State Laws 
At the state level, statutes that might be of use in prosecuting computer crimes would 
include the penal code violations of larceny (in its many forms), false pretenses, forgery, 
fraud, embezzlement, vandalism, property destruction, malicious mischief, proprietary 
information, theft, commercial bribery, and extortion. But most states now expressly provide 
penalties for crimes perpetrated by use of computers or perpetrated against computers. See 
the Law section for a complete listing of state computer fraud statutes. 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1873 
Government Information on Cybercrime 
 
DOJ Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section 
The Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section (CCIPS) of the Criminal Division of 
the U.S. Department of Justice (DOS) provides a number of excellent resources regarding 
computer and Internet fraud. 
 
Their web address is www.cybercrime.gov. On that site, the CCIPS has information about 
computer crimes, encryption, electronic commerce, hacking, legal issues relating to computer 
crimes, privacy issues, and international issues, among others. 
 
They also have some superb information regarding the search and seizure of computers, 
including the CCIPS’s manual entitled, Searching and Seizing Computers and Obtaining Electronic 
Evidence in Criminal Investigations. Additionally, they have set forth the federal criminal code 
sections relating to searches, as well as materials about the Fourth Amendment and the 
Internet. The materials on search and seizure can be accessed directly at the following site: 
www.cybercrime.gov/searching.html. 
 
DHS National Cyber Security Division  
The National Cyber Security Division (NCSD) of the Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) works with public, private, and international entities to ensure the security of 
cyberspace and U.S. cyber assets. The NCSD has the following two primary objectives: 
• Building and maintaining an effective national cyberspace response system 
• Implementing a cyber-risk management program for the protection of critical 
infrastructure 
 
More information about the NCSD can be found at: 
http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/structure/editorial_0839.shtm.   
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1901 
PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD 
 
Government Fraud Auditing Standards 
Standards for audits of government organizations, programs, activities, and functions, and of 
government assistance received by contractors, non-profit organizations, and other non-
 government organizations have been developed by the Comptroller General of the United 
States, Government Accountability Office (GAO). These standards are by and large taken 
from generally accepted auditing standards as established by the AICPA. However, 
Government Auditing Standards, also known as the Yellow Book, go beyond the AICPA 
standards. Generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS) are required to be 
followed by auditors and audit organizations when mandated by law, regulation, agreement, 
contract, or policy. These standards include the following classifications: 
• General standards 
• Fieldwork standards for financial audits 
• Reporting standards for financial audits 
• Field work standards for performance audits 
• Reporting standards for performance audits 
 
(The Yellow Book also provides separate general, field work, and reporting standards for 
attestation engagements. However, the following discussion will focus on those standards 
applicable to financial and performance auditing engagements.) 
 
General standards apply to both financial and performance audits and relate to: 
• Independence of the audit organization and its individual auditors. 
• Use of professional judgment in the performance of work and the preparation of related 
reports. 
• Competence of the audit staff. 
• Audit quality control and assurance. 
• External peer reviews. 
 
Financial audits provide an independent assessment as to whether financial statements are 
presented fairly in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles or other 
recognized criteria. Other objectives of financial audits, which provide for different levels of 
assurance and entail various scopes of work, may include: 
  
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1902                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Reporting on internal control, compliance with laws and regulations, and provisions of 
contracts and grant agreements as they relate to financial transactions, systems, and 
processes; 
• Providing special reports for specified elements, accounts, or items of a financial 
statement; 
• Reviewing interim financial information; 
• Issuing letters for underwriters and certain other requesting parties; 
• Reporting on the controls over the processing of transactions by service organizations; 
and 
• Auditing compliance with regulations relating to federal award expenditures and other 
governmental financial assistance in conjunction with or as a by-product of a financial 
statement audit. 
 
Performance audits provide assurance or conclusions on certain audit objectives based on 
evaluation against objective criteria, such as specific requirements, measures, or defined 
business practices. Performance audits include engagements related to assessing program 
economy, efficiency, and effectiveness; inter nal controls; compliance; and prospective 
analyses.  
 
The following are the GAO Standards or portions thereof that relate to the government 
auditor’s responsibilities pertaining to fraud. (The standards included in the following section 
reflect the version of the standards adopted by the GAO in of July, 2007.) 
 
Field Work Standards for Financial Audits — Chapter 4 
GAGAS field work standards for financial audits include the three AICPA generally 
accepted standards of field work and five other standards specific to government financial 
audits covering auditor communication, considering the results of previous audits, detecting 
material misstatements from violations or abuse, developing elements of a finding, and audit 
documentation. 
 
Detecting Material Misstatements Resulting from Violations of Provisions of Contracts or Grant Agreements or from Abuse 
4.10 Auditors should design the audit to provide reasonable assurance of detecting 
misstatements that result from violations of provisions of contracts or grant 
agreements and could have a direct and material effect on the determination of 
financial statement amounts or other financial data significant to the audit objectives. 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1903 
4.11  If specific information comes to the auditors’ attention that provides evidence 
concerning the existence of possible violations of provisions of contracts or grant 
agreements that could have a material indirect effect on the financial statements, the 
auditors should apply audit procedures specifically directed to ascertaining whether 
such violations have occurred. When the auditors conclude that a violation of 
provisions of contracts or grant agreements has or is likely to have occurred, they 
should determine the effect on the financial statements as well as the implications for 
other aspects of the audit. 
4.12  Abuse involves behavior that is deficient or improper when compared with behavior 
that a prudent person would consider reasonable and necessary business practice 
given the facts and circumstances. Abuse also includes misuse of authority or 
position for personal financial interests or those of an immediate or close family 
member or business associate. Abuse does not necessarily involve fraud, violation of 
laws, regulations, or provisions of a contract or grant agreement. 
4.13 If during the course of the audit, auditors become aware of abuse that could be 
quantitatively or qualitatively material to the financial statements, auditors should 
apply audit procedures specifically directed to ascertain the potential effect on the 
financial statements or other financial data significant to the audit objectives. After 
performing additional work, auditors may discover that the abuse represents 
potential fraud or illegal acts. Because the determination of abuse is subjective, 
auditors are not required to provide reasonable assurance of detecting abuse. 
 
Developing Elements of a Finding 
4.14 Audit findings may involve deficiencies in internal control, fraud, illegal acts, 
violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, and abuse. The elements 
needed for a finding depend entirely on the objectives of the audit. Thus, a finding 
or set of findings is complete to the extent that the audit objectives are satisfied. 
When auditors identify deficiencies, auditors should plan and perform procedures to 
develop the elements of the findings that are relevant and necessary to achieve the 
audit objectives. The elements of an audit finding are discussed in paragraphs 4.15 
through 4.18. 
4.15 Criteria: The laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements, standards, measures, 
expected performance, defined business practices, and benchmarks against which 
performance is compared or evaluated. Criteria identify the required or desired state 
or expectation with respect to the program or operation. Criteria provide a context 
for evaluating evidence and understanding the findings. 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1904                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
4.16 Condition: Condition is a situation that exists. The condition is determined and 
documented during the audit. 
4.17 Cause: The cause identifies the reason or explanation for the condition or the factor 
or factors responsible for the difference between the situation that exists (condition) 
and the required or desired state (criteria), which may also serve as a basis for 
recommendations for corrective actions. Common factors include poorly designed 
policies, procedures, or criteria; inconsistent, incomplete, or incorrect 
implementation; or factors beyond the control of program management. Auditors 
may assess whether the evidence provides a reasonable and convincing argument for 
why the stated cause is the key factor or factors contributing to the difference. 
4.18 Effect or potential effect: The effect is a clear, logical link to establish the impact or 
potential impact of the difference between the situation that exists (condition) and 
the required or desired state (criteria). The effect or potential effect identifies the 
outcomes or consequences of the condition. When the audit objectives include 
identifying the actual or potential consequences of a condition that varies (either 
positively or negatively) from the criteria identified in the audit, “effect” is a measure 
of those consequences. Effect or potential effect may be used to demonstrate the 
need for corrective action in response to identified problems or relevant risks. 
 
Consideration of Fraud and Illegal Acts 
4.27  Under both the AICPA standards and GAGAS, auditors should plan and perform 
the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are 
free of material misstatement, whether caused by error or fraud. Recognizing the 
possibility that a material misstatement due to fraud could be present is important 
for achieving this objective. However, absolute assurance is not attainable and thus 
even a properly planned and performed audit may not detect a material misstatement 
resulting from fraud. 
4.28 Under both the AICPA standards and GAGAS, auditors should design the audit to 
provide reasonable assurance of detecting material misstatements resulting from 
illegal acts that could have a direct and material effect on the financial statements. If 
specific information comes to the auditors’ attention that provides evidence 
concerning the existence of possible illegal acts that could have a material indirect 
effect on the financial statements, the auditors should apply audit procedures 
specifically directed to ascertaining whether an illegal act has occurred. When an 
illegal act has or is likely to have occurred, auditors should determine the effect on 
the financial statements as well as the implications for other aspects of the audit. 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1905 
Reporting Standards for Financial Audits — Chapter 5 
GAGAS reporting standards for financial audits include four AICPA generally accepted 
standards of reporting and eight other standards specific to government financial audits. The 
additional GAGAS standards relate to: 
• Reporting auditors’ compliance with GAGAS; 
• Reporting on internal control and on compliance with laws, regulations, and provisions 
of contracts or grant agreements; 
• Reporting deficiencies in internal control, fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements, or abuse; 
• Communicating significant matters in the auditors’ report; 
• Reporting on restatement of previously-issued financial statements; 
• Reporting views of responsible officials; 
• Reporting confidential or sensitive information; and 
• Distributing reports. 
 
Reporting Deficiencies in Internal Control, Fraud, Illegal Acts, Violations of Provisions of Contracts or Grant Agreements, and Abuse 
5.10  For financial audits, including audits of financial statements in which auditors 
provide an opinion or disclaimer, auditors should report, as applicable to the 
objectives of the audit, and based upon the audit work performed, (1) significant 
deficiencies in internal control, identifying those considered to be material 
weaknesses; (2) all instances of fraud and illegal acts unless inconsequential; and (3) 
violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements and abuse that could have a 
material effect on the financial statements. 
 
FRAUD, ILLEGAL ACTS, VIOLATIONS OF PROVISIONS OF CONTRACTS OR GRANT AGREEMENTS, AND ABUSE 
5.15  Under AICPA standards and GAGAS, auditors have responsibilities for detecting 
fraud and illegal acts that have a material effect on the financial statements and 
determining whether those charged with governance are adequately informed about 
fraud and illegal acts. GAGAS include additional reporting standards. When auditors 
conclude, based on sufficient, appropriate evidence, that any of the following either 
has occurred or is likely to have occurred, they should include in their audit report 
the relevant information about 
a. Fraud and illegal acts that have an effect on the financial statements that is more 
than inconsequential, 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1906                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
b. Fraud and illegal acts that have an effect on the financial statements that is more 
than inconsequential, determination of financial statement amounts or other 
financial data significant to the audit, and 
c. Abuse that is material, either quantitatively or qualitatively. 
5.16  When auditors detect violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements or 
abuse that have an effect on the financial statements that is less than material but 
more than inconsequential, they should communicate those findings in writing to 
officials of the audited entity. Determining whether and how to communicate to 
officials of the audited entity fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of contracts 
or grant agreements, or abuse that is inconsequential is a matter of professional 
judgment. Auditors should document such communications. 
5.17 When fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, or 
abuse either have occurred or are likely to have occurred, auditors may consult with 
authorities or legal counsel about whether publicly reporting such information would 
compromise investigative or legal proceedings. Auditors may limit their public 
reporting to matters that would not compromise those proceedings, and for 
example, report only on information that is already a part of the public record. 
 
REPORTING FINDINGS DIRECTLY TO PARTIES OUTSIDE THE AUDITED ENTITY 
5.18  Auditors should report known or likely fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements, or abuse directly to parties outside the audited entity 
in the following two circumstances: 
a. When entity management fails to satisfy legal or regulatory requirements to 
report such information to external parties specified in law or regulation, auditors 
should first communicate the failure to report such information to those charged 
with governance. If the audited entity still does not report this information to the 
specified external parties as soon as practicable after the auditors’ 
communication with those charged with governance, then the auditors should 
report the information directly to the specified external parties. 
b. When entity management fails to take timely and appropriate steps to respond to 
known or likely fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of contracts or grant 
agreements, or abuse that (1) is likely to have a material effect on the financial 
statements and (2) involves funding received directly or indirectly from a 
government agency, auditors should first report management’s failure to take 
timely and appropriate steps to those charged with governance. If the audited 
entity still does not take timely and appropriate steps as soon as practicable after 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1907 
the auditors’ communication with those charged with governance, then the 
auditors should report the entity’s failure to take timely and appropriate steps 
directly to the funding agency. 
5.19  The reporting in paragraph 5.18 is in addition to any legal requirements to report 
such information directly to parties outside the audited entity. Auditors should 
comply with these requirements even if they have resigned or been dismissed from 
the audit prior to its completion. 
5.20  Auditors should obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence, such as confirmation from 
outside parties, to corroborate assertions by management of the audited entity that it 
has reported such findings in accordance with laws, regulations, and funding 
agreements. When auditors are unable to do so, they should report such information 
directly as discussed in paragraph 5.18. 
 
PRESENTING FINDINGS IN THE AUDITORS’ REPORT 
5.21  In presenting findings such as deficiencies in internal control, fraud, illegal acts, 
violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, and abuse, auditors should 
develop the elements of the findings to the extent necessary to achieve the audit 
objectives. Clearly developed audit findings, as discussed in paragraphs 4.14 through 
4.18, assist management or oversight officials of the audited entity in understanding 
the need for taking corrective action. If auditors sufficiently develop the elements of 
a finding, they may provide recommendations for corrective action. 
5.22 Auditors should place their findings in perspective by describing the nature and 
extent of the issues being reported and the extent of the work performed that 
resulted in the finding. To give the reader a basis for judging the prevalence and 
consequences of these findings, auditors should, as applicable, relate the instances 
identified to the population or the number of cases examined and quantify the results 
in terms of dollar value or other measures, as appropriate. If the results cannot be 
projected, auditors should limit their conclusions appropriately. 
 
Field Work Standards for Performance Audits — Chapter 7 
GAGAS has adopted four field work standards for performance audits. The field work 
standards for performance audits relate to planning the audit; supervising staff; obtaining 
sufficient, appropriate evidence; and preparing audit documentation. 
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1908                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Audit Risk 
7.05  Audit risk is the possibility that the auditors’ findings, conclusions, 
recommendations, or assurance may be improper or incomplete, as a result of 
factors such as evidence that is not sufficient and/or appropriate, an inadequate audit 
process, or intentional omissions or misleading information due to misrepresentation 
or fraud. The assessment of audit risk involves both qualitative and quantitative 
considerations. Factors such as the time frames, complexity, or sensitivity of the 
work; size of the program in terms of dollar amounts and number of citizens served; 
adequacy of the audited entity’s systems and processes to detect inconsistencies, 
significant errors, or fraud; and auditors’ access to records, also impact audit risk. 
Audit risk includes the risk that auditors will not detect a mistake, inconsistency, 
significant error, or fraud in the evidence supporting the audit. Audit risk can be 
reduced by taking actions such as increasing the scope of work; adding experts, 
additional reviewers, and other resources to the audit team; changing the 
methodology to obtain additional evidence, higher quality evidence, or alternative 
forms of corroborating evidence; or aligning the findings and conclusions to reflect 
the evidence obtained. 
 
Planning
7.11  Auditors should assess audit risk and significance within the context of the audit 
objectives by gaining an understanding of the following: 
a. the nature and profile of the programs and the needs of potential users of the 
audit report; 
b. internal control as it relates to the specific objectives and scope of the audit; 
c. information systems controls for purposes of assessing audit risk and planning 
the audit within the context of the audit objectives; 
d. legal and regulatory requirements, contract provisions or grant agreements, 
potential fraud, or abuse that are significant within the context of the audit 
objectives; and 
e. the results of previous audits and attestation engagements that directly relate to 
the current audit objectives. 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1909 
LEGAL AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS, PROVISIONS OF CONTRACTS OR GRANT AGREEMENTS, FRAUD, OR ABUSE
7.30  In planning the audit, auditors should assess risks of fraud occurring that is 
significant within the context of the audit objectives. Audit team members should 
discuss among the team fraud risks, including factors such as individuals’ incentives 
or pressures to commit fraud, the opportunity for fraud to occur, and 
rationalizations or attitudes that could allow individuals to commit fraud. Auditors 
should gather and assess information to identify risks of fraud that are significant 
within the scope of the audit objectives or that could affect the findings and 
conclusions. For example, auditors may obtain information through discussion with 
officials of the audited entity or through other means to determine the susceptibility 
of the program to fraud, the status of internal controls the entity has established to 
detect and prevent fraud, or the risk that officials of the audited entity could override 
internal control. An attitude of professional skepticism in assessing these risks assists 
auditors in assessing which factors or risks could significantly affect the audit 
objectives. 
7.31  When auditors identify factors or risks related to fraud that has occurred or is likely 
to have occurred that they believe are significant within the context of the audit 
objectives, they should design procedures to provide reasonable assurance of 
detecting such fraud. Assessing the risk of fraud is an ongoing process throughout 
the audit and relates not only to planning the audit but also to evaluating evidence 
obtained during the audit. 
7.32  When information comes to the auditors’ attention indicating that fraud that is 
significant within the context of the audit objectives may have occurred, auditors 
should extend the audit steps and procedures, as necessary, to (1) determine whether 
fraud has likely occurred and (2) if so, determine its effect on the audit findings. If 
the fraud that may have occurred is not significant within the context of the audit 
objectives, the auditors may conduct additional audit work as a separate engagement, 
or refer the matter to other parties with oversight responsibility or jurisdiction. 
 
Reporting Standards for Performance Audits — Chapter 8 
According to GAGAS, the reporting standards for performance audits relate to the form of 
the report, the report contents, and report issuance and distribution.  
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1910                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Reporting Findings 
8.18  Auditors should report deficiencies in internal control that are significant within the 
context of the objectives of the audit, all instances of fraud, illegal acts unless they 
are inconsequential within the context of the audit objectives, significant violations 
of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, and significant abuse that have 
occurred or are likely to have occurred. 
 
FRAUD, ILLEGAL ACTS, VIOLATIONS OF PROVISIONS OF CONTRACTS OR GRANT AGREEMENTS, AND ABUSE 
8.21  When auditors conclude, based on sufficient, appropriate evidence, that fraud, illegal 
acts, significant violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, or 
significant abuse either has occurred or is likely to have occurred, they should report 
the matter as a finding. 
8.22  When auditors detect violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, or 
abuse that are not significant, they should communicate those findings in writing to 
officials of the audited entity unless the findings are inconsequential within the 
context of the audit objectives, considering both qualitative and quantitative factors. 
Determining whether or how to communicate to officials of the audited entity fraud, 
illegal acts, violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, or abuse that is 
inconsequential is a matter of the auditors’ professional judgment. Auditors should 
document such communications. 
8.23  When fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, or 
abuse either have occurred or are likely to have occurred, auditors may consult with 
authorities or legal counsel about whether publicly reporting such information would 
compromise investigative or legal proceedings. Auditors may limit their public 
reporting to matters that would not compromise those proceedings, and for 
example, report only on information that is already a part of the public record. 
 
REPORTING FINDINGS DIRECTLY TO PARTIES OUTSIDE THE AUDITED ENTITY 
8.24 Auditors should report known or likely fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements, or abuse directly to parties outside the audited entity 
in the following two circumstances. 
a. When entity management fails to satisfy legal or regulatory requirements to 
report such information to external parties specified in law or regulation, auditors 
should first communicate the failure to report such information to those charged 
with governance. If the audited entity still does not report this information to the 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1911 
specified external parties as soon as practicable after the auditors’ 
communication with those charged with governance, then the auditors should 
report the information directly to the specified external parties. 
b. When entity management fails to take timely and appropriate steps to respond to 
known or likely fraud, illegal acts, violations of provisions of contracts or grant 
agreements, or abuse that (1) is significant to the findings and conclusions, and 
(2) involves funding received directly or indirectly from a government agency, 
auditors should first report management’s failure to take timely and appropriate 
steps to those charged with governance. If the audited entity still does not take 
timely and appropriate steps as soon as practicable after the auditors’ 
communication with those charged with governance, then the auditors should 
report the entity’s failure to take timely and appropriate steps directly to the 
funding agency. 
8.25 The reporting in paragraph 8.24 is in addition to any legal requirements to report 
such information directly to parties outside the audited entity. Auditors should 
comply with these requirements even if they have resigned or been dismissed from 
the audit prior to its completion. 
8.26 Auditors should obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence, such as confirmation from 
outside parties, to corroborate assertions by management of the audited entity that it 
has reported such findings in accordance with laws, regulations, and funding 
agreements. When auditors are unable to do so, they should report such information 
directly as discussed in paragraph 8.24. 
 
 
False Claims and Statements 
Intentionally false statements (such as false eligibility declarations for government benefits 
and false claims) may be offenses themselves or could be part of broader schemes involving 
misappropriation, contract or procurement fraud, and corruption. 
 
Federal Laws Prohibiting False Claims 
There are a number of federal statutes related to false claims and statements made to the 
federal government. Among the most useful are: 
• False, Fictitious, or Fraudulent Claims (18, U.S. Code, § 287) 
• False Statements (18, U.S. Code, § 1001) 
• Conspiracy to Defraud the Government (18, U.S. Code, § 286) 
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1912                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The Major Fraud Act (18, U.S. Code, § 1031) 
• Obstruction of Federal Audit (18, U.S. Code, §1516) 
 
These statutes are discussed in greater detail in the Law section. There are also a number of 
civil remedies discussed in the Law section including the Civil False Claims Act, Program 
Fraud Civil Remedies, and the Civil Monetary Penalty Law (CMPL). 
 
Under 18 U.S. Code, § 1001, a false statement ca n be oral, written, sworn or unsworn, signed 
or unsigned. The person must make the false statement “knowingly and willfully,” which is 
satisfied by showing that the person acted deliberately and with knowledge that the 
representation was false. Concealment by failure to fully disclose required information is also 
a violation. The statement need not be made directly to the government; it can be made to a 
third-party as long as it involves a matter within the jurisdiction of any governmental 
department or agency.  
 
The statement must be material, but there is no requirement that the government suffer an 
actual loss. The materiality of the false statement is judged by the capability of the statement 
to influence government action. 
 
Examples of False Claims 
Some examples of false claims and statements include: 
• Falsified contractor qualifications. 
• False certifications or assurances. 
• False records or invoices. 
• Invoices from nonexistent companies. 
• Claims made in duplicate or altered invoices. 
• Billing for fictitious employees. 
• Billing for goods and services not provided. 
• Inflated costs or substitution of cheaper goods. 
 
Other examples of false claims and statements might include false statements about 
employees, fictitious transactions, and falsified documents. 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1913 
False Statements Concerning Employees 
 
EXAMPLE 
A meat packing company in Nebraska pled guilty to Social Security number misuse, 
Social Security benefits fraud, harboring aliens, and filing false employment documents. The 
company was fined $103,000. The settlement came after federal agents raided the plant, 
arresting more than 300 people. Of those arrested, most agreed to deportation without 
hearings. The company admitted to harboring aliens, but it claimed that illegal workers 
were never hired knowingly.  
 
Fictitious Transactions 
 
EXAMPLE 
A former supervisory accountant in the Environmental Protection Agency pled guilty to 
defrauding the EPA of $28,000. She admitted that she entered false information into the 
EPA’s Integrated Financial Management System resulting in her receiving 23 U.S. 
Treasury checks, which she later deposited into her credit union account. After receiving the 
funds, she made entries into the financial reporting system to balance the accounts. 
 
False Documentation 
 
EXAMPLE 
A former real estate salesperson was indicted and arrested for submitting false statements to 
a mortgage corporation in an attempt to qualify a veteran for a VA-guaranteed loan. The 
indictment charged that the individual deposited funds into a credit union account belonging 
to the veteran, then submitted a document to the mortgage corporation reflecting the false 
and fictitious account balance. The loan defaul ted and resulted in a loss to the VA of 
$44,708.  
 
Detection 
The ultimate detection method for false statements is the examination of source documents. 
This auditing approach is called “tracing” or “inside-out,” that is, from the source document 
out to the report or financial statement. 
 
However, the auditor might be alerted to the possibility of false statements if any of the 
following red flags are present: 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1914                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Failure to produce documents in a timely manner. 
• Failure to respond to inquiries in a timely manner. 
• Inadequacies in reporting requirements (for example, untimely reports, incomplete 
reports, and others). 
• Failure to have an adequate information gathering and retrieval system. 
• Altered or missing documents. 
• Photocopied or duplicate documents. 
• Failure to have adequate supporting documentation for reports and summary data. 
 
Failure to Produce Documents in a Timely Manner 
This might be an indication that there are no source documents to substantiate the summary 
data. For example, if costs are submitted for reimbursement, and the costs have not been 
incurred, then there will be no supporting data. 
 
Failure to Respond to Inquiries in a Timely Manner 
This might also be an indication that there is no source documentation. It can also be an 
indication that the information is not readily retrievable. This area should, however, be 
approached with caution. If new and different information is requested, the contractor or 
agency might have to redesign its system in order to retrieve the requested information, 
causing an unanticipated time delay. It is important the requests for proposals include 
adequate specifications for responding to data requests. 
 
Inadequacies in Reporting Requirements 
If the required reports are consistently late, incomplete, or unsatisfactory, this might be an 
indication that the source data is either unavailable, nonexistent, or it cannot be retrieved. 
Source data is derived from source documentation. If the source documentation is false, 
then summarizing the corresponding data becomes an increasingly more difficult problem. 
  
Failure to Have Adequate Information Gathering and Retrieval Systems 
This, along with the red flags concerning the source documents, assists the auditor in 
determining whether or not the scope of the audit should be increased, and if so, in  
what areas. 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1915 
Altered or Missing Documents 
Frauds are often concealed by altering or misplacing supporting documentation. The tenacity 
of the auditor to obtain and examine the source documentation will go a long way in proving 
false statements. 
 
Photocopied or Duplicate Documents 
Transactions should be authorized and recorded based on original documentation, not 
duplicates. Duplicates or photocopied documentation is subject to alteration and 
manipulation. 
 
Failure to Have Adequate Supporting Documentation for Reports and Summary Data 
For supporting documentation to be adequate, it must be sufficient, competent, and relevant. 
In addition, the auditor must apply common sense to the source document. For example, are 
the amounts too high or too low, do they include odd times, places, and/or people? 
 
These are all indicators that there might be false statements. Therefore, these red flags might 
alert the auditor to select a larger sample of source documents for examination.  
 
 
Beneficiary Fraud 
Beneficiary frauds tend to be perpetrated by individuals, without collusion or bribery. The 
motive for this type of fraud is personal gain (or reduction of loss) by the perpetrator. 
 
An example of this type of fraud might include a taxpayer who claims an unearned tax credit 
on his federal income tax return. This person has perpetrated a fraud against the 
government. 
 
Some reported cases typifying these frauds are: 
• Social Security frauds 
• False claims for benefits 
• Supplemental Security Income (SSI) fraud 
• Fraudulent Social Security numbers 
• Improper billing procedures 
• False Medicare claims 
• Kickbacks 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1916                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Schemes 
Social Security Frauds 
 
EXAMPLE 
An Indiana woman was sentenced to 5-1/2 years incarceration, suspended, ordered to 
make restitution of $40,800, and fined $10, 000 for concealing her mother’s death and 
forging and cashing her Social Security benefits checks. An out-of-state relative had told 
police it was difficult to believe that her mother, who was in her seventies, was always 
indisposed when they called. Police found the woman’s remains in a padlocked mobile home 
next to the woman’s house. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Washington D.C. woman was found to have wrongfully converted 34 Social Security 
widow’s benefit checks made payable to her de ceased mother, thereby improperly receiving 
$13,400 from the Social Security Administration. Aggravating circumstances were found 
in that she wrongfully converted an additional 190 Social Security checks and attempted to 
conceal her misconduct by lying to the SSA field representative regarding the whereabouts of 
her deceased mother. The Administrative Law Judge found that the woman was liable 
under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act for having submitted claims she knew were 
false. She therefore had to pay the maximum amount of penalties and assessments, which 
totaled $196,800.  
 
False Claims for Benefits 
 
EXAMPLE 
A New Jersey Council woman admitted to stealing more than $17,000 in Social Security 
disability benefits from 2007 to 2009. According to her attorney, she had been unable to 
work because of surgeries and pain in her back and had received disability benefits of $600 
per month for a total of for six years. However, she had been working at her family’s 
restaurant for a portion of the time that she was claiming disability. She was asked to help 
out there after her mother’s death in 2007 on a temporary basis, which over time became 
on a daily basis. She resigned from her post, repaid the money, and was sentenced to one 
year probation. 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1917 
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) Fraud 
 
EXAMPLE 
A California woman was convicted of murdering three of seven SSI beneficiaries found 
buried in the yard of her boarding house. She had been charged with murdering all seven 
boarders, plus two found elsewhere, for their benefits. The OIG investigators who assisted 
in identifying the victims and the theft of their benefits checks also proved that the woman 
had impersonated one of the victims in attempting to obtain Dalmane, a drug found in 
seven of the bodies. She was sentenced to life imprisonment without possibility of parole.   
 
Fraudulent Social Security Numbers 
 
EXAMPLE 
Nine individuals were sentenced to prison in Illinois for terms ranging from 2-½ to nearly 
5 years for a series of schemes through which they defrauded several insurance companies. 
They obtained approximately $500,000 by submitting false claims under fraudulent 
SSNs in 27 incidents in several cities throughout the United States. The claims were based 
on automobile and slip-and-fall accidents that  were either staged or never occurred. In 
addition, three of the defendants, two of whom were insurance company employees, stole 
blank checks from an insurance company and cashed them on forged endorsements for 
$68,000. The group moved from city to city using false names and SSNs, which made 
them difficult to find or identify.  
 
Improper Billing Procedures 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Utah physician was convicted on 32 federal counts of mail fraud, submitting false 
claims, and aiding and abetting. Although he was excluded from participating in the 
Medicare and state health care programs in 1987 for similar crimes, he continued to 
submit claims under the names and provider numbers of physicians who performed services 
at his clinic. He also upcoded claims and billed for services not rendered. He was sentenced 
to 56 months in prison and 3 years probation upon release, fined $50,000 and assessed a 
special victim’s assessment fee.  
 
Public Sector Fraud Financial Transactions   
1.1918                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
False Medicare Claims 
 
EXAMPLE 
A speech therapist was sentenced in Minnesota to 16 months incarceration for causing the 
submission of false Medicare claims. He contracted with a therapy company to bill 
Medicare and Medicaid for his work in several nursing homes. The company reported that 
he overstated time spent with patients, claiming up to 20 hours a day. He claimed to 
provide speech therapy to a patient several days after the patient’s death, and to nursing 
home residents he had never met. He was also observed using flash cards with a blind 
resident. He was ordered to pay restitut ion of $40,000 and a fine of $25,000.  
 
Kickbacks 
 
EXAMPLE 
The former billing clerk and 14 former patients of a Georgia chiropractor were sentenced in 
a kickback scheme costing Medicare and more than 30 insurance companies millions of 
dollars. All were incarcerated and ordered to pay fines and restitution. The chiropractor 
and his office manager wife had paid employees 10 percent of each week’s revenues, and 
patients 33 percent of whatever  the carriers paid on their claims. Claims were submitted for 
patients and their families regardless of whether they were treated. In one instance, bills 
were submitted for 169 persons supposedly trea ted in one day. More than 40 persons have 
been sentenced thus far, including the chiropractor and his wife, who earlier received lengthy 
jail sentences and were ordered to pay $2.2 million in restitution.  
 
Detection 
As with false statements perpetrated by management, the best detection methods for 
beneficiary fraud will require the examination of source documents or developing computer 
programs to identify fraudulent patterns. 
 
In either a performance audit or a financial audit, the fraud examiner should include some 
steps to determine if there is a high occurrence rate for beneficiary fraud. By selecting a 
random sample of recipient beneficiaries and examining the documentation supporting the 
benefits, the auditor might be able to estimate the potential of beneficiary fraud schemes.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1919 
Government Initiatives to Reduce Fraud 
 
The Department of Defense (DoD) 
This department, long notorious for its waste and abuse, has dramatically increased its fraud 
detection and prevention efforts in recent years. A full complement of auditors and 
investigators are assigned to detect and prevent fraud. Contract officers are trained to 
recognize and required to promptly report any possibly fraudulent situations. Major 
government contractors are assigned a DoD auditor who works on-site, increasing the 
chances of possible procurement fraud being reported. The measures taken to combat fraud 
in this agency have proven quite effective, with increased prosecution and recovery. 
 
Within the DoD, several investigative agencies exist:  
• Defense Criminal Investigative Service 
• Air Force Office of Special Investigations  
• Army Criminal Investigation Command 
• Naval Criminal Investigative Services 
 
In addition to their other investigative duties, each of these agencies pursues fraud cases 
involving military personnel, civilian employees, and contractors. 
 
Voluntary Disclosure 
The Voluntary Disclosure Program was begun by DoD in 1986 and allows contractors to 
inform DoD of irregularities. While the program does not state that voluntary disclosure will 
exempt contractors from prosecution or suspension, it does note that voluntary disclosure 
and full cooperation “are strong indications of an attitude of contractor integrity even in the 
wake of disclosures of potential criminal liability.” 
 
Certain criteria exist for contractors to claim they made a voluntary disclosure. While 
voluntary disclosure of wrongdoing may not exempt a corporation from prosecution, it 
certainly is a contributing factor in the decision of whether to prosecute. The criteria include 
that:  
• The admission must come from the corporation, not an individual employee.  
• Any disclosure precipitated by the knowledge that news of the fraud may soon leak out 
and cause a government investigation would not allow the contractor to claim voluntary 
disclosure.  
• After the disclosure has been made, the corporation must take immediate steps to 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1920                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
correct the damage done the government and discipline the offending parties.  
• Full cooperation with the government investigation is essential. 
 
Defense Contract Audit Agency (DCAA) 
The DCAA is essentially an audit agency that reviews procurement contracts. It has the 
authority to subpoena contractors’ records if fraud is suspected. Government suppliers with 
large contracts usually are assigned their own DCAA auditor. The Defense Contract Audit 
Manual explains fraud reporting procedures for DCAA auditors. Reports of fraud are passed 
to DCAA Counsel and the Assistant Director and, from there, to the appropriate DoD or 
federal investigative branch. DCAA auditors are trained to look for: 
• Poor internal controls 
• Bad financial situations 
• Inadequate accounting records 
• Poor timekeeping system 
• A mix of commercial, fixed-price, and cost-type contracts 
• A background of fraud 
• Management dominated by one or a few individuals 
• Individuals with lavish lifestyles beyond their incomes 
• No or few internal and external audits 
 
Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) 
Larger go vernment contractors have staff from this agency stationed in their facilities. Their 
purpose there is to serve as contract administrators and inspection personnel. If a DLA 
employee working in this capacity suspects contract or procurement fraud, a report is made 
to DoD legal personnel. Fraud cases are investigated by the Defense Logistics Agency 
Criminal Investigations Activity (DCIA). 
 
The Department of Justice 
The United States Department of Justice (DOJ) is the federal government’s executive 
department that is responsible for enforcing the law and administrating justice. The DOJ is 
headed by the United States Attorney General. United States Attorneys, which are under the 
direction of the Attorney General, serve as the nation’s litigators. They conduct most of the 
trial work in which the United States is a party, including the prosecution of fraud cases. 
They also indict individuals, negotiate settlements, and recover damages. 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1921 
The DOJ and the federal government have increased their efforts to curb fraud and abuse in 
the federal spending. In 2006, for example, the Department of Justice (DOJ) formed the 
National Procurement Fraud Task Force to promote the early detection, prevention, and 
prosecution of procurement fraud. Since its creation, more than 300 procurement fraud 
cases have resulted in criminal convictions and the recovery of hundreds of millions of 
dollars in civil settlements and judgments. Also, President Obama recently clarified his 
position on procurement fraud by ordering an overhaul of the federal contracting system, 
vowing to “strengthen oversight to maximize transparency and accountability.” 
Furthermore, according to a report issued by the Office of the Attorney General (“National 
Priorities for the Investigation and Prosecution of White Collar Crime”), procurement fraud 
has been a primary area of investigative efforts by the DOJ since 1980. 
 
Such efforts are necessary because the federal government spends trillions of dollars each 
year on a wide variety of programs (e.g., national defense and homeland security, Social 
Security, Medicare and Medicaid, anti-poverty programs, interest on the national debt, 
education, veterans’ spending, unemployment  benefits, farm subsidies, etc.), and such 
expenditures create numerous opportunities for corrupt players to commit procurement 
fraud against the government. According to the Government Accountability Office (GAO), 
losses from fraud, misuse, and other types of improper payments are about $100 billion a 
year. 
 
Moreover, federal expenditures are increasing. During fiscal year (FY) 2009, the federal 
government spent about $3.52 trillion, up 18 percent from FY 2008, and the federal 
government is projected to spend $3.6 trillion in FY 2010. Thus, the threat of government 
fraud schemes is also increasing, and, as a result, there is a growing need to detect, prevent, 
and prosecute this type of fraud. 
 
The government’s message is clear: offenders will be prosecuted and punished to the full 
extent of the law.  
 
Divisions 
The DOJ is comprised of several divisions, including the Criminal Division and the Civil 
Division.  
 
The Criminal Division, which is headed by an Assistant Attorney General, is responsible for 
enforcing federal criminal laws.  
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1922                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Within the Justice Department’s Criminal Division, two offices are primarily occupied with 
white-collar crime: the Public Integrity Secti on and the Fraud Section. The Public Integrity 
Section reviews anti-fraud programs involving white-collar crimes by public officials. The 
Fraud Section’s duties include: 
• Investigating and prosecuting complex, sensitive, or multi-district cases involving major 
white-collar crimes either developed by the section or as requested by U.S. Attorney’s 
offices. 
• Providing training to federal, state, and local investigators and prosecutors. 
• Developing and implementing national white-collar crime enforcement policies. 
 
The Civil Division of the DOJ represents the federal government in civil cases. According to 
its website, the Civil Division’s “litigation reflects the diversity of government activities, 
involving, for example, the defense of challenges to Presidential actions; national security 
issues; benefit programs; energy policies; commercial issues such as contract disputes, 
banking insurance, patents, fraud, and debt collection; all manner of accident and liability 
claims; enforcement of immigration laws; and civil and criminal violations of consumer 
protection laws.” 
 
The Department of Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General  
The Department of Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General (OIG) 
investigates federal Medicaid fraud cases, it oversees state Medicaid Fraud Control Units, it 
can sanction fraudulent providers by imposing exclusions and civil monetary penalties, and it 
refers its investigative findings to the DOJ. 
 
Healthcare Fraud and Abuse Control Program  
The Healthcare Fraud and Abuse Control Program (HCFAC), which is jointly directed by 
the DOJ and the OIG, oversees state Medicaid  agencies and provides ongoing forums and 
training for state officials on fraud control. 
 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services  
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is a federal agency wi thin the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, it provides each state with technical assistance, 
guidance, and oversight for Medicare/Medicaid fraud prevention and detection efforts, it 
oversees each state’s fraud and abuse efforts, it keeps the Medicaid Alliance for Program 
Safeguards, which provides assistance against fraud and abuse, in working order, and it 
provides a national forum for Medicaid fraud and abuse issues. 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1923 
Federal Investigative Agencies 
In the United States, several federal agencies have investigative jurisdiction over white-collar 
crime cases. Some of the primary investigative agencies are discussed below.  
 
The Federal Bureau of Investigation 
As the principal investigative arm of the DOJ, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
investigates federal fraud cases, and it refers its investigative findings to the United States 
Attorney’s Office.  
 
The Inspectors General 
In the United States, many agencies use Inspectors General (IGs) to conduct investigations 
of misconduct, waste, fraud, theft, and certain types of criminal activity related to the 
agency’s operations.  
 
The Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigative Division 
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Criminal Investigative Division investigates potential 
criminal violations of the Internal Revenue Code and related financial crimes. 
 
 
Prosecution: The Government Employee’s Role 
The government employee will frequently work with investigators from the appropriate 
government agency. Some of the investigators will be specialists, while others handle a great 
variety of cases. In addition, some investigators are assigned to civil cases, while others will 
specialize in criminal activity. 
 
Common Problems of Investigators 
Regardless of the professional variations, many problems are common among these 
investigators. Several examples are set forth below. 
 
Lack of Familiarity with Terminology 
Many investigators assigned to fraud and white-collar crime cases lack a business 
background. This is both a strength and weakness. It is a strength in that they will normally 
ask the same questions and be confused on the same issues as a jury of laymen. It is a 
weakness in that many investigators are confused over accounting concepts, and the auditor 
must explain these concepts in nontechnical language.  
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1924                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Wide Variety of Case Assignments 
The typical investigator for a government agency must investigate a wide variety of cases, 
and therefore might not be intimately familiar with your type of case.  
 
Case Loads 
Like auditors, most government investigators have more cases than they can handle. They 
therefore look for the most egregious violations, or the ones in which proof is easily at hand. 
For that reason, investigators tend to place more reliance on witnesses than on documents.  
 
Reluctance of Government Prosecutors 
An investigator will not investigate cases that prosecutors will not accept. Although not 
prosecutors themselves, investigators tend to develop a “sixth sense” for what will be 
prosecuted and what will not. This issue is addressed below. 
  
Key Issues Facing Investigators  
Investigators are looking to maximize the cost-benefit relationship of their resources. In 
general, they believe that auditors are too ready to place undue reliance on documentation, 
and do not understand the concept of “jury appeal,” which is detailed in the next section.  
 
The typical investigator will ask: 
• What is the evidence? Is it clear and convincing? 
• Who are the witnesses? Are they credible? 
• What is the amount of the loss? Can it be proven? 
• What is the intent of the perpetrator? Can it be demonstrated that there was malice 
aforethought? 
• How difficult is the case to investigate? Is it necessary to review reams of documents 
looking for evidence? 
 
Overcoming the Reluctance to Investigate 
The auditor can best overcome reluctance of the investigator to work a case by using good 
salesmanship. In this regard, the following suggestions are helpful: 
• Present your case in person, not over the telephone. 
• Spend a little time establishing a relationship with the investigator if you don’t know him.  
• Summarize your case in one sentence. If you cannot, there is little realistic hope of 
prosecution. 
  
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1925 
• After summarizing the case, fill in the details. Do not overwhelm the investigator with 
minutia. 
• Pledge the resources of your agency in helping provide backup.  
• Follow up periodically with the investigator after the case has been referred, but be 
careful of making a pest of yourself.  
• Offer an expert witness if necessary. Remember, though, if you testify in a criminal case, 
you might be excluded from sitting in on your own case due to rules concerning 
witnesses.  
 
 
Interviewing Government Officials 
More and more frequently, high government officials find themselves the subjects of 
investigations into allegedly fraudulent activities. In today’s climate of complaints and 
accusations, a high official may be questioned intensely on subjects ranging from 
misallocating parking spaces or personal use of frequent traveler miles on the trivial end to 
bribery and conflict of interest on the serious side.  
 
Regardless of the seriousness of the allegations, the accusation will trigger an all-out 
investigation/audit into the matter. This is true whether the source of the allegation is a 
reliable one or an anonymous tipster. The issue is not the lack of discretion in deciding what 
“cases” to investigate, but how to conduct interviews of senior officials. 
 
Assigning the Interview 
People assigned to interview high officials will find that there are both similarities and 
differences with “normal” interviews. 
 
The first rule is to ensure that the interviewer is not subordinate to the subject of the 
interview. This is no problem for outside entities such as an independent counsel or even an 
inspector general, but where auditors or investigators need to interview someone far up in 
their own chain of command, problems may arise. 
 
If there is any possibility that the high official could influence the career of the interviewer, 
either presently or in the future, someone else should be chosen. Agencies should be able to 
call on outside entities to conduct such interviews where appropriate. In any event, any hint 
by the official of help (or harm) to the interviewer should be documented and reported. 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1926                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The term “high official” appears to encompass a homogenous group, but, in reality, anyone 
from a naive or brash political appointee to a grizzled and canny veteran civil servant with 
many such interviews under his belt may be encountered. The best method of interviewing 
will therefore depend on a number of factors: 
• Is the interviewee suspected of wrongdoing? 
• Is he likely to be cooperative? (Are there files or previous interviewers who can be 
consulted?) 
• Is he likely to be embarrassed by the results of the inquiry even though not personally 
culpable? 
 
These and other factors will determine whether the interviewer should be humble, 
deferential, apologetic, matter of fact, or aggressive. Obviously, no one mode fits all subjects 
or all situations. However, the interviewer should not be cowed by the subject’s position, 
although feigning humility may be appropriate. 
 
The Warning Dilemma 
A crucial element in interviewing a high official, as with the interview of any public 
employee, is proper regard for the Constitutional rights of the subject. A series of cases in 
the 1960s — such as Murphy v. Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor, 378 U.S. 52 (1964), 
Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493 (1967) and Gardner v. Broderick,  392 U.S. 273 (1968) — are 
instructive. In short, the United States Supreme Court held that a public employee cannot be 
compelled to answer job-related questions concerning his own possible criminal conduct 
under threat of disciplinary action, e.g., removal, without violating his rights under the Self-Incrimination 
Clause of the Fifth Amendment. The choice between job forfeiture and self-incrimination, 
said the Court, is inherently coercive and, in effect, a choice “between the 
rock and the whirlpool.” Put another way, a public employee cannot be put in a position 
wherein he will incriminate himself if he tells the truth, will subject himself to perjury 
prosecution if he lies, or will set himself up for a removal action if he refuses to cooperate. 
Thus, the issue of what warning(s), if any, to give the subject must be addressed. 
   
If the high official is reasonably believed to be merely a third-party witness, no warnings are 
required, and he is obligated to respond to the questions. In fact, most agencies have a 
provision in their policies and procedures manual that mandates cooperation. The following 
is typical: 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1927 
Requirement to Cooperate
 
Employees must furnish testimony, or fully disclose information in their knowledge or 
possession, concerning any matter of official interest, to any federal court, board, panel, 
tribunal, agent, or official authorized to conduct a particular inquiry, investigation, hearing, 
trial or other proceeding, or to act upon such testimony or information, when directed to do 
so by proper authority. In this regard, employees must answer any proper questions, under 
oath or affirmation if required, including furnishing or authorizing the release of 
information related to their financial affairs, which has reasonable relationship to matters of 
official interest. 
 
An agency’s table of offenses and penalties then delineates the punishment for failure  
to cooperate. 
 
However, before these rules can be utilized in a case where the official is suspected of 
wrongdoing, a threshold determination of whether or not the violation is potentially criminal 
(and not whether a prosecutor would in fact accept it), must be made. If the allegation is 
inherently administrative, i.e., noncriminal, in nature, such as a misuse of vehicles or giving 
the appearance of a conflict of interest, the Fifth Amendment does not come into play and 
the official must cooperate in the same fashion as if he were a third-party witness. Instructive 
is the Merit Systems Protection Board’s 1981 decision in Ashford v. Bureau of Prisons, 6 MSPB 389, MSPR 458, 81 FMSR 7044. 
 
Administrative Warnings 
The official should be advised of his obligation to cooperate via the agency’s so-called 
“administrative warning,” which will read similar to the following:   
 
Under [the applicable agency policies and procedures manual] you are required to disclose 
any information in your possession pertaining to the matter under investigation and answer 
any proper questions asked of you. 
 
You may be subject to disciplinary action for your failure or refusal to answer proper 
questions relating to the performance of your duties as an employee. You may also be subject 
to criminal prosecution for any false answer that you give to any such questions. Do you 
understand this? 
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1928                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
It should be noted that there is never a right to lie, even if incorrect warnings or no warnings 
were given. Only silence would be acceptable. 
 
Criminal Investigations 
If, on the other hand, the high government official is the subject of an actual or potential 
criminal investigation, a totally different situation arises. As noted above, a public employee 
cannot be compelled to cooperate or face loss of his job. The first step may well be 
attempting to secure the voluntary  cooperation of the individual with clear and full knowledge 
on his part of the possible consequences. Many agencies have developed their own wording, 
but the “Beckwith” or “Civiletti” warning is often used: 
 
You have the right to remain silent if your answers may tend to incriminate you. 
 
Anything you say may be used as evidence both in an administrative proceeding or any 
future criminal procee ding involving you. 
 
If you refuse to answer the questions posed to you on the grounds that the answers may 
incriminate you, you cannot be discharged solely for remaining silent. However, your silence 
can be considered in an administrative proceeding for its evidentiary value that is warranted 
by the facts surrounding your case. 
 
This warning clearly discloses its voluntary nature and the possible adverse consequences of 
cooperation. But in reality, adverse consequences for failing to cooperate under these 
circumstances are negligible. 
 
Declination of Prosecution 
If the interviewee declines to cooperate voluntarily, the interviewer must make an election. If 
he absolutely needs the statement of the official to ascertain what occurred, he must forego 
any use of the statement (or of any evidence derived from the statement) in a subsequent 
criminal prosecution. In fact, the interviewer must secure a declination of prosecution from a 
prosecutor and thus eliminate the Fifth Amendment problem. (The United States courts and 
most state courts only confer immunity to an official who must cooperate pursuant to an 
agency’s regulations, although at least one state’s supreme court has mandated transactional 
immunity.) In any event, a heavy burden is imposed on the government to show that its 
subsequent criminal case was not tainted by the compelled statement, and a decision to 
compel an interview will ordinarily preclude the option of criminal prosecution. 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1929 
To ensure that the interviewee has been advised of his obligation to cooperate in a declined 
criminal case, the “Kalkines” warning must be given immediately following the above-
 mentioned administrative warning:  
 
You are further advised that the answers you give to questions pertaining to the matter 
presently under investigation or any information or evidence that is gained by reason of your 
answers, cannot and will not be used against you in any subsequent criminal proceedings, 
except that you may be subject to criminal prosecution for any false answer that you give to 
any questions. Do you understand this? 
 
Failure to comply with this elaborate and complex array of warning requirements can, and 
unfortunately often does, ruin otherwise well-run investigations of senior officials. Two 
additional cases worth reading are Kalkines v. United States, 473 F.2d 1391 (CtCl, 1973) and 
Weston v. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 724 F.2d 943 (CAFC, 1983). A final key 
point to remember is that a failure to give a proper warning by any interviewer, with or 
without official authority to bind the government, will in fact do so. 
 
Legal Counsel 
The higher the official to be interviewed, the more likely he is to be cognizant of his right to 
the presence of counsel and his ability to afford one. High officials are also frequently 
shocked by the fact that they may not be entitled to representation. In fact, government 
employees are more often than not in a position where no right to counsel in an interview 
exists. Simply put, if the official is being interviewed as a witness only (and not as a suspect) 
or if the matter is strictly administrative, or if, although criminal in nature, a decision has 
been made not to prosecute, there is simply no right to the presence of an attorney (or any 
other personal representative).  
 
Miranda warnings, of course, are limited to those situations where the interviewee is “in 
custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom of action in any significant way,” i.e., is in jail, 
under arrest, or in a situation that has all the trappings of a formal arrest. Such situations will 
rarely arise. See Beckwith v. United States, 425 U.S. 341 (1976); Howard v. Office of Personnel 
Management, 86 FMSR 5342 (1986); Ashford v. Bureau of Prisons, supra. 
 
Only where criminal liability is a possibility and the interview is thus voluntary in nature will 
the official be able to insist on the presence of a lawyer as a condition of his cooperation. It 
is important to remember, however, that even though an official may not have the right to 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1930                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
counsel, the decision as to whether or not to allow it is a tactical one and, in a particular case, 
may be the quickest and most efficient means to secure the desired information. 
 
Obstructing the Investigation 
An official who declines to be interviewed or to answer certain questions acts at his own 
peril if under orders from his own superior or on the advice of counsel. In fact, a superior 
who tells his employees of whatever rank that they do not have to cooperate with 
investigations commits actionable misconduct. Often overlooked is the ability of high 
officials to influence underlings to be less than forthcoming or to “misplace” key 
documents.  
 
When appropriate, the high official should be reminded of all public employees’ obligation 
to assist in the fact-finding process. Interviewers should make no assumption in advance of 
any high official’s integrity or lack thereof. Finally, the high official who offers the “I was 
conducting my own investigation” story usually gets no further than did the “Abscam” 
defendants. 
 
Rules of Procedure 
Those who interview high officials must avoid extremes of procedure and should, as a 
general rule, neither act overly belligerent nor kowtow to them. Basic rules of procedure in 
the areas of warnings and representation apply to these people as much as to the general 
population of public employees. What is different is the high official’s ability to influence 
others and their particular susceptibility to embarrassing publicity, and a good interviewer 
will turn these traits to his own advantage in his quest for a truthful recitation of what did in 
fact occur. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2001 
CONTRACT AND PROCUREMENT FRAUD 
 
The detection and proof of fraud in contract and procurement areas require expertise in the 
law of contracts, in company or agency policies and rules, and about industry standards  
and practices. 
 
 
Elements of a Contract 
A contract is a mutual agreement, oral or written, between two or more parties that must 
contain the following elements: 
• Competent parties 
• Lawful subject matter or objective 
• Legal consideration(s) 
• Mutual promises 
• Mutual obligations 
 
To be successful in detecting and proving fraud, the fraud examiner must establish objective 
criteria to evaluate the contract. The fraud examiner must have an understanding of proper 
contracting procedures at the presolicitation, solicitation and negotiation, and performance 
and administration phases. 
 
 
Phases of a Contract 
 
Presolicitation Phase 
The activities typically involved during presolicitation are: 
• Need recognition 
• Notice of intent to contract 
• Development of specifications 
• Award criteria 
 
The fraud examiner should look for variations from standard or accepted procedures and 
the absence of proper documentation. 
 
  
Contract and Procurement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.2002                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The most prominent schemes involved at this phase of contracting or procurement are: 
• Determining needs 
• Bid specifications 
 
Determining Needs 
The typical fraud in the need recognition phase of the contract negotiation is collusion 
between the buyer and contractor, where the buyer’s employee receives a gratuity or 
kickback for recognizing a need for a particular product or service. 
 
Bid Specifications 
Bid specifications and statements of work detailing the types and amounts of goods and 
services to be provided are prepared to assist in the selection process. They are intended to 
provide both potential bidders and the selecting officials with a firm basis for making and 
accepting bids. 
 
A well-written contract will contain specifications, standards, and statements of work that 
clearly detail the rights and entitlements of the contractor. Carelessly written specifications, 
standards, and statements of work make it easier for a contractor to claim at a later time that 
he is entitled to more money than the buyer intended to pay. 
 
Sometimes, the buyer’s personnel and the contractor deliberately collude to write vague 
specifications. At other times, there is an agreement to amend the contract to increase the 
price immediately after the award. One contractor actually developed a “cost enhancement 
plan,” which identified all the changes he would make in order to double the cost of the 
contract, before it was even signed. 
 
POORLY WRITTEN SPECIFICATIONS 
In some instances, the fraud is committed solely by the contractor based on poorly written 
specifications. In the instance of poorly written specifications, it is easy for the contractor to 
deliver a product or service that is priced higher than what was ordered. 
 
VAGUE SPECIFICATIONS 
In other instances, vague specifications are deliberately written by the buyer in collusion with 
the contractor, so that more money can be claimed later. 
 
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2003 
AGREEMENT TO AMEND CONTRACTS 
In situations where there is collusion between the buyer and supplier, there is sometimes an 
agreement to award the contract based on skimpy specifications, and then increase the price 
later once the contract has been awarded through amendments to the contract. 
 
DETECTION - BID SPECIFICATIONS  
The following is a list of potential red flags for frauds involving specifications: 
• Providing the contractor with information or advice on a preferential basis. 
• Using statements of work, specification, or sole source justifications developed by, or in 
consultation with, a contractor who will be permitted to bid. 
• Permitting consultants who assisted in the preparation of the statements of work, 
specifications, or design to perform on the contract as subcontractors or consultants. 
• Splitting costs into separate categories to avoid review. 
• Writing specifications not consistent with past similar procurement. 
 
Solicitation and Negotiation Phase 
Fraud schemes involved during this phase typically involve collusion between the buyer and 
contractor and contractors of competing companies in the bidding process. Schemes in this 
phase also involve defective pricing.  
 
Bid Submission Schemes 
Bid submission schemes can take on many forms. They can involve anyone in the contracting 
cycle such as a buyer or contracting official, engineer, technical representative, quality or 
product assurance representative, or subcontractor liaison employee — anyone who can 
influence the awarding of a contract. 
 
Examples of bid submission schemes are: 
• Premature opening of bids 
• Altering bids 
• Unjustifiable extension of bid opening dates 
• Controlled bid opening  
• Falsifying bid logs and documents 
 
  
Contract and Procurement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.2004                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
DETECTION - BID SUBMISSION SCHEMES
To detect bid submission schemes the fraud examiner should be aware of: 
• Acceptance of late bid 
• Falsification of documents or receipts to get a late bid accepted 
• Change in bid after other bidders prices are known 
• Change in bid dates 
• Receipt of late bids 
• Last bid usually receives the bid 
 
Bid-Rigging Schemes 
Most bid-rigging fraud schemes involve collusion between contractors of competing 
companies during the bidding process. 
 
BID ROTATION 
Collusive bidding occurs when a group of prospective vendors exchange information on 
contract solicitations, taking turns at submitting the low bid. 
 
BID SUPPRESSION 
In this type of scheme, one or more competitors agrees with at least one other competitor to 
refrain from bidding or agrees to withdraw a previously submitted bid so that a contractor’s 
bid will be accepted. Other forms of this activity involve agreements by competitors to 
fabricate bid protests or to coerce suppliers and subcontractors not to deal with 
nonconspirators who submit bids. 
 
A variation of bid suppression occurs when competitors make arrangements to refrain from 
competing in a designated portion of a market. This might be accomplished based on 
customer or geographic area. The result of such a division is that competing firms will not 
bid or will submit only complementary bids (discussed below) when requests for bids are 
issued in the competitor’s unassigned area. 
 
COMPLEMENTARY BIDS 
Complementary bidding, also known as “protective” or “shadow” bidding, occurs when 
competitors submit token bids that are too high to be accepted (or if competitive in price, 
then on special terms that will not be acceptable). Such bids are not intended to secure the 
buyer’s acceptance, but are merely designed to give the appearance of genuine bidding. 
 
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2005 
PHANTOM BIDS 
Several companies have been caught creating dummy companies to submit a variety of bids 
on a single contract. That way, they give the appearance of vigorous competition while 
actually bidding against themselves. 
 
DETECTION - BID RIGGING
To detect these types of fraud, the fraud examiner must be alert for: 
• “Unsuccessful” bidders who later become subcontractors. 
• Wide disparity in bid prices. 
• Same contractors who bid on all projects with rotating low bidders. 
• Other qualified vendors who fail to submit bids. 
• Bid protests from losing, qualified bidders. 
• Splitting up requirements so contractors can each get a “fair share,” and can rotate bids. 
• A rotational pattern to winning bidders. 
• A geographical pattern to winning bidders. 
• Joint venture bids by firms who could have bid individually. 
 
Defective Pricing Schemes 
Defective pricing occurs during the negotiated contracting process when contractors fail to 
disclose accurate cost or pricing data in their price proposals, resulting in an increased 
contract price. 
 
Examples of defective pricing schemes generally involve the submission of inflated labor 
costs and inflated material/parts costs. Other schemes involve: 
• The use of vendors other than the one proposed. 
• Not disclosing documents on vendor discounts. 
• Changing make or buy decisions. 
• Not disclosing residual material inventory. 
• Inflating costs by channeling work under contract through a dummy company. 
• Withholding information on batch purchases. 
 
DETECTION - DEFECTIVE PRICING SCHEMES
To detect defective pricing schemes, the fraud examiner should be alert for the following: 
• Failure to update cost or pricing data even though it is known that past activity showed 
that costs or prices have decreased. 
• Failure to correct known system deficiencies that can lead to defective pricing. 
Contract and Procurement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.2006                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Repeated denial by the contractor of the existence of historical records. 
• Delay in the release of data to the buyer to preclude possible price reductions. 
• Altered supporting data. 
 
Contract Performance and Administration Phase 
Contract performance activities include change orders; timely review of completed portions 
prior to sign-off and release of monies; and assessment of deliverables for compliance with 
the terms of the contract, including quality control. There are two basic schemes perpetrated 
during the performance phase: product substitution and mischarges (accounting, material, 
and labor). 
 
Product Substitution 
In order to increase profits, the contractor might employ a product substitution scheme, 
failing to meet the contract specifications in the areas of either quantity or quality of 
products. Examples of schemes involving product substitutions include: 
• Delivery of inferior/substandard material. 
• Delivery of materials that have not been tested. 
• Falsification of test results. 
• Delivery of used, surplus, or reworked parts. 
• Delivery of counterfeit products. 
• Submission of false certifications (certifications are statements that parts or materials are 
new, domestically manufactured, and meet the contract specifications concerning quality 
and quantity or that the company is minority owned). 
• Delivery of commercial equivalents hardware. 
• Passing off or specially creating samples for inspection. 
• Surreptitious movement of inspection tags to uninspected goods. 
• Substitution of look-alike goods. 
 
DETECTION - PRODUCT SUBSTITUTION SCHEMES
The following is a list of potential red flags for product substitution schemes: 
• High percentage of product returns to vendor for noncompliance with specifications. 
• Product compliance certificate missing. 
• Compliance certificates signed by low-level employee with no quality assurance 
responsibilities. 
• Materials testing done by supplier, using his own personnel and facilities. 
  
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2007 
• Laboratory test reports are identical as to sample descriptions and test results, varying 
only as to date and lot number tested. 
• Highest profit product lines have the highest number of material return authorizations or 
reshipments. 
 
In order to detect these types of frauds, the fraud examiner should consider the following 
audit procedures: 
• Conduct both routine and unannounced inspections and testing. 
• Carefully review the inspection and testing reports. 
• Request assistance from outside technical personnel to conduct after-the-fact tests. 
• Interview personnel and others for indications of noncompliance. 
• Review correspondence and contract files for indications of noncompliance. 
 
Mischarges 
ACCOUNTING MISCHARGES 
Accounting mischarges  are defined as knowingly charging unallowable costs to the buyer, 
concealing or misrepresenting them as allowable costs, or hiding them in accounts (such as 
office supplies) that are not usually audited closely. Another common variation involves 
charging types of costs or independent research and development to other cost categories. 
 
MATERIAL MISCHARGES 
Material mischarges are usually limited to raw materials that can be used on many different 
contract products or diverted for personal use. Numerous cases have been discovered where 
the buyer-owned material, which was used on a similar contract (for example, commercial), 
shows up on the accounting records as being used in the manufacturing process for the 
subject contract (for example, government). 
 
DETECTION - MATERIAL MISCHARGES 
Material mischarges can be detected by exam ining material cost transfers. These might 
include transfers: 
• From government contracts to commercial. 
• Via any type of suspense or holding account. 
• From ongoing jobs to jobs not scheduled for delivery until far into the future. 
• From prior lot work orders to current or future work orders. 
• To inventory write-off accounts. 
• To scrap accounts. 
Contract and Procurement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.2008                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Of materials ordered and charged in excess of contract requirements. 
• Of seemingly unrelated materials charged on routing slips. 
• In which material standards are not updated over periods of time when the contractor 
recognizes improvements in manufacturing technology or product design. 
• In which a significant variance exists between proposed versus negotiated vendor prices. 
 
LABOR MISCHARGES 
Labor costs are perhaps more susceptible to mischarging than are material costs, because 
employee labor can readily be charged to any contract. The only way to ensure that labor 
costs are charged to the correct account is to actually observe the work of each employee (to 
determine the contract on which he is working), then determine from the accounting records 
that the employee’s cost is charged to the proper contract. 
 
There are several schemes involving mischarged labor costs. Some of the more prominent 
ones are: 
• Transfer of labor costs. 
• Time and charges do not agree with contractor billing. 
• Fictitious time cards. 
• Changes made to individual time cards. 
• Time card charges by supervisors. 
 
DETECTION - LABOR MISCHARGES
Labor mischarges can sometimes be detected by examining the following: 
• Distinctive labor-charging patterns on research and development. 
• Significant increases in charging to overhead accounts (for example, idle time, down 
time, and nonapplied time). 
• Reclassification or reorganization of employees from indirect to direct charges. 
• Changes in the labor-charging relationships between certain tasks or types of labor. 
• Decrease in indirect expense pools. 
• Increased labor hours with no corresponding increases in materials used or units 
shipped. 
• Actual hours and dollars consistently at or near budgeted amounts. 
 
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2009 
COMPUTER PROGRAMS 
The computer can have a tremendous impact on fraud examinations. Generally, programs 
can be easily written that will identify suspicious activity without having to manually review a 
voluminous amount of data. This is more conducive to detecting fraud as well as  
being a more efficient use of a fraud examiner’s time. Computer programs can be written to 
identify the following: 
• Vendors with post office box addresses. 
• Vendors with addresses in common with employee addresses. 
• Contractors who were unsuccessful bidders who are now subcontractors. 
• Payments to a particular vendor over a specified period of time. 
• Vendor payments that were initiated or paid outside the normal system (for example, 
hand carried or approved). 
• Employees who are assigned to more than one contract on any given day. 

2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.101




:


financi transact and fraud scheme
the materi in the financi transact section is divid into three princip topic area
first gener account concept ar illustr includ the basic of debit and credit
as well as the content of financi statement second employe defalc scheme ar
detail thi section includ discuss on manag auditor and fraud examin
respons regard financi transact fraud fraudul financi statement scheme
asset misappropri scheme and briberi and corrupt final other fraud scheme
primarili extern fraud rang from secur violat to health care fraud ar cover
and explain
account concept
fraudul act ar usual of a financi natur the fraud examin must therefor
understand the essenti natur of financi transact and how thei affect record
addition the fraud examin should have a grasp of both financi terminolog and
account theori
account basic
account can be defin as the identif accumul measur and
commun of econom data about an enterpris for decis maker and other
interest parti the measur and record of thi data ar accomplish through
keep a balanc of the account equat the account model or account equat
as shown below is the basi for all doubleentri account
asset liabil owner equiti
by definit asset consist of the net resourc own by an entiti exampl of asset
includ cash receiv inventori properti and equip as well as intang item of
valu such as patent licens and trademark to qualifi as an asset an item must 1 be
own by the entiti and 2 provid futur benefit
liabil ar the oblig of an entiti or outsid claim against a compani asset
liabil usual aris from the acquisit of asset or the incurr of oper
expens
account concept financi transact
1102 2011 fraud examin manual
owner equiti repres the invest of a compani owner plu accumul profit
revenu less expens owner equiti is equal to asset minu liabil
thi equat ha been the cornerston of account sinc 1494 when luca pacioli
invent it the balanc of the equat is the kei if a compani borrow from a bank cash
an asset and note payabl a liabil increas to show the receipt of cash and an
oblig ow by the compani sinc both asset and liabil increas by the same
amount the equat stai in balanc
account and the account cycl
the major compon of the account equat ar made up of numer detail
account an account is noth more than a specif account record that provid an
effici wai to categor similar transact all transact ar record in account that
ar categor as asset account liabil account owner equiti account revenu
account and expens account account format occur in a number of wai the simplest
most fundament format is the us of a larg letter t often refer to as a t account
entri to the left side of an account ar debit dr and entri to the right side of an account
ar credit cr debit increas asset and expens account while credit decreas them
convers credit increas liabil owner equiti and revenu account debit decreas
them everi transact record in the account record will have both a debit and a
credit thu the term doubleentri account the account equat in the form of t
account look like the follow
fraud investig often requir an understand of the debitandcredit process for
exampl a fraud examin who is search for a mysteri 5000 disappear of cash
find a debit in the legal expens account and a correspond credit in the cash account for
5000 but cannot find genuin document for the charg the examin can then
reason suspect that a perpetr mai have attempt to conceal the theft by label the
misappropri 5000 as a legal expens
asset liabil owner equiti
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1103
discov conceal effort through a review of account record is on of the easier
method of detect intern fraud usual on need onli to look for weak in the
variou step of the account cycl legitim transact leav an audit trail thei start
with a sourc document such as an invoic a check a receipt or a receiv report these
sourc document becom the basi for journal entri which ar chronolog list of
transact with their debit and credit amount entri ar made in variou account
journal then entri ar post to the appropri gener ledger account the
summar account amount becom the basi for financi statement for a particular
period
illustr below is thi flow of transact inform through the account record
follow by exampl of typic account transact to help in understand how
transact affect the balanc sheet
journal entri
as transact occur thei ar record in a compani book via journal entri each journal
entri serv as a record of a particular transact and form an audit trail that can be
retrac later for an understand of a compani oper journal entri that ar not
trigger by a transact call adjust journal entri ar also made period for item
such as depreci expens and account receiv writeoff
transact occur
purchas order receipt and other
document ar creat
transact is record in journal
journal ar post to individu account
financi statement ar gener with
account balanc
account concept financi transact
1104 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
xyz compani complet the follow transact dure it first year of oper
20xx
account method
there ar two primari method of account cashbasi and accrualbasi cashbasi
account involv record revenu and expens base on when a compani pai or
receiv cash for exampl sale ar record when a compani receiv payment for good
regardless of when the good ar deliv if a custom purchas good on credit the
compani doe not book the sale until the cash is receiv for the sale likewis if a
custom prepai for a sale the compani record the sale revenu immedi rather than
when the good ar pass off to the custom the same hold true with expens thei ar
record when paid without consider to when thei ar incur
accrualbasi account on the other hand requir revenu to be record when thei ar
earn gener when good ar deliv or servic ar render to a custom without
transact analysi account debit credit asset liabil equiti
enterpris establish cash increas cash 192000 192000
owner invest 192000 liabil no effect common stock 192000 192000
equiti increas
cumul balanc 1 9 2000 192000 192000 192000
compani borrow 80000 cash increas cash 80000 80000
on a note payabl liabil increas note payabl 80000 80000
equiti no effect
cumul balanc 2 7 2000 272000 272000 80000 1 9 2000
purchas busi cash decreas equip 70000 70000
equip for 70000 asset increas cash 70000 70000
liab equiti no effect
cumul balanc 3 4 2000 342000 272000 80000 1 9 2000
servic render to client cash increas cash 15000 15000
40000 15000 collect a r increas account receiv 25000 25000
in advanc equiti increas sale revenu 40000 40000
cumul balanc 3 8 2000 382000 312000 80000 2 3 2000
oper expens incur cash decreas oper expens 25000 25000
25000 liabil increas cash 14000 14000
14000 paid in cash equiti decreas account payabl 11000 11000
cumul balanc 4 0 7000 407000 298000 91000 2 0 7000
paid 5000 on note cash decreas note payabl 5000 5000
payabl liabil decreas cash 5000 5000
cumul balanc 4 1 2000 412000 293000 86000 2 0 7000
depreci equip for asset decreas depreci expens 7000 7000
1 yr estim life 10yr equiti decreas accum depreci 7000 7000
70000 1 0 7000
cumul balanc 4 1 9000 419000 286000 86000 2 0 0000
balanc sheet effect
journal entri asset liabil owner equiti
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1105
regard to when cash exchang hand expens ar record in the same period as the
revenu to which thei relat for exampl employe wage ar expens in the period
dure which the employe provid servic which mai not necessarili be the same
period in which thei were paid
under cash account a compani mai decid to postpon pai some expens so thei
ar not record in the current period result in an artifici inflat bottom line
convers accrual account requir expens to be match to revenu therefor it
provid a truer pictur of a compani financi situat as such gener accept
account principl mandat the us of accrualbasi account
financi statement
the result of the account process ar report or financi statement that exemplifi the
financi posit and oper result of an entiti financi statement ar often the
vehicl through which fraud occur
accord to au section 623 special report promulg by the aicpa audit
standard board financi statement includ present of financi data and
accompani note prepar in conform with either gener accept account
principl or some other comprehens basi of account the follow is a list of such
financi statement
balanc sheet
statement of incom or statement of oper
statement of retain earn
statement of cash flow
statement of chang in owner equiti
statement of asset and liabil that doe not includ owner equiti account
statement of revenu and expens
summari of oper
statement of oper by product line
statement of cash receipt and disburs
although not specif note in au section 623 financi statement mai also includ
other financi data present such as
prospect financi inform forecast
account concept financi transact
1106 2011 fraud examin manual
proxi statement
interim financi inform for exampl quarterli financi statement
current valu financi present
person financi statement current or present valu
bankruptci financi statement
registr statement disclosur secur act of 1933
other comprehens base of account accord to au section 623 includ
govern or regulatori agenc account
taxbasi account
cash receipt and disburs or modifi cash receipt and disburs
ani other basi with a definit set of criteria appli to all materi item such as the
pricelevel basi of account
consequ the term financi statement includ almost ani financi data present
prepar in accord with gener accept account principl or anoth
comprehens basi of account throughout thi section the term financi statement
will includ the abov form of report financi data includ the accompani
footnot and manag discuss for most compani howev a full set of financi
statement compris a balanc sheet a statement of incom a statement of owner equiti
or a statement of retain earn and a statement of cash flow therefor fraud
examin should be familiar with the purpos and compon of each of these financi
statement
balanc sheet
the balanc sheet show a snapshot of a compani financi situat at a specif point in
time gener the last dai of the account period the balanc sheet is an expans of
the account equat asset liabil owner equiti that is it list a compani asset
on on side and it liabil and owner equiti on the other side the natur of the
account equat mean that the two side of the statement should balanc henc the
name balanc sheet
the follow balanc sheet deriv from the journal entri in the abov exampl show
the financi posit of xyz compani on the last dai of it first year of oper
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1107
xyz compani
balanc sheet
decemb 31 20xx
asset liabil
current asset current liabil
cash 198000 account payabl 11000
account receiv 25000 total current liabil 11000
total current asset 223000
longterm liabil
fix asset note payabl 75000
equip 70000
total longterm
liabil 75000
less accum depreci 7000 total liabil 86000
total fix asset 63000
owner equiti
common stock 192000
retain earn 8000
total owner equiti 200000
total asset 286000
total liabil and
equiti 286000
as mention asset ar the resourc own by a compani gener asset ar present
on the balanc sheet in order of liquid or how soon thei ar expect to be convert to
cash the first section on the asset side current asset includ all those asset that ar
expect to be convert to cash sold or us up within on year thi categori usual
includ cash account receiv the amount ow to a compani by custom for sale
on credit inventori and prepaid item follow the current asset ar the longterm asset
or those asset that will like not be convert to cash in the near futur such as fix asset
eg land build equip and intang asset eg patent trademark goodwil a
compani fix asset ar present net of accumul depreci an amount that
repres the cumul expens taken for wearandtear on a compani properti
likewis intang asset ar present net of accumul amort an amount that
repres the collect expens taken for declin in valu of the intang properti
liabil ar present in order of matur like current asset current liabil ar those
oblig that ar expect to be paid within on year such as account payabl the
amount ow to vendor by a compani for purchas on credit accru expens eg
tax payabl or salari payabl and the portion of longterm debt that will come due
account concept financi transact
1108 2011 fraud examin manual
within the next year those liabil that ar not due for more than a year ar list under
the head longterm liabil the most common liabil in thi group ar bond note
and mortgag payabl the total balanc of the note payabl is list under longterm
liabil on xyz compani balanc sheet indic that it doe not have to make ani
payment on the note dure the next year howev if a 5000 payment wa requir
dure the next year the compani would have to reclassifi 5000 of the note balanc to the
current liabil section and show the remain 70000 as a longterm liabil thi
adjust would not chang the total amount of the outstand liabil that wa shown all
75000 would still appear on the balanc sheet but it would allow financi statement
user to know that the compani had an oblig to pai 5000 dure the next year rather
than at some unspecifi time in the futur
the owner equiti in a firm gener repres amount from two sourc owner
contribut usual refer to as common or capit stock and paidin capit and
undistribut earn usual refer to as retain earn the balanc in the capit stock
account increas when the owner of a compani invest in it through the purchas of
compani stock the retain earn balanc increas when a compani ha earn and
decreas when a compani ha loss the retain earn account is also decreas when
earn ar distribut to a compani owner in the form of dividend or when a compani
ha loss xyz compani balanc sheet show that the compani owner have
contribut 192000 to the compani and that the compani ha retain 8000 of earn
as of decemb 31 20xx
incom statement
wherea the balanc sheet show a compani financi posit at a specif point in time
the incom statement detail how much profit or loss a compani earn dure a period of
time such as a quarter or a year the account reflect on the incom statement ar
temporari at the end of each fiscal year thei ar reduc to a zero balanc close with the
result net incom or loss ad to or subtract from retain earn on the balanc
sheet
below is the incom statement for xyz compani for it first year of oper base on
the sampl transact abov
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1109
xyz compani
statement of incom
for the year end decemb 31 20 x x
revenu
net sale 40000
less cost of good sold 25000
gross profit 15000
oper expens
depreci 7000
total oper expens 7000
net incom 8000
two basic type of account ar report on the incom statement revenu and expens
revenu repres amount receiv from the sale of good or servic dure the
account period most compani present net sale or net servic revenu as the first line item
on the incom statement the term net mean that the amount shown is the compani
total sale minu ani sale refund return discount or allow
from net sale an expens titl cost of good sold or cost of sale is deduct regardless of
industri thi expens denot the amount a compani spent in past present andor futur
account period to produc the good or servic that were sold dure the current
period for a compani that manufactur good cost of good sold signifi the amount the
compani spent on materi labor and overhead expens to produc the good that were
sold dure the account period for a merchandis resel thi expens is the amount the
compani ha paid to purchas the good that were resold dure the period for a servic
compani the cost of sale is typic the amount of salari paid to the employe who
perform the servic that were sold the differ between net sale and cost of good
sold is call gross profit or gross margin which repres the amount left over from sale to
pai the compani oper expens
oper expens ar those cost that a compani incur to support and sustain it busi
oper gener these expens includ item such as advertis manag
salari offic suppli repair and mainten rent util depreci interest and
account concept financi transact
1110 2011 fraud examin manual
tax accrual account requir that these item be includ on the incom statement in
the period in which thei ar incur regardless of when thei ar paid
after subtract oper expens from gross profit a compani net incom or net earn
for the period is determin if a compani total expens were greater than it total
revenu and the bottom line is neg then it had a net loss for the period commonli a
profit compani will distribut some of it net incom to it owner in the form of
dividend whatev incom is not distribut is transfer to the retain earn account
on the balanc sheet in the case of xyz compani net incom for the year wa 8000 the
compani did not distribut ani of these earn so the total amount 8000 is shown
on the balanc sheet as retain earn if the compani is also profit dure it next
year of oper ani net incom that is not distribut as dividend will be ad to the
8000 balanc in retain earn if expens outpac revenu and xyz compani show
a loss for it second year that loss will be deduct from the 8000 retain earn
balanc at the end of the second year
to summar the incom statement ti to the balanc sheet through the retain earn
account as follow
statement of owner equiti
the statement of owner equiti detail the chang in the total owner equiti amount list
on the balanc sheet becaus it show how the amount on the incom statement flow
through to the balanc sheet it act as the connect link between the two statement the
balanc of the owner equiti at the begin of the year is the start point for the
statement the transact that affect owner equiti ar list next and ad togeth
the result is ad to or subtract from if neg the beginningoftheyear balanc
which provid the endoftheyear balanc for total owner equiti
asset liabil owner equiti
common stock retain earn
dividend net incom
revenu expens
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1111
the statement of owner equiti for xyz compani would appear as follow
xyz compani
statement of owner equiti
for the year end decemb 31 20xx
owner equiti januari 1 20xx
invest by owner dure the year 192000
net incom for the year 8000
increas in owner equiti 200000
owner equiti decemb 31 20xx 200000
xyz compani complet two type of transact that affect the owner equiti dure
20xx the 192000 invest by the compani sharehold and the revenu and expens
that result in the net incom of 8000 had the compani distribut ani monei to the
sharehold in the form of dividend that amount would be list on the statement of
owner equiti as well notic that the 8000 ti directli to the bottom line of the incom
statement and the 200000 owner equiti ti to the total owner equiti amount on the
balanc sheet
some compani present a statement of retain earn rather than a statement of owner
equiti similar to the statement of owner equiti the statement of retain earn start
with the retain earn balanc at the begin of the year all transact affect the
retain earn account ar then list and ad to the begin balanc to arriv at the
end balanc in the retain earn account below is an exampl of the statement of
retain earn for xyz compani
xyz compani
statement of retain earn
for the year end decemb 31 20xx
retain earn januari 1 20xx
net incom for the year 8000
increas in owner equiti 8000
retain earn decemb 31 20xx 8000
account concept financi transact
1112 2011 fraud examin manual
statement of cash flow
the statement of cash flow report a compani sourc and us of cash dure the
account period thi statement is often us by potenti investor and other interest
parti in tandem with the incom statement to determin the true financi perform of
a compani dure the period be report the natur of accrual account allow and
often requir the incom statement to contain mani noncash item and subject
estim that make it difficult to fulli and clearli interpret a compani oper result
howev it is much harder to distort the amount of cold hard cash that wa receiv and
paid dure the year so the statement of cash flow add to the transpar of the financi
statement
the follow is the statement of cash flow for xyz compani
xyz compani
statement of cash flow direct method
for the year end decemb 31 20 x x
cash flow from oper activ
cash receiv from custom 15000
cash paid for merchandis 14000
net cash flow from oper activ 1000
cash flow from invest activ
cash paid for purchas of equip 70000
net cash flow from invest activ 70000
cash flow from financ activ
cash receiv as owner invest 192000
cash receiv from issu note payabl 80000
cash paid on note payabl 5000
net cash flow from financ activ 267000
increas in cash 198000
cash balanc at the begin of the year 0
cash balanc at the end of the year 198000
the statement of cash flow is broken down into three section cash flow from oper
activ cash flow from invest activ and cash flow from financ activ
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1113
cash flow from oper
the cash flow from oper section summar a compani cash receipt and payment
aris from it normal busi oper cash inflow includ in thi categori
commonli consist of payment receiv from custom for sale and cash outflow includ
payment to vendor for merchandis and oper expens and to employe for wage
thi categori can also be summar as those cash transact that ultim affect a
compani oper incom therefor it is often consid the most import of the
three categori of cash flow if a compani continu show larg profit per it incom
statement but cannot gener posit cash flow from oper then question
account practic might be to blame on the other hand net incom that is support by
posit and increas net cash flow from oper is gener consid an indic of
a strong compani
there ar two method of report cash flow from oper in the abov exampl
xyz compani statement of cash flow is present us the direct method thi method
list the sourc of oper cash flow and the us of oper cash flow with the
differ between them be the net cash flow from oper activ
in contrast the indirect method reconcil net incom per the incom statement with net cash
flow from oper activ that is accrualbasi net incom is adjust for noncash
revenu and expens to arriv at net cash flow from oper below is an exampl of
xyz compani cash flow from oper us the indirect method
xyz compani
statement of cash flow indirect method
for the year end decemb 31 20 x x
cash flow from oper activ
net incom per incom statement 8000
add depreci 7000
increas in account payabl 11000 18000
26000
subtract increas in account receiv 25000 25000
net cash flow from oper activ 1000
account concept financi transact
1114 2011 fraud examin manual
note that the net cash flow from oper activ is the same amount in thi case
1000 regardless of the method that is us the indirect method is usual easier to
comput and provid a comparison of a compani oper result under the accrual and
cash method of account as a result most compani choos to us the indirect method
but either method is accept
cash flow from invest activ
cash inflow from invest activ usual aris from the sale of fix asset eg
properti and equip invest eg the stock and bond of other compani or
intang asset eg patent and trademark similarli cash outflow from invest
activ includ ani cash paid for the purchas of fix asset invest or intang
asset
cash flow from financ activ
cash flow from financ activ involv the cash receiv or paid in connect with
issu debt and equiti secur cash inflow in thi categori occur when a compani sell
it own stock issu bond or take out a loan a compani cash outflow from financ
activ includ pai cash dividend to sharehold acquir share of it own stock
call treasuri stock and repai debt
the total cash flow from all three categori ar combin to arriv at the net increas or
decreas in cash for the year thi total is then ad to or subtract from the cash balanc
at the begin of the year to arriv at the cash balanc at the end of the year which ti
back to the amount of cash report on the balanc sheet
user of financi statement
financi statement fraud scheme ar most often perpetr by manag against
potenti user of the statement these user of financi statement includ compani
ownership and manag lend organ investor regul bodi vendor
and custom the product of truth financi statement plai an import role in
the continu success of an organ howev fraudul statement can be us for a
number of reason the most common us is to increas the appar prosper of an
organ in the ey of potenti and current investor for more inform see the
chapter on financi statement fraud
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1115
gener accept account principl gaap
in prepar financi statement manag account and auditor ar charg with
follow measur and report practic known as gener accept account principl
gaap the account practic that compos gaap have develop through the
accumul of authorit account pronounc issu by sever authorit
bodi histor these pronounc includ account research bulletin
account principl board apb opinion financi account standard board
fasb statement and interpret emerg issu task forc abstract and sec
staff account bulletin
in 2009 fasb launch the fasb account standard codificationfasb asc as the
sole sourc of authorit us gaap for nongovernment organ the
codif compil and organ all previou sourc of gaap by topic provid an
effici and easytous structur for research and referenc account standard the
fasb asc effect supersed the precodif gaap hierarchi establish in sa
no 69 and fasb statement no 162
while the us ha it own set of account standard that form gaap the variou
account rule from differ countri ar converg the intern account
standard board iasb is develop a singl set of standard call intern financi
report standard ifr for each account function the iasb is look for the most
appropri principl for how transact should be account for or the most suitabl
method of report the result the iasb ha sought the best sometim adopt a
standard from on countri or anoth other time creat a new standard entir
current more than 120 countri requir or permit the us of ifr with sever more
plan to adopt ifr in the next few year a list of the countri that have adopt the
ifr is avail at wwwiaspluscomcountryuseiashtm
basic underli account principl
basic account principl refer to as gener accept account principl ar the
rule by which a compani financi transact ar record into their appropri account
classif these principl have evolv over time and ar expect to continu
chang in respons to shift in social and econom condit advanc in
technolog and demand by user for more us or product standard the follow is
a list of the basic underli principl on which account should base their practic
account concept financi transact
1116 2011 fraud examin manual
histor cost
although some except exist histor cost is gener the proper basi for the
record of asset expens equiti etc for exampl a piec of oper machineri
should be shown on the balanc sheet at initi acquisit cost and not at current market
valu or an estim replac valu
revenu recognit
in gener revenu is recogn or record when it becom realiz or realiz and
earn these criteria ar usual met when
persuas evid of an arrang exist
deliveri ha occur or servic have been render
the seller price to the buyer is fix or determin and
collect is reason assur
therefor revenu should not be recogn for work that is to be perform in subsequ
account period even though the work mai current be under contract the revenu
should be recogn in the period in which the work is perform
match
the match principl requir that expens be record in the same account period as
the revenu thei help gener estim accrual and alloc ar often need to
meet thi requir when a sale is record the appropri charg for cost of good
sold or other expens directli correspond to the sale should be record in the same
account period
consist
entiti should emploi consist account procedur from period to period variat
or chang in account polici and procedur must be justifi standard us to valu
inventori depreci asset or accru expens should be consist from on account
period to the next
full disclosur
the financi statement of an entiti should includ all inform necessari for the
format of valid decis by the user the statement should not includ too much
inform but ar requir to includ enough inform so that the user is not misl
supplement note to the financi statement ar usual requir to meet these criteria
financi transact account concept
2011 fraud examin manual 1117
object
account record should be design and kept on object rather than subject
evid underli verifi must exist for the inform contain in the statement
for exampl asset ar carri at histor cost and not at an estim current valu
histor cost should be verifi through legitim proof of purchas
separ entiti assumpt
econom activ of an entiti should be kept separ from other person or busi
entiti for exampl person busi transact of an entiti owner or oper
should not be includ in the financi report of the entiti
go concern continu assumpt
there is an assumpt that an entiti will continu as a go concern that is the life of the
entiti will be long enough to fulfil it financi and legal oblig ani evid to the
contrari must be report in the financi statement of the entiti
unit of measur
all financi report ar base on the monetari unit eg the dollar for us entiti thi
assumpt recogn that the monetari unit is an effect mean of commun
financi inform adjust for inflationari trend ar not shown in the financi
statement of the entiti
periodicitytim period assumpt
the life of an entiti is divid into econom time period on which report statement ar
fashion these report period vari but a year is the most common some compani
follow the calendar year while other us a busi year that end near the lowest point of
busi activ in a 12month cycl regardless of where that point fall in the calendar year
departur from gaap modifi convent
as with rule for most thing departur from gaap ar sometim requir the
follow modifi convent give guidanc and should be consid when deviat
from what is gener accept
conservat
when consid an account matter in which there ar two altern that equal
satisfi conceptu and implement principl for a transact an account should
account concept financi transact
1118 2011 fraud examin manual
take a conserv approach and follow the altern that will have the least favor
impact on the net incom of the entiti
industri practic and peculiar
the peculiar and practic of an industri such as bank invest and insur
mai warrant select except to account principl some differ in account
also occur in respons to legal requir such as those entiti subject to regulatori
control
substanc over form
the econom substanc of a transact determin the account treatment which mai
differ from the legal treatment for exampl although a leas contract mai not transfer
properti right if the true substanc of the transact is a sale then the lesse should
record the transact as an acquisit and capit the properti
applic of judgment
an account mai depart from gaap if the result of departur appear reason under
the circumst especi when strict adher to gaap will produc unreason
result and the departur is properli disclos
materi
the amount of an item is materi if it omiss would affect the judgment of a reason
person who is reli on the financi statement the materi threshold doe not mean
that immateri item do not have to be record rather strict adher to gaap is
necessari onli when the item ha a signific impact on the financi statement of an
entiti in addit the aggreg effect of immateri item must also be consid
costbenefit
a departur from gaap is permit if the expect cost of report a transact in
complianc with gaap exce the expect benefit of complianc
2011 fraud examin manual 1201
manag auditor and fraud examin respons
manag auditor and fraud examin all have a respons with respect to the
prevent and detect of fraud thi section of the fraud examin manual describ
the regul and best practic guidanc for manag intern and extern auditor
and fraud examin in carri out their respect antifraud respons
legisl and best practic
an organ board of director and senior manag gener set the code of
conduct for the compani thi code of conduct is often refer to as the compani ethic
and is the standard by which all employe ar expect to conduct themselv if the
compani ethic is on of high integr it is anticip that the employe will tend to be
more honest if on the other hand the ethic is on of corrupt the employe will view it
as a licens to be corrupt ethic leadership ha to come from insid and from the top
ethic consider have got to be on senior manag agenda and thei have to set
the tone by exampl not by send memo sai j gregori dee a professor at harvard
busi school
an unimpeach compani ethic doe not in and of itself ensur that financi statement
fraud will not occur other measur ar requir for manag to discharg it
respons to prevent and detect fraudul financi report
the treadwai commiss
the nation commiss on fraudul financi report more commonli refer to
as the treadwai commiss wa form in the unit state in 1985 to better defin the
respons of the auditor in detect and prevent fraud the profession audit
organ the american institut of certifi public account the institut of
intern auditor and the american account associ among other establish
the treadwai commiss to underwrit a studi and make recommend in an effort
to curb fraudul financi report the treadwai commiss offer four
recommend that when combin with other measur might help reduc the
probabl of fraudul financi report these recommend ar address to the
board of director audit committe
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1202 2011 fraud examin manual
mandatori independ audit committe
the board of director overse the conduct of manag the treadwai commiss
recommend that each board of director have an audit committe compos of outsid
director
written charter
the treadwai commiss also suggest that compani develop a written charter set
forth the duti and respons of the audit committe the board of director should
period review modifi and approv thi written charter
resourc and author
accord to the treadwai commiss the exist of an audit committe and a written
charter is not enough the committe also must have adequ resourc and author to
carri out it respons
inform vigil and effect audit committe
the audit committe should be compos of member who ar inform vigil and
effect
the coso report
in addit in 1987 the treadwai commiss recommend that manag of publicli
held compani includ with it manag report an acknowledg of respons
for intern control and an assess of it effect in meet those control the
treadwai commiss form the committe on sponsor organ coso to
actual it recommend in 1992 coso issu intern controlintegr framework
follow by an addendum which provid the follow definit
intern control is a process design to provid reason assur regard the
achiev of object in the follow categori
a reliabl of financi report
b effect and effici of oper and
c complianc with applic law and regul
coso also identifi for manag five interrel compon of intern control
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1203
the control environ set the tone of an organ influenc the control
conscious of the organ and provid a foundat for all other control
compon
risk assess is an entiti identif and assess of risk relev to achiev
control object
control activ ar an entiti control polici and procedur
inform and commun is the exchang of inform in a wai that allow
employe to carri out their respons
monitor is the process that assess the control environ over time
these compon combin form an integr system of control
coso guidanc for smaller public compani
in 2006 coso issu a report titl intern control over financi report guidanc for
smaller public compani which provid guidanc for small compani on implement cost
effect intern control over financi report as requir under sarbanesoxlei section
404 while acknowledg that smaller public compani often face uniqu and
disproportion challeng in appli sound intern control practic coso note that
the benefit of good intern control outweigh the cost and add signific valu to an
organ the guidanc is split between three volum and contain 20 principl relat
to the intern controlintegr framework as well as 75 attribut relat to these principl
the report outlin sever method small compani can util to establish and enhanc
costeffect intern control such as widen and direct control from the top
emphas effect oversight on the part of the board of director compens for
limit segreg of duti leverag the abil of commerci avail inform
technolog and us manag monitor activ to offset shortcom in other
control area the report also discuss wai to achiev further effici in design
implement and assess control includ focus on risk adjust document
polici to fit the need of the organ and view intern control as an integr
process
more inform on the coso report can be found at wwwcosoorg
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1204 2011 fraud examin manual
the sarbanesoxlei act
on juli 30 2002 presid bush sign the sarbanesoxlei act thi law significantli
chang the law of corpor govern and the rule and regul under which
account firm and corpor must oper addition certain provis
consider increas the respons of manag and the account profess
with regard to fraud sinc the enact of sarbanesoxlei the secur and exchang
commiss sec ha issu numer sec releas that support and expand the act
requir below is a summari of some of the most import provis of sarban
oxlei and the correspond sec rule that re late to fraud detect and prevent more
inform about sarbanesoxlei can be found in the chapter entitl the law relat to
fraud in the law section of the fraud examin manual
the doddfrank wall street reform and consum protect act sign in juli 2010
allow small public compani those with less than 75 million in market cap a perman
exempt from section 404b of the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002
public compani account oversight board
titl i of sarbanesoxlei establish the public compani account oversight board
pcaob whose purpos is
to overse the audit of public compani that ar subject to the secur law and
relat matter in order to protect the int rest of investor and further the public
interest in the prepar of inform accur and independ audit report for
compani the secur of which ar sold to and held by and for public investor
section 101
in short the board is charg with overse public compani audit set audit
standard and investig act of noncompli by auditor or audit firm the board is
appoint and overseen by the secur and exchang commiss it is made up of five
person two who ar or have been certifi public account cpa and three who have
never been cpa the act list the board duti which includ
regist public account firm that audit publicli trade compani
establish or adopt audit qualiti control ethic independ and other
standard relat to audit of publicli trade compani
inspect regist public account firm
investig regist public account firm and their employe conduct
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1205
disciplinari hear and impos sanction where justifi
perform such other duti as ar necessari to promot high profession standard
among regist account firm to improv the qualiti of audit servic offer by
those firm and to protect investor
enforc complianc with the sarbanesoxlei act the rule of the board profession
standard and secur law relat to public compani audit
registr with the board
public account firm must regist with the pcaob in order to legal prepar or issu an
audit report on a publicli trade compani in order to becom regist account firm
must disclos among other thing the name of all public compani thei audit in the
preced year the name of all public compani thei expect to audit in the current year
and the annual fee thei receiv from each of their public audit client for audit
account and nonaudit servic
audit qualiti control and independ standard and rule
section 103 of the act requir the board to establish standard for audit qualiti control
ethic independ and other issu relat to audit of publicli trade compani
although the act place the respons on the board to establish audit standard it also
set forth certain rule that the board is requir to includ in those audit standard
these rule includ the follow
audit work paper must be maintain for at least seven year
audit firm must includ a concur or second partner review and approv of audit
report and concur approv in the issuanc of the audit report by a qualifi person
other than the person in charg of the audit
all audit report must describ the scope of test of the compani intern control
structur and must present the auditor find from the test includ an
evalu of whether the intern control structur is accept a descript of
materi weak in intern control and ani materi noncompli with control
inspect of regist public account firm
the act also author the board to conduct regular inspect of public account firm
to assess their degre of complianc with law rule and profession standard regard
audit inspect ar to be conduct onc a year for firm that regularli audit more than
100 public compani and at least onc everi three year for firm that regularli audit
between 1 and 100 public compani
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1206 2011 fraud examin manual
investig and disciplinari proceed
the board ha the author to investig regist public account firm or their
employe for potenti violat of the sarbanesoxlei act profession standard ani
rule establish by the board or ani secur law relat to the prepar and issuanc
of audit report dure an investig the board ha the power to compel testimoni and
document product
the board also ha the power to issu sanction for violat or for noncooper with
an investig sanction can includ temporari or perman suspens of a firm
registr with the board which would mean the firm could no longer legal audit
publicli trade compani temporari or perman suspens of a person right to be
associ with a regist public account firm prohibit from audit public
compani and civil monetari penalti of up to 750000 for an individu and up to
15000000 for a firm
offic and director
the act includ sever respons for the offic and director of public compani
certif oblig
the chief execut offic and chief financi offic of public compani must
person certifi annual and quarterli sec file
section 302 of the act requir that the ceo and cfo person certifi the follow
thei have person review the report
base on their knowledg the report doe not contain ani materi misstat that
would render the report mislead
base on their knowledg the financi statement and inform in the report fairli
present in all materi respect the financi condit and result of oper of the
compani
thei ar respons for establish and maintain intern control and have
design such control to ensur that materi inform relat to the compani and
it consolid subsidiari is made known to them thei have evalu the
effect of intern control within 90 dai prior to the report and thei have
present their conclus about the effect of those control in the report
thei have disclos to their auditor and the audit committe ani signific defici
in the control that could advers affect the compani abil to record process
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1207
summar and report financi data and thei have identifi for their auditor ani
materi weak in intern control further thei have disclos to their auditor
ani fraud whether materi or not that involv manag or other employe who
have a signific role in the compani intern control
thei have indic in their report whether there have been signific chang in the
compani intern control sinc the file of the last report includ ani correct
action with respect to previous identifi signific defici and materi
weak
intern control
under section 404 of the act and sec releas no 338238 and 3447986 manag
respons pertain to the compani intern control over financi report ha been
increas substanti
defin intern control
intern control over financi report icofr is defin as
a process design to provid reason assur re gard the reliabl of financi report and the
prepar of financi statement for extern purpos in accord with gener accept account
principl
addition icofr is deem to includ all polici and procedur that
pertain to the mainten of record that in reason detail accur and fairli
reflect the transact and disposit of the asset of the compani
provid reason assur that transact ar record as necessari to permit
prepar of financi statement in accord with gener accept account
principl and that receipt and expenditur of the compani ar be made onli in
accord with author of manag and director of the compani and
provid reason assur regard prevent or time detect of unauthor
acquisit us or disposit of the compani s asset that could have a materi effect
on the financi statement
exampl of intern control cover by section 404 and the relat releas and standard
includ but ar not limit to
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1208 2011 fraud examin manual
control over initi author record process reconcil and report
signific account balanc transact and disclosur includ in the financi
statement
control relat to the prevent identif and detect of fraud
control relat to initi and process of nonrout and nonsystemat
transact
control relat to the select and applic of appropri account polici
manag report on intern control
the provis of section 404 requir manag to acknowledg it respons for the
icofr of the compani and to assess the oper effect of those control as a
result public compani must issu an addit intern control report within their annual
report contain
a statement of manag respons for establish and maintain adequ
icofr
a statement identifi the framework that manag us in conduct the
assess of the effect of the compani icofr
manag assess of the effect of the compani icofr as of the end of
the compani most recent fiscal year includ disclosur of ani materi weak
identifi in the compani icofr and an explicit statement as to whether the icofr
is effect and
a statement that the compani independ auditor ha issu an attest report
cover manag assess of the compani icofr the auditor attest
report must also be file with the annual report
manag assess of intern control
in perform the icofr assess manag must choos a suitabl intern control
framework against which to evalu the design and effect of the compani icofr
the most commonli us model in the unit state is the intern controlintegr
framework establish by the committe of sponsor organ coso of the
treadwai commiss which provid five compon of effect intern control
control environ
control activ
risk assess
inform and commun
monitor
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1209
the coso framework is discuss in more detail in the fraud prevent program
chapter in the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud examin manual
further detail on the intern controlintegr framework is also avail at the coso
websit httpwwwcosoorg
addition manag must
determin which intern control to test in perform the assess consid the
signific of each control both individu and in the aggreg
evalu whether the failur of a control could result in a misstat to the financi
statement the likelihood and magnitud of ani result misstat and whether
other control ar in place to mitig thi occurr
determin which locat or busi unit to includ in the assess if applic
evalu the design and oper effect of the intern control us the intern
control framework chosen as a guid
evalu the probabl of occurr and the size of potenti misstat result
from the intern control defici identifi and determin whether thei either
individu or in the aggreg constitut materi weak ani defici where the
likelihood of potenti misstat is more than remot or signific defici ani
defici where the likelihood of potenti misstat is more than remot and the
magnitud is more than inconsequenti
provid suffici document to support the assess of icofr includ
document the design of the intern control and the result of manag test
and evalu and
commun the assess find to the independ auditor and ani other
applic parti
recogn that each compani differ with regard to intern control structur the rule
state that the natur of the test perform by manag will depend on the specif
circumst of the compani and the signific of the control be test howev the
rule also assert that inquiri alon ar gener not a suffici basi for manag
assess
in juli 2007 the sec issu guidanc specif address to manag about fulfil
their respons pertain to report on intern control over financi report the
guidanc emphas a topdown riskbas approach to manag evalu of
icofr and explicitli state that an evalu perform in complianc with the guidanc is
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1210 2011 fraud examin manual
on wai that manag can satisfi the intern control requir establish by
sarbanesoxlei in provid direct to assist compani manag in evalu and
assess of the icofr the guidanc address the follow topic
identifi financi report risk and control
evalu evid of the oper effect of icofr
report consider
the full text of the sec interpret guidanc can be found at
httpwwwsecgovrulesinterp2007338810pdf
code of ethic
as requir by section 406 of the act and sec releas no 338177 public compani must
disclos in their annual report whether thei have adopt a code of ethic for senior
financi offic and if thei have not thei must explain their reason
defin code of ethic
the rule defin a code of ethic as a set of written standard that ar design to deter
wrongdo and to promot
honest and ethic conduct includ the ethic treatment of actual or appar
conflict of interest between person and profession interest
full fair accur time and understand disclosur in all document file with the
sec and all other public commun
complianc with all applic government law rule and regul
the prompt report to the appropri person or person within the compani of
violat of the code and
account for adher to the code
the sec believ that the establish of provis beyond thi definit outlin is
best left to the discret of the compani therefor the rule do not specifi ani detail
requir particular languag complianc procedur or sanction for violat that
must be includ in the code of ethic the sec doe howev explicitli encourag the
adopt of code that ar broader and more comprehens than necessari to meet the
disclosur requir
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1211
senior financi offic
the senior financi offic that must be cover by the compani code of ethic includ
the princip execut offic princip financi offic princip account offic or
control and person perform similar function while the rule state that a compani
must have a special code of ethic that appli to senior financi offic the compani
doe not need to adopt a separ code of ethic for these offic howev if it doe not
the compani gener code of ethic should ex pressli state that it appli to all senior
financi offic
disclosur requir
in addit to the disclosur of the exist of the code of ethic in the annual report the
rule requir that compani make publicli avail the portion of their code of ethic that
address the ethic consider contain within the definit of code of ethic and
that appli to the senior financi offic to do so the sec permit compani to emploi
on of three altern method
file the code of ethic that appli to the senior financi offic as an exhibit in the
compani annual report
post the code of ethic that is relev to the senior financi offic on it websit
and disclos the internet address and the fact that the code is post in thi manner
within the annual report or
provid a copi of the code of ethic to ani person upon request and without charg
provid the annual report contain an undertak to do so and an explan of how
a person can make such a request
public compani must also make known either on a form 8k or on their websit ani
chang in and ani waiver of the code of ethic relat to the senior financi offic the
natur of the chang or waiver must be disclos within five busi dai of it occurr
and if disclos on a websit must remain post for 12 month
exampl of code of ethic
the follow ar some exampl of organ that have adopt code of ethic that
meet the sec guidelin addition the acf sampl code of ethic is contain in
the fraud prevent program chapter in the fraud prevent and deterr section
of the fraud examin manual
fei httpinvestorfeicomdocumentdisplaycfmdocumentid2453
exxonmobil
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1212 2011 fraud examin manual
httpwwwexxonmobilcomcorporateaboutoperationssbcethicsaspx
httpmediacorporateirnetmediafilesnysnmgareportsnmgcoefppdf
mcdonald httpwwwmcdonaldscomcorpinvestgovofficerethicshtml
audit committe
the audit committe of a compani is a committe establish by the board of director for
the purpos of overse the account financi report and audit process
section 301 and 407 of the act and sec releas no 338177 338220 3447235 and 34
47654 set out specif requir for audit committe of public compani
composit of the audit committe
independ
each member of the audit committe must be a member of the board of director and must
be independ as evalu by two criteria
feesaudit committe member mai onli be compens for their servic on the
board and ani board committe thei cannot be paid by the compani or ani of it
subsidiari for ani other consult or advisori work includ indirect payment
made by the compani to a parti relat to the committe member audit committe
member mai receiv ani fix retir benefit thei ar entitl to for prior servic
with the compani without violat thi provis as long as the benefit ar not
conting upon the member continu servic
affiliationaudit committe member cannot be affili person of the compani
or ani other compani relat to it thi preclud execut offic
directoremploye gener partner and manag member of the compani or it
parent subsidiari or sister compani from serv on the audit committe there is a
safe harbor provis that exclud member from be consid an affili person
as long as thei ar not an execut offic of the compani or ani of it subsidiari and
thei ar not a sharehold of 10 percent or more of ani class of vote stock of the
compani or ani of it subsidiari
the sec permit three exempt from the independ standard the first provid a
oneyear phasein period for public noninvest compani wherebi there must be at
least on fulli independ member when the compani goe public a major of
independ member within 90 dai and a fulli independ committe within on year
the second exempt allow a committe member to simultan sit on the board of
director of the compani and of an affili compani ie a parent subsidiari or sister
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1213
compani without be consid an affili person provid the member otherwis
meet the independ criteria the final exempt exist to provid a number of
accommod for foreign privat issuer or list compani that ar incorpor
outsid of the unit state the sec ha state that beyond these three exempt no
addit exempt will be grant nor will it consid exempt or waiver for
particular relationship on a casebycas basi
financi expert
the board of director must includ a disclosur in the compani annual report state
whether or not there is at least on member of it audit committe that qualifi as an audit
committe financi expert if there is the compani must also includ the name of the
expert and whether the expert is independ from manag if there is not an
explan must be given as to why the committe doe not have such an expert
addition the board is permit but not requir to disclos that it ha more than on
audit committe financi expert on it audit committe
to qualifi as an audit committe financi expert an individu must possess
an understand of gener accept account principl and of financi
statement
the abil to evalu the applic of account principl us in the account for
estim accrual and reserv
experi in prepar audit analyz or evalu financi statement
contain account issu that ar gene ralli compar to those expect to be
rais in the compani financi statement or experi supervis someon engag
in such activ
an understand of intern control and financi report procedur and
an understand of the function of an audit committe
the rule state that the audit committe financi expert must have acquir these attribut
through educ and experi from serv as or activ supervis a princip
financi offic princip account offic control public account or auditor or
other similar posit or through the oversight or assess of compani or public
account regard the prepar audit or evalu of financi statement the sec
also recogn that individu that do not meet ani of these requir but have other
relev experi mai qualifi as an audit committe financi expert howev ani board
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1214 2011 fraud examin manual
of director that qualifi an expert under thi categori is requir to provid a brief list
of that person experi with the disclosur in the annual report
in determin whether an individu qualifi as an audit committe financi expert the
board of director should consid all relev fact and circumst includ but not
limit to certain qualit factor such as the level of the person account or financi
educ whether the person is a cpa whether the person ha previous serv as a cfo
or control of a public compani the person past or current membership on other audit
committe and ani other relev qualif or experi that would assist in
understand and evalu the compani financi statement the sec emphas that
such factor ar mere exampl and should be consid onli as part of an evalu of
the person knowledg and experi as a whole
to dissuad hesit to serv as an audit committe financi expert the sec ha expressli
state that the duti oblig and liabil of the member serv as the expert ar no
greater than the duti oblig and liabil of all other member of the audit committe
similarli the design of an audit committe member as a financi expert doe not
chang the duti oblig or liabil of ani other board or audit committe member
respons relat to extern auditor
the audit committe ha sole respons for hire pai retain overse and if
necessari fire the compani outsid auditor as well as the ultim author to approv
all audit engag fee and term as a result the extern auditor must report directli to
the audit committe the committe is also charg with resolv ani disput that aris
between the extern auditor and manag regard financi report issu
all audit and permit nonaudit servic other than de minimi servic provid by the
extern auditor must be preapprov by the audit committe the audit committe can
accomplish thi either by approv all servic separ prior to each engag or by
establish a detail set of preapprov polici and procedur cover all engag
as long as the audit committe is inform on a time basi of each servic and the
respons of preapprov cannot be shift to manag if the committe choos
to implement a set of preapprov polici and procedur then either a clear descript or
copi of those polici and procedur must be includ with the compani proxi
statement
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1215
procedur for handl complaint
the audit committe is requir to establish procedur eg a hotlin for receiv
retain and deal with complaint includ confidenti or anonym employe tip
regard irregular in the compani account method intern control or audit
matter
the sec doe not requir ani specif procedur for handl complaint but rather allow
the audit committe to determin the most appropri procedur for the compani
circumst includ in thi flexibl is the abil of the audit committe to defer the
receipt and screen of the complaint to anoth parti such as a messag servic
howev when complaint ar receiv by a parti outsid of the audit committe the
procedur should dictat that the tip ar ultim direct to the audit committe for
resolut further the procedur should be design such that manag is not
exclus respons for receiv and screen the complaint to prevent unscrupul
manag from mishandl complaint or retali against employe complain
ultim the enact of formal procedur should encourag the disclosur of concern
and promot proper conduct throughout the organ the establish procedur
should also allow the audit committe to be alert to potenti problem befor seriou
consequ aris
author to engag outsid advisor
in certain situat audit committe mai want to consult expert other than those hire by
manag especi when face with possibl conflict of manag interest the
rule provid that audit committe ar allow to engag ani outsid advisor such as
expert in specif account issu that mai be necessari to properli carri out their duti
fund
the audit committe is entitl to receiv appropri fund from the compani for
fee paid to the extern auditor for perform of ani audit review or attest
engag
payment to ani outsid advisor retain by the audit committe and
ani administr expens necessari for the audit committe to carri out it duti
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1216 2011 fraud examin manual
extern auditor
report to the audit committe
auditor must report directli to the audit committeenot managementand must make
time report on the follow
all critic account polici and practic us
altern gaap method that were discuss with manag the ramif of
the us of those altern treatment and the treatment prefer by the auditor and
ani other materi written commun between the auditor and manag such
as ani manag letter or the schedul of unadjust audit differ
report over intern control
auditor must also now attest to and issu a report on manag assess of intern
control over financi report under section 404 of sarbanesoxlei thi requir is
cover in more detail in the previou section on pcaob audit standard no 5 an
audit of intern control over financi report that is integr with an audit of financi
statement
whistleblow protect
in addit to requir the audit committe to establish procedur to handl employe tip
and complaint the sarbanesoxlei act includ two provis that creat broad
protect for corpor whistleblow
civil liabil
section 806 of the act creat a civil liabil for an employ who out of retali fire
demot suspend threaten harass or discrimin against an employe who provid
inform or otherwis assist in an investig of fraudul activ employe ar
also protect against retali for file testifi particip or otherwis assist in a
proceed file or about to be file relat to an alleg violat of secur law and
regul employe that were retali against in such a manner ar entitl to
compensatori damag under section 806 includ reinstat with back pai and
interest and compens for legal fee it should be note howev that thi provis
doe not provid protect to all whistleblow as it onli cover employe of publicli
trade compani
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1217
crimin sanction
section 1107 of the act establish crimin sanction for anyon who intention retali
against anoth parti for provid inform regard an alleg feder offens to a law
enforc offic punish for violat the provis includ fine of up to 250000
and up to 10 year in prison for individu and fine of up to 500000 for corpor
unlik the civil liabil the protect provid under section 1107 appli to all individu
regardless of where thei work
the whistleblow protect provis ar discuss in more detail in the law relat to
fraud chapter in the law section of the fraud examin manual
civil and crimin penalti for noncompli
depend on which particular provis of the sarbanesoxlei act is violat the penalti
can be sever in addit to creat addit crimin offens eg the whistleblow
retali crime discuss abov it increas the jail term for exist crime such as mail
fraud and wire fraud from five to twenti year it also make it a crime to destroi document
and requir auditor of public compani to keep work paper for at least five year
the act also author the sec to freez question asset dure an investig
addition section 304 of the act requir that if a public compani is requir to prepar
an account restat due to misconduct that result in materi noncompli with
ani financi report requir the ceo and cfo shall reimburs the compani for
ani bonus or other incentivebas or equitybas compens that thei receiv
dure the 12month period follow the first public issuanc or file whichev is
earlier of a financi document embodi such financi report requir and
profit on the sale of compani secur dure such 12month period
privat secur litig reform act
the privat secur litig reform act of 1995 drastic chang the procedur and
proof requir in secur fraud case it also includ addit respons for
independ auditor of public compani under the act each audit of the financi
statement of a public compani must includ the follow
procedur design to provid reason assur of detect illeg act that would
have a direct and materi effect on the determin of financi statement amount
procedur design to identifi relatedparti transact that ar materi to the
financi statement or otherwis requir disclosur therein
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1218 2011 fraud examin manual
an evalu of whether there is substanti doubt about the abil of the issuer to
continu as a go concern dure the ensu fiscal year
the term illeg act is defin to mean ani act or omiss that violat ani law rule or
regul have the forc of law
addition if in the cours of an audit an auditor detect or otherwis becom awar
that an illeg act whether or not perceiv to have a materi effect on the financi
statement of the issuer ha or might have occur the auditor must then
determin and consid the possibl effect of the illeg act on the financi statement
of the compani includ ani conting monetari effect such as fine penalti and
damag
inform the appropri level of manag as soon as practic and
assur that the audit committe or the board of director in the absenc of an audit
committe is adequ inform of the illeg act that have been detect unless such
act ar clearli inconsequenti
the reform act provid further that the auditor must take notic of what if ani action is
taken by the compani in respons if the auditor conclud that the illeg act ha a materi
effect on the financi statement of the compani the auditor must then determin
whether senior manag ha taken tim eli and appropri remedi action and
whether the failur to take remedi action is reason expect to warrant departur
from a standard report of the auditor when made or warrant resign from the audit
engag
if the auditor conclud that senior manag ha fail to appropri address the
situat he must report hi conclus to the board of director if the board receiv such
a report the board is then requir to notifi the sec within on busi dai and send a
copi of the sec notic to the auditor if the auditor doe not receiv a copi of thi notic
befor the onedai deadlin then the auditor is requir to furnish the sec with a copi of
hi report to the board
the auditor is provid with some protect howev the act expressli provid that the
auditor cannot be liabl in a privat action for ani statement contain in the auditor
report to the sec
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1219
manag
ultim manag is respons for the prevent and detect of fraud within an
organ it is manag job to ensur the proper intern control ar in place to
prevent fraud as well as to detect it although manag mai not execut all of the
controlsa the perform of intern cont rol function ar gener spread across
individu throughout the entir organ includ individu contributor
manag and even the board of directorsmanag is also respons for
monitor and remedi intern control to ensur thei ar effect design and
oper to prevent and detect fraud
as mention abov the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002 includ sever requir of
manag in public compani also discuss abov coso provid sever guidelin
for manag prevent and detect of fraud through the intern control
environ
although prepar the financi statement is the respons of manag fraud is
also frequent investig by member of manag or by peopl under the direct
and control of manag thi can present potenti conflict
document retent polici
manag of an organ should ensur that the organ ha a proper and
effect document retent polici drp in place when establish a document retent
polici it is imper that the organ consid all feder and state law and
regul regard recordkeep requir industri such as health care bank
and audit contain tradespecif rule for document and retain record
furthermor compani should continu check for legal updat concern these
requir to have a document retent polici that ignor pertin recordkeep
requir could lead to statutori violat
an effect document retent polici requir that a compani 1 establish retent
protocol befor it forese litig or offici investig 2 develop review andor
amend a polici for complianc with applic state and feder law and regul 3
ensur the reason of the polici accord to the compani busi practic 4
provid a concis explan of what is to be destroi and when 5 provid adequ
protocol for manag of electron document and 6 clearli set forth when the polici
should be immobil due to a pend investig or forese litig
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1220 2011 fraud examin manual
becaus industri vari significantli in the type of document produc receiv and
distribut court lean toward a subject reason standard in determin
whether a particular polici is adequ thu each compani must develop a polici that is
specif tailor to it busi practic a compani mai find it help to refer to
retent polici of other compani for guidanc but should avoid duplic such
polici by establish individu busi polici and compartment lowvalu and
highvalu document compani can gain quick access to intern document
a properli plan and execut document retent polici will do littl good if individu
within the compani ar unawar of it not onli must employe be awar of the polici thei
must also understand what is to be destroi and when
while electron commun continu to soar compani struggl to catch up with it
agil it is vital that compani includ protocol for preserv and destroi electron
document compani with inform technolog it depart should develop
procedur for handl electron data compani counsel execut and manag
should be awar of how electron data is store and destroi for exampl an email
delet by an employe mai remain in a compani comput system until an administr
perman delet it such situat must be recogn and address when design a
document retent polici
what document should be kept
on of the first step in establish a document retent polici is to identifi the type of
document that need to be retain or destroi it is import to rememb that everi
organ is differ thu an organ mai requir the retent of document that
ar not provid for in thi text all type of document produc by an organ must
be initi account for thi includ tangibl and electron document and is never
limit to financi document account record corpor tax record bank record
employ record variou workplac record includ inhous email and client
correspond and legal record must be consid when construct a drp for a
particular organ
a sampl document retent polici that contain a list of record to be taken into account
when determin retent protocol is includ at the end of thi chapter a compani
should check with it local counsel regard specif state statut requir differ
period
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1221
other factor to consid in identifi document includ memberconstitu
expect ir regul busi taxabl incom regul standard under
sarbanesoxlei and intern factor eg chang in board of director board resolut
patent and copyright
record typic gener by a compani that reflect or materi relat to profession
servic must also be identifi in the drp for exampl account and audit firm
should mention the retent and destruct of document that make up client file such as
client bill and payment record correspond and time record
document storag
in thi electron ag most compani ar back up document via electron media rather
than fill file cabinet storag expens scare small busi document storag
compani ar avail for store tangibl and electron document but can be costli
hard drive backup appear to be the most cost effici mean of storag but it requir
compani to have the comput gusto to withstand larg amount of inform
most importantli document must remain safe for confidenti and destruct
purpos and be easili access in the event of potenti litig and legal request for
document
document destruct
an organ must ceas destruct of document when face with potenti litig or
when a legal document request is pend or immin destruct under a valid drp will
be ineffect if document ar not actual destroi befor a potenti litig trigger
occur thu it is imper that the drp provid for complet destruct of document
that can be validli expung dure the proper period under the polici document should
be destroi by shred or by some other mean that will render them unread
similarli a protocol for the destruct of electron data should be in place to ensur that
document to be destroi ar actual destroi the delet of email or other file on
on comput doe not mean that such record ar remov from evid
drp manag
final in order to properli execut a drp someon with detail knowledg of the drp
should be in charg of the polici and should ensur that employe understand and follow it
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1222 2011 fraud examin manual
as design thi individu should be a seniorlevel employe with the power to enforc the
polici a drp manag is respons for
implement the drp
ensur that employe understand and follow the drp purpos
provid oversight on actual retent and destruct of document
ensur proper storag of document
period followingup with counsel to ensur proper retent period ar in place
suspend the destruct of document upon forese litig and
inform corpor offic director and employe of chang in relat to the
drp
fraud prevent program
the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002 the feder sentenc guidelin and other rule and
regul either requir or strongli encourag the implement of on or more fraud
prevent program in most instanc manag is respons for the institut of
such program
these program as well as further detail regard manag respons for fraud
ar discuss in detail in the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud
examin manual
certifi fraud examin extern auditor and intern auditor also plai kei role in the
detect and deterr of fraudul financi report follow is a discuss of their
profession respons
extern auditor
chang in the audit landscap primarili those stem from the passag of the
sarbanesoxlei act have led to a dichotomi of standard for extern auditor auditor of
public compani compani regist with the secmust adher to the audit rule
promulg by the public compani account oversight board pcaob convers
for audit of nonsecregist entiti the gener accept audit standard laid out
by the aicpa audit standard board asb appli it should be note howev that
the pcaob adopt all of the asb standard alreadi in exist on april 16 2003 ie
all standard issu through statement on audit standard sa no 101 as interim
standard applic to auditor of public compani unless and until such standard ar
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1223
supersed or amend by the pcaob therefor the discuss below on au section
316 which codifi sa no 99 appli to all extern auditor wherea au section 314
and 339 which respect codifi sa no 109 and 103 appli to audit of nonpubl
entiti onli likewis the pcaob standard discuss appli onli to auditor of sec
regist compani
au section 316 consider of fraud in a financi statement audit sourc sa no 99 and 113
in 1996 the aicpa audit standard board issu sa no 82 consider of fraud in a
financi statement audit in respons to question and critic of the audit and
account profess lack of adequ addr ssing of the subject of fraud follow the
highprofil financi fraud that occur in 2001 and 2002 the asb replac sa no 82
with sa no 99 consider of fraud in a financi statement audit to give expand
guidanc to auditor for detect materi fraud per the aicpa the standard wa part of
an effort to restor investor confid in us capit market and reestablish audit
financi statement as a clear pictur window into corpor america the standard
becam effect for audit of financi statement for period begin on or after
decemb 15 2002 and is codifi in au section 316 consider of fraud in a financi
statement audit
au section 110 respons and function of the independ auditor state the auditor ha
a respons to plan and perform the audit to obtain reason assur about whether
the financi statement ar free of materi misstat whether caus by error or fraud
the purpos of au section 316 is to establ h standard and provid guidanc to auditor
in fulfil that respons
au section 316 is divid into 10 main section
descript and characterist of fraud
import of exercis profession skeptic
discuss among engag personnel regard risk of materi misstat due to
fraud
obtain inform need to identifi risk of materi misstat due to fraud
identifi risk that mai result in materi misstat due to fraud
assess the identifi risk after take into account an evalu of the entiti
program and control
respond to the result of the assess
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1224 2011 fraud examin manual
evalu audit evid
commun about fraud to manag the audit committe and other
document the auditor consider of fraud
follow is a brief descript of each of these section practition in thi area should
review au section 316 in it entireti for more detail inform a copi of the entir
standard can be obtain from the aicpa wwwaicpaorg
descript and characterist of fraud
au section 316 emphas that while auditor do not make legal determin about the
exist of fraud thei should be interest in all act that result in materi misstat
of the financi statement such misstat can be the result of either fraud or error
depend on whether the misstat ar intent or unintent
two type of misstat ar consid relev for audit purpos
misstat aris from fraudul financi report
misstat aris from misappropri of asset
misstat aris from fraudul financi report
thi categori is defin as intent misstat or omiss of amount or disclosur
in financi statement that ar design to deceiv financi statement user
fraudul financi report mai be accomplish by
manipul falsifi or alter acco unt record or support document
misrepres or intention omit event transact or other signific
inform or
intention misappli account principl relat to amount classif
manner of present or disclosur
misstat aris from misappropri of asset
also refer to as theft or defalc thi categori includ the theft of an entiti asset
where the effect of the theft caus the financi statement in all materi respect not to be
in conform with gaap
au section 316 goe on to remind the auditor that by definit fraud often is conceal
and manag is in a posit to perpetr fraud more easili becaus it is in a posit of
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1225
be abl to directli or indirectli manipul account record auditor cannot obtain
absolut assur that materi misstat ar not present but auditor should be awar
of the possibl that fraud might be conceal and that employe might be in collus
with each other or outsid vendor if auditor notic record or activ that seem unusu
then thei should at least consid the possibl that fraud might have occur
import of exercis profession skeptic
au section 230 due profession care in the perform of work state that due profession
care requir the auditor to exercis profession skeptic becaus of the characterist of
fraud the auditor should conduct the audit w ith a mindset that recogn the possibl
that a materi misstat due to fraud could be present au section 230 also requir an
ongo question of whether inform the auditor obtain could suggest a materi
misstat due to fraud
discuss among engag personnel regard risk of materi misstat due to fraud
prior to or in conjunct with the informationgath procedur discuss below the
member of the audit team should discuss the potenti for materi misstat due to
fraud
the discuss should includ brainstorm among the audit team member about the
follow
how and where thei believ the entiti financi statement might be suscept to
fraud
how manag could perpetr or conceal fraud and
how asset of the entiti could be misappropri
thi discuss should also includ a consider of known extern and intern factor
affect the entiti that might
creat incentivespressur for manag and other to commit fraud
provid the opportun for fraud to be perpetr and
indic a cultur or environ that enabl manag and other to ration
commit fraud
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1226 2011 fraud examin manual
furthermor the discuss should emphas the need to maintain a question mind in
gather and evalu evid throughout the audit and to obtain addit inform
if necessari
obtain inform need to identifi risk of materi misstat due to fraud
au section 314 understand the entiti and it environ and assess the risk of materi
misstat provid guidanc on how the auditor obtain knowledg about the entiti and
it environ includ it intern control as part of that process the auditor should
perform the follow procedur to obtain inform to us in identifi the risk of
materi misstat due to fraud
make inquiri of manag and other within the entiti to obtain their view on the
risk of fraud and how those risk ar address
consid ani unusu or unexpect relationship that have been identifi in
perform analyt procedur in plan the audit
consid whether on or more fraud risk factor exist and
consid other inform that mai be help in the identif of risk of materi
misstat due to fraud
make inquiri of manag and other within the entiti to obtain their view about the risk of fraud and how those risk ar address
thi step involv ask manag about a number of issu includ
whether manag ha knowledg of fraud or suspect fraud
manag understand of the risk of fraud
program and control the entiti ha establish to help prevent deter or detect fraud
and
whether and how manag commun to employe it view on busi
practic and ethic behavior
the auditor should also question the audit committe directli about it view concern the
risk of fraud and whether the committe ha knowledg of fraud or suspect fraud the
same should be done with the compani intern audit depart
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1227
addition the auditor mai need to conduct similar inquiri of the entiti other
personnel if the auditor believ thei mai have addit inform about the risk of
fraud
consid the result of analyt procedur perform in plan the audit
au section 329 analyt procedur requir that analyt procedur be perform in
plan the audit with the object of identifi the exist of unusu transact or
event and amount ratio and trend that might indic matter that have financi
statement and audit plan implic if the result of these procedur yield unusu
or unexpect relationship the auditor should consid the result in identifi the risk of
materi misstat due to fraud
consid fraud risk factor
as discuss abov even though fraud is conceal the auditor mai identifi event or
condit that indic incent or pressur to commit fraud opportun to carri out
fraud or attitud and ration to justifi fraudul conduct these event and
condit ar refer to as fraud risk factor the auditor should consid whether on
or more fraud risk factor ar present and should be consid in identifi and assess
the risk of materi misstat due to fraud howev the auditor should be care not
to creat a laundri list of factor that ar onli given cursori consider the appendix to
au section 316 contain a list of exampl of fraud risk factor
consid other inform that might be help in identifi risk of materi misstat due to fraud
final the auditor should consid ani other inform that might be help in
identifi the risk of materi misstat due to fraud
identifi risk that mai result in materi misstat due to fraud
after gather the inform as discuss abov the auditor should consid the
inform in the context of the three condit present when fraud occur
incentivespressur opportun and attitudesration
the auditor should consid
the type of risk that mai exist ie whether it involv fraudul financi report or
misappropri of asset
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1228 2011 fraud examin manual
the signific of the risk ie whether it is of a magnitud that could result in a possibl
materi misstat
the likelihood of the risk ie the likelihood that it will result in a materi misstat
and
the pervas of the risk ie whether the potenti risk is pervas to the financi
statement as a whole or is specif relat to a particular assert account or class of
transact
assess the identifi risk after take into account an evalu of the entiti program and control
au section 314 requir the auditor to obtain an understand of each of the five
compon of intern control suffici to plan the audit as part of thi requir the
auditor should evalu whether the entiti prog ram and control that address identifi
risk of fraud have been suitabl design and place in oper these program and
control mai involv
specif control design to mitig specif risk of fraud eg control to prevent
misappropri of particular suscept asset and
broader program design to prevent deter and detect fraud eg ethic polici
exhibit i of au section 316 provid exampl of program and control an entiti might
implement to creat a cultur of honesti and to prevent fraud see also the chapter on
fraud prevent program in the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud
examin manual
respond to the result of the assess
onc the auditor ha gather the inform and assess the risk of fraud he must
determin what impact the assess will have on how the audit is conduct for
exampl the auditor mai need to design addit or differ audit procedur to obtain
more reliabl evid in support of account balanc transact etc or to obtain
addit corrobor of manag expl anat and represent concern
materi matter eg thirdparti confirm document from independ sourc
us of a specialist and analyt procedur
overal respons to the risk of materi misstat
judgment about the risk of materi misstatem ent due to fraud have an overal effect on
how the audit is conduct in sever wai
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1229
assign of personnel and supervis the auditor mai need to consult with
specialist in a particular field
account principl the auditor should consid manag select and
applic of signific account principl particularli those relat to subject
measur and complex transact
predict of audit procedur the auditor should incorpor an element of
unpredict in the select of audit procedur to be perform such as us
differ sampl method and perform procedur at differ locat or at
locat on an unannounc basi
respons involv the natur time and extent of procedur to be perform to address the identifi risk
thi section note that the audit procedur perform in respons to identifi risk will
vari depend on the type of risk identifi such procedur mai involv both
substant test and test of the oper effect of the entiti intern control
howev becaus manag mai have the abil to overrid control that mai otherwis
appear to be oper effect it is unlik that the audit risk can be reduc
appropri by perform onli test of control
therefor the auditor respons to specif identifi risk of fraud should includ the
follow
chang the natur of the audit procedur to obtain more reliabl or addit
corrobor inform by for exampl consult independ sourc or
conduct physic inspect
chang the time of substant test by for exampl conduct substant test at
or near the end of a report period and
ensur the extent of the procedur reflect the assess of the risk of fraud by for
exampl increas sampl size or perform analyt procedur at a more detail
level
exampl of respons to identifi risk of misstat aris from fraudul financi report
au section 316 provid a number of exampl of respons the auditor mai take in regard
to risk of misstat aris from both fraudul financi report and asset
misappropri
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1230 2011 fraud examin manual
some of the exampl of test auditor mai perform to address the risk of fraudul
financi report includ
revenu recognitionperform substant analyt procedur relat to revenu
us disaggreg data for exampl compar revenu report by month and by
product line dure the current report period with compar prior period
confirm with custom relev contract term or question staff about shipment
near the end of a period
inventori quantitiesexamin inventori record to identifi locat or item that
requir specif attent dure or after the physic inventori count perform a more
rigor examin of the count such as examin content of box item and
conduct addit test of count sheet tag or other record
manag estimatesdevelop or engag a specialist to develop an independ
estim for comparison to manag estim and gather further inform to
help evalu the reason of manag estim and underli assumpt
exampl of respons to identifi risk of misstat aris from misappropri of asset
if the auditor identifi a risk of materi misstat due to fraud relat to
misappropri of asset the auditor mai wish to includ addit procedur for
exampl if a particular asset is highli suscept to misappropri the auditor mai wish
to conduct further test of the control to prevent and detect such misappropri
respons to further address risk of manag overrid of control
becaus manag is in a uniqu posit to overrid exist control if such a risk is
identifi the auditor mai need to perform addit procedur to further address the risk
of manag overrid of control
examin journal entri and other adjust for evid of possibl materi misstat due to fraud
materi misstat of financi statement often involv record inappropri or
unauthor journal entri or make adjust to amount report in the financi
statement that ar not reflect in journal entri eg consolid adjust or
reclassif therefor the auditor should design procedur to test the appropri
of journal entri record in the gener ledger and of other adjust eg entri
post directli to financi statement draft
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1231
review account estim for bias that could result in materi misstat due to fraud
in prepar financi statement manag is respons for make a number of
judgment or assumpt that affect signific account estim fraudul financi
report is often accomplish through intent misstat of these estim in
perform the audit the auditor should consid whether the differ between estim
support by the audit evid and the estim includ in the financi statement
indic a possibl bia on the part of manag if so the auditor should perform a
retrospect review of signific account estim of the prior year thi review should
provid the auditor with addit inform about whether manag mai have a bia
in present the currentyear estim
evalu the busi rational for signific unusu transact
dure the cours of the audit the auditor mai becom awar of signific transact that
ar outsid the normal cours of the entiti busi or appear unusu given the auditor
understand of the entiti oper the auditor should gain an understand of the
busi rational for these transact and whether the rational or lack thereof suggest
the transact mai have been enter into to engag in fraudul financi report or to
conceal misappropri of asset
some question the auditor should consid includ
ar the transact overli complex
ha manag discuss the transact with the board of director and audit
committe
ha manag place more emphasi on the need for a particular account
treatment than on the underli econom of the particular transact
do the transact involv unconsolid unrel parti includ special purpos
entiti or parti that do not have the substanc or financi strength to support the
transact
evalu audit evid
assess risk of materi misstat due to fraud throughout the audit
dure the perform of the audit the auditor mai identifi condit that either chang
or support a judgment regard the assess of risk exampl includ
discrep in the account record eg transact that ar not record
unsupport or unauthor balanc or transact or last minut adjust
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1232 2011 fraud examin manual
conflict or miss evidenti matter eg miss or alter document or record
unexplain item on reconcili or miss inventori
problemat or unusu relationship between the auditor and manag eg denial
of access to record facil employe or custom complaint by manag
about the conduct of the audit team unusu delai in provid inform or
unwilling to add or revis disclosur
evalu whether analyt procedur perform indic a previous unrecogn risk of fraud
analyt procedur perform dure the audit mai result in identifi unusu or
unexpect relationship that should be consid in assess the risk of materi
misstat due to fraud determin whether a particular trend or relationship is a risk of
fraud requir profession judgment unusu relationship involv yearend revenu and
incom often ar particularli relev and might includ 1 uncharacterist larg
amount of incom report in the last week or two of the report period from unusu
transact and 2 incom that is inconsist with trend in cash flow from oper
analyt procedur ar us becaus manag or employe gener ar unabl to
manipul all the inform necessari to produc normal or expect relationship au
section 316 provid sever exampl includ the follow
the relationship of net incom to cash flow from oper mai appear unusu
becaus manag record fictiti revenu and receiv but wa unabl to
manipul cash
chang in inventori account payabl sale or cost of sale from the prior period to
the current period mai be inconsist indic a possibl theft of inventori becaus
the employe wa unabl to manipul all of the relat account
an unexpect or unexplain relationship between sale volum as determin from
the account record and product statist maintain by oper personnel
which ar more difficult for manag to manipul mai indic a possibl
misstat of sale
evalu risk of materi misstat at or near the complet of fieldwork
at or near the complet of fieldwork the auditor should evalu whether the accumul
result of audit procedur and other observ affect the assess of risk of
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1233
materi misstat due to fraud made earlier such an evalu might identifi whether
there is a need to perform further audit procedur
respond to misstat that mai be the result of fraud
if the auditor believ that misstat ar or mai be the result of fraud but the effect of
the misstat is not materi to the financi statement the auditor nevertheless should
evalu their implic the auditor should be especi concern with ani implic
pertain to the organiz posit of the person involv as thei mai requir a
reevalu of the assess of the risk of materi misstat for exampl in the
event of theft of cash from a small petti cash fund the amount of the theft gener would
not be of signific to the auditor howev if the theft wa perpetr by higherlevel
manag then it might be indic of a more pervas problem such as
manag integr
if the auditor believ that a misstat is or mai be the result of fraud and either ha
determin that the effect of the misstat is materi to the financi statement or ha
been unabl to evalu whether the effect is materi the auditor should
attempt to obtain addit evid to determin whether materi fraud occur and
it effect on the financi statement
consid the implic for other aspect of the audit
discuss the matter and the approach for further investig with an appropri level
of manag that is at least on level abov those involv and with senior
manag and the audit committe and
if appropri suggest the client consult with legal counsel
commun about possibl fraud to manag the audit committe and other
au section 316 state whenev an auditor ha determin that there is evid that
fraud mai exist the matter should be brought to the attent of an appropri level of
manag it is consid appropri to do so even if the matter might be consid
inconsequenti fraud involv senior manag and fraud by anyon that caus a
materi misstat should be report directli to those charg with govern
if the auditor ha identifi risk of materi misstat due to fraud that have continu
control implic the auditor should consid whether these risk should be
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1234 2011 fraud examin manual
commun to those charg with govern convers the auditor should consid
whether the absenc of control to deter detect or prevent fraud should be report
the disclosur of possibl fraud to parti other than the client senior manag and
those charg with govern is ordinarili not part of the auditor respons and mai
be preclud by the auditor legal or ethic oblig of confidenti unless the matter
is reflect in the auditor report
howev au section 316 point out that there mai be a duti to disclos the inform to
outsid parti in the follow circumst
to compli with certain legal and regulatori requir eg sec rule
to inform successor auditor pursuant to au section 315 commun between
predecessor and successor auditor
in respons to a subpoena and
to a fund agenc or other specifi agenc in accord with the requir for
audit of entiti that receiv government financi assist
document the auditor consider of fraud
au section 316 conclud by requir that auditor document the follow
discuss among engag personnel regard the suscept of the entiti
financi statement to materi misstat due to fraud includ how and when the
discuss occur the team member who particip and the subject matter
discuss
procedur perform to obtain inform necessari to identifi and assess the risk of
materi misstat due to fraud
specif risk of materi misstat due to fraud that were identifi and the auditor
respons to those risk
the reason support the auditor conclus if the auditor ha not identifi
improp revenu recognit as a risk
the result of the procedur perform to further address the risk of manag
overrid of control
other condit and analyt relationship that caus the auditor to believ that
addit audit procedur or other respons were requir to address such risk
and
the natur of the commun about fraud made to manag those charg with
govern or other
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1235
pcaob audit standard no 5an audit of intern control over financi report that is integr with an audit of financi statement
in mai 2007 the pcaob adopt audit standard no 5 an audit of intern control over
financi report that is integr with an audit of financi statement as a replac to
audit standard no 2 an audit of intern control over financi report perform in
conjunct with an audit of financi statement the previou standard govern audit of
intern control over financi report ico fr as mandat by the sarbanesoxlei act
the audit standard wa intend to improv the effici and effect of intern
control audit while also reduc unnecessari cost especi for smaller public
compani audit standard no 5 supersed audit standard no 2 for all audit of
icofr for fiscal year end on or after novemb 15 2007
section 404 of the sarbanesoxlei act mandat that manag must assess and report
on the effect of the compani icofr and the extern auditor must attest to
manag intern control assess audit standard no 5 lai out the
requir and provid guidanc for auditor who ar engag to perform an audit of
manag assess of the intern control that is integr with an audit of the
financi statement
follow is a descript summari of some of the requir laid out in the standard
practition in thi area should review audit standard no 5 in it entireti for more
detail inform a copi of the entir standard can be obtain from the pcaob
wwwpcaobusorg
perform an icofr audit
integr the intern control audit and the financi statement audit
audit standard no 5 state that although the object of financi statement audit and
audit of icofr ar not ident the two au dit should be integr with the auditor
plan and perform the work to achiev the object of both audit the auditor
should design and perform the test of control in a manner that yield suffici evid to
support both the auditor opinion at yearend and the auditor control risk assess for
the financi statement audit
plan the audit
when plan an integr audit of icofr and the financi statement the auditor must
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1236 2011 fraud examin manual
evalu whether the follow matter ar import to the financi statement and to
icofr and if so how thei w ill affect the audit procedur
knowledg of the compani icofr obtain dure other engag
inform about the compani industri includ financi report practic
econom condit law and regul and technolog chang
inform about the compani busi activ organ oper
characterist and capit structur
the exist and extent of ani recent chang in the compani it oper or it
icofr
the auditor preliminari judgment about materi risk and other factor relat
to the determin of materi weak
ani control defici previous commun to the audit committe board of
director or compani manag
legal or regulatori issu of which the compani is awar
the type and extent of evid relat to the effect of the compani
icofr
preliminari judgment about the effect of icofr
public inform about the compani relat to the evalu of the likelihood of
materi misstat in the compani financi statement and the effect of
the compani icofr
knowledg about the risk relat to the compani that were consid as part of
the auditor client accept and retent evalu and
the rel complex of the compani oper
assess the risk that materi weak exist in area of the compani icofr in order
to determin which account disclosur and assert ar signific and relev to
the audit which control to test and what evid is necessari for a given control in
form thi assess the complex of the organ busi unit or process
will plai an import role
focu the audit attent on those area of the compani icofr that ar assess to
have the highest risk that a materi weak exist the auditor should keep in mind
that the risk a compani icofr will fail to prevent or detect a misstat caus by
fraud usual is higher than the risk of failur to prevent or detect error
scale the audit appropri base on the wai the compani meet it control
object with attent given to the size and complex of the compani it busi
process and it busi unit
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1237
evalu the extent to which he will us the work of other to reduc hi own audit
work
us the same materi consider us in plan the audit of the compani
financi statement
us a topdown approach
in an audit of icofr auditor should implement a topdown approach accord to
audit standard no 5 a topdown approach begin at the financi statement level and
with the auditor understand of the over all risk to intern control over financi
report the auditor then focus on entitylevel control and work down to signific
account and disclosur and their relev assert paragraph 21 thi approach
focus auditor on those account disclosur and assert that ar most like to result
in materi misstat of the compani financi statement the standard make explicit
mention howev that thi approach describ the auditor thought process when
identifi risk and the control to test rather than the order in which the auditor should
perform the audit procedur
test control
the auditor should test both the design and oper effect of the compani
icofr in test the design effect of the control the auditor should determin
whether the control if oper as prescrib satisfi the compani control object and
can effect prevent or detect error or fraud that could result in materi misstat
thi test mai includ inquiri of staff member observ of oper and
examin of relev document
in test the oper effect of the control the auditor should determin whether
the control is oper as design as well as whether the person oper the control ha
the appropri author and compet to perform the control effect an auditor mai
test the oper of the control through inquiri of staff member observ of
oper examin of relev document and reperform of the control
fraud consider
as part of an audit of icofr the auditor must specif evalu 1 the control enact
to address the risk of manag overrid of other control and 2 whether the compani
intern control adequ address the risk of materi misstat due to fraud these
control includ
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1238 2011 fraud examin manual
control over signific unusu transact
control over journal entri and adjust made dure the end of the period
financi report process
control over relat parti transact
control relat to signific manag estim and
control that mitig the motiv for and pressur on manag to engag in
inappropri earn manag and financi statement fraud
further if the auditor discov ani defici in these control the auditor should address
the defici when respond to the risk of materi misstat dure the financi
statement audit
form an opinion on the effect of icofr
in form an opinion on the effect of the compani icofr the auditor must
evalu evid from all sourc thi includ not onli the auditor test of control but
also ani misstat detect dure the financi statement audit as well as ani identifi
control defici the auditor should also review ani report issu dure the year by the
intern audit function that pertain to icofr and should evalu ani defici
identifi therein
the auditor must also evalu manag assess of icofr includ in it annual
report file with the sec to ensur that all requir element in manag report ar
complet and properli present
at the close of the integr audit the auditor mai choos to issu a singl report
contain both an opinion on the compani financi statement and an opinion on
icofr or to issu a separ report for each opinion
statement of standard for attest engag no 15an examin of an
entiti intern control over financi report that is integr with an audit of it financi statement
nonpubl entiti mai wish to have auditor examin the intern control over financi
report as a matter of best practic or to compli with lender or regulatori requir
the audit standard board issu statement of standard for attest engag
ssae no 15 an examin of an entiti s intern control over financi report that is
integr with an audit of it financi statement as guidanc to auditor of nonpubl
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1239
organ when undertak thi type of engag alongsid an audit of the financi
statement ssae no 15 converg the standard for these engag for auditor of
nonpubl compani with those provid for auditor of public compani in pcaob
audit standard no 5 more inform about ssae no 15 is avail at
wwwaicpaorg
riskbas audit approach
the pcaob and the aicpa have issu standard that indic both organ
emphasi on us a riskbas approach to audit thi approach involv begin the
audit process with a risk assess and select the particular area of focu base upon
the level of risk to the organ in a riskbas approach auditor focu their resourc
on the area of highest concern as oppos to audit area on a rotat basi or other
method of select audit area thi work well for both intern and extern audit and
also work well at both the macro eg overal financi statement or the organ as a
whole and micro eg account payabl level
as the risk of fraud is signific in most organ it is normal a major factor in the
risk assess process focus audit resourc on the area with the highest risk of fraud
give auditor a significantli higher probabl of detect fraud ifwhen it occur
the standard go into effect for fiscal period begin on or after decemb 15 2010
the pcaob standard includ
as no 8 audit risk
as no 9 audit plan
as no 10 supervis of the audit engag
as no 11 consider of materi in plan and perform the audit
as no 12 identifi and assess risk of ma terial misstat
as no 13 the auditor respons to the risk of materi misstat
as no 14 evalu audit result
as no 15 audit evid
the aicpa standard includ
au section 326audit evid
au section 312materi in plan and perform an audit
au section 312evalu of misstat identifi dure an audit
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1240 2011 fraud examin manual
au section 311plan an audit
au section 314understand the entiti and it environ and assess the
risk of mat erial misstat
au section 318perform audit procedur in respons to assess risk and
evalu the audit evid obtain
the specif detail of the standard can be found at the pcaob websit at
wwwpcaobusorg and at the aicpa websit at wwwaicpaorg
pcaob audit standard no 3audit document
pcaob audit standard no 3 audit document provid gener guidanc on the
content and extent of the document public compani auditor should prepar when
conduct audit of financi statement audit of intern control over financi report
and review of interim financi inform
audit document includ all memoranda confirm correspond schedul
audit program and letter of represent prepar and obtain dure the audit
engag thi document should be prepar in suffici detail to provid a clear
understand of it purpos and sourc and the conclus reach addition
becaus the document serv as the foundat for the represent in the auditor
report the standard assert that it should
demonstr that the engag wa conduct in complianc with the standard of
the pcaob
support the basi for the auditor conclus concern all relev financi
statement assert and
demonstr that the underli account record agre to or reconcil with the
financi statement
to meet these requir the standard state that audit document should contain
suffici inform to enabl an experienc auditor have no previou connect with
the engag
to understand the natur time extent and result of the procedur perform
evid obtain and conclus reach and
to determin who perform the work and the date such work wa complet as well as
the person who review the work and the date of such review
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1241
the standard also requir auditor to retain audit document for seven year from the
date the auditor report is releas or if no report is issu from the date the audit work is
substanti complet
the full text of the audit standard which also includ guidanc about document of
specif matter and subsequ chang to audit document can be found on the
pcaob websit wwwpcaobusorg
au section 339audit document sourc sa no 103
the asb counterpart to pcaob audit standard no 3 appear in the form of sa no
103 audit document sa no 103 supersed sa no 96 audit document as the
guidanc on audit document that appli to auditor of nonpubl entiti the
standard is codifi in au section 339
in develop au section 339 the asb consid the provis of pcaob audit
standard no 3 consequ the requir of the two standard ar similar in mani
respect specif au section 339 doe the follow
chang the date of the auditor report from the final dai of fieldwork to the date on or
after which the auditor obtain suffici evid to support the audit opinion
requir the audit document to be suffici such that an experienc auditor with
no previou connect to the audit could understand the work perform the evid
obtain and the conclus reach
requir document of departur from gener accept audit standard along
with the justif and altern procedur us
provid that oral explan mai be us to clarifi or explain audit document
but alon ar insuffici support for audit work
requir specif document of matter that the auditor identifi as contradictori or
inconsist with the final audit conclus as well as how the auditor address such
find
instruct the auditor to assembl all of the audit document into the audit file within
60 dai follow the audit report releas date
state that after 60 dai follow the audit report releas date workpap mai not be
delet and all addit must be note as such and
specifi a minimum retent period for audit document of five year from the
report releas date
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1242 2011 fraud examin manual
intern auditor respons
intern auditor plai a kei role in help organ prevent and detect fraudul
activ becaus of their proxim to and understand of the inner work of the
organ intern auditor ar in a uniqu posit to uncov potenti unscrupul
act in fact the acf 2010 report to the nation on occup fraud and abus show that
the intern audit function plai a vital role in detect occup fraud account for
the detect of 139 percent of the 1843 case includ in the studi
as part of it intern profession practic framework ippf the institut of intern
auditor iia ha develop the intern standard for the profession practic of intern
audit thi section includ those iia standard that pertain to the intern auditor
respons for prevent detect and assess the risk of fraud within an
organ more detail on these and all other iia standard can be found at the iia
websit wwwtheiiaorg
standard 1210profici
intern auditor must possess the knowledg skill and other compet need to
perform their individu respons the intern audit activ collect must possess
or obtain the knowledg skill and other compet need to perform it
respons
1210a2
intern auditor must have suffici knowledg to evalu the risk of fraud and the
manner in which it is manag by the organ but ar not expect to have the
expertis of a person whose primari respons is detect and investig fraud
standard 1220due profession care
intern auditor must appli the care and skill expect of a reason prudent and
compet intern auditor due profession care doe not impli infal
1220a1
intern auditor must exercis due profession care by consid the
extent of work need to achiev the engag object
rel complex materi or signific of matter to which assur procedur
ar appli
adequaci and effect of govern risk manag and control process
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1243
probabl of signific error fraud or noncompli and
cost of assur in relat to potenti benefit
1220a3
intern auditor must be alert to the signific risk that might affect object oper
or resourc howev assur procedur alon even when perform with due
profession care do not guarante that all signific risk will be identifi
standard 2060report to senior manag and the board
the chief audit execut must report period to senior manag and the board on
the intern audit activ purpos author respons and perform rel to it
plan report must also includ signific risk exposur and control issu includ
fraud risk govern issu and other matter need or request by senior manag
and the board
standard 2110govern
the intern audit activ must assess and make appropri recommend for
improv the govern process in it accomplish of the follow object
promot appropri ethic and valu within the organ
ensur effect organiz perform manag and account
commun risk and control inform to appropri area of the organ
and
coordin the activ of and commun inform among the board extern
and intern auditor and manag
2110a1
the intern audit activ must evalu the design implement and effect of the
organ ethicsrel object program and activ
standard 2120risk manag
the intern audit activ must evalu the effect and contribut to the
improv of risk manag process
2120a1
the intern audit activ must evalu risk exposur relat to the organ
govern oper and inform system regard the
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1244 2011 fraud examin manual
reliabl and integr of financi and oper inform
effect and effici of oper
safeguard of asset and
complianc with law regul and contract
2120a2
the intern audit activ must evalu the potenti for the occurr of fraud and how
the organ manag fraud risk
standard 2130control
the intern audit activ must assist the organ in maintain effect control by
evalu their effect and effici and by promot continu improv
2130a1
the intern audit activ must evalu the adequaci and effect of control in
respond to risk within the organ govern oper and inform
system regard the
reliabl and integr of financi and oper inform
effect and effici of oper
safeguard of asset and
complianc with law regul and contract
standard 2210engag object
object must be establish for each engag
2210a1
intern auditor must conduct a preliminari assess of the risk relev to the activ
under review engag object must reflect the result of thi assess
2210a2
intern auditor must consid the probabl of signific error fraud noncompli
and other exposur when develop the engag object
iia ippfpractic guid intern audit and fraud
to help auditor compli with their respons pertain to fraud the iia in decemb
of 2009 releas ippfpractic guid intern audit and fraud practic guid although
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1245
not mandatori the guidanc includ in the practic guid is strongli recommend
specif the practic guid address fraud awar potenti fraud indic role
and respons for fraud prevent and detect the intern auditor role dure
audit engag fraud risk assess fraud prevent and detect fraud
investig and form an opinion on intern control relat to fraud the practic
guid also includ an appendix that list ippf practic advisori that pertain to fraud
follow is a discuss of select topic from the practic guid the complet guid is
avail from the iia websit wwwtheiiaorg
intern audit role in fight fraud
fight fraud in an organ requir the combin effort of mani differ
depart includ intern audit intern auditor assist in the prevent and detect
of fraud by evalu the adequaci and effect of intern control assist
manag in establish effect fraud prevent measur proactiv audit for
fraud and investig suspect fraud specif the practic guid state that in
conduct audit engag the intern auditor should
consid fraud risk in the assess of intern control design and determin of
audit step to perform
have suffici knowledg of fraud to identifi red flag indic fraud mai have been
commit
be alert to opportun that could allow fraud such as control defici
evalu whether manag is activ retain respons for oversight of the
fraud risk manag program whether time and suffici correct measur have
been taken with respect to ani note control defici or weak and whether
the plan for monitor the program continu to be adequ for the program ongo
success
evalu the indic of fraud and decid whether ani further action is necessari or
whether an investig should be recommend
recommend investig when appropri
the role intern audit plai in fraud investig vari by organ intern audit mai
have primari respons for fraud investig mai serv as a resourc for the
investig or mai have no involv at all in the investig for intern auditor
who find themselv involv in fraud investig the practic guid discuss the
investig process the role of the intern auditor conduct the investig report
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1246 2011 fraud examin manual
the investig resolut and commun of fraud incid and analysi of lesson
learn
the practic guid also emphas that intern auditor must exercis profession
skeptic an attitud that includ a question mind and a critic assess of audit
evid in all audit work by exercis profession skeptic and focus on the
effect of intern control auditor increas the likelihood that thei will uncov
possibl fraudul activ
other role and respons for fraud prevent and detect
other typic role and respons for fraud detect and prevent outlin in the
practic guid includ the follow
board of director the board of director is respons for effect and respons
corpor fraud govern and is task with overse manag action to manag
fraud risk
audit committe the audit committe role is to evalu manag identif of
fraud risk and the implement of antifraud measur and to provid the tone at the
top that fraud will not be accept in ani form the audit committe is also respons for
overse control to prevent or detect manag fraud
manag manag is respons for overse the activ of employe
assess the vulner of the entiti to fraud and establish and maintain an
effect intern control system at a reason cost
legal counsel legal counsel advis the organ on legal matter pertain to fraud
extern auditor extern auditor have a respons to compli with profession
standard and to plan and perform the audit of the organ financi statement to
obtain reason assur about whether the financi statement ar free of materi
misstat whether caus by error or fraud for more inform on the extern
auditor respons for fraud see the previou section extern auditor
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1247
loss prevent managerth loss prevent manag deal with crime disast
accid wast and other busi risk and usual work close with intern auditor to
identifi area of weak intern control within the organ
fraud investig fraud investig ar respons for detect and investig
fraud and recov asset
other employe all employe have a respons to report suspici activ to a
hotlin the intern audit depart or manag
gao audit standard
standard for govern auditor ar fundament base on the gener accept
audit standard gaa set for auditor of public compani howev for audit of
govern organ program activ function and fund the requir of
govern audit standard also known as the yellow book go beyond gaa the
follow discuss of the yellow book standard is base upon the juli 2007 revis of
the standard for more inform pleas see the full text of the gao standard avail
at wwwgaogov
purpos and applic
the yellow book provid gener a ccept govern audit standard gaga that
form a framework of guidanc for auditor of govern entiti and entiti that receiv
govern award audit perform us yellow book standard provid inform
that is us for oversight account and improv of govern program and
oper by follow the requir and guidanc contain in gaga auditor
perform their duti in a wai that can lead to improv govern manag better
decis make and oversight effect and effici oper and account for
resourc and result
the us of gaga standard is frequent requir under specif law regul
contract grant agreement or polici howev mani auditor and organ mai
voluntarili choos to adher to the standard as well as such the standard in the yellow
book appli to audit and attest engag of govern entiti program
activ and function and of govern assist administ by contractor
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1248 2011 fraud examin manual
nonprofit entiti and other nongovernment entiti when the us of gaga is requir
or is voluntarili follow
ethic principl in govern audit
manag
accord to the yellow book manag is re sponsibl for set the ethic tone of the
organ by
maintain and demonstr an ethic cultur
clearli commun expect about accept behavior to employe and
creat an environ that reinforc and encourag ethic behavior throughout the
organ
auditor
the yellow book stress the import of the auditor ethic respons while
conduct govern audit emphas that the public expect auditor in the
govern sector to conduct their profession work in accord with ethic principl
to underscor thi respons gaga lai out five specif overarch ethic
principl that must guid the work of all auditor perform govern audit
engag
the public interest
serv the public interest and honor the public trust ar crucial compon of the
auditor respons when perform en gagement in the govern environ
gaga defin the public interest as the collect wellb of the commun of peopl
and entiti the auditor serv
integr
to strengthen the public confid in the govern auditor must maintain the highest
level of integr when discharg their profession duti dure a gaga engag
thi involv conduct the audit with an attitud that is object factbas
nonpartisan and nonideolog with regard to audit entiti and user of the auditor
report specif auditor ar instruct to
ensur that all commun regard the audit ar honest candid and construct
make decis that ar consist with the public interest of the program or activ
under audit and
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1249
place prioriti on their respons to the public interest in resolv ani conflict
pressur that mai aris dure the audit engag
object
the auditor credibl in perform an audit of a government entiti is base upon hi
abil to remain object gaga state that object includ
be independ in fact and appear
maintain an attitud of imparti
have intellectu honesti and
be free of conflict of interest
proper us of govern inform resourc and posit
dure an audit of a government entiti the auditor must us all govern inform
resourc and posit for offici purpos onli auditor must not us their access to
these asset for person gain in illeg manner or to the detriment of the legitim
interest of the audit entiti
profession behavior
in conduct an audit or attest engag for a government entiti auditor must
behav in a profession manner thi includ
compli with law and regul
avoid ani conduct that mai discredit the auditor work and
put forth an honest effort in perform their duti and profession servic
type of govern audit engag
the yellow book describ and promulg standard for two type of audit that
govern and nongovern audit organ conduct financi audit and
perform audit the yellow book also contain standard cover attest
engag such as examin and review and other nonaudit servic perform on
govern organ and program
financi audit
financi audit ar defin as those audit that provid an independ assess of
whether an entiti report financi condit result and us of resourc ar present
fairli in accord with recogn criteria in addit to tradit financi statement
audit the yellow book also includ in thi categori those engag for
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1250 2011 fraud examin manual
report on intern control complianc with law and regul and provis of
contract and grant agreement as thei relat to financi transact system
and process
provid special report for specifi element account or item of a
financi statement
review interim financi inform
issu letter for underwrit or other request parti
report on the process of transact by servic organ and
audit complianc with regul relat to feder award expenditur and other
government financi assist in conjunct with or as a byproduct of a financi
statement audit
perform audit
perform audit ar describ in the yellow book as audit that provid assur or
conclus base on an evalu of suffici appropri evid against state criteria
such as specif requir measur or defin busi practic the object of
these audit can vari and mai includ the assess of program economi effici or
effect intern control complianc and prospect analys addition a
perform audit mai cover more than on of these object
attest engag
attest engag can cover financi or nonfinanci inform these
engag involv express a specifi level of assur about the subject matter or
assert relat to the subject matter depend on the user need there ar three type
of attest engag
examin which involv express an opinion on whether the subject matter is
base on or in conform with the criteria in all materi respect or the assert is
present or fairli state in all materi respect base on the criteria
review consist of express of a conclus about whether ani inform came
to the auditor attent that indic that the subject matter is not base on or not
in conform with the criteria or the assert is not present or not fairli state in
all materi respect base on the criteria
agreedupon procedur engag which involv perform specif procedur on
the subject matter
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1251
audit standard
the yellow book set out three type of govern audit standard gener standard field
work standard and report standard the gener standard appli to both financi and
perform audit howev gaga provid a separ set of field work and report
standard for each type of govern audit addition the yellow book provid a
separ set of standard gener field work and report for attest engag
the discuss below contain a brief overview of the yellow book standard for audit
engag
gener standard
the follow gener standard coupl with the ethic principl outlin abov establish
a foundat for credibl of auditor work
independ
both the audit organ and the individu auditor must remain independ in both fact
and appear throughout the engag so that all opinion conclus judgment and
recommend made by the auditor will be imparti and will be view as imparti by
knowledg third parti in determin independ auditor must consid three
type of potenti impair person impair such as famili relationship financi
interest or bias extern impair aris from actual or perceiv pressur from the
audit organ manag or employe and organiz impair which occur
when the audit function is organization locat within the report line of the area
under audit or when the auditor is assign or take on respons that affect oper
of the area under audit
the perform of nonaudit servic must also be consid when assess auditor
independ specif auditor must appli the follow two principl in regard to
maintain independ while perform nonaudit servic for an audit program or
entiti
audit organ must not provid nonaudit servic that involv perform
manag function or make manag decis and
audit organ must not audit their own work or provid nonaudit servic in
situat in which the nonaudit servic ar signific or materi to the subject matter
of the audit
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1252 2011 fraud examin manual
profession judgment
the auditor must us profession judgment includ exercis profession skeptic
and reason care in plan perform and report the result of the audit or
attest engag in appli profession judgment it is imper that the auditor
retain an attitud of profession skeptic assum that manag is neither inher
honest nor inher dishonest thu auditor must approach the engag with a
question mind and a critic assess of all evid the applic of profession
judgment also requir auditor to us their profession knowledg skill and experi to
dilig gather inform and object evalu the suffici and appropri of
evid
compet
the staff assign to an engag must collect possess adequ profession
knowledg skill and experi to properli conduct the audit the necessari compet
includ knowledg of gaga and other applic audit and account standard
gener knowledg of the organ oper environ skill to commun
clearli and effect both oral and in write and ani specif skill appropri to the
work be perform such as statist sampl skill or inform technolog skill in
order to maintain their profession compet all auditor perform government
audit must meet the continu profession educ requir under gaga
qualiti control and assur
audit organ perform govern audit must have an intern qualiti control
system in place thi system is compos of the organ leadership and it polici
and procedur establish to provid reason assur that the organ is in
complianc with all applic audit standard as part of the system organ should
establish polici and procedur that collect address
leadership respons for qualiti of audit and attest engag
independ legal and ethic requir
initi accept and continu of audit and attest engag
human resourc issu
perform document and report of audit and attest engag and
monitor of qualiti
addition audit organ conduct audit and attest under gaga must
have period extern peer review of their audit and attest engag practic at
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1253
least onc everi three year in addit the result of the most recent peer review should be
made publicli avail
field work standard for financi audit
gaga field work standard for financi audit includ the three gener accept
standard of fieldwork establish by the aicpa as well as five addit fieldwork
standard
the three aicpa standard of fieldwork ar as follow
the auditor must adequ plan the work and must properli supervis ani assist
the auditor must obtain a suffici understand of the entiti and it environ
includ it intern control to assess the risk of materi misstat of the financi
statement whether due to error or fraud and to design the natur time and extent of
further audit procedur
the auditor must obtain suffici appropri audit evid by perform procedur
to afford a reason basi for an opinion regard financi statement under audit
the five addit fieldwork standard prescrib by gaga state that
auditor should commun with the audit entiti their understand of the servic
to be perform for each engag and document that understand through a
written commun in their commun auditor should specif address
their plan work and the level of assur to be provid relat to test intern
control over financi report and complianc with law regul and provis of
contract or grant agreement auditor should also commun ani potenti
restrict on the auditor report in order to reduc the risk that the need or
expect of the parti involv mai be misinterpret
auditor should evalu whether the audit entiti ha taken appropri correct
action to address find and recommend from previou engag that could
have a materi effect on the financi statement
auditor should design the audit to provid reason assur of detect materi
misstat result from violat of contract provis or grant agreement that
have a direct and materi effect on the determin of financi statement amount if
dure the cours of the audit auditor becom awar of indic of abus that could
have a materi indirect effect on the financi statement auditor should appli audit
procedur specif direct to ascertain whether materi abus ha occur and the
potenti effect on the financi statement or other financi data signific to the audit
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1254 2011 fraud examin manual
object howev becaus the determin of abus is subject auditor ar not
requir to provid reason assur of detect abus
when auditor identifi problem such as intern control defici fraud illeg act
violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or abus thei should plan
audit procedur to develop an explan of the criteria condit caus and effect or
potenti effect of the problem to facilit the achiev of the audit object
audit document should contain suffici inform to provid a clear
understand of the work perform the audit evid obtain and it sourc and
the conclus reach the audit document should enabl an experienc auditor
have no previou connect with the audit to understand from the document
the natur time extent and result of the audit procedur perform the conclus
reach on signific matter and that the account record reconcil to the financi
statement the document should be complet prior to the issuanc of the
auditor report and should also includ evid of supervisori review of the work
perform as well as ani departur from gaga
report standard for financi audit
for report standard for financi statement audit gaga incorpor the follow
four aicpa gener accept standard of report
the auditor report must state whether the financi statement ar present in
accord with gener accept account principl gaap
the auditor report must identifi ani circumst in which gaap wa not
consist appli in the current period in relat to the preced period
inform disclosur in the financi statement ar consid reason adequ
unless otherwis state in the auditor report
the auditor report must contain either an express of opinion regard the financi
statement taken as a whole or an assert that such an opinion cannot be express
if an overal opinion cannot be express the reason should be state in all case
where an auditor name is associ with financi statement the report should
contain a clearcut indic of the charact of the auditor work if ani and the
degre of respons the auditor is take
gaga prescrib eight addit report standard for govern financi audit thei
ar
the auditor report should specif state that the audit wa perform in accord
with gaga
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1255
the auditor report should either 1 describ the scope of the auditor test intern
control over financi report and complianc with law regul and provis of
contract or grant agreement and present the result of those test or an opinion if
suffici work wa perform or 2 refer to separ report contain that
inform if a separ report is us the auditor report should state that the
separ report is an integr part of the audit and should be consid in assess the
result of the audit
auditor should report 1 signific defici and materi weak in intern
control 2 all materi instanc of fraud and illeg act and 3 signific violat of
contract provis or grant agreement and abus in some situat the auditor
should report the occurr of these problem directli to parti outsid of the audit
organ
auditor mai add a separ paragraph or separ section of the auditor report to
emphas certain inform that mai be critic to the proper us and understand
of the audit financi statement exampl of matter that requir such emphasi mai
includ signific uncertainti and catastroph or unusu event
auditor have specif respons relat to potenti materi misstat and
restat of previouslyissu financi statement in situat where auditor
becom awar of new inform that previous issu financi statement were
materi misstat and that manag intend to restat and reissu the misstat
financi statement auditor should advis manag to disclos the inform and
it impact on the financi statement to parti who reli on the financi statement
addition the auditor must 1 evalu the timeli and appropri of
manag disclosur of the misstat and the action taken to correct the
misstat 2 perform audit procedur suffici to reissu or updat the auditor
report on the restat financi statement and 3 report directli to appropri offici
when the audit entiti doe not take the necessari step
if the auditor report contain ani disclosur regard defici in intern control
fraud illeg act violat of contract provis or grant agreement or abus the
report should also includ the view of the organ respons offici
concern the find conclus and recommend as well as ani plan
correct action
if ani pertin inform about the audit entiti is prohibit by law or regul
from be disclos to the gener public the auditor report should state the natur of
the omit inform and the reason for it omiss
govern auditor should submit their audit report to those charg with
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1256 2011 fraud examin manual
govern to the appropri offici of the audit organ to the parti
requir or arrang for the audit to offici with oversight author for the
organ to parti who mai be respons for act on audit find and
recommend and to other who ar author to receiv such report
nongovern auditor should distribut the report accord to applic audit
standard as well as the agreement reach with the parti contract the audit
field work standard for perform audit
the gaga field work standard for perform audit relat to plan the audit
supervis staff obtain suffici appropri evid and prepar audit
document
auditor must adequ plan and document the plan of the audit work thi
includ assess signific defin as the rel import of a matter within the
context in which it is be consid includ quantit and qualit factor
and audit risk defin as the possibl that the auditor find conclus
recommend or assur mai be improp or incomplet as a result of factor
such as evid that is not suffici andor appropri an inadequ audit process
or intent omiss or mislead inform due to misrepresent or fraud
while defin the audit object scope and methodolog addition as part of
plan the engag auditor must
consid the natur and profil of the entiti as well as the need of the user of the
audit report
consid the entiti intern control and inform system control
consid all signific legal and regulatori requir contract provis grant
agreement and potenti fraud and abus affect the audit entiti
consid the result of previou audit and attest engag
identifi potenti criteria need to evalu the audit matter and potenti sourc
of audit evid base on the amount and type of evid need
consid reli on the work of other auditor and expert to help achiev audit
object
assign staff and specialist with suffici profession compet to perform the
audit
identifi other resourc need to complet the audit
commun matter about the audit plan and perform to manag
offici and
prepar a written audit plan
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1257
audit supervisor must properli supervis the audit staff which involv provid
guidanc and direct to the staff stai inform about signific problem
encount review the work perform and provid effect onthejob train
auditor must obtain suffici appropri evid to provid a reason basi for
the auditor find conclus and recommend
auditor should prepar suffici detail audit document to provid a clear
understand of the natur time extent and result of the work perform the
evid obtain and it sourc and the conclus reach
report standard for perform audit
the yellow book standard for perform audit relat to the form of the report the
report content and the report issuanc and distribut
auditor should prepar audit report commun the result of each audit the
report should be written or present in some other retriev form and should be
appropri for it intend us
the auditor report should contain
the audit object scope and methodolog
the audit result includ find conclus and recommend
a refer to complianc with gaga
the view of respons offici and
the natur of ani privileg and confidenti inform omit if applic
the report find should includ ani signific defici in intern control all
materi instanc of fraud and illeg act signific violat of provis of
contract or grant agreement and signific abus
govern auditor should submit audit report to those charg with govern to
the appropri offici of the audit entiti and to the appropri oversight bodi or
organ requir or arrang for the audit auditor should also send copi of
the report to other offici who have legal oversight author or who mai be
respons for act on audit find and recommend and to other author
to receiv such report
in addit to these standard auditor should refer to au 801 sa no 74 complianc
audit consider in audit of government entiti and recipi of government financi
assist thi standard incorpor a discuss of respons under certain law and
govern bulletin and auditor should know these requir a thorough review of
thi statement will provid addit guidanc
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1258 2011 fraud examin manual
more inform about the yellow book and govern audit is contain in the
chapter entitl public sector fraud the fu ll text of all of the govern audit
standard is also avail at the govern account offic websit
wwwgaogov
certifi fraud examin
certifi fraud examin ar not normal respons for the initi detect of fraud
instead certifi fraud examin usual becom involv after suffici predic
exist certifi fraud examin commonli supervis or direct a fraud examin or
investig the respons of certifi fraud examin ar to
help resolv alleg of fraud from incept to disposit
obtain evid
take statement
write report of fraud examin
testifi to find
assist in fraud detect and prevent
help resolv alleg of fraud
alleg of fraud often ar base on insuffici evid thei must be resolv through
law evidencegath method the certifi fraud examin code of profession
ethic requir certifi fraud examin to assist in that resolut the disposit of a
case might be a settlement or some other form of agreement rather than a trial and
convict or acquitt
obtain evid
certifi fraud examin ar respons for gather and maintain custodi of
evid that will either confirm or refut a fraud alleg the avail evid might
demonstr that the fraud alleg is without merit such evid is equal as import
as evid that might prove the commiss of fraud
take statement
certifi fraud examin us the skill of interview these skill ar invalu in
obtain statement from wit as well as secur admiss of guilt from
perpetr
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1259
write report
report write is an import step in fraud examin the report is a narrat of the
seri of event that ha occur the wit who will testifi to the fact and if
appropri the sign admiss of the perpetr
testifi to find
certifi fraud examin might testifi to the find of an examin although thi
step is not alwai necessari for exampl in case that do not proce to trial it is
import that all examin be conduct under the premis that the case will go to trial
and testimoni will be requir keep thi premis in mind help the fraud examin
rememb to take the time to perform the examin scrupul
assist in the detect and prevent of fraud
becaus of their educ experi and train certifi fraud examin ar uniqu
qualifi to assist compani with proactiv fraud prevent and detect program
certifi fraud examin assist in the investig of fraud alleg and also aid
manag with design and implement intern control system so that fraud
scheme will be less common and not go undetect
it is common for a certifi fraud examin to hold anoth design such as certifi
public account certifi protect profession or certifi intern auditor deal
with account and audit matter often requir the opinion of these profession
although certifi fraud examin might hold other design thei ar bound by the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic which specif state in part
a certifi fraud examin when conduct examin will obtain evid or other
document to establish a reason basi for ani opinion requir no opinion shall be
express regard the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti
thi articl mean that the certifi fraud examin will not express an opinion even if
person convinc of the guilt of an individu determin the guilt or innoc of an
individu is reserv for a judg and juri the certifi fraud examin is a gather of
fact not the ultim judg of them
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1260 2011 fraud examin manual
sampl document retent polici
thi is onli a sampl document retent polici drp and is not legal
advic it is onli an exampl of a gener drp and should not be us without revis to meet the
particular administr and legal need of your organi zation there ar mani feder state and local law
that requir organ to retain document for a certain period of time that mai not be repres in thi
sampl polici all compani should contact counsel licens to practic law in their state befor implement
a drp
i purpos
to ensur the most effici and effect oper of organ organ we ar
implement thi document retent polici drp or polici the record of organ and it
subsidiari ar import to the proper function of organ our record includ virtual all
of the record you produc as an organ employe such record can be in electron or paper
form thu item that you mai not consid import such as interoffic email desktop
calendar and print memoranda ar record that ar consid import under thi polici if you
ar ever uncertain as to ani procedur set forth in thi polici eg what record to retain or destroi
when to do so or how to do so it is your respons to seek answer from organ drp
manag
the goal of thi drp ar to
1 retain import document for refer and futur us
2 delet document that ar no longer necessari for the proper function of organ
3 organ import document for effici retriev and
4 ensur that you as an organ employe know what document should be retain
the length of their retent mean of storag and when and how thei should be destroi
feder and state law requir organ to maintain certain type of record for particular
period failur to maintain such record could subject you and organ to penalti and fine
obstruct justic spoil legal evid andor serious harm organ posit in litig
thu it is imper that you fulli understand and compli with thi and ani futur record
retent or destruct polici and schedul unless you have been notifi by organ or
if you believ that 1 such record ar or could be relev to ani futur litig 2 there is a
disput that could lead to litig or 3 organ is a parti to a lawsuit in which case you
must preserv such record until organ legal counsel determin that the record ar
no longer need
record discuss herein refer to all busi record of organ and is us
interchang with document includ written print and record materi as well as
electron record ie email and document save electron all busi record shall be
retain for a period no longer than necessari for the proper conduct and function of
organ no busi record shall be retain longer than five 5 year except those that
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1261
1 have time period provid for herein 2 ar in the document retent schedul found at
appendix a or 3 ar specif exempt by organ drp manag
ii manag
to ensur complianc with thi drp organ drp manag is respons for the follow
oversight function
implement the drp
ensur that employe ar properli educ understand and follow the drp purpos
provid oversight on actual retent and destruct of document
ensur proper storag of document
period followingup with counsel to ensur proper retent period ar in place
ensur the proper storag of document
suspend the destruct of document upon forese litig and
keep corpor offic director and employe inform of chang in relat to the
drp
organ drp manag shall annual review the drp modifi it accordingli and inform and
educ all organ employe on ani such chang all question relat to document
retent andor destruct should be directli address to organ drp manag
iii type of record
appendix a attach at the end of thi drp list sever categori of record as well as specif
record that contain specif retent period thi is refer to as a document retent schedul
dr all record not provid for in the dr or describ herein shall be classifi into three
type 1 temporari record 2 final record and 3 perman record 1
temporari record
temporari record consist of all busi document that have not been complet includ but
not limit to written memoranda and dictat to be type in the futur remind todo list
report case studi and calcul draft interoffic correspond regard a client or busi
transact and run log
temporari record can be destroi or perman delet if in electron form see protocol
below for proper destruct of data in electron form when a projectcasefil close upon the
close of a projectcasefil gather and review all such temporari record befor you destroi or
perman delet these document make sure you have duplic of all the final record pertain
1 see ashcraft h document retent gu idelin for manag project file februari 2002 avail at
httpterrarrgcomimagespdfsdocumentretentionpdf
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1262 2011 fraud examin manual
to the projectcasefil upon destruct or delet organ the final record and duplic in a
file mark final and store them appropri
final record
final record includ all busi document that ar not supersed by modif or addit
such as but not limit to document given or sent via electron form to ani thirdparti not
emploi by organ or govern agenc final memoranda and report correspond
handwritten telephon memoranda not further transcrib minut designplan specif
journal entri and cost estim all account record shall be deem final
except as provid for in the dr all final document ar to be discard 10 year after the close of
a projectcasefil
perman record
perman record includ all busi document that defin organ scope of work
express of profession opinion research and refer materi and includ but ar not
limit to contract propos materi referenc ing expert opinion annual financi statement
feder tax return payrol regist copyright registr and patent
except as provid for in the document retent schedul appendix a all perman
document ar to be retain indefinit
account and corpor tax record
account and corpor tax record includ but ar not limit to financi statement ledger
audit record invoic and expens record feder state and properti tax return payrol
account procedur gross receipt custom record and purchas
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of six year
or until the statut of limit for a particular record expir pleas consult organ counsel
for time period if you managecontrol such record
workplac record
workplac record includ but ar not limit to articl of incorpor bylaw meet
minut deed and titl leas polici statement contract and agreement and patent and
trademark record
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain in perpetu
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1263
employ employe and payrol record
employ record includ but ar not limit to job announc and advertis
employ applic background investig resum and letter of recommend for
person not hire
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of on year
employe record includ but ar not limit to employ applic background
investig resum and letter of recommend of current and past employe and record
relat to current and past employe perform review and complaint
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of three year
follow unemploy with organ
payrol record includ but ar not limit to wage rate tabl salari histor y current rate of pai
payrol deduct time card form w2 and w4 and bonus
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of six year
bank record
bank record includ but ar not limit to bank deposit check copi stop payment order bank
statement check signatur author and bank reconcili
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of three
year
legal record
legal record includ but ar not limit to a ll contract all legal record statement and
correspond trademark and copyright registr patent person injuri record and
statement press releas and public find
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of 10 year
histor record
histor record ar those that ar no longer of us to organ but by virtu of their ag or
research valu mai be of histor interest or signific to organ histor record should
be retain indefinit
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1264 2011 fraud examin manual
iv storag
tangibl record
tangibl record ar those which you must physic move to store such as paper record includ
print version of electron save document photograph audio record advertis
and promot item activ record and record that need to be readili access mai be store in
organ offic space or equip inact record can be sent to organ offsit
storag facil
electron record
electron mail email should be either print and store as tangibl evid or store
electron
organ ha comput softwar that duplic file which ar then back up on central
server if you have a notebook comput from organ that you work on out of the offic
your comput contain synchron softwar that duplic and back up file when you log
into the network howev it is import that all employe take precautionari measur to save
work and record on organ network drive
v destruct delet
tangibl record
tangibl record should be destroi by shred or some other mean that will render them
unread if you have a record that you do not know how to destroi such as a photograph
compact disk or tape record ask the advic of organ drp manag
electron record
email record that you delet remain in organi zation system thu organ inform
technolog it depart will be respons for perman remov delet email from the
comput system
delet file and empti the recycl bin is usual suffici in most circumst to get rid of a
record howev becaus electron record can be store in mani locat organ it
depart will be respons for perman remov delet file from the comput system
keep in mind where duplic record ar involv both must be destroyeddelet where proper
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1265
vi cessat of record destruct delet
if a lawsuit is file or immin or a legal document request ha been made upon organ all
record destruct must ceas immedi organ drp manag mai
suspend thi drp to requir that document relat to the lawsuit or potenti legal issu be
retain and organ a critic understand of thi section is imper should you fail to
follow thi protocol you andor organ mai be subject to fine and penalti among other
sanction
vii acknowledg
i have read and understand the purpos of thi drp i understand that strict adher to thi drp
is a condit of my employ with organ if i do not understand someth regard thi
drp i will contact organ drp manag im mediat for clarif i agre to abid by
organ drp
employe signatur date
employe name print
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1266 2011 fraud examin manual
sampl document retent schedul
thi is onli a sampl document retent schedul dr and is
not legal advic there ar mani feder state and local law that requir
organ to retain document for a certain period of time that mai be differ in your state or
differ to your particular industri or that mai not be repres in thi sampl polici all
compani should contact counsel licens to practic law in their state for proper retent period
type of record specif record suggest retent period
account record
annual financi statement perman
monthli financi statement 3 year
gener ledger 20 year
annual audit record 10 year
journal entri 8 year
special report 8 year
cancel check 8 year
ap paid invoic 8 year
busi expens record 8 year
credit card receipt 3 year
cash receipt 3 year
ar invoic 8 year
data for acquisitionsdivestitur perman
data for abort
acquisitionsdivestitur
5 year
account payabl 7 year
account receiv 7 year
audit report 7 year
chart of account perman
expens record 7 year
inventori record 7 year
loan document 7 year after final payment
purchas order 7 year
sale record 7 year
stop payment order 3 year
bank reconcili 3 year
tax record
feder tax return nonpayrol perman
state local tax return nonperman
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1267
payrol
form 990 and support
document
perman
form 990t and support
document
perman
support document for
tax
4 year
citi and state excis tax report
and support document
5 year or longer if design
by state law
unclaim properti file and
support document
6 year or longer if design
by state law
form 1099 8 year
magnet tape and similar record 1 year
payrol tax form w2 and w3 perman
payrol tax form 940 and
941 state withhold return
and state unemploy return
8 year or longer if design
by state law
payrol record
wage rate tabl 3 year
cost of live tabl 3 year
wage histori 6 year
salari histori 6 year
payrol deduct 6 year
time card or form 5 year
form w2 8 year
form w4 8 year
garnish 4 year follow unemploy
payrol regist perman
state employ form 4 year
state unemploy tax record perman
cancel payrol check 8 year
deduct regist 8 year
earn record 8 year
chang or adjust to
salari
8 year
insur record
polici includ expir
polici
perman
claim for lossdamag accid
report apprais
5 year
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1268 2011 fraud examin manual
workplac record
incorpor and reorgan
record articl of
incorpor bylaw etc
perman
meet minut perman
polici statement 10 year
employe directori 5 year
legal record
gener contract 3 year after termin
real estat contract and record 20 yearsperman
person injuri record 8 year
trademark registr perman
copyright registr perman
patent perman
litig claim 5 year follow close of case
court document and record 5 year follow close of case
deposit transcript 5 year follow close of case
discoveri materi 3 year follow close of case
leas 6 year after termin
personnel record
employ applic
person not hire
1 year
employ applic
person hire
3 year follow employ
employe resum and
employ histori
3 year follow employ
period
evalu 3 year follow employ
promot rais
reclassif and job
descript
5 year follow employ
disciplinari warn
demot layoff and
discharg
5 year follow employ
employ and termin
agreement
perman
promot and rais 3 year follow employ
beneficiari inform 3 year follow employ
medic and safeti record 6 year
accid report 6 year
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1269
educ assist while emploi
sickleav benefit while emploi
retir plan after
expir
6 year
incent plan after expir 6 year
pension plan after expir 6 year
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1301
financi statement fraud
financi statement scheme ar on of a larg categori of fraud that fall under the head
of occup fraud and abus which is defin as the us of on occup for person
enrich through the deliber misus or misappl of the emploi organ
resourc or asset simpli state occup fraud ar those in which an employe
manag offic or owner of an organ commit fraud to the detriment of that
organ the three major type of occup fraud ar corrupt asset
misappropri and fraudul statement which includ financi statement scheme
the complet classif of occup fraud is shown below
financi statement fraud financi transact
1302 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1303
what is financi statement fraud
financi statement fraud is the deliber misrepresent of the financi condit of an
enterpris accomplish through the intent misstat or omiss of amount or
disclosur in the financi statement to deceiv financi statement user
financi statement fraud is usual a mean to an end rather than an end in itself when
peopl cook the book thei mai be do it to bui more time to quietli fix busi
problem that prevent their compani from achiev it expect earn or compli
with loan coven it mai also be done to obtain or renew financ that would not be
grant or would be smaller if honest financi statement were provid peopl who ar
intent on profit from crime mai commit financi statement fraud to obtain loan thei
can then siphon off for person gain or to inflat the price of the compani share
allow them to sell their hold or exercis stock option at a profit howev in mani
past case of financi statement fraud the perpetr have gain littl or noth
person in financi term instead the focu appear to have been preserv their statu
as leader of the organizationa statu that might have been lost had the real financi
result been publish promptli
financi statement fraud usual involv overst asset revenu and profit and
underst liabil expens and loss howev the overal object of the
manipul mai sometim requir the opposit action eg conceal overbudget result
in a good year in order to help the subsequ year which is expect to be tougher
the cost of financi statement fraud
financi statement fraud frequent ha a devast impact on the reput and the
financi posit of organ and peopl involv the stock market capit of
compani affect by financi statement fraud mai fall substanti almost overnight
lose billion of dollar for investor a 2006 report by the unit state govern
account offic gao06678 found that in the three trade dai surround the
initi announc of a restat the compani studi lost an adjust amount of 36
billion in market capit
financi statement fraud financi transact
1304 2011 fraud examin manual
mani job mai be lost as compani restructu re to try to restor profit as media
interview of former enron employe show financi statement fraud can exert a high
toll on the wellb of employe who mai lose their job their pension their save
invest in their employ stock and health care and other benefit the compani
auditor ar like to be su for the amount of investor loss which these dai mai mean
ten of billion of dollar for larg public compani for larg and small compani alik
financi statement fraud can be huge costli and potenti a corpor deathblow
why financi statement fraud is commit
there ar a number of reason why individu commit financi statement fraud most
commonli financi statement fraud is us to make a compani earn look better on
paper it sometim cover up the embezzl of compani fund financi fraud occur
through a varieti of method such as valuat judgment and fine point of time the
record of transact these more subtl type of fraud ar often dismiss as either
mistak or error in judgment and estim some of the more common reason why
peopl commit financi statement fraud includ
to encourag invest through the sale of stock
to demonstr increas earn per share or partnership profit interest thu
allow increas dividenddistribut payout
to cover inabl to gener cash flow
to dispel neg market percept
to obtain financ or to obtain more favor term on exist financ
to receiv higher purchas price for acquisit
to demonstr complianc with financ coven
to meet compani goal and object
to receiv performancerel bonus
thi limit list of reason show that the motiv for financi fraud doe not alwai
involv direct person financi gain sometim the caus of fraudul financi report
is the combin of situat pressur on either the compani or the manag and the
opportun to commit the fraud without the percept of be detect these pressur
ar known as red flag that is to sai if red flag situat pressur and opportun
ar present then the risk of financi report fraud increas significantli
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1305
exampl of situat pressur includ
sudden decreas in revenu or market share experienc by a compani or an industri
unrealist budget pressur particularli for shortterm result the pressur becom
even greater with arbitrarili establish budget that ar without refer to current
condit
financi pressur result from bonu plan that depend on shortterm econom
perform these pressur ar particularli acut if the bonu is a signific
compon of the individu total compens
opportun to commit fraud most often aris gradual gener these opportun can
stem from a lack of adequ oversight function within the compani the exist of an
oversight function doe not in and of itself guarante the detect of fraudul act the
oversight function must also respond effect the percept of detect not intern
control per se is arguabl the strongest deterr to fraud
some of the more obviou opportun for the exist of fraud ar
absenc of a board of director or audit committe
improp oversight or other neglect behavior by the board of director or audit
committe
weak or nonexist intern control includ an ineffect intern audit staff and a
lack of extern audit
unusu or complex transact an understand of the transact their compon
part and their impact on financi statement is paramount to fraud deterr
financi estim that requir signific subject judgment by manag
trend in financi statement fraud
financi statement fraud is estim to compris about 10 percent of all occup
fraud accord to the acf 2010 report to the nation on occup fraud a nd abus
fraudul statement compris 48 percent of the fraud report in the studi with a
median loss of 4100000 howev it is im portant to note that quot loss result
from financi statement fraud ar often measur lost market capit or lost
sharehold valu rather than direct loss of financi asset thi doe not make the scheme
ani less harm in fact the lost sharehold valu result from financi statement fraud
can have crippl effect on even the largest compani as we have seen with highprofil
financi statement fraud financi transact
1306 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud such as the enron and worldcom scandal it can also have a tremend impact on
the organ sharehold
similar result came out of a secur and exchang commiss sec studi requir
under the sarbanesoxlei act sox the agen cy wa charg with review incid of
financi statement fraud in the five year prior to passag of the legisl from juli 31
1997 through juli 30 2002 the sec file 51 5 enforc action for financi report
and disclosur violat aris out of 227 divis of enforc investig
enforc matter the 515 action includ 869 name parti consist of 164
entiti and 705 individu the yearoveryear number reveal the grow problem of
financi report violat dure the studi period
sourc sec report pursuant to section 704 of the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002
httpwwwsecgovnewss tudiessox704reportpdf
most of the action involv improp revenu recognit in 126 of the 227 enforc
matter manag report fictiti sale improperli time revenu recognit or
improperli valu revenu anoth 101 enforc matter involv improp expens
recognit includ improp capit or deferr of expens improp us of
reserv or other understat of expens addition 23 enforc matter
involv improp account for busi combin and 137 enforc matter
involv other account and report issu such as inadequ manag
discuss and analysi mda disclosur and improp us of offbal sheet
arrang see the follow chart note the sum of the number in the second
column is greater than the total number of 227 becaus most of the action involv more
than on type of improp conduct
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1307
improp account practic number of enforc matter
involv each practic
improp revenu recognit 126
improp expens recognit 101
improp account in connect with busi
combin
23
other account and report issu 130
inadequ disclosur in mda and elsewher 43
failur to disclos relatedparti transact 23
inappropri account for nonmonetari and
roundtrip transact
19
improp account for foreign payment in violat
of the fcpa
6
improp us of of fbalanc sheet arrang 3
improp us of nongaap financi measur 2
sourc sec report pursuant to section 704 of the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002
httpwwwsecgovnewss tudiessox704reportpdf
the sec studi reveal further proof of manag involv in financi statement
fraud in these enforc matter charg were brought against 75 chairmen of the board
111 chief execut offic ceo 111 presid 105 chief financi offic cfo 21
chief oper offic coo 16 chief account offic cao and 27 vice presid
vp of financ
studi by the us govern account offic gaoformerli known as the
gener account officealso reveal compar abl trend in financi statement fraud
in juli 2006 the gao issu an updat to it 2002 report financi statement restat
trend market impact regulatori respons and remain challeng the origin report wa
base on the gao analysi of 689 of 919 financi statement restat occur from
januari 1 1997 through june 30 2002 to updat the inform in the origin the gao
undertook a similar analysi of 1390 public compani restat that occur between
januari 1 2002 and septemb 30 2005 the follow ar some of the find of the two
studi
the percentag of publicli trade compani announc restat increas from
less than on percent in 1997 to over three percent by the end of 2002 thi percentag
rose again to 68 percent by septemb of 2005
the quantiti of restat result from account irregular grew from 92 in
1997 to 314 in 2002 or approxim 241 percent in the first 9 month of 2005
through septemb 30 there were 523 restat announc which amount to an
increas of approxim 67 percent from 2002 and more than 468 percent from 1997
financi statement fraud financi transact
1308 2011 fraud examin manual
the averag size of a compani restat it financi statement increas from 500
million in 1997 to 2 billion in 2002 by septemb 30 2005 the averag market
capit of a compani announc a restat had grown to 6 billion
cost and expens issu were the most common reason for restat between juli
2002 and septemb 2005 these restat which includ over or underst cost
or expens improp classif of cost and other misreport of cost account
for over 35 percent of restat examin dure that period in the 2002 studi cost
and expens issu were the second most common reason for restat compris
16 percent of all restat
twenti percent of the restat analyz in the 2006 studi were due to revenu
recognit issu make thi the second most common reason for restat dure
the period studi thi repres a declin from the 2002 studi in which revenu
recognit wa the most common reason for restat compris 38 percent of the
popul revenu recognit restat includ recogn revenu sooner or
later than allow under gaap or recogn question or fictiti revenu
todai financi statement and account fraud case continu to be the singl largest
categori of sec action file mani relat to the subprim mortgag market and anoth
larg group relat to execut compens most notabl the sec file civil suit
expand the scope of substant claim and remedi aggress appli the
clawback provis of section 304 of the sa rbanesoxlei act of 2002 and alleg fals
disclosur of nongaap financi metric in violat of regul g
in the summer of 2010 coso issu the fraudul financi report 19982 0 0 7 an
analysi of us public compani highlight of the report ar as follow
347 compani were involv in alleg incid of financi statement fraud dure the
10 year period
seventytwo percent of the case name the ceo and 65 percent name the cfo as
be associ with the fraud
the averag fraud last 314 month with the median fraud last 24 month
virtual all of the firm receiv an un qualifi audit opinion on the last set of
fraudul misstat financi statement
twenti percent of the fraud of public compani occur in the comput
hardwaresoftwar industri manufactur also repres 20 percent of the fraud
improp revenu recognit occur 61 percent of the fraud method overstat
of asset occur in 51 percent of the case understat of liabilitiesexpens
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1309
occur in 31 percent of the case insid trade wa cite in 24 percent of the case
as well
financi statement fraud scheme
fraud in financi statement typic take the form of
overst asset or revenu
underst liabil and expens
overst asset and revenu fals reflect a financi stronger compani by inclus
of fictiti asset cost or artifici revenu underst liabil and expens ar shown
through exclus of cost or financi oblig both method result in increas equiti
and net worth for the compani thi manipul result in increas earn per share or
partnership profit interest or a more stabl pictur of the compani true situat
howev in govern contract just the opposit mai be true
asset and revenu ar underst
liabil and expens ar overst
why as explain by govern auditor entiti mai reli on underst revenu or
overst expens to get more monei for a project or contract howev such scheme
ar by far the minor of financi statement fraud case
to demonstr the over and understat typic us to fraudul enhanc the
financi statement the scheme have been divid into five class becaus the mainten
of financi record involv a doubleentri system fraudul account entri alwai affect
at least two account and therefor at least two categori on the financi statement while
the area describ below reflect their financi statement classif keep in mind that the
other side of the fraudul transact exist elsewher it is common for scheme to involv
a combin of sever method the five classif of financi statement scheme ar
fictiti revenu
time differ
improp asset valuat
conceal liabil and expens
improp disclosur
financi statement fraud financi transact
1310 2011 fraud examin manual
fictiti revenu
fictiti or fabric revenu involv the record of sale of good or servic that did
not occur fictiti sale most often involv fake or phantom custom but can also
involv legitim custom for exampl a fictiti invoic can be prepar but not
mail for a legitim custom although the good ar not deliv or the servic ar not
render at the begin of the next account period the sale might be revers to help
conceal the fraud but thi mai lead to a revenu shortfal in the new period creat the
need for more fictiti sale anoth method is to us legitim custom and artifici
inflat or alter invoic reflect higher amount or quantiti than ar actual sold
gener speak revenu is recogn when it is 1 realiz or realiz and 2 earn
the secur and exchang commiss sec issu staff account bulletin sab
topic 13 revenu recognit now codifi in fasb asc 60510s99 to provid addit
guidanc on revenu recognit criteria and to rein in some of the inappropri practic
that had been observ fasb asc 60510s99 state that revenu is typic consid
realiz or realiz and earn when all of the follow criteria ar met
persuas evid of an arrang exist
deliveri ha occur or servic have been render
the seller price to the buyer is fix or determin and
collect is reason assur
exampl of fictiti revenu
in on case a foreign subsidiari of a us compani record sever larg fictiti sale to
a seri of compani thei invoic the sa le but did not collect ani of the account
receiv which becam sever past due the manag of the foreign subsidiari arrang
for fals confirm of the account receiv for audit purpos and even hire actor to
pretend to be the custom dure a visit fr om us manag background check on
the custom would have reveal that some of the compani were fictiti while other
either were undisclos relat parti or oper in industri that would have no need for
the good supposedli suppli an investig reveal that the manag of the foreign
subsidiari direct the scheme to record fictiti revenu in order to meet unrealist
revenu goal set by us manag
in some case compani go to great length to conceal fictiti sale a sampl journal
entri from such a case is detail below a fiction entri is made to record a purport
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1311
purchas of fix asset thi entri debit fix asset for the amount of the alleg
purchas and the credit is to cash for the payment
date descript ref debit credit
1201x1 fix asset 104 350000
cash 101 350000
a fictiti sale entri is then made for the same amount as the fals purchas debit
account receiv and credit the sale account the cash outflow that supposedli paid
for the fix asset is return as payment on the receiv account though in practic
the cash might never have move if the fraudster didnt bother to falsifi that extra
documentari support
date descript ref debit credit
1201x1 account rec 120 350000
sale 400 350000
1215x1 cash 101 350000
account rec 120 350000
the result of thi complet fabric sequenc of event is an increas in both fix asset
and revenu the debit could altern have been direct to other account such as
inventori or account payabl or simpli left in account receiv if the fraud were
commit close to the year end and the receiv could be left outstand without
attract undu attent
sale with condit
sale with condit ar those that have term that have not been complet and the right
and risk of ownership have not pass to the purchas thei do not qualifi for record
as revenu these type of sale ar similar to scheme involv the recognit of revenu
in improp period sinc the condit for sale mai becom satisfi in the futur at
which point revenu recognit would becom appropri the recognit of revenu in
improp period is discuss further in the next section
what red flag ar associ with fictiti revenu
the follow red flag ar associ with fictiti revenu
rapid growth or unusu profit especi compar to that of other compani in
the same industri
financi statement fraud financi transact
1312 2011 fraud examin manual
recur neg cash flow from oper or an inabl to gener posit cash
flow from oper while report earn and earn growth
signific transact with relat parti or special purpos entiti not in the ordinari
cours of busi or where those entiti ar not audit or ar audit by a separ
firm
signific unusu or highli complex transact especi those close to the period
end that pose difficult substanc over form question
unusu growth in the dai sale in receiv ratio receivablesaverag daili sale
a signific volum of sale to entiti whose substanc and ownership is not known
an unusu surg in sale by a minor of unit within a compani or in sale record
by corpor headquart
time differ includ prematur revenu recognit
financi statement fraud might also involv time differ that is the record of
revenu or expens in improp period thi can be done to shift revenu or expens
between on period and the next increas or decreas earn as desir
prematur revenu recognit
as previous mention revenu should be recogn in the account record when the
follow four criteria as set out in fasb asc 60510s99 have been satisfi
persuas evid of an arrang exist
deliveri ha occur or servic have been render
the seller price to the buyer is fix or determin and
collect is reason assur
on or more of these criteria is typic not met when manag recogn revenu
prematur exampl of common problem with prematur revenu recognit ar set
out below
persuas evid of an arrang doe not exist
no written or verbal agreement exist
a verbal agreement exist but a written agreement is customari
a written order exist but is condit upon sale to end user such as a consign
sale
a written order exist but contain a right of return
a written order exist but a side letter alter the term in wai that elimin the requir
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1313
element for an agreement
the transact is with a relat parti which ha not been disclos
deliveri ha not occur or servic have not been render
shipment ha not been made and the criteria for recogn revenu on billandhold
transact set out in fasb asc 60510s99 have not been met
shipment ha been made not to the custom but to the seller agent an instal or to a
public warehous
some but not all of the compon requir for oper were ship
item of the wrong specif were ship
deliveri is not complet until instal custom test and custom accept
ha occur
servic have not been provid at all
servic ar be perform over an extend period and onli a portion of the servic
revenu should have been recogn in the current period
the mix of good and servic in a contract ha been misstat in order to improperli
acceler revenu recognit
the seller price to the buyer is not fix or determin
the price is conting upon some futur event
a servic or membership fee is subject to unpredict cancel dure the contract
period
the transact includ an option to exchang the product for other
payment term ar extend for a substanti period and addit discount or
upgrad mai be requir to induc continu us and payment instead of switch to
altern product
collect is not reason assur
collect is conting upon a futur event such as resal of the product receipt of
addit fund or litig
the custom doe not have the abil to pai for exampl it is financi troubl it
ha purchas far more than it can afford or it is a shell compani with minim asset
exampl
abc inc sell product that requir engin and adapt work befor thei ar
accept to custom howev the compani record sale revenu befor complet the
financi statement fraud financi transact
1314 2011 fraud examin manual
engin test evalu and custom accept stage of product in some case
sale do not take place for week or month in other case the sale ar specif
conting upon the custom trial and accept of the product
exampl
anoth compani is engag in the design develop manufactur market and
servic of comput peripher subsystem the compani recogn revenu prior to a time
when collect of the sale price wa reason assur and at a time prior to complet
of the underli sale transact
it wa the compani polici to recogn revenu when the product we re ship howev
the sale were not complet as of the time of shipment becaus custom were not oblig
to pai for the equip until it had been instal the compani had substanti
oblig to the custom for instal and adjust and there remain major
uncertainti concern the custom true willing to complet the transact becaus
of the volatil natur of the hightech product
longterm contract
longterm contract pose special problem for revenu recognit longterm construct
contract for exampl us either the completedcontract method or the percentageofcomplet
method depend partli on the circumst the completedcontract
method doe not record revenu until the project is 100 percent complet construct
cost ar held in an inventori account until complet of the project the percentageofcomplet
method recogn revenu and expens as measur progress on a project is
made but thi method is particularli vulner to manipul manag can often easili
manipul the percentageofcomplet and the estim cost to complet a construct
project in order to recogn revenu prematur and conceal contract overrun
multipl deliver
product and servic sale sometim involv multipl deliver or multipleel
arrang for exampl a cell phone compani provid a discount or free cell phone
to a custom who sign up for a twoyear servic agreement in thi situat the
deliver includ both the product cell phone and the servic which span two year in
multipleel arrang the seller complet the earn processand thu must
recogn revenueov a period of time
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1315
under fasb asc 60525 revenu recognitionmultipleel arrang compani ar
requir to estim the price of the individu compon in a multipleel sale
compani must then recogn the revenu relat to each of the compon as thei ar
deliv the inher inexact natur of the estim involv in thi process leav thi
revenu recognit method vulner to fraud as manag can manipul the estim
price of the individu compon in order to delai or acceler revenu recognit
channelstuf
a challeng area of revenu recognit that ha attract the attent of the sec is
known as channelstuf channelstuf refer to the sale of an unusu larg
quantiti of a product to distributor who ar encourag to overbui through the us of deep
discount or extend payment term thi practic is especi attract to industri with
high gross margin such as tobacco pharmaceut perfum soda concentr and
brand consum good becaus it can increas shortterm earn on the downsid
howev steal from futur period sale make it harder to achiev sale goal in those
futur period the pressur to meet sale goal can in turn lead to increasingli disrupt
level of channelstuf and ultim to a restat although order ar receiv the
term of the order might rais question about the collect of the account receiv
and ani exist side agreement that grant a right of return mai effect turn the sale
into consign sale also there might be a greater risk of return for certain product if
thei cannot be sold befor their shelf life end
in recent year the sec ha brought enforc action or charg relat to channelstuf
against a number of major us corpor includ mcafe inc and the cocacola
compani in 2006 the sec releas a press releas state that mcafe agre to settl
the proceed and pai a 50 million penalti after be charg by the sec with
account fraud httpwwwsecgovnewspress20063htm accord to the press
releas the account fraud charg includ alleg that mcafe us a varieti of
undisclos ploi dure the year 1998 throug h 2000 to aggress oversel it product
to distributor in amount that far exceed the public demand for the product the
sec alleg that as part of thi channelstuf scheme mcafe
improperli record the sale to distributor as revenu
offer it distributor lucr sale incent includ deep price discount and
rebat in an effort to persuad the distributor to continu to bui and stockpil
mcafe product
secretli paid distributor million of dollar to hold the excess inventori rather than
financi statement fraud financi transact
1316 2011 fraud examin manual
return it to mcafe for a refund and consequ reduct in mcafe revenu
us an undisclos whollyown subsidiari net tool inc to repurchas inventori
that mcafe had oversold to it distributor and
took action to conceal the fraud from investor by among other thing wrongli
record in it book the payment and discount that it offer to distributor and
improperli manipul reserv account to increas inadequ sale reserv and cover
the cost of the distributor payment
in 2005 the sec issu a press releas announc an enforc action against the
cocacola compani relat to it channelstuf practic in japan known as gallon
push httpwwwsecgovnewspress200558htm accord to the press releas
the sec found that from 1997 through 1999 cocacola fail to disclos certain endof
quarter sale practic us to meet earn expect specif cocacola wa
alleg by the sec to have offer extend credit to japanes bottler to induc them to
purchas quantiti of beverag concentr the bottler otherwis would not have
purchas until a follow period although cocacola account treatment for sale
made in connect with gallon push wa found to be without issu the sec did find
that cocacola failur to disclos the impact of gallon push on current and futur
earn as well as relat fals statement and omiss within a pertin form 8k
violat the antifraud and period report requir of the feder secur law
record expens in the wrong period
the time record of expens is often compromis due to pressur to meet budget
project and goal or due to lack of proper account control as the expens of
certain cost is push into period other than the on in which thei actual occur thei ar
not properli match against the incom that thei help produc for exampl revenu mai
be recogn on the sale of certain item but the cost of good and servic that went into
the item sold might intention not be record in the account system until the
subsequ period thi might make the sale revenu from the transact almost pure
profit inflat earn in the next period earn would be depress by a similar
amount
what red flag ar associ with time differ includ prematur revenu recognit
rapid growth or unusu profit especi compar to that of other compani in
the same industri
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1317
recur neg cash flow from oper or an inabl to gener posit cash
flow from oper while report earn and earn growth
signific unusu or highli complex transact especi those close to the period
end that pose difficult substanc over form question
unusu increas in gross margin or gross margin in excess of industri peer
unusu growth in the dai sale in receiv ratio receivablesaverag daili sale
unusu declin in the dai purchas in account payabl ratio account
payableaverag daili purchas
improp asset valuat
under the lower of cost or market valu ru le where an asset cost exce it current
market valu as happen often with obsolet technolog the asset must be written down to
market valu with the except of certain secur asset valu ar gener not increas
to reflect current market valu it is often necessari to us estim in account for
exampl estim ar us in determin the residu valu and the us life of a
depreci asset the uncollect portion of account receiv or the excess or obsolet
portion of inventori whenev estim ar us there is an addit opportun for
fraud by manipul those estim
mani scheme ar us to inflat current asset at the expens of longterm asset the net
effect is seen in the current ratio the misclassif of longterm asset as current asset
can be of critic concern to lend institut that often requir the mainten of
certain financi ratio thi is of particular consequ when the loan coven ar on
unsecur or undersecur line of credit and other shortterm borrow sometim
these misclassif ar refer to as window dress
most improp asset valuat involv the fraudul overstat of inventori or
receiv other improp asset valuat includ manipul of the alloc of the
purchas price of an acquir busi in order to inflat futur earn misclassif of
fix and other asset or improp capit of inventori or startup cost
improp asset valuat usual take the form of on of the follow classif
inventori valuat
account receiv
busi combin
fix asset
financi statement fraud financi transact
1318 2011 fraud examin manual
inventori valuat
inventori should be record at the lower of cost or market valu thi mean that
inventori must be valu at it acquisit cost except when the cost is determin to be
higher than the current market valu in which case it should be written down to it current
valu or written off altogeth if it ha no valu fail to write down inventori result in
overst asset and the mismatch of cost of good sold with revenu other method
by which inventori can be improperli state includ manipul of the physic inventori
count inflat of the unit cost us to price out inventori and failur to reliev inventori
for the cost of good sold fictiti inventori scheme usual involv the creation of fake
document such as inventori count sheet and receiv report compani have even
program special comput report of inventori for auditor that incorrectli ad up
the line item valu so as to inflat the overal inventori balanc computerassist audit
techniqu can significantli help auditor to detect mani of these inventori fraud
techniqu
in some instanc friendli coconspir claim to be hold inventori for compani in
question other time compani fals report larg valu of inventori in transit perhap
in the middl of the pacif ocean know that the auditor will have a difficult time
observ it bill and hold item that have alreadi been record as sale might be
includ in the physic inventori count as might good own by third parti but held by
compani on consign or for storag compani have even made up pallet of
inventori with hollow center place brick in seal box instead of high valu product
and shuttl inventori overnight between locat be observ by auditor on differ
dai so as to doubl count the inventori final it is also common for compani to insert
phoni count sheet dure the inventori observ or chang the quantiti on the
count sheet
account receiv
account receiv ar subject to manipul in the same manner as sale and inventori
and in mani case the scheme ar conduct togeth the two most common scheme
involv account receiv ar fictiti receiv and failur to write off account
receiv as bad debt or failur to establish an adequ allow for bad debt
fictiti receiv commonli aris from fictiti revenu which were discuss earlier
account receiv should be report at net realiz valu that is the amount of the
receiv less the amount expect not to be collect
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1319
fictiti account receiv
fictiti account receiv ar common among compani with financi problem as
well as with manag who receiv a commiss base on sale the typic entri under
fictiti account receiv is to debit increas account receiv and credit increas
sale of cours these scheme ar more common around the end of the account period
sinc account receiv ar expect to be paid in cash within a reason time
fraudster commonli attempt to conceal fictiti account receiv by provid fals
confirm of balanc to auditor thei get the audit confirm becaus the mail
address thei provid for the phoni custom is typic either a mailbox under their
control a home address or the busi address of a coconspir such scheme can be
detect by us busi credit report public record or even the telephon book to
identifi signific custom with no physic exist or no appar busi need for
the product sold to them
failur to write down
compani ar requir to accru loss on uncollect receiv when the criteria in
financi account standard board statement no 5 account for conting ar met
compani struggl for profit and incom mai be tempt to omit the recognit of
such loss becaus of their neg impact on incom
busi combin
compani ar requir to alloc the purchas price thei have paid to acquir anoth
busi to the tangibl and intang asset of that busi ani excess of the purchas
price over the valu of the acquir asset is treat as goodwil current standard
govern goodwil account have decreas the incent for compani to minim the
amount alloc to goodwil that previous wa requir to be amort against futur
earn howev compani mai still be tempt to overalloc the purchas price to in
process research and develop asset in order to then write them off immedi or
thei mai establish excess reserv for variou expens at the time of acquisit
intend to quietli releas those excess reserv into earn at a futur date
fix asset
bogu fix asset can be creat by a varieti of method thei ar subject to manipul
through sever differ scheme some of the more common scheme ar book
fictiti asset misrepres asset valuat and capit nonasset cost
financi statement fraud financi transact
1320 2011 fraud examin manual
book fictiti asset
on of the easiest method of asset misrepresent is the record of fictiti asset
thi fals creation of asset affect account total on a compani balanc sheet the
correspond account commonli us is the owner equiti account becaus compani
asset ar often physic found in mani differ locat thi fraud can sometim be
easili overlook on of the most common fictiti asset scheme is to simpli creat
fictiti document in other instanc the equip is leas not own and thi fact is
not disclos dure the audit of fix asset bogu fix asset can sometim be detect
becaus the fix asset addit make no busi sens
misrepres the valu of fix asset
fix asset should be record at cost although asset mai appreci in valu thi
increas in valu should not be recogn on compani financi statement mani financi
statement fraud have involv the report of fix asset at market valu instead of the
lower acquisit cost or at even higher inflat valu with phoni valuat to support
them further compani mai fals inflat the valu of fix asset by fail to record
impair of longliv asset as requir by fasb asc 3503035 and of goodwil as
requir by fasb asc 3502035 misrepresentat ion of asset valu frequent goe hand
in hand with other scheme
exampl
in octob 2002 the sec file a civil enforc action against former enron cfo
andrew s fastow who also face crimin charg relat to an alleg selfenrich
scheme to defraud enron secur holder through the us of certain offbalancesheet
entiti on of the six transact in the sec complaint against andrew fastow
involv raptor i and avici accord to the complaint enron and the fastow
control partnership ljm2 engag in complex transact with an entiti call raptor
i raptor i wa us to manipul enron balanc sheet and incom statement and to
gener profit for ljm2 and fastow at enron expens in septemb 2000 fastow
and other us raptor i to effectu a fraudul hedg transact ion and thu avoid a
decreas in the valu of enron invest in the stock of a public compani call avici
system inc specif fastow and other backdat document to make it appear that
enron had lock in the valu of it invest in avici in august of 2000 when avici
stock wa trade at it all time high price
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1321
capit nonasset cost
exclud from the cost of a purchas asset ar interest and financ charg incur in the
purchas for exampl when a compani financ a capit equip purchas monthli
payment includ both princip liabil reduct and interest payment on initi
purchas onli the origin cost of the asset should be capit the subsequ interest
payment should be charg to interest expens and not to the asset without a reason for
intens review fraud of thi type can go uncheck
underst asset
in some case as with some governmentrel or regul compani it is advantag
to underst asset addit fund is often base on asset amount thi
understat can be done directli or through improp depreci
misclassifi asset
in order to meet budget requir and for variou other reason asset ar sometim
misclassifi into gener ledger account in which thei dont belong for exampl fix
asset mai be fraudul reclassifi as current asset the manipul can skew financi
ratio and help the compani compli with loan coven or other borrow requir
what red flag ar associ with improp asset valuat
recur neg cash flow from oper or an inabl to gener posit cash
flow from oper while report earn and earn growth
signific declin in custom demand and increas busi failur in either the
industri or the overal economi
asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that involv
subject judgment or uncertainti that ar difficult to support
nonfinanci manag excess part icip in or preoccup with the
select of account principl or the determin of signific estim
unusu increas in gross margin or margin in excess of industri peer
unusu growth in the number of dai sale in receiv ratio
unusu growth in the number of dai purchas in inventori ratio
reduct in allow for bad debt excess inventori obsolet inventori etc
especi if relev ratio ar out of line with those of industri peer
unusu chang in the relationship between fix asset and depreci
ad to asset while competitor ar reduc capit ti up in asset
financi statement fraud financi transact
1322 2011 fraud examin manual
conceal liabil and expens
underst liabil and expens is on of the wai financi statement can be
manipul to make a compani appear more profit than it actual is becaus pretax
incom will increas by the full amount of the expens or liabil not record thi financi
statement fraud method can have a signific impact on report earn with rel
littl effort by the fraudster it is much easier to commit than falsifi sale transact
miss transact can also be harder for auditor to detect than improperli record on
sinc the miss transact leav no audit trail
there ar three common method for conceal liabil and expens
liabilityexpens omiss
capit expens
failur to disclos warranti cost and liabil
liabilityexpens omiss
the prefer and easiest method of conceal liabil or expens is to simpli fail to
record them multimilliondollar judgment ag ainst a compani from a recent court decis
might be conveni ignor vendor invoic might be thrown awai or stuf into
drawer rather than post into the account payabl system therebi increas report
earn by the full amount of the invoic in a retail environ debit memo might be
creat for chargeback to vendor supposedli to claim permit rebat or allow but
sometim sole to creat addit incom whether or not these item ar properli
record in a subsequ account period doe not chang the fraudul natur of the
current financi statement
often perpetr of liabil and expens omiss believ thei can conceal their fraud in
futur period thei frequent plan to compens for their omit liabil with vision
of other incom sourc such as profit from futur price increas
just as thei ar easi to conceal omit lia biliti ar probabl on of the most difficult
scheme to uncov a thorough review of all postfinancialstatementd transact
such as account payabl increas and decreas can aid in the discoveri of omit
liabil in financi statement as can a computer analysi of expens record
addition if the auditor request and wa grant unrestrict access to the client file
a physic search could turn up conceal invoic and unpost liabil probe
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1323
interview of account payabl and other personnel can reveal unrecord or delai item
too
exampl
in juli 2002 the sec file suit in the unit state di trict court for the southern
district of new york charg major cabl televis produc adelphia commun
corpor the compani or adelphia it founder john j riga hi three son
timothi j riga michael j riga and jame p riga and two senior execut at
adelphia jame r brown and michael c mulcahei in on of the most extens
financi fraud ever to take place at a public compani the sec charg that adelphia
at the direct of the individu defend 1 fraudul exclud over 23 billion in
liabil from it consolid financi statement by hide them in off balanc sheet
affili 2 falsifi oper statist and inflat adelphia earn to meet wall
street expect and 3 conceal rampant selfdeal by the riga famili
includ the undisclos us of corpor fu nd for riga famili stock purchas and the
acquisit of luxuri condominium in new york and elsewher
with respect to the conceal liabil the complaint alleg that between mid1999 and
the end of 2001 john j riga timothi j ri ga michael j riga jame p riga and
jame r brown with the assist of michael c mulcahei caus adelphia to
fraudul exclud from the compani a nnual and quarterli consolid financi
statement over 23 billion in bank debt by deliber shift those liabil onto the
book of adelphia off balanc sheet unconsolid affili failur to record thi debt
violat gaap requir and precipit a seri of misrepresent about those
liabil by adelphia and the defend includ the creation of 1 sham transact
back by fictiti document to give the fals appear that adelphia had actual
repaid debt when in truth it had simpli shi fted them to unconsoli date rigascontrol
entiti and 2 mislead financi statement by give the fals impress through the
us of footnot that liabil list in the compani financi includ all outstand
bank debt
in novemb 2002 in exchang for hi testimoni against the riga men jame brown
wa releas from prosecut by consent to an entri of a perman injunct against
him for feder secur law violat addition brown ha been perman bar
from becom an offic or director of a public corpor
financi statement fraud financi transact
1324 2011 fraud examin manual
in juli 2004 after a threemonth trial a feder juri convict john and timothi riga of
conspiraci secur fraud and bank fraud john riga receiv a 15year prison sentenc
and wa fine 2300 and timothi riga wa sentenc to 20 year in prison jame
riga wa never crimin charg by the court in novemb 2005 michael riga
plead guilti to a charg of make a fals entri in a financi record
in april 2005 the sec file perman injunct against john timothi michael
and jame riga as well as jame brown michael mulcahei and adelphia
commun corpor the defend were charg with violat antifraud
period report record keep ing and intern control provis of feder secur law
in addit the riga famili member were bar from ever hold offic or director
posit in a public compani
capit expens
capit expens is anoth wai to increas incom and asset becaus capit item
ar depreci or amort over a period of year rather than expens immedi if
expenditur ar capit as asset and not expens dure the current period incom
will be overst as the asset ar depreci incom in subsequ period will be
underst
exampl
in novemb 2002 the sec file an am end complaint against worldcom inc
broaden it charg to alleg that worldcom misl investor from at least as earli as
1999 through the first quarter of 2002 the complaint state that the compani had
acknowledg that dure that period worl dcom materi overst the incom it
report on it financi statement by approx imat 9 billion main ly us two method
first worldcom reduc it oper expens by improperli releas as a credit to
oper expens certain provis previous establish for line cost and for tax
second the compani improperli reduc it oper expens by recharacter certain
expens as capit asset much of the 9 billion relat to improp account for line
cost which were among worldcom major oper expens the sec complaint
alleg that in a scheme direct and approv by member of senior manag
worldcom conceal the true extent of it l in cost by improperli reduc provis
held against line cost and by transfer certain line cost to it capit asset
account worldcom fals portrai itself as a profit busi when it wa not and
conceal larg loss these improp er account practic were design to and did inflat
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1325
incom to correspond with estim by wall street analyst and to support the price of
worldcom stock
in march 2005 former worldcom ceo bernard ebber wa convict of on count of
conspiraci on count of secur fraud and seven count of fals regulatori file and wa
later sentenc to 25 year in prison he also agre to forfeit nearli all of hi person
asset to settl a civil suit file by aggriev worldcom investor
scott sullivan the former cfo under ebber and the architect behind the fraud
scheme pled guilti to fraud charg and agre to testifi against ebber due to hi
cooper dure the investig he wa sentenc to onli five year in prison he also
agre to forfeit the proce from the sale of hi 10 million home along with hi 401k
hold to settl the civil suit brought by sharehold
former worldcom control david f myer and former director of gener
account buford buddi yate jr pled gu ilti to crimin charg prosecut by the
us attornei offic for the southern district of new york myer receiv a sentenc
of on year and on dai in prison yate wa also sentenc to on year and on dai in
prison and order to pai a 5000 fine addition each man wa perman
enjoin from act as an offic or director of ani public compani and wa suspend from
practic befor the sec as an accountan t under rule 1022 of the commiss
rule of practic
the sec also brought civil action against former member of the worldcom gener
account depart betti l vinson cpa and troi m normand both were
perman enjoin from secur violat s vinson wa suspend from appear or
practic befor the sec as an account in addit she pled guilti to on count of
secur fraud and on count of conspiraci to commit secur fraud and wa sentenc to
five month in prison and five month of hous arrest norm and pled guilti to similar
charg and receiv three year of probat for hi role in the fraud
expens capit expenditur
just as capit expens is improp so is expens cost that should be capit
the organ mai want to minim it net incom due to tax consider or to
increas earn in futur period expens an item that should be depreci over a
period of time help to accomplish just thatnet incom is lower and therefor so ar
tax
financi statement fraud financi transact
1326 2011 fraud examin manual
return and allow and warranti
improp record of sale return and allow occur when a compani fail to properli
record or present the expens associ with sale return and custom allow
stem from custom dissatisfact it is inevit that a certain percentag of product
sold will for on reason or anoth be return when thi happen manag must
record the relat expens as a contrasal account which reduc the amount of net sale
present on the compani incom statement
likewis when a compani offer a warranti on product sale it must estim the amount
of warranti expens it reason expect to incur over the warranti period and accru a
liabil for that amount in warranti liabil fraud the warranti liabil is usual either
omit altogeth or substanti underst anoth similar area is the liabil result
from defect product product liabil
what red flag ar associ with conceal liabil and expens
recur neg cash flow from oper or an inabl to gener posit cash
flow from oper while report earn and earn growth
asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that involv
subject judgment or uncertainti that ar difficult to support
nonfinanci manag excess part icip in or preoccup with the
select of account principl or the determin of signific estim
unusu increas in gross margin or margin in excess of industri peer
allow for sale return warranti claim etc that ar shrink in percentag term
or ar otherwis out of line with industri peer
unusu reduct in the number of dai purchas in account payabl ratio
reduc account payabl while competitor ar stretch out payment to vendor
improp disclosur
account principl requir that financi statement includ all the inform necessari
to prevent a reason discern user of the financi statement from be misl the
note should includ narr disclosur support schedul and ani other inform
requir to avoid mislead potenti investor creditor or ani other user of the financi
statement
manag ha an oblig to disclos all signific inform appropri in the
financi statement and in manag discuss and analysi in addit the disclos
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1327
inform must not be mislead improp disclosur relat to financi statement
fraud usual involv the follow
liabil omiss
subsequ event
manag fraud
relatedparti transact
account chang
liabil omiss
typic omiss includ the failur to disclos loan coven or conting liabil
loan coven ar agreement in addit to or as part of a financ arrang that a
borrow ha promis to keep as long as the financ is in place the agreement can
contain variou type of coven includ certain financi ratio limit and restrict on
other major financ arrang conting liabil ar potenti oblig that will
materi onli if certain event occur in the futur a corpor guarante of person loan
taken out by an offic or a privat compani control by an offic is an exampl of a
conting liabil the compani potenti lia biliti if materi must be disclos
subsequ event
event occur or becom known after the close of the period mai have a signific
effect on the financi statement and should be disclos fraudster typic avoid
disclos court judgment and regulatori decis that undermin the report valu of
asset that indic unrecord liabil or that advers reflect upon manag
integr public record search can reveal thi inform
manag fraud
manag ha an oblig to disclos to the sharehold signific fraud commit
by offic execut and other in posit of trust withhold such inform from
auditor would like also involv ly to auditor an illeg act in itself
relatedparti transact
relatedparti transact occur when a compani doe busi with anoth entiti whose
manag or oper polici can be control or significantli influenc by the
compani or by some other parti in common there is noth inher wrong with
relatedparti transact as long as thei ar fulli disclos if the transact ar not
conduct on an armslength basi the compani mai suffer econom harm injur
financi statement fraud financi transact
1328 2011 fraud examin manual
stockhold the financi interest that a compani offici might have mai not be readili
appar for exampl common director of two compani that do busi with each
other ani corpor gener partner and the partnership with which it doe busi and
ani control sharehold of the corpor with which hesheit doe busi mai be
relatedparti famili relationship can also be consid relat parti such as all lineal
descend and ancestor without regard to financi interest relatedparti transact
ar sometim refer to as selfdeal while these transact ar sometim
conduct at arm length often thei ar not
exampl
in septemb 2002 the sec charg former top execut of tyco intern ltd
includ former ceo l denni kozlowski with violat the feder secur law by
fail to disclos to sharehold hundr of million of dollar of lowinterest and interestfre
loan thei took from the compani and in some case never repaid the sec
complaint which also charg former tyc o cfo mark h swartz and chief legal
offic mark a belnick alleg that the three former execut also sold share of tyco
stock valu at million of dollar while their selfdeal remain undisclos the
complaint alleg numer improp transact ion includ kozlowski us of 242
million of loan for impermiss and una uthor purpos includ fund an
extravag lifestyl with these undisclos loan kozlowski allegedli amass million of
dollar in fine art yacht and estat jewelri as well as a 31 million park avenu
apart and a palati estat in nantucket kozlowski and swartz allegedli engag in
undisclos nonarmslength real estat transact with tyco or it subsidiari and
receiv undisclos compens and perqui site includ forgiv of multimillion
dollar loan rentfre us of larg new york apart and us of corpor aircraft for
person purpos at littl or no cost
in juli 2004 belnick wa acquit of all the charg brought against him in a separ
trial kozlowski and swartz were each found gu ilti of 22 charg in clude grand larceni
falsifi busi record con piraci and secur fraud and were sentenc to eight and
onethird to 25 year in prison
account chang
in gener three type of account chang must be disclos to avoid mislead the user
of financi statement account principl estim and report entiti although the
requir treatment for each type of chang is differ thei ar all suscept to
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1329
manipul by a determin fraudster for exampl fraudster mai fail to properli
retroact restat financi statement for a chang in account principl if the chang
caus the compani financi statement to appear weaker likewis thei mai fail to
disclos signific chang in estim such as the us live and estim salvag valu
of depreci asset or the estim underli the determin of warranti or other
liabil thei mai even secretli chang the report entiti by ad entiti own
privat by manag or by exclud certain companyown unit in order to improv
report result
backdat stock option
as a supplement to salari compani frequent offer employe stock option which grant
the recipi the privileg to purchas a share of the compani stock at a futur date for a
specif price call the strike price a strike price is the valu of a share at a particular date
gener the strike price is set at the price of the underli stock on the dai the option is
grant therefor the option becom valuabl onli with futur increas in the stock price
in thi wai compani grant stock option as an incent for employe to boost compani
perform and thu rais the stock price the practic of backdat stock option
howev give the employe a chanc to profit by purchas stock at past low price
provid an immedi payoff backdat stock option occur when a compani alter the
date of the grant to a time when the stock wa trade at a lower price in the interest of
make the option instantli valuabl and further increas the employe gain if the stock
price continu to rise
exampl
on june 1 20x1 compani xyz grant it ceo a stock option that provid the
execut the right to purchas 100 share of xyz stock on januari 1 20x2 for the
strike price per it usual polici the strike price is set at the price of the compani stock on
the date of the option grant on june 1 2008 the grant date xyz stock wa trade at
40 per share therefor if the stock price increas to 45 per share by januari 1
20x2 the ceo could exercis the option and purchas the share for 40 per share then
sell them immedi on the market for 45 per share result in a gain of 5 per share
howev the compani ha recent experienc a dramat increas in it share price on
mai 24 20x1 the stock wa trade for 15 per share to provid the ceo with an
opportun to exploit thi increas in share price the compani choos to backdat the
stock option to make it appear that thei were grant on mai 24 20x1 becaus the
strike price is set at the price of the stock on the option grant date the strike price is
financi statement fraud financi transact
1330 2011 fraud examin manual
effect chang to 15 per share as a result the ceo now ha the option to bui 100
share of xyz stock on januari 1 20x2 for 15 per share thu the ceo ha
immedi gain 25 per share the differ between the stock price on the actual grant
date of june 1 and the state grant date of mai 24 base sole on the manipul of
the grant date us
backdat stock option came to the attent of the us secur and exchang
commiss sec when academ research reveal a pattern of stock price descend
just prior to mani report date of option grant then ascend immedi afterward
backdat is not necessarili illeg but can be if not handl appropri in order to be
legal the practic must be explicitli report to sharehold and the govern failur to
do so mai constitut secur fraud
in august of 2002 certain provis laid out under the sarbanesoxlei act took effect
requir compani to report stock option grant within two busi dai after the grant
the rule greatli reduc the time compani had to choos a favor grant date
compani were previous allow week or month befor thei were requir to report
stock option grant consequ the appar pattern of backdat nearli disappear
around the time the rule were enact howev report of actual practic in stock option
and the record data remain inconsist in mani case becaus not all compani adher
to sarbanesoxlei addition the revel of the preval of backdat ha caus
concern that compani mai not have record and disclos the option grant on the
financi statement in an accur manner in respons to thi issu the public compani
account oversight board pcaob issu a practic alert to prepar auditor for the
possibl of financi misstat due to backdat of stock option to keep a tight
rope on the possibl of thi type of illeg activ auditor should assess the inform
obtain from the audit to determin if there is a need for further audit procedur
what red flag ar associ with improp disclosur
domin of manag by a singl person or small group in a nonownermanag
busi without compens control
ineffect board of director or audit committe oversight over the financi report
process and intern control
ineffect commun implement support or enforc of the entiti
valu or ethic standard by manag or the commun of inappropri
valu or ethic standard
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1331
rapid growth or unusu profit especi compar to that of other compani in
the same industri
signific unusu or highli complex transact especi those close to a period
end that pose difficult substanc over form question
signific relatedparti transact not in the ordinari cours of busi or with
relat entiti either not audit or audit by a differ firm
signific bank account or subsidiari or branch oper in taxhaven jurisdict
for which there appear to be no clear busi justif
overli complex organiz structur invo lving unusu legal entiti or manageri
line of author
known histori of violat of secur la ws or other law and regul or claim
against the entiti it senior manag or board member alleg fraud or violat
of law and regul
recur attempt by manag to justifi margin or inappropri account on
the basi of materi
formal or inform restrict on the auditor that inappropri limit access to peopl
or inform or limit the abil of the auditor to commun effect with the
board of director or audit committe
what red flag ar associ with financi statement fraud gener
red flag associ with particular financi statement fraud scheme have been discuss
abov there ar mani red flag associ with financi statement fraud gener an
extens list of such red flag can be found in an appendix to au section 316 consider
of fraud in a financi statement audit where thei ar call risk factor some red flag
indic increas vulner to financi statement fraud other indic a greater
likelihood that financi statement fraud ha occur
some of the more signific red flag list in au section 316 ar
domin of manag by a singl person or small group in a nonownermanag
busi without compens control
profit or trend level expect of invest analyst institut investor
signific creditor or other extern parti particularli expect that ar unduli
aggress or unrealist includ expect creat by manag in for exampl
overli optimist press releas or annual report messag
ineffect commun implement support or enforc of the entiti
financi statement fraud financi transact
1332 2011 fraud examin manual
valu or ethic standard by manag or the commun of inappropri
valu or ethic standard
recur neg cash flow from oper or an inabl to gener posit cash
flow from oper while report earn and earn growth
rapid growth or unusu profit especi compar to that of other compani in
the same industri
signific unusu or highli complex transact especi those close to a period
end that pose difficult substanc over form question
signific relatedparti transact not in the ordinari cours of busi or with
relat entiti not audit or audit by anoth firm
recur attempt by manag to justifi margin or inappropri account on
the basi of materi
formal or inform restrict on the auditor that inappropri limit access to peopl
or inform or limit the abil of the auditor to commun effect with those
charg with govern
detect of fraudul financi statement scheme
to better understand basic account concept and to see how an analysi of account
record and procedur can reveal a fraud consid the follow exampl
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1333
exampl
jackson hardwar suppli is a mediums pl umb and electr wholesal distributor
on decemb 31 the balanc sheet and incom statement were as follow
jackson hardwar suppli
balanc sheet
as of decemb 31
asset liabil owner equiti
cash 2427000 liabil
account receiv 300000 account payabl 300000
inventori 300000 salari payabl 70000
suppli 11000 rent payabl 50000
prepaid insur 44000 defer tax payabl 438000
equip 440000 total liabil 858000
owner equiti
common stock 2000000
retain earn 664000
total owner equiti 2664000
total asset
3522000
total liabil
owner equiti
3522000
jackson hardwar suppli
incom statement
for the year end decemb 31
revenu
sale revenu 3470000
cost of good sold 2100000
gross profit from sale 1370000
rent revenu 10000
gross profit 1380000
gener and administr expens
insur expens 4000
salari expens 220000
suppli expens 14000
rental expens 40000
total gener and
administr expens
278000
net incom befor tax 1102000
incom tax 438000
net incom 664000
financi statement fraud financi transact
1334 2011 fraud examin manual
an anonym tip wa receiv that the paymast is steal cash from the compani
late he ha been seen drive a new bmw and ha taken expens vacat the
presid of the compani want to follow up on the tip although the paymast is a
longtim trust employe the presid ask the fraud examin to determin if the
paymast ha been steal although there ar sever wai to proce with the
investig the fraud examin with account knowledg decid to first compar thi
year total salari expens with last year balanc he theoriz that if the paymast is
dishonest he might be conceal the theft in the salari expens account past experi
ha taught the fraud examin to look in the most obviou place first
the examin note that the balanc of 220000 in the salari expens account thi year is
significantli larger than the 180000 balanc last year he ask the owner if there is an
increas in the number of employe and how larg acrosstheboard rais were thi year
he discov that the work forc ha not incr eas and all employe includ the owner
receiv 10 percent rais he recalcul thi year salari by increas last year
salari 10 percent and determin that the balanc in the salari ex pens account should be
approxim 198000 180000 x 110 198000 he now believ that excess
salari went to someon
the next step is to follow the overstat in salari expens backward from the incom
statement through the account and journal entri to the sourc documentsth payrol
check in thi case he find that there ar 12 check payabl to john doe an employe
who quit in januari of last year he compar the endors on john doe check with
those on the paymast check and notic di stinct similar in the signatur arm
with thi evid he interview the paymast who confess es that he ha stolen 22000
and conceal the theft by issu payrol check to a nonexist employe check that he
subsequ endors and cash
obvious thi exampl is rel simpl but most fraud scheme ar simpl especi
for an examin who understand conceal techniqu and account
other detect techniqu ar avail for deter mine if the paymast is steal these
includ run a comput list of all employe who do not elect insur coverag and
other payrol withhold withhold on fictiti employe creat addit
conceal problem for perpetr have someon els distribut the check and
check social secur number of all activ employe ani of these method might have
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1335
reveal the spuriou paycheck to john doe the approach show howev how an
understand of account can be invalu for detect fraud
financi statement analysi
compar financi statement provid inform for current and past account
period account express in whole dollar amount yield a limit amount of inform
the convers of these number into ratio or percentag allow the reader of the
statement to analyz them base on their relationship to each other in addit it allow
the reader to more readili compar current perform with past perform in fraud
detect and investig the determin of the reason for relationship and chang
in amount can be import these determin ar the red flag that point an examin
in the direct of possibl fraud if larg enough a fraudul misstat will affect the
financi statement in such a wai that relationship between the number becom
question mani scheme ar detect becaus the financi statement when analyz
close do not make sens financi statement analysi includ the follow
vertic analysi
horizont analysi
ratio analysi
percentag analysi horizont and vertic
there ar tradition two method of percentag analysi of financi statement vertic
analysi is a techniqu for analyz the relationship between the item on an incom
statement balanc sheet or statement of cash flow by express compon as
percentag thi method is often refer to as common size financi statement in
the vertic analysi of an incom statement net sale is assign 100 percent for a balanc
sheet total asset is assign 100 percent on the asset side and total liabil and equiti is
express as 100 percent all other item in each of the section ar express as a
percentag of these number
horizont analysi is a techniqu for analyz the percentag chang in individu financi
statement item from on period to the next the first period in the analysi is consid
the base period and the chang in the subsequ period ar comput as a percentag of
the base period if more than two period ar present each period chang ar comput
as a percentag of the preced period as is the case with vertic analysi thi techniqu
will not work for small immateri fraud
financi statement fraud financi transact
1336 2011 fraud examin manual
the follow is an exampl of financi statement that ar analyz by both horizont and
vertic analysi
vertic analysi discuss
vertic analysi is the express of the relationship or percentag of compon item to a
specif base item in the abov exampl vertic analysi of the incom statement includ
total sale as the base amount and all other item ar then analyz as a percentag of that
total vertic analysi emphas the relationship of statement item wi thin each account
period these relationship can be us with histor averag to determin statement
anomali
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1337
in the abov exampl we can observ that account payabl make up 29 percent of total
liabil in year on histor we mai find that thi account averag slightli over 25
percent of total liabil in year two account payabl as a percentag of total liabil
increas to 51 percent although thi increas mai be explain through a correl
with a rise in sale such a signific increas could also be the start point of a fraud
examin sourc document should be examin to determin the reason for the rise in
thi percentag with thi type of examin fraudul activ might be detect the
same type of chang can be seen as sell expens declin as a percentag of sale in year
two from 20 percent to 17 percent again thi chang mai be explain with higher
volum sale or anoth bona fide explan but close examin mai point a fraud
examin to uncov fictiti sale sinc there wa not a correspond increas in sell
expens
horizont analysi discuss
horizont statement analysi us percentag comparison from on account period to the
next the percentag chang is calcul by divid the amount of increas or decreas for
each item by the base period amount the result percentag ar then studi in detail it
is import to consid the amount of chang as well as the percentag in horizont
comparison a 5 percent chang in an account with a veri larg dollar amount mai actual
be much more of a chang than a 50 percent chang in an account with much less activ
in the abov exampl it is obviou that the 80 percent increas in sale ha a much greater
correspond increas in cost of good sold which rose 140 percent these account ar
often us to hide fraudul expens withdraw or other illeg transact
ratio analysi
ratio analysi is a mean of measur the relationship between two differ financi
statement amount the relationship and comparison ar the kei to the analysi mani
profession includ banker investor and busi owner as well as major invest
firm us thi method ratio analysi allow for intern evalu us financi statement
data tradition financi statement ratio ar compar to an entiti industri averag
the ratio and comparison can be veri us in detect red flag for a fraud examin
the financi ratio present a signific chang from on year to the next or over a period
of year it becom obviou that there mai a problem as in all other analysi specif
chang ar often explain by chang in the busi oper analys chang in
financi statement fraud financi transact
1338 2011 fraud examin manual
current asset
current liabil
cashsecuritiesreceiv
current liabil
specif ratio is detect the appropri sourc account should be research and
examin in detail to determin if fraud ha occur for instanc a signific decreas in
a compani current ratio mai point to an incr eas in current liabil or a reduct in
asset both of which could be us to cover fraud
in the analysi of financi statement each reader of the statement will determin which
portion ar most import like the statement analysi discuss previous the analysi of
ratio is limit by it inabl to detect fraud on a smaller immateri scale some of the
type of financi ratio comparison ar shown below
mani of the possibl ratio ar us in industryspecif situat but the nine comparison
mention below ar ratio that mai lead to discoveri of fraud the follow calcul
ar base on the exampl financi statement present earlier
common financi ratio
current ratio
the current ratiocurr asset to current
liabilitiesi probabl the most commonli us ratio in financi statement analysi thi
comparison measur a compani abil to meet present oblig from it liquid asset
the number of time that current asset exce current liabil ha long been a quick
measur of financi strength
in detect fraud thi ratio can be a prime indic of manipul of the account
involv embezzl will caus the ratio to decreas liabil conceal will caus a
more favor ratio
in the case exampl the drastic chang in the current ratio from year on 284 to year
two 170 should caus an examin to look at these account in more detail for instanc
a checktamp scheme will usual result in a decreas in the current asset cash which
will in turn decreas the ratio
quick ratio
the quick ratio often refer to as the acid test ratio
compar the most liquid asset to current liabil thi calcul divid the total of
cash secur and receiv by current liabil to yield a measur of a compani abil
to meet sudden cash requir the quick ratio is a conserv measur of liquid that
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1339
net sale on account
averag net receiv
365
receiv turnov
cost of good sold
averag inventori
is often us in turbul econom time to provid an analyst with a worstcas scenario of
a compani work capit situat
an examin will analyz the quick ratio for fraud indic in year on of the exampl
the compani balanc sheet reflect a quick ratio of 205 thi ratio drop to 100 in year
two in thi situat a closer review of account receiv show thei ar increas at an
unusu rate which could indic that fictiti account receiv have been ad to
inflat sale of more concern perhap is the increas in account payabl which might
requir at a minimum a closer review to determin why
receiv turnov
receiv turnov is defin as net sale on account
divid by averag net receiv it measur the number of time account receiv is
turn over dure the account period in other word it measur the time between on
account sale and collect of fund thi ratio is on that us both incom statement and
balanc sheet account in it analysi if the fraud includ fictiti sale thi bogu incom
will never be collect as a result the turnov of receiv will decreas
collect ratio
account receiv ag is measur by the
collect ratio it divid 365 dai by the receiv turnov ratio to arriv at the averag
number of dai to collect receiv in gener the lower the collect ratio the faster
receiv ar collect a fraud examin mai us thi ratio as a first step in detect
fictiti receiv or larceni and skim scheme normal thi ratio will stai fairli
consist from year to year but chang in bill polici or collect effort mai caus a
fluctuat the exampl show a favor reduct in the collect ratio from 2263 in
year on to 17033 in year two thi mean that the compani is collect it receiv
more quickli in year two than in year on
inventori turnov
the relationship between a compani cost of good
sold and averag inventori is shown through the inventori turnov ratio thi ratio
measur the number of time inventori is sold dure the period thi ratio is a good
determin of purchas product and sale effici in gener a higher inventori
turnov ratio is consid more favor for exampl if cost of good sold ha increas
due to theft of inventori end inventori ha declin but not through sale then thi
financi statement fraud financi transact
1340 2011 fraud examin manual
365
inventori turnov
total liabil
total equiti
net incom
net sale
ratio will be abnorm high in the case exampl inventori turnov increas in year two
signal the possibl that an embezzl is buri in the inventori account an
examin should investig the chang in the compon of the ratio to determin where
to look for possibl fraud
averag number of dai inventori is in stock
the averag number of dai inventori is in stock ratio is a
restat of the inventori turnov ratio express in dai thi rate is import for
sever reason an increas in the number of dai inventori stai in stock caus addit
expens includ storag cost risk of inventori obsolesc and market price
reduct as well as interest and other expens incur due to ty up fund in inventori
stock inconsist or signific varianc in thi ratio is a red flag for fraud investig
examin mai us thi ratio to examin inventori account for possibl larceni scheme
purchas and receiv inventori scheme can affect the ratio as well underst the
cost of good sold will result in an increas in the ratio signific chang in the inventori
turnov ratio ar good indic of possibl fraudul inventori activ
debt to equiti ratio
the debt to equiti ratio is comput by divid total
liabil by total equiti thi ratio is on that is heavili
consid by lend institut it provid a clear pictur of the rel risk assum by
the creditor and owner the higher the ratio the more difficult it will be for the owner to
rais capit by increas longterm debt debt to equiti requir ar often includ as
borrow coven in corpor lend agreement the exampl displai a veri
favor year on ratio of 089 year two howev show a ratio of 184 which indic
that debt is greatli increas in thi case the increas in the ratio correspond with the rise
in account payabl sudden chang in thi ratio mai signal an examin to look for fraud
profit margin
profit margin ratio is defin as net incom divid by
net sale thi ratio is often refer to as the effici ratio in that it reveal profit earn
per dollar of sale thi percentag of net incom to sale relat not onli the effect of gross
margin chang but also charg to sale and administr expens as fraud is
commit net incom will be artifici overst and the profit margin ratio will be
abnorm high fals expens and fraudul disburs will caus an increas in
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1341
net sale
averag asset
expens and a decreas in the profit margin ratio over time thi ratio should be
fairli consist
asset turnov
net sale divid by averag oper asset is the
calcul us to determin the asset turnov ratio thi ratio is us to determin the
effici with which asset resourc ar util the case exampl displai a greater us of
asset in year two than in year on
by perform an analysi of the financi statement the examin mai be direct toward
the direct evid to resolv an alleg of fraud after perform a financi statement
analysi the examin can select statist sampl in the target account and eventu
examin the sourc document if an irregular of overstat is suspect begin the
examin with the financi statement if howev an irregular of understat is
suspect begin the examin with a review of the sourc document thi rule of thumb
is especi effect in the area of omiss of liabil such as litig conting
liabil leas and some product warranti
tax return review
tax return ar good sourc of addit and compar inform on the oper
of the busi a complet review and comparison to the financi statement mai provid
inform unknown to the lender or disclos unexplain discrep again the lack of
properli prepar or time file tax return mai be a method of stall or not provid
the requir inform most perpetr of fraud ar reluct to continu the decept
and falsifi a tax return yearafteryear extens and file of the tax return on the last
possibl date could be a ploi to cover up financi statement and tax return differ
interview in fraudul financi statement case
for indepth interview techniqu pleas refer to the interview theori and
applic chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin manual
financi statement fraud doe not occur in an isol environ peopl in organ
who have both motiv and opportun ar the prime candid to commit fraudul
misstat in the overwhelm major of situat two kei manag particip
activ in the fraud the chief execut offic and the chief financi offic other
financi statement fraud financi transact
1342 2011 fraud examin manual
becom involv larg out of necess those who ar not directli involv most often
ar not awar that anyth is wrong
investig of financi statement fraud ar uniqu in that thei almost alwai involv
interview the execut manag of the organ to detect or deter financi
statement fraud it is absolut necessari that top manag be interview by a
compet and experienc fraud examin who possess the abil to solicit honest
answer to tough but vital question about whether anyon ha tamper with the book
interview techniqu
situat in which account ar tempt to misstat financi statement most often
involv pressur connect with financi perform the follow is a fictiti
convers between upper manag of a corpor the exampl show how the
pressur to commit financi statement fraud can greatli influenc account personnel
cfo to ceo boss it look like we will not have a good year financi we told
the sharehold or bank that our earn would be 4 a share and it look like well
be veri lucki to even make 3
ceo well what ar we go to do about it if we miss the earn project or
dont get the loan our goos will be cook well both lose our job we must get those
earn up to where thei should be
cfo what do you mean
ceo what i mean is that it is your job to bring in the number your go to have
to find a wai to get them up im sure we can probabl make up the differ next year
but for now you get our earningsassetsequ up howev you have to all financi
statement ar essenti estim anyhow so you figur out how to estim the number
more in our favor i dont know how to do it and i dont want you to tell me but get it
done
the cfo face a dilemma cook the book or lose hi job the action of the cfo ar veri
hard to predict if he step over the edg chanc ar he will need to enlist the aid of
account and cleric personnel to carri out the detail even if these employe do not
know what thei ar actual do for exampl the cfo might tell the chief account to
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1343
book certain receiv and incom which would produc the need effectpump up
the equiti such a scheme might onli be appar to the real insid
in order to detect financi statement fraud through interview manag and kei
support staff must be interview fraud examin and auditor collect refer to as
examin must consid mani import ant issu when conduct interview on
import issu examin should keep in mind when conduct interview is that there is
gener no liabil in ask question in which thei have a legitim interest no matter
how insult the question might be to the respond examin therefor have the
legal right to be fearless in ask question as long as the question ar ask privat and
under reason circumst thi legal right doesnt extend to accusationsonli to
question ar you still cook the book is an accus wherea ar you cook
the book is a question it is import to know the differ and to frame question
accordingli
examin should also be sure to interview onli on person at a time group of peopl
should not be interview togeth becaus member tend to influenc each other the
interview should alwai be conduct under privat condit which permit the
respond to answer candidli
it is import that examin aim to be nonthreaten in their interview approach the
less threaten the interview appear the less reluct the respond will be to answer
question an interview should not be judgment or show surpris or disgust such action
can inhibit the flow of inform
examin should warm up respond thoroughli befor ask sensit question it is
best to obtain all of the procedur inform and inform pertain to intern
control prior to discuss fraud fraud should usual be the last thing cover in an
interview
in order to reduc the possibl of offend respond examin can explain the natur
of their interest befor ask sensit question for exampl an examin can sai as you
know as an auditor i am requir to activ look for fraud thi mean i must ask you some direct
question about the subject do you understand then after obtain a posit respons the
examin can proce to ask question about fraud it is best to ask the least difficult
question first
financi statement fraud financi transact
1344 2011 fraud examin manual
anoth approach examin can take to make tough interview question more palat is
to phrase them hypothet especi dure the begin of the interview for exampl
rather than ask a chief financi offic have you commit fraud an examin can
sai to the execut suppos someon in the po sition of chief financi offic decid to
pump up the financi how would he do it the latter question is far more like to illicit
specif inform than the former later in the interview the execut should be ask
specif if he ha commit the fraud the examin can sai someth along the line of
my profession respons requir me to ask you on particularli sensit direct
question have you commit fraud or other illeg act against the compani the vast
major of respond will answer no to such a question without hesit whether
thei have or not howev simpli ask the question place the examin in a much more
favor posit if attack profession for not detect a fraud
the interview
fraud examin and auditor should ask question design to elicit the most specif
inform possibl in a profession manner
the chief execut offic
gener the ceo should be interview first in ani proactiv or reactiv fraud situat
there ar sever good reason for thi approach first of all the auditor or fraud examin
must have a thorough understand with manag as to what hi respons in thi
area ar second it is unwis to conduct sensit inquiri within ani organ without
first advis the ceo if he learn from some other sourc that you ar make discreet
fraudrel inquiri without tell him he is more like to misunderstand your object
and take the inquiri as a person affront third if there is ani signific cook of the
book the ceo is almost alwai involv the fraudrel question you should ask in
connect with a regular audit should includ at a minimum the follow note how the
question ar for set up purpos
1 mr ceo as you know we ar requir to assess the risk that materi fraud exist in everi compani
not just your thi is sort of a sensit area for everyon but our profession respons dictat
that we address thi area do you understand wait for an affirm respons befor proceed
2 do you have ani reason to believ that materi fraud is be commit at ani level within the
organ
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1345
3 mr ceo on trend in fraud is that small fraud ar commit by employe with littl author
which mean that the largest on ar usual commit with the knowledg of upper manag do
you understand that wait for an affirm respons befor proceed
4 becaus of that we ar requir to at least look at the possibl that all ceo includ you might
commit signific fraud against custom investor or sharehold do you understand our situat
wait for an affirm respons
5 so dure thi audit examin we need to ask direct question ab out thi subject to you and your
staff as a matter of fact we will at least discuss the possibl of fraud with everi employe we talk with
in connect with thi audit exa minat do you have ani problem with that wait for a neg
respons if the ceo protest satisfi hi object if he cannot be satisfi assess the risk of whether
the ceo is attempt to obstruct the audit or examin
6 first let look at your cfo can you think of a reason he might have to get back at you or the
compani by commit fraud
7 ha the cfo ever ask you to approv ani financi transact you thought might be improp or
illeg
8 do you know whether the cfo ha ani outsid busi interest that might conflict with hi duti
here
9 doe the cfo emploi ani friend or rel in the compani look for possibl conflict or sweetheart
deal
10 what inform do you have about the cfo lifestyl look for expens home car toi and
habit
11 what is your gener impress of how the cfo get along with hi staff look for abus of
author etc that would motiv employe di rectli below the cfo to particip in fraud
12 how do you think fraud in your compani compar with other in the same industri
13 of cours mr ceo i must ask you mani of the same question about yourself is there ani reason
that anyon below you might claim you ar commit fraud against the compani
financi statement fraud financi transact
1346 2011 fraud examin manual
14 i must also ask you some person financi quest ion do you have ani problem with thi wait for
neg respons
15 pleas give me a current estim of your person asset s liabil incom and expens list what
percentag of your net worth is ti directli to thi compani look for highli leverag individu whose
compani hold ar a signific portion of their net worth
16 ar you current experienc ani person financi problem look for lawsuit lien judgment or
other indic
17 do you have friend or rel work for thi compani look for conflict of interest
18 do you have friend or rel work for major supplier or vendor to thi compani look for
conflict of interest
19 do you own ani portion of a compani that doe busi with thi organ look for conflict of
interest
20 hypothet if you want to pump up your compani profit what would be the easiest wai to do it
21 as i said we will be requir to ask mani question of your staff is there ani reason why someon who
work for you would sai you ar at risk to commit signific fraud against the compani or it
sharehold
22 mr ceo thi is the last question and it should be obviou why i have to ask it have you commit
fraud or other illeg act against the compani do not apolog for ask the question it your job
the ceo top staff
ceo of corpor larg and small ar busi individu becaus thei tend to be big
pictur peopl by natur thei reli heavili on their staffsprincip their person
assistantsto take care of detail but person assist do not usual becom close ti
to the boss without a demonstr histori of loyalti and discret in short if you make
the bosss assist mad your fraudrel question ar go to be interpret in the worst
possibl light therebi make your job much more difficult
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1347
so the kei to interview the ceo top sta ff is to approach the interview process
correctli from the outset thi mean lai a great deal of groundwork befor ask
sensit question start with procedur matter or some other nonsensit topic and ask
the fraudrel question toward the end of your convers
1 mr assist part of my job as an auditor fraud examin is to assess the risk that the compani
book ar not materi correct as a result of fraud by employe or manag i have alreadi talk
about these issu with your boss he understand their import and he is awar that as part of the
audit i will be talk to everyon about the subject to some extent do you have ani problem with thi
wait for neg respons
2 do you think fraud is a problem for bu siness in gener icebreak
3 how do you think thi compani stack up to other in term of honesti of it employe and manag
4 have you ever heard rumor in the compani that someon is commit fraud especi someon high
up in the organ
5 is the compani in ani kind of financi troubl that would motiv manag to misstat the
compani profit
6 do you think your cowork ar essenti honest
7 ha anyon you work with ever ask you to do someth you felt wa not legal or ethic
8 how would you handl such a situat solic it inform on fraud report program
9 if someon in a posit of author in the compani want to commit fraud what would be the easiest
wai to do it
10 as your auditor mai i ask you to report ani instanc in the futur of anyon ask you to do anyth
to the book and record that you feel is not right solicit futur cooper
financi statement fraud financi transact
1348 2011 fraud examin manual
the chief financi offic
in the vast major of case the cfo is an integr part of ani financi statement fraud as
illustr previous as a result the interview with the cfo should concentr not onli
on possibl motiv to commit fraud but also on the opportun to do so sinc most
cfo ar account thei should more readili understand your fraudrel mission thi
can be good or bad good if the cfo is hone st and bad if he isnt among all financi
personnel the cfo is in the best posit to know how to cook the book and keep it from
be uncov as if that werent enough mani cfo ar hire directli from the firm
that audit the compani is there ani other person more like to be at the center of the
fraud
1 mr cfo you now know that audit standard requir us to activ assess the risk that materi fraud
could be affect the financi statement we have ta lked with the ceo and he is fulli awar that we
will be ask most everyon we speak with about the possibl of fraud or irregular you
understand thi dont you wait for affirm respons
2 of the account on the compani book which do you suspect might be the most vulner to
manipul and why
3 what kind of histori doe the compani have with fraud in gener includ defalc and employe
theft look for sign of a weak corpor cultur
4 we know that fraud usual exist to some extenteven if it is smallin most compani how do you
think your compani compar to other
5 what is your overal impress of the compani ethic and corpor cultur
6 dure our assess of risk of fraud in your compani ar there ani specif ar ea youd like to discuss
with us
7 is there ani reason that anyon in the compani might sai that manag had a motiv to misstat the
financi
8 ha anyon you work with ever ask you to do anyth with the book that you thought wa
question uneth or illeg
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1349
9 ar you involv in the person financ of the ceo if so is there anyth about them that might
make you think he is under person financi pressur
10 do either the ceo lifestyl or habit give you ani reason to think he mai be live beyond hi mean
11 ha anyon in a posit of author ever ask that you withhold in format from the auditor alter
document or make fictiti en tri in the book and record
12 is there anyth about your own background or financ that would caus someon to suspect that you
had a motiv for commit fraud
13 becaus of your import as cf o i must ask you on final question have you yourself commit
fraud or illeg act against thi compani rememberdont apolog
the account staff
if a financi statement fraud ha been order by the cfo he will either do the actual dirti
work himself or get hi staff to do it in some case the staff will understand the big pictur
but in most situat the employe is told onli what he need to know it is uncommon for
a cfo to share with a lower staff person the fact that he is cook the book
as a result the examin gener must complet hi audit work befor begin the
interview of the account staff thi will allow specif transact to be discuss with
the peopl who actual enter them into the compani record for exampl all thorough
audit will examin the major journal entri frequent these journal entri will be order
by the cfo but actual enter by a staff member there would gener be no record of
the cfo request the entri so thi fact must be establish through interview
interview of the account staff will allow suffici examin of procedur and
control over asset after these question ar answer you can gener pursu the line of
inquiri suggest abov for the ceo assist
it should be note that there ar similar and differ in the question ask of the
ceo the cfo and their staff in the case of the ceo and the cfo both were specif
ask if thei had commit fraud against the compani albeit in a nice wai the staffer
were not ask that specif question
financi statement fraud financi transact
1350 2011 fraud examin manual
the reason is thi signific financi statement fraud as we have state gener
origin with on or both of these two execut staffer have less motiv to engag
in financi statement fraud and ar therefor at less risk to do so thei ar also less like
to have the financi author to enter transact into the book without higher approv
so absent ani specif inform to the contrari ask the employe point blank if thei
have commit fraud is less like to produc inform and more like to offend them
but with the cfo and the ceo ask the direct question will add measur to the
prevent of fraud there ar few defens to not ask the question other than the
specter of embarrass the execut you ar audit that will of cours sound pretti
weak in a court of law where you ar fight for your profession life
prevent of financi statement fraud
prevent and deterr of financi statement fraud consist of those action taken to
discourag the perpetr of fraud and limit the exposur if fraud doe occur
intern auditor
intern auditor ar respons for help to deter fraud by examin and evalu the
adequaci and the effect of control commensur with the extent of the potenti
exposur in the variou segment of an entiti oper the intern audit standard
state that the princip mechan for deter fraud is intern control primari
respons for establish and maintain intern control rest with manag the
treadwai commiss address thi issu by recommend that intern audit depart
or staff have not onli the support of top manag but also the necessari resourc
avail to carri out their mission the intern auditor respons is to aid manag
in the deterr of fraud by evalu the adequaci and effect of the compani
intern control system as well as the compani potenti exposur to fraud with particular
consider given to the five element of intern control laid out by coso
manag
it is manag respo nsibil to set the ethic tone of the organ as with other
type of occup fraud and abus reduc the three factor that contribut to fraud
will greatli help in the prevent of financi statement fraud reduc exist pressur
to commit fraud remov potenti opportun to commit fraud and reliev possibl
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1351
ration for commit fraud will greatli aid in the prevent of financi statement
fraud
reduc the situat pressur that encourag financi statement fraud
avoid set unachiev financi goal
elimin extern pressur that might tempt account personnel to prepar
fraudul financi statement
remov oper obstacl that block effect financi perform such as
work capit restraint excess product volum or inventori restraint
establish clear and uniform account procedur that do not contain except
claus
reduc the opportun to commit fraud
maintain accur and complet intern account record
carefulli monitor the busi transact and interperson relationship of supplier
buyer purchas agent sale repres and other who interfac in the
transact between financi unit
establish a physic secur system to secur compani asset includ finish good
cash capit equip tool and other valuabl item
divid import function between employe separ total control of on area
maintain accur personnel record includ background check where permit by
law on new employe
encourag strong supervisori and leadership relationship within group to ensur
enforc of account procedur
reduc the ration of fraud strengthen employe person integr
manag should set an exampl by promot ing honesti in the account area it is
import that manag practic what it preach dishonest act by manag
even if thei ar direct at someon outsid of the organ creat a dishonest
environ that can spread to other busi activ and other employe both
intern and extern
honest and dishonest behavior should be defin in compani polici organiz
account polici should clear up ani grai area in account procedur
the consequ of violat the rule includ the punish of violat should
be clear
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1401
asset misappropri cash receipt
asset misappropri ar by far the most common of all occup fraud there ar
three major categori of asset misappropri scheme cash receipt scheme will be
discuss in thi section fraudul disburs of cash will be address in the next
section and the follow section will cover scheme involv the theft of inventori and
other noncash asset
cash is the focal point of most account entri cash both on deposit in bank and on
hand as petti cash can be misappropri through mani differ scheme these scheme
can be either onbook or offbook depend on where thei occur
cash receipt scheme fall into two categori skim and larceni the differ in the two
type of fraud depend complet on when the cash is stolen cash larceni is the theft of
monei that ha alreadi appear on a victim organ book while skim is the theft
of cash that ha not yet been record in the account system the wai in which an employe
extract the cash mai be exactli the same for a cash larceni or skim scheme
skim
skim is the remov of cash from a victim entiti prior to it entri in an account
system employe who skim from their compani steal sale or receiv befor thei ar
record in the compani book skim scheme ar known as offbook fraud
mean monei is stolen befor it is record in the victim organ account thi
aspect of skim scheme mean thei leav no direct audit trail becaus the stolen fund
ar never record the victim organ mai not be awar that the cash wa ever
receiv consequ it mai be veri difficult to detect that the monei ha been stolen
thi is the prime advantag of a skim scheme to the fraudster
skim is on of the most common form of occup fraud it can occur at ani point
where cash enter a busi so almost anyon who deal with the process of receiv cash
mai be in a posit to skim monei thi includ salespeopl teller waitperson and
other who receiv cash directli from custom
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1402 2011 fraud examin manual
in addit mani skim scheme ar perpetr by employe whose duti includ
receiv and log payment made by custom through the mail these employe slip
check out of the incom mail instead of post those check to the proper revenu or
receiv account those who deal directli with custom or who handl custom
payment ar obvious the most like candid to skim fund
sale skim
the most basic skim scheme occur when an employe sell good or servic to a
custom collect the custom payment but make no record of the sale the employe
simpli pocket the monei receiv from the custom instead of turn it over to hi
employ see unrecord sale flowchart
consid on of the simplest and most common sale transact a sale of good at the
cash regist in a normal transact a custom purchas an item and an employe enter
the sale on the regist the regist tape reflect that the sale ha been made and show that
a certain amount of cash the purchas price of the item should have been place in the
regist by compar the regist tape to the amount of monei on hand it mai be possibl
to detect theft for instanc if there were 500 worth of sale record on a particular
regist on a given dai but onli 400 cash in the regist it would be obviou that someon
had stolen 100 assum no begin cash balanc
if the employe is skim monei howev it will be imposs to detect theft simpli by
compar the regist tape to the cash drawer return to the exampl in the paragraph
abov assum that an employe want to make off with 100 through the cours of the
dai there ar 500 worth of sale at hi regist on sale is for 100 when the 100 sale is
made the employe doe not record the transact on hi regist the custom pai 100
and take the merchandis home but instead of place the monei in the cash drawer the
employe pocket it in order to creat the appear that the sale is be enter in the
regist the employe might ring a no sale or some other noncash transact sinc the
employe did not record the sale at the end of the dai the regist tape will onli reflect 400
in sale there will be 400 on hand in the re gister 500 in total sale minu the 100 that
the employe stole so the regist will balanc thu by not record the sale the employe
is abl to steal monei without the miss fund appear on the book of cours the
theft will show up indirectli in the compani record as inventori shrinkag but the book
will provid no direct evid of the theft
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1403
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1404 2011 fraud examin manual
the most difficult part in skim at the regist is that the employe must commit the
overt act of take monei if the employe take the custom monei and shove it into hi
pocket without enter the transact on the regist the custom will probabl suspect
that someth is wrong and might report the conduct to anoth employe or a manag it
is also possibl that a manag a fellow employe or a surveil camera will spot the
illeg conduct therefor it is often desir for a perpetr to act as though he is
properli record a transact while he skim sale
regist manipul
some employe might ring a no sale or ot her noncash transact to mask the theft of
sale the fals transact is enter on the regist so that it appear a sale is be rung up
the perpetr open the regist drawer and pretend to place the cash he ha just receiv
in the drawer but in realiti he pocket the cash to the casual observ it look as though
the sale is be properli record
some employe mai also rig their regist so that a sale can be enter on the regist kei
but will not appear on the regist tape the employe can then safe skim the sale anyon
observ the employe will see the sale enter see the cash drawer open etc yet the
regist tape will not reflect the transact
exampl
a servic station employe hid stolen gasolin sale by simpli lift the ribbon from the
printer on hi regist he collect and pocket the sale which were not record on the
regist tape the fraudster would then roll back the tape to the point where the next
transact should appear and replac the ribb on the next transact would be print
without leav ani blank space on the tape appar leav no trace of the fraud
when the ribbon is remov from the regist the result is a blank space on the regist tape
where the skim sale should have been print unusu gap between transact on a
regist tape mai mean that someon is skim sale
fraudster will often manual roll back the tape when thei replac the ribbon on their
regist so that there is no gap between transact most regist transact howev
ar sequenti number if a transact ha been omit from the regist tape the result
is a break in the sequenc for instanc if an employe skim sale 155 then the regist
tape would onli show transact 153 154 156 157 and so on the miss
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1405
transact number omit becaus the ribbon wa lift when thei took place would
indic fraud
skim dure nonbusi hour
anoth wai to skim unrecord sale is to conduct sale dure nonbusi hour for
instanc some employe will open store on weekend or after hour without the
knowledg of the owner thei can pocket the proce of all sale made dure these time
becaus the owner have no idea that their store ar even open for busi
exampl
a manag of a retail facil went to work two hour earli everi dai open hi store at
800 am instead of 1000 am and pocket all the sale made dure these two hour
he rang up sale on the regist as if it wa busi as usual but then remov the regist
tape and all the cash he had accumul the manag then start from scratch at 1000
as if the store wa just open the tape wa destroi so there wa no record of the befor
hour revenu
to thi point skim ha been discuss in the context of cash regist transact but
skim doe not have to occur at a regist some of the most costli skim scheme
ar perpetr by employe who work at remot locat or without close supervis
thi can includ onsit sale person who do not deal with regist independ salesmen
who oper offsit and employe who work at branch or satellit offic these
employe have a high level of autonomi in their job which often translat into poor
supervis and in turn to fraud
skim of offsit sale
sever industri reli on remot salesperson to gener revenu the fact that these
employe ar larg unsupervis put them in a good posit to skim revenu for
exampl consid the apart rental industri where apart manag handl the
daytodai oper without much oversight a common scheme is for an onsit employe to
identifi the tenant who pai in currenc and remov them from the book thi caus a
particular apart to appear as vacant on the record when in fact it is occupi the
manag can skim the rental payment from the vacant unit and the revenu will never be
miss as long as no on physic check the apart the perpetr can continu
skim indefinit
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1406 2011 fraud examin manual
anoth rentalskim scheme occur when apart ar rent out but no leas is
sign on the book the apart will still a ppear to be vacant even though there ar
tenant on the premis the perpetr can skim the rental payment from these tenant
without fear that thei will show up as past due in the compani record sometim the
employe in these scheme work in conjunct with the renter and give a special rate to
these peopl in return the renter payment ar made directli to the employe and ani
complaint or mainten request ar direct onli to that employe so the tenant
presenc in the apart remain hidden
instead of skim rent some properti manag focu on less predict form of
revenu like applic fee and late fee ownership mai know when rent is due and how
mani apart ar occupi but often there is no control in place to track the number of
peopl who fill out rental applic or how mani tenant pai their rent a dai or two late
properti manag can make thousand of dollar by skim these nickel and dime
payment
offsit skim is by no mean limit to the apart rental industri the scheme
describ abov can easili translat into ani arena where those who gener or collect
revenu oper in an independ fashion a prime exampl is the insur agent who
sell polici to custom then neglect to file the polici with the carrier most custom
do not want to file claim on a polici especi earli in the term for fear that their
premium will rise know thi the agent k eep all document on the polici instead
of turn it over to the carrier the agent is abl to skim the custom payment becaus
the carrier doe not know the polici exist the custom continu to make hi payment
think that he is insur when in fact the polici is a ruse
poor collect procedur
poor collect and record procedur can make it easi for an employe to skim sale or
receiv
exampl
a government author that dealt with public hous wa victim becaus it fail to
item daili receipt thi agenc receiv pa yment from sever public hous tenant
but at the end of the dai monei receiv from tenant wa list as a whole receipt
number were not us to item iz the payment made by tenant so there wa no wai to
pinpoint which tenant had paid how much consequ the employe in charg of
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1407
collect monei from tenant wa abl to skim a portion of their payment she simpli did
not record the receipt of over 10000 her action caus certain account receiv to be
overst where tenant payment were not properli record
underst sale
the discuss abov focus on pure offbook sale those which ar never record
underst sale work differ becaus the transact in question is post to the
book but for a lower amount than what the perpetr actual collect see
underst sale flowchart on wai employe commit underst sale scheme is by
alter receipt or prepar fals receipt that misstat the amount of sale
exampl
an employe wrote receipt to custom for their purchas but she remov the carbon
paper back on the receipt so that thei did not produc a compani copi the employe
then us a pencil to prepar compani copi that show lower purchas price for
exampl if the custom had paid 100 the compani copi might reflect a payment of 80
the employe skim the differ between the actual amount of revenu and the amount
reflect on the fraudul receipt
underst sale scheme ar commonli undertaken by employe who work at the cash
regist in a typic scheme an employe enter a sale total that is lower than the amount
actual paid by the custom the employe skim the differ between the actual
purchas price of the item and the sale figur record on the regist for instanc if an
item is sold for 100 the employe could ring up the sale of an 80 item and skim the excess
20
rather than reduc the price of an item an employe might record the sale of fewer item if
100 unit ar sold for instanc an employe might onli record the sale of 50 unit and skim
the excess receipt
a similar method is us when sale ar made on account the bill to the custom reflect
the true amount of the sale but the receiv is underst in the compani book for
instanc a compani might be ow 1000 but the receiv is record as 800 sale ar
correspondingli underst by 200 when the custom make payment on the account
the employe can skim 200 and post the 800 to the account the account will appear to
have been paid in full
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1408 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1409
fals discount
those employe with the author to grant discount mai util thi author to skim
sale and receiv in a fals discount skim scheme an employe accept full
payment for an item but record the transact as if the custom had been given a
discount the employe skim the amount of the discount for exampl on a 100
purchas if an employe grant a fals discount of 20 percent he could skim 20 and leav
the compani book in balanc
theft of check receiv through the mail
check receiv through the mail ar a frequent target of employe seek illicit gain
theft of incom check usual occur when a singl employe is in charg of open the
mail and record the receipt of payment thi employe simpli steal on or more
incom check instead of post them to custom account see theft of incom
check flowchart when the task of receiv and record incom payment is left to a
singl person it is all too easi for that employe to make off with an occasion check
exampl
a mailroom employe stole over 2 million in govern check arriv through the mail
thi employe simpli identifi and remov envelop deliv from a govern agenc
known to send check to the compani us a group of accomplic act under the name
of fictiti person and compani thi indi vidual wa abl to launder the check and
divid the proce with hi croni
the theft of check is not usual complic but it is sometim more difficult to conceal a
check theft scheme than other form of skim if the stolen check were payment on
the victim compani receiv then these payment were expect as receiv becom
past due the victim compani will send notic of nonpay to it custom a custom
is like to complain when he receiv a second bill for a payment he ha alreadi made in
addit the cash check will serv as evid that the custom made hi payment the
method us to conceal check theft scheme will be discuss later in thi section
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1410 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1411
check for currenc substitut
the intellig crimin will gener prefer to steal currenc rather than check if given the
opportun the reason why ar obviou first currenc is harder to trace than a check a
cash check eventu return to the person who wrote it and mai provid evid of
who cash it or where it wa spent endors bank stamp and so forth mai indic
the ident of the thief currenc on the other hand disappear into the economi onc it is
stolen
the second reason that currenc is prefer to a check is the difficulti in convert the
check when currenc is stolen it can be spent immedi a check on the other hand
must be endors and cash or deposit befor the thief can put hi hand on the monei
it repres to avoid thi problem employe who steal unrecord check will frequent
substitut them for receipt currenc if for exampl an employe skim an incom
check worth 500 he can add the check to the dai receipt and remov 500 in currenc
the total receipt will match the amount of cash on hand but payment in currenc ar
replac by the check
exampl
an employe respons for receipt ticket and fine payment on behalf of a municip
abus her posit and stole incom revenu es for nearli two year when payment in
currenc were receiv by thi individu she issu receipt but when check were receiv
she did not the check payment were theref or unrecord revenuesrip for skim
these unrecord check were place in the dai receipt and an equal amount of cash wa
remov the receipt match the amount of monei on hand except that payment in
currenc had been replac with check
the check for currenc substitut is veri common while these substitut make it easier
for a crook to convert stolen payment the problem of conceal the theft still remain
the fact that the stolen check ar not post mean that some custom account ar in
danger of becom past due if thi happen the perpetr scheme is in danger becaus
these custom will almost sure complain about the misappl of their payment
howev the misappli payment can be conceal on the book by forc account total
steal custom account statement lap and make other fraudul account
entri these conceal techniqu will be discuss in more detail in the skim
receiv section
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1412 2011 fraud examin manual
check for currenc substitut ar especi common when an employe ha access to
some unexpect sourc of fund such as a manufactur refund that arriv outsid the
regular stream of sale and receiv payment in these case the check can be swap
for cash and there is usual no addit step requir to conceal the crime the refund
check an unexpect sourc of fund will not be miss by the victim organ and the
parti who issu the check expect no good or servic in return
skim receiv
it is gener more difficult to conceal the skim of receiv than the skim of
sale becaus receiv payment ar expect the victim organ know the custom
ow monei and it is wait for the payment to arriv when unrecord sale ar skim
it is as though the sale never exist but when receiv ar skim the absenc of the
payment appear on the book as a delinqu account in order to conceal a skim
receiv a perpetr must somehow account for the payment that wa due to the
compani but never receiv there ar a number of common techniqu fraudster us to
conceal the skim of receiv
forc account balanc or destroi transact record
among the most danger receiv skim scheme ar those in which the
perpetr is in charg of collect and post payment if a fraudster ha a hand in both
end of the receipt process he can falsifi record to conceal the theft of receiv
payment for exampl the fraudster might post the custom payment to their
receiv account even though the payment will never be deposit thi keep the
receiv from ag but it creat an imbal in the cash account the perpetr hide
the imbal by forc the total on the cash account overst it to match the total
post to account receiv
exampl
the chief financi offic of a small corpor stole approxim 100000 from hi
compani by divert custom check thi in dividu control all the book and record
for the victim compani he stole check from custom and deposit them in hi person
bank account the custom payment were still post to keep the receiv from ag
the perpetr stole check in an amount equal to the victim compani tax liabil to
keep the book in balanc he would prepar check payabl to the ir but he never
mail them the check were record in the victim record and the fals disburs
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1413
offset the amount of fals post to acco unt receiv the scheme wa uncov when
the ir notifi the victim compani that it tax were delinqu
some fraudster simpli destroi all record that might prove that thei have been steal
destroi record en mass doe not prevent the victim organ from realiz that it
is be rob but it mai help conceal the ident of the thief
lap
lap custom payment is on of the most common method of conceal receiv
skim lap is the credit of on a ccount through the abstract of monei from
anoth account it is the fraudster version of rob peter to pai paul
suppos a compani ha three custom a b and c when as payment is receiv the
fraudster steal it instead of post it to as account custom a expect that hi account
will be credit with the payment he ha made if the payment ha not been post by the
time as next statement is mail he will see that the payment wa not appli to hi
account and will almost certainli complain to avoid thi the thief must take some action to
make it appear that the payment wa post
when bs check arriv the thief post thi monei to as account payment now appear to
be uptod on as account but bs account is behind when cs payment is receiv the
perpetr appli it to bs account thi process continu indefinit until on of three
thing happen 1 someon discov the scheme 2 restitut is made to the account or
3 some conceal entri is made to adjust the account receiv balanc
exampl
a clerk work for a govern agenc commit a lap scheme that involv the
theft of more than 150 custom payment caus a total misappropri of more than
30000 in govern fund thi individu stole tax fee and other incom
payment from custom to cover hi person expens when a custom payment wa
stolen the document on that payment would be hidden until a later payment wa
receiv the later payment would be appli to the earlier custom record
as the rotat schedul of appli and misappli payment becam more and more
complic the perpetr insist on exert more and more control over the receipt
process he insist on handl all incom mail prepar the deposit and deliv the
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1414 2011 fraud examin manual
deposit to the bank so that he could continu to delai the post of payment the fraud
wa detect in larg part becaus sever consum complain that thei had not receiv
confirm of their payment even though their check had clear month earlier
becaus lap scheme can becom veri intric fraudster sometim keep a second set
of book on hand detail the true natur of the payment receiv in mani skim
case a search of the fraudster work area will reveal a set of record track the actual
payment and how thei have been misappli to conceal the theft it mai seem odd that
peopl would keep record of their illeg activ on hand but mani lap scheme
becom extrem complic as more and more payment ar misappli the second set
of record help the perpetr keep track of the fund that were stolen and which account
need to be credit to conceal the fraud uncov these record if thei exist will greatli
facilit the investig of a lap scheme
while lap is more commonli us to conceal receiv skim it can also be us
to disguis the skim of sale employe sometim steal all or part of on dai receipt
and replac them with the receipt from the follow dai thi type of conceal
requir the employe to delai make the compani deposit until enough monei can be
collect to recoup the stolen fund if an organ rigidli adher to a deposit schedul
it is unlik that lap will be effect in conceal thi type of fraud
stolen statement
when employe skim receiv thei mai let the target account ag instead of
attempt to forc the balanc in other word thei steal an incom check intend as
payment on a receiv and thei simpli act as if the check never arriv thi method
keep the victim organ cash account in balanc becaus the stolen payment is never
post
of cours if the custom payment is not post the receiv will eventu becom
past due the custom will have proof in the form of a cancel check that a payment wa
made on the account the question will aris where did the payment go the answer of
cours is that it went into the fraudster pocket so the goal of the fraudster must be to
keep the custom from realiz that hi account wa not credit with the payment if thi
can be accomplish the custom will not complain about the miss payment and the
victim organ will not realiz that skim ha occur
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1415
on wai fraudster attempt to conceal the fact that thei have skim a payment from a
custom is to intercept the custom account statement andor late notic in some
case the perpetr intercept the account statement by chang the custom address in
the bill system so that statement ar sent directli to the perpetr home or to an
address where he can retriev them in other instanc the perpetr physic intercept
the statement befor thei ar mail
onc the real statement indic that the payment wa not receiv ha been intercept
the fraudster usual alter the statement or produc a counterfeit the fals statement
indic that the custom payment wa properli post thi lead the custom to believ
that hi account is uptod and keep the custom from complain about stolen
payment
fals account entri
intercept the custom statement will keep him in the dark as to the statu of hi
account but as long as the custom payment ar be skim hi account is slip
further and further past due the perpetr must bring the account back up to date in
order to conceal hi crime lap is on wai to keep account current as the employe
skim from them anoth wai is to make fals entri in the victim organ
account system
debit to expens account
an employe might conceal the skim of fund by make unsupport entri in the
victim compani book if a payment is made on a receiv for instanc the proper entri
is a debit to cash and a credit to the receiv instead of debit cash the employe might
choos to debit an expens account thi transact still keep the compani book in
balanc but the incom cash is never record in addit the custom receiv
account is credit so it will not becom delinqu
debit to ag or fictiti receiv
the same method discuss abov is us when employe debit exist or fictiti
account receiv in order to conceal skim cash for exampl an employe who ha
skim on custom payment might add the stolen amount to ag account that ar
soon to be written off as uncollect or to veri larg account where a small debit might
go unnot
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1416 2011 fraud examin manual
some perpetr also set up complet fictiti account and debit them for the cost of
skim receiv the employe then simpli wait for the fictiti receiv to ag
and be written off as uncollect in the meantim the fictiti receiv carri the cost
of a skim scheme where it will not be detect
write off account balanc
some employe cover their skim by post entri to contra revenu account such as
discount and allow if for instanc an employe intercept a 1000 payment he
would creat a 1000 discount on the acco unt to compens for the miss monei
anoth account that might be us in thi type of conceal is the bad debt expens
account
exampl
a bill manag wa author iz to write off certain patient balanc as hardship
allow thi employe accept payment from patient then instruct bill personnel
to write off the balanc in question the payment were never post thei were intercept
by the bill manag she cover approxim 30000 in stolen fund by us her
author to write off patient balanc
inventori pad
a problem for fraudster in some skim scheme is the victim organ inventori
offbook sale of good will alwai leav an in ventori shortag and a correspond rise in
the cost of good sold
when a sale of good is made the physic inventori is reduc by the amount of
merchandis sold for instanc when a retail sell a pair of shoe there is on less pair of
shoe in the stock room if thi sale is not record howev the shoe ar not remov
from the perpetu inventori record thu there is on less pair of shoe on hand than in
the perpetu inventori a reduct in the physic inventori without a correspond
reduct in the perpetu inventori is known as shrinkag
when an employe skim sale of servic there is no shrinkag becaus there is no
inventori for servic but when sale of good ar skim shrinkag alwai occur some
amount of shrinkag ar expect due to custom theft faulti product and spoilag but
high level of shrinkag serv as a warn that a compani could be a victim of occup
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1417
fraud the gener method us to conceal inventori shrinkag ar discuss in detail in the
inventori and other asset section
detect of skim scheme
the follow ar some detect method that mai be effect in detect skim
scheme
receipt or sale level detect
kei analyt procedur such as vertic and horizont analysi of sale account can be
us for skim detect on a grand scale these procedur analyz chang in the
account and can possibl point to skim problem includ underst sale
ratio analysi can also provid kei to the detect of skim scheme these
procedur ar discuss in detail in the fraudul financi statement section
detail inventori control procedur can also be util to detect inventori shrinkag due
to unrecord sale inventori detect method includ statist sampl trend analysi
review of receiv report and inventori record verif of materi requisit and
ship document as well as actual physic inventori count these procedur ar
review in the section on inventori and other asset
journal entri review
skim can sometim be detect by review and analyz all journal entri made to
the cash and inventori account journal entri involv the follow topic should be
examin
fals credit to inventori to conceal unrecord or underst sale
writeoff of lost stolen or obsolet inventori
writeoff of account receiv account
irregular entri to cash account
detect lap of sale or receiv
lap can usual be detect by compar the date of the custom payment with the
date the custom account ar post thi will requir an examin of the sourc
document such as the composit of bank deposit discrep should be investig
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1418 2011 fraud examin manual
confirm of custom account is anoth method that might detect lap
confirm ar especi effect on larg account where the time valu of monei is an
issu howev custom who pai on invoic rather than on balanc might not know the
exact balanc of their account if thi is the case it might be more effect to confirm by
invoic and reconstruct the account balanc us the sourc document in the file and the
result of the confirm if fraud is suspect ask the custom or the bank to return a
copi of both the front and the back of the check us to pai specif invoic match the
data on the check copi with the post date in the custom account
prevent of skim scheme
receipt or sale level control
as with most fraud scheme intern control procedur ar a kei to prevent of
skim scheme an essenti part of develop control procedur is manag
commun to employe control whether or not an employe will not record a sale
underst a sale or steal incom payment is extrem difficult
gener control
sale entri and gener ledger access control should includ document polici and
procedur which ar commun directli from manag the control procedur
will gener cover the follow subject
appropri segreg of duti and access control procedur regard who make
ledger transact will be follow
transact must be properli record as to amount date of occurr and ledger
account
proper safeguard measur will be adopt to ensur physic access to the account
system addit measur should ensur the secur of compani asset
independ reconcili as well as intern verif of account will be perform
on ledger accounts1
skim control
the discoveri of theft of check and cash involv proper control on the receipt process
defici in the answer to these typic auditprogram question mai be red flag
is mail open by someon independ of cashier account receiv bookkeep or
other account employe who mai initi or post journal entri
1 georg georgiad audit procedur new york harcourt brace profession publish 1995
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1419
is the deliveri of unopen busi mail prohibit to employe have access to the
account record
doe the employe who open the mail
place restrict endors for deposit onli on all check receiv
prepar a list of the monei check and other receipt
forward all remitt to the person respons for prepar and make the daili
bank deposit
forward the total of all remitt to the person respons for compar it to the
authent deposit ticket and amount record
is a lock box us
do cash sale occur if ye
ar cash receipt prenumb
is an independ check of prenumb receipt done daili and reconcil to cash
collect
do cash refund requir approv
ar cash receipt deposit intact daili
ar employe who handl receipt bond
is the account receiv bookkeep restrict from
prepar the bank deposit
obtain access to the cash receipt book
have access to collect from custom
ar bank instruct not to cash check drawn to the order of the compani
is the cashier restrict from gain access to the account receiv record and bank
and custom statement
ar area where physic handl of cash take place reason safeguard
is the person who make post to the gener ledger independ of the cash receipt
and account receiv function
doe a person independ of the cashier or account receiv function handl
custom complaint
cash larceni
in the occup fraud set a cash larceni mai be defin as the intent take of
an employ cash the term cash includ both currenc and check without the consent
and against the will of the employ
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1420 2011 fraud examin manual
a cash larceni scheme can take place in ani circumst in which an employe ha access
to cash everi compani must deal with the receipt deposit and distribut of cash so
everi compani is potenti vulner to a cash larceni scheme while the circumst in
which an employe might steal cash ar nearli limitless most larceni scheme involv the
theft of incom cash currenc on hand in a cash regist cash box etc or theft of cash
from the victim organ bank deposit
incom cash
theft of cash from the regist
a larg percentag of cash larceni scheme occur at the cash regist and for good reason
the regist is usual where the cash is the regist or similar cash collect point like
cash drawer or cash box is usual the most common point of access to cash for
employe so it is understand that thi is where larceni scheme frequent occur
furthermor there is often a great deal of activ at the regist numer transact that
requir employe to handl cash thi can serv as a cover for the theft of cash in a flurri
of activ with monei be pass back and forth between custom and employe an
employe can often slip cash out of the regist and into hi pocket undetect
the most straightforward cash larceni scheme is to simpli open the regist and remov
currenc or check see cash larceni from the regist flowchart the theft is often
commit as a sale is be conduct so that it appear to be part of the transact in
other circumst the perpetr wait for a slow moment when no on is around to
notic him dig into the cash drawer
recal that the difficulti in detect skim scheme come from the fact that the stolen
fund ar never enter on the victim organ account in a larceni scheme on the
other hand the fund that the perpetr steal have alreadi been reflect on the regist
tape as a result an imbal will result between the regist tape and the cash drawer
a regist is balanc by compar the transact on the regist tape to the amount of
cash on hand sale return and other regist transact that ar record on the regist
tape ar ad to or subtract from a known balanc to arriv at a total for the period in
question the actual cash is then count and the two total ar compar if the regist
tape show that there should be more cash in the regist than what is present the
discrep mai be due to larceni
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1421
the actual method for take monei at the regist open the regist and remov
currenc rare vari it is the method us by perpetr to avoid get caught that
distinguish larceni scheme oddli in mani instanc the perpetr ha no plan for
avoid detect a larg part of fraud is ration the employe convinc himself that
he is somehow entitl to what he is take or that what he is do is not actual a crime
regist larceni scheme frequent begin when the perpetr convinc himself that he is
onli borrow the fund to cover a temporari monetari need these peopl might carri
the miss currenc in their regist for sever dai delud themselv in the belief that
thei will on dai repai the fund thei have stolen
the employe who doe noth to camouflag hi crime is easili caught more danger
is the person take activ step to hide hi crime on basic wai for an employe to
disguis the fact that he is steal currenc is to take monei from someon els regist
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1422 2011 fraud examin manual
in some retail organ employe ar assign to certain regist altern on
regist is us and each employe ha an access code when cash is miss from a certain
cashier regist that cashier is obvious the most like suspect for the theft therefor by
steal from a cowork regist or by us someon els access code to enter the
regist the perpetr make sure that anoth employe will be the prime suspect in the
theft
exampl
a teller for a retail sale compani simpli sign onto a regist rang a no sale and took
currenc from the drawer over a period of time the teller took approxim 6000
through thi simpl method in order to get awai with the theft the teller wait until a
cowork wa on break then log onto that person regist rang a no sale and took
the cash the result cash shortag therefor appear in the regist of an honest
employe deflect attent from the true thief
a veri unsophist wai to avoid detect is to steal currenc in veri small amount over
an extend period of time becaus the miss amount ar small the shortag mai be
dismiss as account error rather than theft typic the employe becom depend
on the extra monei he is pilfer and hi theft increas in scale or becom more frequent
which caus the scheme to be uncov most retail organ track overag or
shortag by employe make thi method larg ineffect
revers transact
some employe conceal cash larceni by process revers transact which caus the
regist tape to reconcil to the amount of cash on hand after the theft by process fals
void or refund an employe can reduc the cash balanc reflect on the regist tape
exampl
a cashier receiv payment from a custom and record the transact on her system
she stole the payment from the custom then destroi the compani receipt that
reflect the transact to complet the coverup the cashier went back and void the
transact that she had enter at the time the payment were receiv the revers
entri brought the receipt total in to balanc with the cash on hand
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1423
regist manipul
instead of us revers entri an employe might manual alter the regist tape again
the purpos of thi activ is to forc a balanc between the cash on hand and the actual
cash receiv an employe might us whiteout to cover up a sale whose proce were
stolen or he might simpli cross out or alter the number on the tape so that the regist
total and the cash drawer balanc thi type of conceal is not common becaus in
gener the alter will be notic
alter cash count
anoth method for conceal cash larceni is to alter the cash count on regist when
cash from a regist is total and prepar for deposit an employe simpli record the
wrong amount so that the cash on hand appear to balanc with the total on the regist
tape obvious employe who deal with the receipt of cash should not be charg with
verifi the amount of cash on hand in their own regist but thi control is often
overlook
destroi regist tape
if the fraudster cannot make the cash and the tape balanc the next best thing is to prevent
other from comput the total and discov the imbal employe who ar
steal from the regist sometim destroi detail tape that would implic them in a
crime when detail tape ar miss or defac it mai be becaus someon is try to
conceal a fraud
other larceni of sale and receiv
not all receipt arriv via the cash regist employe can just as easili steal monei receiv
at other point on of the more common method is to take check receiv through the
mail post the payment to the account system but steal the check see other cash
larceni flowchart obvious thi type of scheme leav the cash account out of balanc
from a perpetr perspect it would make much more sens to take check that have
not yet been post to custom account often thi type of cash larceni scheme is
commit by an employe who claim to onli be borrow the fund for a short while
on of the classic ration in occup fraud scheme
those employe who have total control of a compani account system can overcom
the problem of outofbal account it is common especi in small busi for a
singl person to control all of a compani deposit and ledger these employe can steal
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1424 2011 fraud examin manual
incom cash that ha alreadi been post then conceal the crime by make unsupport
entri in the victim organ book poor separ of duti is veri often the
weak that allow cash larceni scheme to go undetect
exampl
an employe post custom payment to the account receiv journal but stole the cash
receiv thi result in an imbal in the victim compani cash account but the
perpetr had control over the compani deposit and all it ledger thi allow her to
conceal her crime by make unsupport entr i in the compani book that produc a
fictiti balanc between receipt and ledger
in circumst in which payment ar stolen but nonetheless post to the cash receipt
journal revers entri ar sometim us to balanc the victim compani account the
incom payment is initi credit to the custom account but the entri is later
revers with an unauthor adjust such as a courtesi discount
a less eleg wai to hide a crime is to simpli destroi all record that might prove that the
perpetr ha been steal thi slash and burn conceal techniqu doe not
prevent the victim compani from realiz that it ha been rob but it mai help conceal
the ident of the thief
cash larceni from the deposit
at some point in everi revenuegener busi someon must physic take the
compani currenc and check to the bank thi person or person left alon liter
hold the bag will have an opportun to take a portion of the monei prior to deposit
it into the compani account
typic when a compani receiv cash someon is assign to tabul the receipt list
the form of payment currenc or check and prepar a deposit slip for the bank then
anoth employe take the cash and deposit it in the bank the person who made out the
deposit gener retain on copi of the slip thi copi is match to a receipt copi of
the slip which is stamp by the bank when the deposit is made
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1425
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1426 2011 fraud examin manual
thi procedur is design to prevent the theft of fund from the deposit but theft still
occur often becaus the process is not adher to see cash larceni from the deposit
flowchart for exampl when on person is in charg of prepar the deposit slip make
the deposit and reconcil the bank statement that person can pilfer monei from the dai
receipt and conceal it by falsifi the deposit slip if the dai receipt ar 1000 the
perpetr might fill out a deposit slip for 5 00 and steal the other 500 the employe then
make correspondingli fals entri in the book underst the dai receipt thi
process creat a fals balanc in the victim organ record
a failur to reconcil the bank copi of the deposit slip with the offic copi can result in
fraud when the person make the deposit know hi compani doe not reconcil the two
copi he can steal cash from the deposit on the wai to the bank and alter the deposit slip
so that it reflect a lesser amount in some case sale record will also be alter to match
the diminish deposit
when cash is stolen from the deposit the receipt deposit slip will of cours be out of
balanc with the compani copi of the deposit slip unless the perpetr also prepar the
deposit to correct thi problem some perpetr alter the bank copi of the deposit slip
after it ha been valid thi bring the two copi back into balanc
exampl
an employe alter 24 deposit slip and valid bank receipt in the cours of a year to
conceal the theft of over 15 000 these document were alter with whiteout or a ball
point pen to match the compani cash report
on commonsens issu that is sometim over look by organ is the handl of
the deposit on the wai to the bank onc prepar the deposit should immedi be put in
a safe place until it is taken to the bank unfortun some organ leav their
deposit carelessli unattend for exampl some compani prepar the daili deposit then
leav it in the offic overnight to be taken to the bank the next morn employe familiar
with thi routin have littl troubl pilfer check and currenc from the deposit after
hour
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1427
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1428 2011 fraud examin manual
as with all cash larceni scheme steal from the compani deposit can be rather difficult
to conceal in most case these scheme ar onli success in the long term when the
person who count the cash also make the deposit in ani other circumst the success of
the scheme depend primarili on the inattent of those charg with prepar and
reconcil the deposit
deposit lap
on method that fraudster sometim us to conceal cash larceni from the deposit is
lap lap occur when an employe steal the deposit from dai on then replac it
with dai two deposit dai two is replac with dai three and so on the perpetr is
alwai on dai behind but as long as no on demand an uptoth minut reconcili of
the deposit to the bank statementand if daili receipt do not drop precipit he mai
be abl to avoid detect for a period of time lap is discuss in more detail in the
skim section
deposit in transit
a final strategi us to conceal stolen deposit is to carri the miss monei as deposit in
transit which ar a wai of account for discrep between the compani record and
the bank statement
exampl
an employe wa respons for receiv collect issu receipt post transact
reconcil account and make deposit thi employe took over 20000 in collect
from her employ over a fivemonth period to hide her theft the perpetr carri the
miss monei as deposit in transit mean that the miss monei would appear on the
next month bank statement of cours it never did the balanc wa carri for sever
month as dit until an auditor recogn the discrep and put a halt to the fraud
detect of cash larceni
receipt record
indepth analysi of the cash receipt and record process is the kei to detect a cash
larceni scheme area of analysi mai includ
mail and regist receipt point
journal and record of the receipt
secur of the cash from receipt to deposit
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1429
control object
in analyz the cash receipt process it is import to meet the follow control
object
cash receipt must be complet each dai receipt must be promptli collect and
deposit in full
each receiv transact record must be legitim and have support
document
all inform includ in the transact must be correctli verifi as to amount date
account code and descript
the cash must be safeguard while in the physic possess of the compani
there must be appropri personnel respons for overse cash control process
cash regist tape total should be reconcil to the amount of cash in drawer
an independ list of cash receipt should be prepar befor the receipt ar
submit to the cashier or account receiv bookkeep
an independ person should verifi the list against the deposit slip
authent deposit slip should be retain and reconcil to the correspond
amount in the cash receipt record
the bank deposit should be made by someon other than the cashier or the account
receiv bookkeep a person independ of the cash receipt and account
receiv function should compar entri to the cash receipt journal with
authent bank deposit slip
deposit per the bank statement
area where physic handl of cash take place should be reason safeguard
analyt review
analyz the relationship between sale cost of sale and the return and allow can
detect inappropri refund and discount
if a larg cash fraud is suspect a thorough review of these account mai enlighten the
examin as to the magnitud of the suspect fraud
an analysi of refund and return and allow with the actual flow of inventori mai
reveal some fraud scheme the refund should caus an entri to inventori even if it is
damag inventori likewis a return will caus a correspond entri to an inventori
account
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1430 2011 fraud examin manual
there should be a linear relationship between sale and return and allow over a
relev rang ani chang in thi relationship mai point to a fraud scheme unless there
is anoth valid explan such as a chang in the manufactur process chang in
product line or chang in price
detect at the regist
as cash is receiv whether at a regist or through the mail it is import to ensur
that the employe respons for complet these import task ar inform of
their respons and properli supervis
access to the regist must be close monitor and access code must be kept secur
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and agre them to regist total
popular conceal method must be watch for these method discuss earlier
includ check for cash revers transact regist tape destruct or alter
and sale cash count
complet regist document and cash must be deliv to the appropri
personnel in a time manner
cash theft ar sometim reveal by custom who have either paid monei on an
account and have not receiv credit or in some case when thei notic that the credit
thei have been given doe not agre with the payment thei have made complaint and
inquiri ar also receiv frequent from bank
cash account analysi
cash larceni can be detect by review and analyz all journal entri made to the cash
account thi review and analysi should be perform on a regular basi if an employe is
unabl to conceal the fraud through alter the sourc document such as the cash regist
tape then he mai resort to make a journal entri directli to cash in gener and except in
financi institut there ar veri few instanc in everydai busi activ where an
independ journal entri is necessari for cash on of these except is the record of
the bank servic charg howev thi is an easi journal entri to trace to it sourc
document name the bank statement therefor all other entri directli to cash ar
suspect and should be trace to their sourc document or explan suspect entri
will gener credit the cash account and correspondingli debit variou other account such
as a sale contra account or bad debt expens
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1431
prevent of cash larceni
segreg of duti
the primari prevent of cash larceni is segreg of duti whenev on individu
ha control over the entir account transact eg author record and
custodi the opportun is present for cash fraud each of the follow duti and
respons should ideal be segreg
cash receipt
cash count
bank deposit
deposit receipt reconcili
bank reconcili
post of deposit
cash disburs
if ani on person ha the author to collect the cash deposit the receipt record that
collect and disburs compani fund the risk that fraud can occur is high
assign rotat and mandatori vacat
mani intern fraud scheme ar continu in natur and requir ongo effort by the
employe to conceal defalc mandatori job rotat is an excel method of
detect cash fraud by establish a mandatori job or assign rotat the
conceal element is interrupt if mandatori vacat ar within the compani
polici it is import that dure the employe absenc the normal workload of that
employe be perform by anoth individu the purpos of mandatori vacat is lost if
the work is allow to remain undon dure the employe time off
surpris cash count and procedur supervis
surpris cash count and supervisori observ ar a us fraud prevent method if
properli us it is import that employe know that cash will be count on a sporad
and unschedul basi these surpris count must be made at all step of the process from
receiv the check to deposit
physic secur of cash
ensur proper segreg of duti of kei personnel
review the check and cash composit of the daili bank deposit dure unannounc
cash count and dure substant audit test of cash receipt
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1432 2011 fraud examin manual
review the entiti record of the numer seri of print prenumb receipt and
verifi that these receipt ar us sequenti includ void document
review the timeli of deposit from locat to the central treasur function
observ cash receipt oper of locat
prepar and review a schedul of all cash receipt function from a review of revenu
report from cash receipt form at the central treasur function and from discuss
with knowledg employe
prepar and analyz an inventori of all imprest and chang fund by purpos amount
custodian date and locat
audit all revenu sourc on a cycl
period us compar analyt review to determin which function have
unfavor trend
determin reason why revenu ha chang from previou report period
confirm respons obtain from manag by us altern record or through
substant audit test
adher to a commun polici of unannounc cash count
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1501
asset misappropri fraudul disburs
in fraudul disburs scheme an employe make a distribut of compani fund
for a dishonest purpos exampl of fraudul disburs includ forg compani
check the submiss of fals invoic doctor timecard and so forth on their face
the fraudul disburs do not appear ani differ from valid disburs of cash
for instanc when an employe run a bogu invoic through the account payabl system
the victim organ cut a check for the bad invoic right along with all the legitim
payment it make the perpetr ha taken monei from hi employ in such a wai that it
appear to be a normal disburs of cash someon might notic the fraud base on the
amount recipi or destin of the payment but the method of payment is legitim
regist disburs scheme
fraudul disburs at the cash regist ar differ from the other scheme that
often take place at the regist such as skim and cash larceni when cash is stolen as
part of a regist disburs scheme the remov of the cash is record on the regist
tape a fals transact is enter so it appear that the disburs of monei wa
legitim
there ar two basic regist disburs scheme fals refund and fals void while the
scheme ar larg similar there ar a few differ between the two that merit discuss
them separ
fals refund
a refund is process at the regist when a custom return an item of merchandis that
wa purchas from the store the transact that is enter on the regist indic the
merchandis is be replac in the store inventori and the purchas price is be
return to the custom in other word a refund show cash be disburs from the
regist to the custom see fals refund flowchart
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1502 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1503
fictiti refund
in a fictiti refund scheme an employe process a transact as if a custom were
return merchandis even though there is no actual return two thing result from thi
fraudul transact the first is that the employe take cash from the regist in the
amount of the fals return for instanc if the employe process a fictiti return for a
100 pair of shoe he remov 100 from the regist the regist tape will indic that the
shoe were return so the disburs appear to be legitim the regist tape balanc
with the amount of cash on hand becaus the fraudul refund account for the cash that
the employe stole
the second thing that happen in a fictiti refund scheme is that a debit is made to the
inventori system show that the merchandis ha been return to the inventori sinc
the transact is fictiti no merchandis is actual return the result is that the
compani inventori is overst
exampl
a manag creat 5500 worth of fals re turn result in a larg shortag in the
compani inventori he wa abl to carri hi scheme on for sever month howev
becaus 1 inventori wa not count regularli and 2 the perpetr a manag wa
on of the peopl who perform inventori count
overst refund
rather than creat an entir fictiti refund some employe mere overst the amount
of a legitim refund and steal the excess monei for exampl if a custom return 100
worth of merchandis the employe might ring up a 200 return the employe give the
custom 100 in return for the merchandis then pocket the remain 100 thi will
result in shrinkag of 100 worth of inventori
credit card refund
when purchas ar made with a credit card rather than cash refund appear as credit to
the custom credit card rather than as cash disburs some dishonest employe
process fals refund on credit card sale in lieu of process a normal cash transact
on benefit of the credit card method is that the perpetr doe not have to physic take
cash from the regist and carri it out of the store by process the refund to a credit card
account a perpetr reap a financi gain and avoid the potenti embarrass of be
caught redhand take cash
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1504 2011 fraud examin manual
in a typic credit card refund scheme the perpetr ring up a refund on a credit card sale
even though the merchandis is not actual be return the employe credit hi own
credit card number rather than the custom the result is that the cost of the item is
credit to the perpetr credit card account
a more creativ and widerang applic of the credit card refund scheme occur when
employe process refund to the account of other peopl and in return receiv a portion
of the refund as a kickback suppos a person is 100 short on the rent that person goe to
the retail store where hi friend is a teller and ha the teller process a credit of 150 to hi
account the custom then goe to an atm machin and withdraw 150 in cash he
pai 50 to the teller and keep 100 for himself
refund scheme ar more difficult to perpetr in mani hightech retail store where the
cash regist have antifraud control that requir the refund to be made to the origin
credit card us for the purchas or that onli allow for refund in the form of a store credit
for the current valu of the item purchas
fals void
fictiti void ar similar to refund scheme in that thei make fraudul disburs
from the regist appear to be legitim when a sale is void on a regist a copi of the
custom receipt is usual attach to a void slip along with the signatur or initi of a
manag indic that the transact ha been approv see fals void flowchart in
order to process a fals void then the first thing the perpetr need is the custom
copi of the sale receipt typic when an employe set about process a fictiti void
he simpli withhold the custom receipt at the time of the sale in mani case custom
do not notic that thei ar not given a receipt
with the custom copi of the receipt in hand the culprit ring a void sale whatev
monei the custom paid for the item is remov from the regist as though it is be
return to a custom the copi of the custom receipt is attach to the void slip to
verifi the authent of the transact
befor the void sale will be perceiv as valid a manag gener must approv the
transact in mani instanc the manag in question simpli neglect to verifi the
authent of the void sale a number of manag will sign most anyth present to
them and thu leav themselv vulner to void sale scheme it is not a coincid
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1505
that the perpetr of these crime present their void slip to manag who ar
lackadais about author them these kind of manag ar gener target by the
fraudster and ar essenti to the success of the scheme
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1506 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1507
exampl
an employe process fraudul void kept custom receipt and present them to her
supervisor for review at the end of her shift long after the alleg transact had taken
place her supervisor approv the void sale and the account receiv depart
fail to notic the excess number of void sale process by thi employe
obvious not all manag give rubberstamp approv to void sale some employe
must therefor take other rout to get their void sale approv in most of these case
the perpetr simpli forg hi supervisor author on the fraudul void slip it is
also possibl that manag will conspir with regist employe and approv fals void in
return for a share of the proce from the scheme
conceal regist disburs scheme
as ha alreadi been discuss two thing happen when a fals refund or void is enter into
the regist the first is that the employe commit the fraud remov cash from the
regist and the second is that the item allegedli be return is debit back into the
perpetu inventori of cours there realli is no merchandis be return thi lead to
inventori shrinkag a situat in which there is less inventori actual on hand than the
perpetu inventori record reflect a certain amount of shrinkag is expect in ani retail
industri but too much of it rais concern of fraud it is therefor in the perpetr best
interest to conceal the appear of shrinkag on the book
inventori is essenti account for by a twostep process the first part of the process is
the perpetu inventori which is a run tabul of how much inventori should be on
hand when a sale of merchandis is made the perpetu inventori is credit to remov thi
merchandis from the record the amount of merchandis that should be on hand is
reduc convers when merchandis is return the perpetu inventori is debit
period someon from the compani take a physic count of the inventori go
through the stockroom or warehous and count the amount of inventori that is actual on
hand the two figur ar then compar to see if there is a discrep between the
perpetu inventori what should be on hand and the physic inventori what is on hand
in regist disburs scheme shrinkag is often conceal by overst inventori
dure the physic count especi if take inventori is on of the perpetr duti
the perpetr simpli overst the amount of inventori on hand so it match the
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1508 2011 fraud examin manual
perpetu inventori for a more detail analysi of method us to conceal inventori
shrinkag pleas see the inventori and other asset section
small disburs
anoth wai for employe to avoid detect in a refund scheme is to keep the size of the
disburs low mani compani set limit below which manag review of a refund
is not requir where thi is the case employe simpli process copiou number of
refund that ar small enough that thei do not have to be review
exampl
an employe creat over 1000 fals refund all under the review limit of 15 he wa
eventu caught becaus he began process refund befor store hour and anoth
employe notic that refund were appear on the system befor the store open
nevertheless befor hi scheme wa detect the man made off with over 11000 of hi
employ monei
destroi record
on final mean of conceal a regist scheme as with mani kind of fraud is to destroi
all record of the transact most conceal method ar concern with keep
manag from realiz that fraud ha occur when an employe resort to destroi
record howev he typic ha conced that manag will discov hi theft the
purpos of destroi record is usual to prevent manag from determin who the
thief is
detect of regist disburs scheme
fictiti refund or void sale
fictiti refund or void sale can often be detect when close examin the
document submit with the cash receipt
on detect method is to evalu the refund or discount given by each cashier or
salesperson thi analysi mai point out that a singl employe or group of employe
ha a higher incid of refund or discount than other further examin is then
necessari to determin if the refund ar appropri and properli document
sign in the regist area ask custom to ask for and examin their receipt emploi
the custom as part of the intern control system thi help ensur that the cashier or
salesperson is properli account for the sale and prevent employe from us
custom receipt as support for fals void or refund
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1509
random servic call to custom who have return merchandis or void sale can
be us to verifi the legitimaci of transact
review and analysi of decreas in gross sale andor increas in return and allow
analyz the relationship between sale cost of sale and the return and allow can
detect inappropri refund and discount if a larg cash fraud is suspect a thorough
review of these account might enlighten the examin as to the magnitud of the suspect
fraud an analysi of refund and return and allow with the actual flow of inventori
might reveal some fraud scheme the refund should caus an entri to inventori even if it is
damag inventori likewis a return will caus a correspond entri to an inventori
account there should be a linear relationship between sale and return and allow over
a relev rang ani chang in thi relationship might point to a fraud scheme unless there
is anoth valid explan such as a chang in the manufactur process chang in
product line or chang in price
regist scheme red flag
inappropri employe segreg of duti for exampl regist count and
reconcil should not be done by the cashier
cashier rather than supervisor have access to the control kei that ar necessari for
refund and void
regist employe ha author to void own transact
regist refund ar not method review
multipl cashier oper from a singl cash drawer without separ access code
person check from cashier found in regist
void transact ar not properli document or not approv by a supervisor
void cash receipt form manual system or support document for void
transact cash regist system ar not retain on file
miss or obvious alter regist tape
gap in the sequenc of transact on regist tape
an inordin number of refund void or nosal on regist tape
inventori total appear forc
multipl refund or void for am ount just under the review limit
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1510 2011 fraud examin manual
prevent of regist disburs scheme
review the segreg of duti of kei employe who staff the regist as well as the
duti of their supervisor
as cash is receiv it is import to ensur that the employe respons for
complet these import task ar inform of their respons and properli
supervis
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and agre them to regist total
complet regist document and cash must be deliv to the appropri
personnel in a time manner
cash theft ar sometim reveal by custom who have paid monei on an account
and have not receiv credit or in some case who have been credit for an amount
that doe not agre with the payment thei have made complaint and inquiri ar also
receiv frequent from bank
access to the regist must be close monitor and access code must be kept secur
quantiti of refund should be analyz to detect multipl small refund
commun and adher to compani polici of perform unannounc cash count
maintain the presenc of a manag or supervisor near the area of the cash regist as a
deterr to theft
review support document for void and refund transact for proprieti ie
legitimaci and approv
review the numer sequenc and complet of cash regist tape
check tamper
check tamper is uniqu among the fraudul disburs scheme becaus it is the on
group in which the perpetr physic prepar the fraudul check in most fraudul
disburs scheme the culprit gener a payment to himself by submit some fals
document to the victim organ such as an invoic or a timecard the fals document
repres a claim for payment and caus the victim organ to issu a check that the
perpetr can convert
check tamper scheme ar fundament differ in these scheme the perpetr
take physic control of a check and make it payabl to himself through on of sever
method check tamper fraud depend upon factor such as access to the compani
checkbook access to bank statement and the abil to forg signatur or alter other
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1511
inform on the face of the check most check tamper crime fall into on of four
categori forg maker scheme forg endors scheme alter paye scheme and
author maker scheme
forg maker scheme
the legal definit of forgeri includ not onli the sign of anoth person name to a
document such as a check with a fraudul intent but also the fraudul alter of a
genuin instrument thi definit is so broad that it would encompass all check tamper
scheme for the purpos of thi text the definit of forgeri ha been narrow to fit the
fraud examin need in order to properli distinguish the variou method us by
individu to tamper with check the concept of forgeri will be limit to those case in
which an individu sign anoth person name on a check
the person who sign a check is known as the maker of the check a forg maker
scheme then mai be defin as a check tamper scheme in which an employe
misappropri a check and fraudul affix the signatur of an author maker
thereon see forg maker scheme flowchart fraud that involv other type of check
tamper such as the alter of the paye or the chang of the dollar amount ar
classifi separ
in order to forg a check an employe must have access to a blank check he must be abl
to produc a convinc forgeri of an author signatur and he must be abl to conceal
hi crime conceal is a univers problem in check tamper scheme the method
us ar basic the same whether on is deal with a forg maker scheme an
intercept check scheme a conceal check scheme or an author maker scheme
therefor conceal issu will be discuss as a group later in thi section
obtain the check
employe with access to compani check
on cannot forg a compani check unless on first possess a compani check most
forgeri scheme ar commit by account payabl clerk offic manag bookkeep or
other employe whose duti typic includ the prepar of compani check these
ar peopl who have access to the compani checkbook on a regular basi and ar therefor
in the best posit to steal blank check
1 henri campbel black black law dictionari fifth edit st paul west publish co 1979 p 585
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1512 2011 fraud examin manual
employe lack access to compani check
if the perpetr doe not have access to the compani checkbook through hi work duti
he will have to find other mean of misappropri a check the wai a person steal a
check depend larg on how the checkbook is handl within a particular compani in
some circumst the checkbook is poorli guard left in unattend area where anyon
can get to it in other compani where blank check ar kept in a restrict area the
perpetr might have surreptiti obtain a kei or combin to thi area an
accomplic might provid blank check for the perpetr in return for a portion of the
stolen fund perhap a secretari see the checkbook left on a manag desk or a custodian
come across blank check in an unlock desk drawer
in some compani check ar comput gener when thi is the case an employe who
know the password for prepar and issu check can usual obtain as mani unsign
check as he desir there ar an unlimit number of wai to steal a check each
depend on the wai in which a particular compani guard it blank check in some
instanc employe go so far as to produc counterfeit check
exampl
an employe had an accomplic who work for a checkprint compani the accomplic
wa abl to print blank check with the account number of the perpetr compani the
perpetr then wrote over 100000 worth of forgeri on these counterfeit check
to whom is the check made payabl
to the perpetr
onc a blank check ha been obtain the perpetr must decid to whom it should be
made payabl in most instanc forg check ar made payabl to the perpetr himself
so that thei can be easili convert cancel check that ar payabl to an employe should
be close scrutin for the possibl of fraud
if the perpetr own hi own busi or ha establish a shell compani he will usual
write fraudul check to these entiti rather than himself these check ar not as
obvious fraudul on their face as check made payabl to an employe at the same
time these check ar easi to convert becaus the perpetr own the entiti to which the
check ar payabl
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1513
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1514 2011 fraud examin manual
to an accomplic
if a fraudster is work with an accomplic he can make the forg check payabl to that
person the accomplic then cash the check and split the monei with the employeefraudst
becaus the check is payabl to the accomplic in hi true ident it is easili
convert an addit benefit to us an accomplic is that a cancel check payabl to a
thirdparti accomplic is not as like to rais suspicion as a cancel check to an employe
the obviou drawback to us an accomplic in a scheme is that the employeefraudst
usual ha to share the proce of the scheme
to cash
the perpetr mai also write check payabl to cash in order to avoid list himself as
the paye check made payabl to cash howev must still be endors the perpetr
will have to sign hi own name or forg the name of anoth in order to convert the check
check payabl to cash ar usual view more skeptic than check payabl to person
or busi some institut mai refus to cash check made payabl to cash
to vendor
not all fraudster forg compani check to obtain cash some employe us forg maker
scheme to purchas good or servic for their own benefit these fraudul check ar
made payabl to thirdparti vendor who ar uninvolv in the fraud for instanc an
employe might forg a compani check to bui a comput for hi home the comput
vendor is not involv in the fraud at all furthermor if the victim organ regularli
doe busi with thi vendor the person who reconcil the compani account mai
assum that the check wa us for a legitim busi expens
forg the signatur
after the employe ha obtain and prepar a blank check he must forg an author
signatur in order to convert the check the most obviou method and the on that come
to mind when on think of the word forgeri is to simpli take pen in hand and sign the
name of an author maker
freehand forgeri
the difficulti a fraudster encount when physic sign the author maker name is
in creat a reason approxim of the true signatur if the forgeri appear authent
the perpetr will probabl have no problem cash the check in truth the forg
signatur mai not have to be particularli accur mani fraudster cash forg check at
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1515
liquor store groceri store or other institut that ar known to be less than dilig in
verifi signatur and identif nevertheless a poorli forg signatur is a clear red
flag of fraud the maker signatur on can cele check should be review for forgeri
dure the reconcili process
photocopi forgeri
to guarante an accur forgeri some employe make photocopi of legitim
signatur the signatur of an author signer is copi from some document such as a
busi letter onto a transpar then the transpar is laid over a blank check so that
the signatur copi onto the maker line of the check the result is a check with a perfect
signatur of an author maker
automat checksign instrument
compani that issu a larg number of check sometim util automat checksign
instrument autom signatur ar either produc with manual instrument like
signatur stamp or thei ar print by comput obvious an employe who ha access to
an automat checksign instrument will have no troubl forg the signatur of
author maker even the most rudimentari control procedur should sever limit
access to these instrument
exampl
a fiscal offic maintain a set of manual check that were unknown to other person in
the compani the compani us an autom check signer and the custodian of the signer
let the offic have uncontrol access to it us the manual check and the compani
check signer the fiscal offic wa abl to write over 90000 worth of fraudul check to
himself over a period of approxim four year
the same principl appli to computergener signatur access to the password or
program that print sign check should be restrict specif exclud those who
prepar check and those who reconcil the bank statement
convert the check
in order to convert the forg check the perpetr must endors it the endors is
typic made in the name of the paye on the check sinc identif is typic
requir when on seek to convert a check the perpetr usual need fake identif
if he forg check to real or fictiti third person as discuss earlier check payabl to
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1516 2011 fraud examin manual
cash requir the endors of the person convert them without a fake id the
perpetr will like have to endors these check in hi own name an employe
endors on a cancel check is obvious a red flag
forg endors scheme
forg endors ar those check tamper scheme in which an employe intercept a
compani check intend to pai a third parti and convert the check by endors it in the
thirdparti name in some case the employe also sign hi own name as a second
endors see forg endors scheme flowchart
a fraudster main dilemma in a forg endors scheme and in all intercept check
scheme for that matter is gain access to a check after it ha been sign the fraudster
must either steal the check between the point where it is sign and the point where it is
deliv or he must rerout the check caus it to be deliv to a locat where he can
retriev it the manner us to steal a check depend larg upon the wai the compani
handl outgo disburs anyon who is allow to handl sign check mai be in
a good posit to intercept them
intercept check befor deliveri
employe involv in deliveri of check
obvious the employe in the best posit to intercept sign check ar those whose
duti includ the handl and deliveri of sign check the most obviou exampl is a
mailroom employe who open outgo mail contain sign check and steal the
check other personnel with access to outgo check might includ account payabl
employe payrol clerk and secretari
poor control of sign check
unfortun employe ar often abl to intercept sign check becaus of poor intern
control for instanc mani employe simpli find sign check left unattend in the
work area of the person who sign them or the person charg with their deliveri in
these case it is easi for the perpetr to steal the check anoth common breakdown
occur when the person who prepar a check is also involv in the deliveri of that check
onc it ha been sign
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1517
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1518 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a highlevel manag with author to disburs employe benefit instruct account
payabl personnel to return sign benefit check to him instead of immedi deliv
them to their intend recipi these instruct were not question due to the
manag level of author within the compani the perpetr simpli took the check
that were return to him and deposit them into hi person bank account forg the
endors of the intend paye
in addit to the preced exampl secretari or clerk who prepar check for their
boss to sign ar often respons for mail those check it is veri simpl for those
employe to make out a fraudul check and obtain a signatur know that the boss will
give the sign check right back to them thi scheme is indic of the kei problem with
occup fraud trust in order for an offic to run effici highlevel employe must
be abl to reli on their subordin yet thi relianc is precis what put subordin in a
posit to defraud their employ
theft of return check
check that have been mail and ar later return to the victim for some reason such as
an incorrect address ar often target for theft by fraudster employe with access to
incom mail ar abl to intercept these return check and convert them by forg the
endors of the intend paye
exampl
a manag took and convert approxim 130000 worth of check that were
return due to noncurr address he also stole outgo check cash them and then
declar them lost the fraudster wa well known at hi bank and wa abl to convert the
check by claim that he wa do it as a favor to the real paye who were too busi to
come to the bank the fraudster wa abl to continu with hi scheme becaus the natur
of hi compani busi wa such that the recipi of the misdeliv check were often
not awar that the victim compani ow them monei therefor thei did not complain
when their check fail to arriv in addit the perpetr had complet control over the
bank reconcili so he could issu new check to those paye who did complain then
forc the reconcili make it appear that the bank balanc and book balanc
match when in fact thei did not
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1519
rerout the deliveri of check
employe mai also misappropri sign check by alter the address to which those
check ar mail these perpetr usual replac the legitim address of the paye with
an address where the employe can retriev the check such as the employe home or a
po box the employe control in other instanc the perpetr might purpos
misaddress a check so that it will be return as undeliver the employe steal the check
after it is return to the victim organ
obvious proper separ of duti should preclud anyon who prepar disburs
from be involv in their deliveri nevertheless the person who prepar a check is often
allow to address and mail it as well in some instanc where proper control ar in place
employe ar still abl to caus the misdeliveri of check
exampl
a clerk in the custom servic depart of a mortgag compani wa in charg of
chang the mail address of properti ow ner she wa assign a password that gave
her access to make these chang the clerk wa transfer to a new depart where on
of her duti wa the issuanc of check to properti owner unfortun her supervisor
forgot to cancel her old password when the clerk realiz thi oversight she would request
a check for a certain properti owner then sign onto the system with her old password and
chang the address of that properti owner the check would be sent to her the next dai
the employe would us her old password to reenter the system and replac the proper
address so that there would be no record of where the check h ad been sent thi fraudster
scheme result in a loss of over 250000 to the victim compani
convert the stolen check
onc a check ha been intercept the perpetr can cash it by forg the paye
signatur henc the term forg endors scheme depend on where he tri to cash the
check the perpetr mai or mai not need fake identif at thi stage if a perpetr
is requir to produc identif in order to cash hi stolen check and if he doe not
have a fake id in the paye name he mai us a dual endors to cash or deposit the
check in other word the perpetr forg the paye signatur as though the paye had
transfer the check to him then the perpetr endors the check in hi own name and
convert it when the bank statement is reconcil dual endors on check should
alwai rais suspicion particularli when the second signer is an employe of the compani
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1520 2011 fraud examin manual
alter paye scheme
the second type of intercept check scheme is the alter paye scheme thi is a form of
check tamper in which an employe intercept a compani check intend for a third
parti and alter the paye design so that the check can be convert by the employe or
an accomplic see alter paye scheme flowchart the employe insert hi own
name the name of an accomplic or the name of a fictiti entiti on the paye line of the
check the alter essenti make the check payabl to the employe or an
accomplic so there is no need to forg an endors and no need to obtain fals
identif
alter check prepar by other insert a new paye
the method us to alter the paye design on a check depend larg on how that
check is prepar and intercept incident the amount of the check mai also be alter
at the same time and by the same method as the paye design check prepar by
other can be intercept by ani of the method discuss in the forg endors
section abov when the perpetr intercept a check that ha been prepar by someon
els there ar basic two method that mai be emploi to chang the paye the first is
to insert the fals paye name in place of the true paye the true name might be
scratch out with a pen or cover up with whiteout anoth name is then enter on the
paye design line these kind of alter ar usual simpl to detect
a more sophist method occur when the perpetr of the fraud enter the account
payabl system and chang the name of paye befor check ar gener thi can be
accomplish by anyon with a password that permit access to the account payabl
address file
exampl
an account payabl employe wa so trust that her manag allow her to us hi
comput password in hi absenc the password permit access to the account payabl
address file thi employe wait until the manag wa absent then select a legitim
vendor with whom her compani did a lot of busi she held up the vendor invoic for
the dai and after work us the manag login code to chang the vendor name and
address to that of a fictiti compani the new name and address were run through the
account payabl cycl with an old invoic number caus a fraudul check to be issu
the victim compani had an autom duplic invoic test but the perpetr
circumv it substitut 1 for i and 0 zero for capit o the next dai
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1521
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1522 2011 fraud examin manual
the employe would replac the true vendor name and address and mutil the check
regist so that the check payabl to the fi ctitiou vendor wa conceal approxim
300000 in fals check wa issu us thi method
alter check prepar by other tack on
the other method that can be us by perpetr to alter check prepar by other is
tack on addit letter or word to the end of the real paye design for
instanc check payabl to abc compani might be alter to read ab collin the
employe then cash the check in the name of ab collin it sound like an odd scheme
but it realli happen in these case the simpl inclus of a filler line after the paye
design would prevent the loss
in addit to alter the paye design the amount of the check can be alter by
tack on extra number if the person prepar the check is careless and leav space for
extra number in the amount portion of the check
alter check prepar by the fraudster eras ink
when the perpetr prepar the check that is to be alter the scheme tend to be a bit
more sophist the reason for thi is obviou if the perpetr is abl to prepar the
check himself he can prepar it with the thought of how the paye design will be
chang on of the most common wai to prepar a check for alter is to write or type
the paye name and possibl the amount in eras ink after an author maker sign
the check the perpetr retriev the check eras the paye name and insert hi own
in some case employe even obtain signatur on check written in pencil
exampl
a bookkeep type out small check to a local supplier and had the owner of the compani
sign them the bookkeep then us her eras typewrit to lift the paye design and
amount from the check she enter her own name as the paye and rais the amount
precipit for instanc the owner might si gn a 10 check that later becam a 10000
check these check were enter in the disburs journal as payment for aggreg
inventori to the compani largest supplier who receiv sever larg check each month
the bookkeep stole over 300000 fr om her employ in thi scheme
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1523
where a proper separ of duti is in place a person who prepar a check should not be
permit to handl the check after it ha been sign nevertheless thi is exactli what
happen in most alter paye scheme the person who prepar the check know that the
maker of the check will return it to him after it ha been sign
alter check prepar by the fraudster blank check
the most egregi exampl of poor control in the handl of sign check is on in
which the perpetr prepar a check leav the paye design blank and submit it to an
author maker who sign the check and return it to the employe obvious thi make
it quit easi for the perpetr to design himself or an accomplic as the paye common
sens should prevent anyon from give a sign blank check to anoth person
nevertheless thi is a fairli common occurr especi when the perpetr is a trust
longtim employe
convert alter check
as with all other type of fraudul check convers is accomplish by endors the
check in the name of the paye convers of fraudul check ha alreadi been discuss
in previou section and will not be reexamin here
author maker scheme
the final check tamper scheme the author maker scheme mai be the most difficult
to defend against an author maker scheme occur when an employe with signatur
author on a compani account write fraudul check for hi own benefit and sign hi
own name as the maker see author maker scheme flowchart the perpetr in
these scheme can write and sign fraudul check himself he doe not have to alter a pre
prepar instrument or forg the maker signatur
overrid control through intimid
when a person is author to sign compani check prepar the check is easi the
employe simpli write and sign the instrument the same wai he would with ani legitim
check in most situat check signer ar owner offic or otherwis highrank
employe and thu have or can obtain access to all the blank check thei need even if
compani polici prohibit check signer from handl blank check the perpetr can
normal us hi influenc to overcom thi impedi what employe is go to tell the
ceo that he cant have a blank check
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1524 2011 fraud examin manual
the most basic wai an employe accomplish an author maker scheme is to overrid
control design to prevent fraud most author signatori have high level of influenc
within their compani the perpetr us thi influenc to deflect question about
fraudul transact
a common author maker scheme is on in which a major owner or sole sharehold
us hi compani as a sort of alter ego pai person expens directli out of compani
account instead of pai person expens the perpetr might cut check directli to
himself hi friend or famili us fear of job secur as a weapon the owner can
maintain a work environ in which employe ar afraid to question these transact
highlevel manag or offic might also us their author to overrid control in
compani with absent or inattent ownership intimid can plai a larg part in the
commiss and conceal of type of occup fraud involv power individu
exampl
the manag of a sale offic stole approxim 150000 from hi employ over a two
year period thi manag had primari checksign author and abus thi power by
write compani check to pai hi person expens the manag fraudul activ
were well known by certain member of hi staff but these employe career were control
by the perpetr fear of lose their job combin with lack of a proper whistleblow
structur prevent the manag employe from report hi fraud
poor control
although overrid control is the most blatant wai to execut an author maker
scheme it is not the most common far more of these scheme occur becaus no on is
pai attent to the account and few control ar present to prevent fraud some
employe who write check to themselv or to purchas item for themselv simpli code
the check to expens account that thei know ar not like to be review
the failur to close monitor account is supplement by lack of intern control
specif the absenc of separ of duti in the cash disburs process
employe who commit author maker fraud ar often in charg of reconcil the bank
account of the busi thi is especi common in small busi employe with
total control over the disburs process ar in a perfect posit to write fraudul
check for their own benefit
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1525
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1526 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
the bookkeep of a mediums compani wa charg with pai all bill and
prepar the compani payrol she had access to an automat check signer and total
control over compani bank account the bookkeep wrote extra check to herself code
the expenditur to payrol and destroi the ca ncele check when thei were return with
the bank statement
conceal check tamper scheme
most check tamper scheme do not consist of a singl occurr but instead continu
over a period of time therefor conceal the fraud is arguabl the most import aspect
of the scheme if an employe intend to steal a larg sum of monei and escap to south
america hide the fraud might not be so import but the vast major of occup
fraudster remain employe of their compani as thei continu to steal from them which
make conceal the kei to the crime
conceal of the fraud mean not onli hide the ident of the crimin but in most
case hide the fact that a fraud ha even occur the most success fraud ar those in
which the victim organ is unawar that it is be rob obvious onc a busi
learn that it is be victim it will take step to staunch it bleed and the end of the
scheme will be at hand
check tamper scheme can present especi tricki conceal problem for dishonest
employe in other type of fraudul disburs such as invoic or payrol scheme
the fraudul payment is enter in the book as a legitim transact by someon other
than the perpetr the payment in those scheme ar gener by the product of
fals document that caus account payabl personnel to think that monei is ow to a
particular person or vendor when account payabl issu a disburs for a bogu
invoic it doe so becaus it believ the invoic to be genuin the payment is then enter
in the book as a legitim payment in other word the perpetr gener doe not have
to worri about conceal the payment in the book becaus someon els unwittingli doe
it for him but in forgeri and author maker scheme the perpetr is the on write
the check and he is usual the on code the check in the disburs journal he must
explain the check on the book
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1527
forg endors scheme and alter paye scheme ar differ becaus thei involv
the alter of check that were alreadi prepar and code by someon els
nevertheless thei creat a problem for the perpetr becaus the intercept check wa
intend for a legitim recipi someon is out there wait for the check that the
perpetr ha taken the culprit in these scheme must worri not onli about hide the
fraud from hi employ but also about appeas the intend paye
the fraudster reconcil the bank statement
a larg percentag of those who perpetr check tamper fraud ar involv in
reconcil the compani bank statement the bank statement that a compani receiv
normal includ the cancel check that have been cash in the preced period a
person who reconcil the account is therefor in a posit to hide the exist of ani
fraudul check he ha written to himself he can remov the fraudul check or doctor
the bank statement or both
in forg maker and author maker scheme the perpetr usual ha to code the
check in the disburs journal the most basic wai to hide the check is to code it as
void or to includ no list at all in the journal then when the bank statement arriv
the perpetr remov the fraudul check from the stack of return check and destroi
it now there is no record of the payment in the journal and no physic evid of the
check on hand of cours the bank will have a copi of the check but unless someon
question the miss check it is unlik that the compani will discov the problem and
sinc the perpetr is the on who reconcil the account it is unlik that anyon will
even notic that the check is miss
the problem with simpli omit the fraudul check from the disburs journal is
that the bank balanc will not reconcil to the book balanc for instanc if the perpetr
wrote a 25000 check to himself and did not record it then the book balanc will be
25000 higher than the bank balanc 25000 wa taken out of the bank account by the
perpetr but wa not credit out of the compani cash account employe usual
omit their illicit check from the disburs journal onli in situat where thei
person reconcil the bank statement and no on review their work thi allow the
perpetr to forc the reconcili in ot her word the perpetr report that the
bank balanc and book balanc match when in fact thei do not
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1528 2011 fraud examin manual
some victim organ simpli do not regularli reconcil their account thi make it
easi for employe to write check without record them in a system where control ar
so lax almost ani conceal method will be effect to disguis fraud in fact it mai not
be necessari to make ani effort at all to conceal the crime
some fraudster physic alter the bank statement to caus it to match the compani book
balanc for instanc a person engag in a forg maker scheme mai decid to steal blank
check from the back of the checkbook these check ar out of sequenc and therefor will
be list last on the bank statement thi employe can delet the clump of fraudul
check at the end of the statement and alter the balanc to match the victim compani
book
realter of check
in alter paye scheme rememb that it is common for the perpetr to take a check
intend for a legitim recipi then doctor the instrument so that the perpetr
becom the design paye but a cancel check payabl to an employe will obvious
rais suspicion of fraud therefor some employe realter their fraudul check when
the bank statement arriv it ha alreadi been discuss how employe can alter check by
write the paye name in eras ink when the check is prepar these employe obtain
a signatur for the check then eras the true paye name and insert their own when the
fraudul check return with the bank statement the employe eras hi own name and re
enter the name of the proper paye thu there will be no appear of mischief
miscod fraudul check
rather than omit a fraudul check from the disburs journal or list it as void the
perpetr might write a check payabl to himself but list a differ person as the paye on
the book usual the fake paye is a regular vendor a person or busi that receiv
numer check from the victim compani employe tend to pick known vendor for
these scheme becaus on extra disburs to a regular paye is less like to be notic
than a check to an unknown person
the fraudster can also conceal a fraudul check overst the amount of legitim
disburs in the journal in order to absorb the cost of a fraudul check for instanc
assum that a compani ow 10000 to a part icular vendor the fraudster would write a
check to the vendor for 10000 but enter the check in the disburs journal as a
15000 payment the compani disburs ar now overst by 5000 the
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1529
fraudster can write a 5000 check to himself and list that check as void in the disburs
journal the bank balanc and the book balanc will still match becaus the cost of the
fraudul check wa absorb when the amount of the legitim check wa overst of
cours the fact that the cancel check do not match the entri in the journal should
indic potenti fraud thi type of conceal is realli onli effect when the bank
account ar not close monitor or where the employe is in charg of reconcil the
account
if possibl employe will try to code their fraudul check to exist account that ar
rare review or to account that ar veri activ most of these check ar code to
expens account or liabil account thi particular method can be veri effect in
conceal fraud particularli when the victim compani is not dilig in reconcil it bank
account for instanc some organ reconcil their account by crossreferenc
check number with the amount of the check but thei do not verifi that the paye on the
actual check match the paye list in the disburs journal these organ will
be unabl to detect check that have been code to the wrong paye in the disburs
journal
reissu intercept check
in intercept check scheme the employe face detect not onli through hi employ
normal control procedur but also from the intend recipi of the stolen check when
the real paye do not receiv their check thei ar like to complain these complaint in
turn could trigger a fraud investig on wai for an employe to avoid thi problem is
to issu new check to the intend paye
exampl
an account payabl troubleshoot wa in char ge of audit payment to all supplier
review support document and mail check everi onc in a while she would
purpos fail to mail a check to a vendor the vendor of cours would call account
payabl about the late payment and would be told that hi invoic had been paid on a
certain date sinc account payabl did not have a copi of the cancel check becaus the
fraudster wa still hold it thei would call the troubleshoot to research the problem
unfortun for the compani the troubleshoot wa the on who had stolen the check
she would tell account payabl to issu anoth check to the vendor while she stop
payment on the first check thu the vendor receiv hi payment meanwhil instead of
stop payment on the first check the troubleshoot deposit it into her own account
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1530 2011 fraud examin manual
bogu support document
while some perpetr attempt to wipe out all trace of their fraudul disburs by
destroi the check forc the bank reconcili and so on other opt to justifi their
check by manufactur fake support for them these person prepar fals payment
voucher includ fals invoic purchas order andor receiv report to creat an
appear of authent thi conceal strategi is onli practic when the employe
write check payabl to someon other than himself such as an accomplic or a shell
compani a check made payabl to an employe mai rais suspicion regardless of ani
support document that he manufactur
detect of check tamper scheme
account analysi through cutoff statement
bank cutoff statement should be request for 10 to 15 dai after the close date of the
balanc sheet these statement mai be us to detect cash fraud dure period between
monthli bank statement cutoff statement ar often us by auditor to ensur that
incom and expens ar report in the proper period if employe know that at ani time
dure the month a cutoff statement mai be order and review independ cash
fraud will be less like
a cutoff statement is gener order from the bank deliv unopen to the auditor
or outsid and reconcil it can be order at ani time dure the account cycl if
cutoff bank statement ar not order or receiv obtain the follow period bank
statement and perform account analysi and investig
bank reconcili
copi of the bank reconcili and account analysi should be obtain along with the
complet set of bank statement on all check and save account as well as certif
of deposit and other interest bear and noninterest bear account from the
reconcili perform the follow test
confirm the mathemat accuraci of the reconcili
examin the bank statement for possibl alter
trace the balanc on the statement back to the bank cutoff and bank confirm
statement
foot the balanc to the compani ledger
2 georg georgiad audit procedur new york harcourt brace profession publish 1995
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1531
trace the deposit in transit to the bank cutoff statement to ensur record in
proper period
examin cancel check and compar to the list of outstand check
sampl support document of check written for a materi amount
verifi support document on outstand check written for a materi amount
verifi accuraci of nonoperationalcash or ca shequival account cd and other
invest account analysi should includ the verif of the institut hold
the fund interest rate matur date begin and end balanc and current period
activ book and bank balanc should be compar and ani accrual of interest
analyzed3
bank confirm
anoth method relat to the cutoff statement is the bank confirm request unlik
the cutoff statement thi detect method is mere a report of the balanc in the account
as of the date request thi balanc should be request to confirm the statement balanc
as well as ani other necessari balanc date if fraud is occur at the bank reconcili
stage thi independ confirm mai prove to be veri help
checktamp red flag
the follow irregular mai indic fraud
void check mai indic employe have embezzl cash and charg the
embezzl to expens account when the expens is paid from account payabl
fraudul check ar mark and enter as void and remov from distribut point
an accountbalanc journal entri is then made the list of void check should be
verifi against physic copi of the check bank statement should be review to
ensur that void check have not been process
miss check mai indic lax control over the physic safekeep of check stop
payment should be issu for all miss check
check payabl to employe with the except of regular payrol check should be
close scrutin such an examin mai indic other scheme such as conflict of
interest fictiti vendor or duplic expens reimburs
alter endors or dual endors of return check mai indic possibl
tamper
3 id
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1532 2011 fraud examin manual
return check with obvious forg or question signatur endors should
be verifi with origin paye
alter paye on return check should be verifi with intend paye
duplic or counterfeit check indic fraud these check mai be traceabl to
depositor through bank check code
question deposit date should be match to the correspond custom account
an examin of all cash advanc mai reveal that not all advanc ar properli
document and therefor inappropri payment have been made to employe
custom complaint regard payment not be appli to their account should be
investig
a question paye or paye address on a check should trigger review of the
correspond check and support document
prevent of check tamper scheme
check disburs control
the follow list of activ will help tighten control and possibl deter employe from
give in to the temptat to commit check fraud
check cut and prepar is not done by a signatori on the account
check ar mail immedi after sign
theft control procedur ar adher to see below
account payabl record and address ar secur from possibl tamper chang in
vendor inform should be verifi
bank statement should be review dilig ensur that amount and signatur
have not been alter
bank reconcili should be complet immedi after monthli statement ar
receiv the uniform commerci code state that discrep must be present
within 30 dai from the bank statement in order to hold the bank liabl
bank reconcili ar not made by signatori on the account
bank statement should be reconcil and review by more than on person
appropri separ of duti should be document and adher to
detail comparison ar routin made between check paye and the paye list in
the cash disburs journal
personnel respons for handl and code check ar period rotat keep
total personnel involv to a minimum
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1533
bankassist control
compani should work in a cooper effort with bank to prevent check fraud consid
the follow control measur that mai be taken in regard to a firm check account
establish maximum dollar amount abov which the compani bank will not accept
check drawn against the account
us posit pai bank control posit pai allow a compani and it bank to work
togeth to detect fraudul item present for payment the compani provid the
bank with a list of check and amount that ar written each dai the bank verifi item
present for payment against the compani li t the bank reject item that ar not on
the list investig ar conduct as to the origin of nonlist item
physic tamper prevent
the follow list detail checktamp prevent techniqu that ar be us todai
by some institut to secur busi check integr these method can be us
individu or in combin
signatur line void safeti band the word void appear on the check when
photocopi
rainbow foil bar a horizont color bar place on the check fade and is shade
from on bar to the next photocopi foil bar appear solid
holograph safeti border holograph imag ar creat in a wai that reflect light to
reveal a threedimension graphic
emboss pearlesc numberingcheck ar number us a techniqu that is
reveal by a color highlight pen or by a bright light held behind the check
other chemic voidscheck reveal an imag or the word void when treat with an
erad chemic
micro line print extrem small print is too small to read with the nake ey and
becom distort when photocopi
high resolut microprintingimag ar produc on the check in high resolut
2400 dot per inch or higher thi techniqu is veri difficult to reproduc
secur inkscheck contain ink that react with erad chemic reduc a
forger abil to modifi the check
chrome color the us of chromelik color deter photocopi even with
color copier the chrome pattern or number develop solid black
watermark backer hidden imag can onli be seen when the check is held at an
angl thi imag is veri difficult to reproduc
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1534 2011 fraud examin manual
ultraviolet ink thi ink displai an imag or messag when held under ultraviolet
light
check theft control procedur
it is veri import to provid intern control that will minim the possibl of check
tamper and theft below is a list of item that should be incorpor into compani
polici and procedur to help deter check tamper
new check should be purchas from reput wellestablish check produc
unus check should be store in a secur area such as a safe vault or other lock
area secur to thi area should be restrict to author personnel onli routin
chang kei and access code to storag area
review all hire procedur on of the most import mean of fight fraud is to
not hire peopl with question background develop a distinct separ of duti
in the account payabl depart includ written polici and procedur for all
personnel who have the opportun to handl check from mailroom clerk to the
ceo
us electron payment servic to handl larg vendor and financ payment
elimin the us of paper check
report lost or stolen check immedi
properli and secur store cancel check
destroi unus check for account that have been close
print and sign check should be mail immedi after sign
bill scheme
the asset misappropri scheme discuss up to thi pointskim larceni regist
scheme and check tamperingal requir the perpetr of the scheme to physic take
cash or check from hi employ the next three section will cover a differ kind of asset
misappropri scheme on which allow the perpetr to misappropri compani
fund without ever actual handl cash or check while at work these succe by make
a fals claim for payment upon the victim organ thi group consist of bill scheme
which attack the purchas function of a compani payrol scheme and expens reimburs
scheme the most common of these is the bill scheme
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1535
bill scheme ar a popular form of employe fraud mainli becaus thei offer the
prospect of larg reward sinc the major of most busi disburs ar made in
the purchas cycl larger theft can be hidden through falsebil scheme than through
other kind of fraudul disburs there ar three princip type of bill scheme
fals invoic via shell compani fals invoic via nonaccomplic vendor and person
purchas made with compani fund
invoic via shell compani
form a shell compani
shell compani ar fictiti entiti creat for the purpos of commit fraud thei mai
be noth more than a fabric name and a post offic box that an employe us to
collect disburs from fals bill howev sinc the check receiv will be made
out in the name of the shell compani the perpetr will normal also set up a bank
account in hi new compani name so he can deposit and cash the fraudul check see
fals bill from shell compani flowchart
a person will probabl have to present a bank with a certif of incorpor or an
assumednam certif in order to open a bank account for a shell compani these ar
document that a compani must obtain through a state or local govern the document
can be forg but it is more like that the perpetr will simpli file the requisit
paperwork and obtain legitim document from hi state or counti thi can usual be
accomplish for a small fee the cost of which will be more than offset by a success fraud
scheme
if it is discov that a vendor is fals bill a compani investig for the victim
compani mai be abl to identifi the owner of the suspect compani by review it busi
registr file which ar a matter of public record
to avoid be detect through a record search some perpetr form their shell
compani under anoth name it is common for instanc for employe to set up shell
compani in the name of a spous or other close rel male fraudster often establish
shell compani under their wive maiden name an employe might also form the
compani under a complet fictiti name
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1536 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1537
exampl
an employe us a cowork identif to form a shell vendor the fraudster then
proceed to bill hi employ for approxim 20000 in fals servic the result
check were deposit in the account of the shell compani and currenc wa withdrawn from
the account through an atm
anoth issu involv in form a shell compani is the entiti addressth place where
fraudul check will be collect often an employe rent a post offic box and list it as
the mail address of hi shell compani some employe list their home address instead a
comparison of employe address to vendor address might reveal shell compani in an
account payabl system
exampl
a depart head set up a dummi compani us ing hi resid as the mail address
over a twoyear period thi man submit over 250000 worth of fals invoic
eventu the scheme wa detect by a newli hire clerk the clerk wa process an
invoic when she notic that the address of the vendor wa the same as her bosss address
by a lucki coincid the clerk had type a person letter for her boss earlier that dai
and rememb hi address had the depart head us a po box instead of hi
home address on the invoic hi scheme might have continu indefinit
employe often us their home address to collect fraudul disburs becaus
mani busi ar wari of send check to vendor that have a post offic box for a
mail address other common collect site for shell compani scheme ar the address
of rel friend or accomplic
submit fals invoic
onc a shell compani ha been form and a bank account ha been open the corrupt
employe begin bill hi employ invoic can be manufactur by variou mean such
as a profession printer a person comput or a typewrit fals invoic do not alwai
have to be of profession qualiti to gener fraudul disburs typewritten
invoic ar often suffici to gener check
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1538 2011 fraud examin manual
selfapprov of fraudul invoic
the difficulti in a shell compani scheme is not usual in produc the invoic but in
get the victim organ to pai them author for the fictiti purchas and
therefor payment of the bill is the kei in a larg percentag of shell compani case the
perpetr is in a posit to approv payment on the veri invoic he is fraudul
submit it is obviou the duti of prepar and approv voucher should be separ
to avoid thi kind of scheme
in compani where a proper separ of duti exist the employe with approv
author sometim creat fraudul voucher or purchas order and forg the signatur
of the person who is in charg of prepar these document then the perpetr approv
payment on the fraudul voucher he ha gener thi make it appear that two
employe have sign off on the voucher as mandat by the victim organ
control
not all compani requir the complet of payment voucher befor thei will issu check
in some enterpris check ar written base on less formal procedur such as the
submiss of check request these request simpli list the name of the paye the
amount to be paid and a brief narr state the reason for the check obvious thi is
not a veri sound procedur for prevent fraud dishonest employe have littl troubl
run shell compani scheme in organ that oper thi wai
rubber stamp supervisor
if an employe cannot author payment himself the next best thing is if the person who
ha that author is inattent or overli trust rubber stamp supervisor like thi ar
destin to be target by uneth employe in some case supervisor ar attent to
the purchas order thei ar ask to author but thei lack the technic knowledg to
spot fraud as it is happen for instanc a manag or administr might not complet
understand the cost associ with upgrad comput softwar to modern a work
area thi manag will have to reli on hi subordin who have the necessari technic
expertis to determin that cost ar be kept in line the subordin mai be abl to take
advantag of thi situat to caus the compani to overpai for the equip requir to
upgrad the system
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1539
relianc on fals document
when an employe doe not have approv author for purchas and doe not have the
benefit of a rubber stamp supervisor he must run hi voucher through the normal account
payabl process the success of thi kind of scheme will depend on the appar authent
of the fals voucher he creat if the perpetr can gener purchas order and receiv
report that corrobor the inform on the fraudul invoic from hi shell compani
he can fool account payabl into issu a check
collus
collus among sever employe is sometim us to overcom welldesign intern
control for exampl in a compani with proper separ of duti the function of
purchas good or servic author the purchas receiv the good or servic and
make the payment to the vendor should all be separ if thi process is strictli adher
to it will be extrem difficult for ani singl employe to commit a falsebil scheme but
if sever employe work togeth thei can overcom the intern control of their
employ
exampl
a warehous foreman and a part order clerk conspir to purchas approxim
300000 of nonexist suppli the part order clerk would initi the fals
transact by obtain approv to place order for part he claim were need the
order were then sent to a vendor who act in conjunct with the two employe
fraudster prepar fals invoic which were sent to the victim compani meanwhil the
warehous foreman verifi receipt of the fi ctitiou shipment of incom suppli the
perpetr were therefor abl to compil complet voucher for the fraudul purchas
without overstep their normal duti
even if all intern control ar observ at some point a compani must reli on it
employe to be honest on of the purpos of separ duti is to prevent ani on
person from have too much control over a particular busi function it provid a builtin
monitor mechan where everi person action ar in some wai verifi by anoth
person but if everyon is corrupt even proper control will not prevent fraud
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1540 2011 fraud examin manual
purchas of servic rather than good
most shell compani scheme involv the purchas of servic rather than good the
primari reason for thi is that servic ar not tangibl if an employe set up a shell
compani to make fictiti sale of good to hi employ these good will obvious never
arriv by compar it purchas to it inventori level the victim organ might
detect the fraud it is much more difficult on the other hand for the victim organ to
verifi that the servic were never render for thi reason mani employe involv in
shell compani scheme bill their employ for thing like consult servic
passthrough scheme
in most shell compani scheme victim organ ar bill for complet fictiti
purchas of good or servic howev there is a subcategori of shellcompani scheme
in which actual good or servic ar sold to the victim compani these ar known as passthrough
scheme
passthrough scheme ar usual undertaken by employe in charg of purchas on
behalf of the victim compani instead of bui merchandis directli from a vendor the
employe set up a shell compani and purchas the merchandis through that fictiti
entiti he then resel the merchandis to hi employ from the shell compani at an
inflat price
exampl
a depart director wa put in charg of purchas comput equip becaus of hi
expertis on the subject and hi high stand within the compani he wa unsupervis in
thi task the director set up a shell compani in anoth state and bought us comput
through the shell compani then turn around and sold them to hi employ at a greatli
exagger price the monei from the victim compani first instal on the comput
wa us to pai the shell compani debt to the real vendor subsequ payment were
profit for the bogu compani the scheme cost the victim compani over 1 million
invoic via nonaccomplic vendor
payandreturn scheme
instead of us shell compani in their overbil scheme some employe gener
fraudul disburs by us the invoic of legitim thirdparti vendor who ar not
a part of the fraud scheme in a payandreturn scheme an employe intention mishandl
payment that ar ow to legitim vendor see pai and return scheme flowchart
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1541
on wai to do thi is to purpos doublep ay an invoic for instanc a clerk might
intention pai an invoic twice then call the vendor and request that on of the check be
return the clerk then intercept the return check
anoth wai to accomplish a payandreturn scheme is to intention pai the wrong
vendor in thi type of scheme an employe send vendor as check to vendor b after the
check ar mail the employe call the vendor to explain the mistak and request that
thei return the check to hi attent when the check arriv the employe convert them
and keep the monei the employe usual run the voucher through the account payabl
system a second time so that the vendor eventu get their monei
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1542 2011 fraud examin manual
an employe might also pai the proper vendor but intention overpai him onc again
the employe contact the vendor thi time to request that the excess payment be return
final an employe might intention purchas excess merchandis return the excess and
pocket the refund
overbil with a nonaccomplic vendor invoic
in most instanc where an employe creat fraudul invoic to overbil hi employ he
us a shell compani it is not as common for an employe to submit the invoic of an
exist vendor nevertheless in some instanc an employe will undertak such a scheme
by alter an exist vendor invoic or by creat a counterfeit copi of a vendor
invoic form
person purchas with compani fund
instead of undertak bill scheme to gener cash mani fraudster simpli purchas
person item with their compani monei compani account ar us to bui item for
employe their busi their famili and so on
person purchas through fals invoic
employe who undertak purchas scheme mai do so by run unsanct invoic
through the account payabl system the perpetr in thi type of scheme bui an item
and submit the bill to hi employ as if it repres a legitim compani expens the
victim compani end up unknowingli bui good or servic for a dishonest employe
see invoic purchas scheme flowchart
the fraudster as author of invoic
the person who engag in a purchas scheme is often the veri person in the compani
whose duti includ author purchas obvious proper control should preclud
anyon from approv hi own purchas such poorli separ function leav littl other
than hi conscienc to dissuad an employe from fraud fraud aris in part becaus of a
perceiv opportun an employe who see that no on is review hi action is more
like to turn to fraud than on who know hi compani work dilig to detect employe
theft
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1543
exampl
a manag of a remot locat of a larg publicli trade compani wa author to
order suppli and approv vend or invoic for payment for over a year the manag
routin ad person item and suppli for hi own busi to order made on behalf
of hi employ the order often includ a strang mix of item for instanc technic
suppli and home furnish might be purchas in the same order becaus the manag
wa in a posit to approv hi own purcha se he could get awai with such blatantli
obviou fraud in addit to order person item the perpetr chang the deliveri
address for certain suppli so that thei would be deliv directli to hi home or side
busi thi scheme cost the victim comp ani approxim 300000 in unnecessari
purchas
in some situat the perpetr is author to approv purchas but control prevent
him from also initi purchas request thi procedur is suppos to prevent an
employe from purchas person item with compani fund unfortun those with
author to approv purchas often have a good deal of control over their subordin
these person can us their influenc to forc subordin to assist in purchas scheme
in other case the manag might simpli initi the purchas order himself by forg the
subordin signatur
exampl
purchas for under 1000 at a certain util compani could be made with limit valu
purchas order lpo which requir the signatur of two peopl the origin of a
purchas request and the approv of the request an lpo attach to an invoic for less
than 1000 would be paid by the account payabl depart in thi case a manag
bought good and servic on compani account and prepar lpo for the purchas in
some case the lpo would fals describ the item to conceal the natu re of the purchas
onc the lpo wa prepar the manag forc a clerk in hi depart to sign the
document as the origin of the transact the clerk in timid by her boss did not
question the authent of the lpo with two signatur affix the lpo appear to
be legitim and the bill were paid the sche me cost the victim compani at least 25000
fals purchas requisit
if an employe doe not have purchas author he mai get approv for a fraudul
purchas by misrepres the natur of the acquisit in mani compani those with
the power to author purchas ar not alwai attent to their duti if a trust
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1544 2011 fraud examin manual
subordin sai that the compani need to bui a certain item or item busi supervisor
often give rubber stamp approv to the purchas requisit addition employe
sometim misrepres the natur of the item thei ar purchas in order to pass a
cursori review by their superior
exampl
an engin bought over 30000 worth of person item the engin dealt directli with
vendor and wa also in charg of overse the receipt of the materi he purchas he
wa therefor abl to misrepres the natur of the merchandis he bought list it as
mainten item vendor invoic were alter to agre to thi descript
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1545
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1546 2011 fraud examin manual
if the perpetr falsifi hi purchas requisit in thi manner the fraud should be
detect when deliveri occur for exampl if the purchas requisit sai mainten
item but the vendor deliv home furnish it will be obviou that the perpetr ha
commit fraud the problem of deliveri can be avoid if the perpetr is in charg of
receiv incom shipment he can verifi that deliveri of mainten item wa
receiv thi is a breach of separ of duti but unfortun it is fairli common for
purchas agent to verifi deliveri of their own order even if the victim organ
enforc a central deliveri point the perpetr might enlist the aid of an accomplic in
the receiv depart to falsifi the organ receiv report
anoth wai to avoid detect at the deliveri stage is to chang the deliveri address for
purchas instead of be ship to the victim organ the item that the employe
bui ar sent directli to hi home or busi the perpetr might also order the good
drop ship to a remot locat
person purchas on credit card or other compani account
instead of run fals invoic through account payabl some employe make person
purchas on compani credit card or on run account with vendor see purchas
on credit card or compani account flowchar t unlik invoic scheme prior approv
for these purchas is not requir an employe with a compani credit card can bui an
item mere by sign hi name or forg someon els at the time of purchas later
review of the credit card statement howev mai detect the fraudul purchas
unfortun mani highlevel employe approv their own credit card expens make it
veri easi to carri out a purchas scheme
of cours onli certain employe ar author to us compani credit card employe
without thi privileg can onli make fraudul purchas with a compani card if thei first
manag to get hold of on to thi end compani card ar sometim stolen or borrow
from author user
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1547
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1548 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an account fals ad her name to a list of employe to whom card were to be
issu she us her card to make fraudul purchas but forg the signatur of
author cardhold to cover her track sinc no on knew she even had a compani
card she would not be a prime suspect in the fraud even if someon question the
purchas for over five year thi employe continu her scheme rack up a six figur
bill on her employ account in addit she had control of the credit card statement and
wa abl to code her purchas to variou expens account therebi further delai
detect of her crime
anoth wai to conceal a credit card purchas scheme is to doctor the credit card
statement so that fraudul purchas do not show up some employe go so far as to
destroi the real credit card statement and produc counterfeit copi on which their
fraudul purchas ar omit
return merchandis for cash
the fraudul purchas scheme discuss to thi point have all involv fals purchas
of merchandis for the sake of obtain the merchandis in some case howev an
employe bui item and then return them for cash
exampl
an employe made fraudul gain from a busi travel account the employe scheme
began by purchas ticket for herself and her famili through her compani travel budget
poor separ of duti allow the fraudster to order the ticket receiv them prepar
claim for payment and distribut check the onli review of her activ wa made by a
busi and rather uninterest supervisor who approv the employe claim without
requir support document eventu the employe scheme evolv she began to
purchas airlin ticket and return them for their cash valu an employe of the travel
agenc assist in the scheme by encod the ticket as though the fraudster had paid for
them herself that caus the airlin to pai refund directli to the fraudster rather than to
her employ in the cours of two year thi employe embezzl over 100000 through
her purchas scheme
detect of bill scheme
becaus there ar mani variat of purchas fraud scheme there ar also sever
detect method detect method ar most effect when us in combin each
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1549
detect method is like to point out anomali that can then be investig further to
determin if a fraud scheme ha occur or is current underwai addition the
detect method will point out the weak in intern control and alert the auditor to
potenti opportun for futur fraud scheme
analyt review
a review of the variou gener ledger account might reveal unusu or unexpect event
these event could be undetect purchas fraud for exampl a comparison of inventori
purchas in relationship to net sale might indic that purchas ar too high or too low
for that level of sale thi might be a red flag indic excess purchas scheme or
fictiti sale scheme respect
anoth analyt method us a comparison of the inventori purchas of prior year with
those of the current year thi comparison might indic that an overbil scheme or a
duplicatepay scheme is in progress
analys such as those describ abov can be perform for ani acquisit of good or
servic of a compani analyt review ar most effect in detect fraud scheme that
ar larg such that the anomali will be appar other detect method ar more
effect for fraud scheme that ar smaller in relationship to the financi statement taken
as a whole regardless of fraud size examin of sourc document will be necessari
when an anomali is detect further investig is requir which will demand an
examin of sourc document
computerassist analyt review
the comput can assist the auditor in determin the presenc of unusu pattern in the
acquisit or purchas function the comput can provid the auditor with a matrix of
the purchas activ to determin the presenc of unusu pattern an analysi of the
follow data might uncov purchas scheme such as
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1550 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud scheme detect method
fictiti vendor vendor and employe with match address
more than on vendor with the same address
vendor with onli post offic box address
overbil
unusu or onetim extra charg
conflict of interest vendor with employe who ar employe famili member
an unusu high occurr of complaint
complaint about specif vendor
higher price andor substandard qualiti
statist sampl
as with inventori the sourc document for purchas can be statist sampl and
examin for irregular statist sampl can be drawn to test specif attribut thi
detect method is particularli effect if a singl attribut is suspect such as fictiti
vendor a list of all post offic box address might reveal fictiti vendor
vendor or outsid complaint
fraudul scheme will often unravel becaus a vendor or other outsid complain to the
employ or compani complaint from custom vendor and other ar good detect
tool that can lead the fraud examin to further inquiri
site visit observ
a site visit will often reveal much about the intern control or lack thereof for ani
locat the observ of how the account transact ar actual transcrib will
sometim alert the fraud examin to potenti problem area
sampl audit program
the follow audit program mai be benefici in detect red flag to bill scheme
doe the compani have a purchas depart if ye is it independ of 1 the
account depart 2 the receiv depart or 3 the ship depart
ar purchas made onli after the respect depart head sign purchas
requisit
ar purchas made by mean of purchas order sent to vendor for all purchas or
onli for purchas over a predetermin dollar limit
do purchas order specifi a descript of item quantiti price term deliveri
requir and date
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1551
is a list of unfil purchas order maintain and review period
ar purchas order form prenumb and is the sequenc account for period
doe the client maintain an approv vendor list
ar item purchas onli after competit bid ar obtain if so ar competit bid
obtain for all purchas or onli for purchas over a predetermin dollar limit
is a log maintain of all receipt
doe the receiv depart prepar receiv report for all item receiv if ye
ar receiv report 1 prepar for all item 2 prepar onli for item that have
purchas order or 3 renumb
at the time the item ar receiv doe someon independ of the purchas
depart check the merchandis befor accept as to descript quantiti
and condit
ar copi of receiv report 1 furnish to the account depart 2 furnish
to the purchas depart or 3 file in the receiv depart
ar receipt under blanket purchas order monitor and ar quantiti exceed
author total return to the vendor
ar procedur adequ for the proper account for partial deliveri of
purchas order
ar purchas and receiv function separ from invoic process account
payabl and gener ledger function
ar vendor invoic receiv report and purchas order match befor the relat
liabil is record
ar invoic check as to price extens foot freight charg allow and
credit term
ar control adequ to ensur that all avail discount ar taken
ar purchas record in a purchas regist or voucher regist befor be process
through cash disburs
doe a respons employe assign the appropri gener ledger account distribut
to which the invoic ar to be post
ar procedur adequ to ensur that invoic have been process befor payment
and to prevent duplic payment eg a block stamp
doe a respons offici approv invoic for payment
ar procedur adequ to ensur that merchandis purchas for direct deliveri to
custom is promptli bill to the custom and record as both a receiv and
a payabl
ar record of good return to vendor match to vendor credit memo
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1552 2011 fraud examin manual
ar unmatch receiv report purchas order and vendor invoic period
review and investig for proper record
is the account payabl ledger or voucher regist reconcil monthli to the gener
ledger control account
ar statement from vendor regularli review and reconcil against record
liabil
do adjust to account payabl eg write off of debit balanc requir the
approv of a design offici
ar budget us if ye ar bu dget approv by respons offici and ar actual
expenditur compar with budget amount and varianc analyz and explain
if excess inventori purchas is suspect verifi that all inventori purchas wa
receiv receiv report at the proper locat an examin of receiv report or
invoic might reveal altern ship site
prevent of bill scheme
the prevent of purchas fraud can be especi difficult purchas personnel ar
often held to a differ standard than other employe of a compani for exampl sale
peopl often ar given induc or perquisit in order to persuad potenti custom
these same induc ar offer to the purchas personnel of the compani from the
compani vendor and yet the compani ex pect the purchas personnel to perform
their function without bia and to make decis that ar in the best interest of the
compani without regard to the induc offer by supplier addition the
personnel involv in the purchas and payment function ar gener not compens
on a basi commensur with their perform as ar salespeopl therefor there is a
revers incent to perform in the best interest of the compani
probabl the most effect purchas fraud prevent measur is educ train of
the purchas and payabl personnel the second most effect purchas fraud
prevent measur is an object compens arrang with peopl respons for
purchas decis
educ train
purchas personnel should be train thoroughli in ethic situat the nation
associ of purchas manag ha a code of ethic for it certifi purchas
manag as a deterr to fraud compani might consid enrol and certif
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1553
compens
peopl respons for the purchas decis buyer should be paid well enough to
reduc the motiv and ration for fraud auditor can examin the compens of
purchas and determin if ani buyer were recent pass over for rais thi might be
an indic of discont that could lead to the format of a fraudul scheme against
the employ
proper document
proper document for purchas should includ prenumb and control purchas
requisit purchas order receiv report and check
proper approv
befor ad a vendor to the list there should be an investig of the propos
vendor perform by someon other than the personnel in purchas and account
payabl if a vendor number is requir befor payment is made and the personnel
respons for the investig assign the vendor that identif number then the
buyer cannot place fictiti vendor on the list larg or unusu purchas should be
approv by someon independ of the purchas depart
segreg of duti
for the best result and account each compani suffici in size should have a
separ purchas depart regardless of the compani size the purchas function
should be separ from the payment function
hotlin
compani should studi the feasibl of instal hotlin to provid a forum for
complaint by employe and outsid
competit bid
ensur that bid polici and procedur ar thoroughli review whenev possibl
enforc competit bid after the bid process ha been complet a questionnair
can be sent to success and unsuccess bidder thi questionnair can reveal area to not
onli make the bid process more effect but it also can provid a forum for bidder to
express concern over question or fraudul activ
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1554 2011 fraud examin manual
prevent checklist
the follow is a list of bill scheme prevent method that mai be help in the
deterr of bill fraud
author procedur of purchas order invoic and payment should be
document and adher to
the account payabl list of vendor should be period review for strang vendor
and address
payment code should be review for abnorm descript
vendor purchas should be analyz for abnorm level on both a monthli and yearli
basi
purchas and inventori level should be compar and analyz see inventori and
other asset
control method to check for duplic invoic and purchas order number should be
in place
a separ of duti between author purchas receiv ship and
account should be in place
payment of voucher should be period review to ensur integr of proper
document
receiv and ship report should be review for complet and accuraci
asset inform should includ purchas trail and other inform
journal entri to inventori account should be strictli scrutin
appropri bank reconcili and review procedur should be perform
period check for outofplac vendor and endors
credit card statement should be review often for irregular
the valid of invoic with a post offic box address should be verifi
proper control for the receipt and handl of return to sender check should be
instal
payrol fraud
payrol scheme ar similar to bill scheme the perpetr of these fraud produc
fals document which caus the victim compani to unknowingli make a fraudul
disburs in bill scheme the fals document is usual an invoic coupl perhap
with fals receiv report purchas order and purchas author in payrol
scheme the perpetr typic falsifi a timecard or alter inform in the payrol
record the major differ between payrol scheme and bill scheme is that payrol
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1555
fraud involv disburs to employe rather than to extern parti the most
common payrol fraud ar ghost employe scheme falsifi hour and salari scheme and
commiss scheme
ghost employe
the term ghost employe refer to someon on the payrol who doe not actual work for the
victim compani through the falsif of personnel or payrol record a fraudster caus
paycheck to be gener to a ghost the fraudster or an accomplic then convert these
paycheck see ghost employe flowchart the ghost employe mai be a fictiti
person or a real individu who simpli doe not work for the victim employ when the
ghost is a real person it is often a friend or rel of the perpetr
in order for a ghost employe scheme to work four thing must happen 1 the ghost must
be ad to the payrol 2 timekeep and wage rate inform must be collect 3 a
paycheck must be issu to the ghost and 4 the check must be deliv to the perpetr
or an accomplic
ad the ghost to the payrol
the first step in a ghost employe scheme is enter the ghost on the payrol in some
busi all hire is done through a central personnel depart while in other the
personnel function is spread over the manageri respons of variou depart
regardless of how hire of new employe is handl within a busi it is the person or
person with author to add new employe and remov termin employe that ar in
the best posit to put ghost on the payrol
exampl
a manag who wa respons for hire and schedul janitori work ad over 80
ghost employe to hi payrol the ghost in thi case were actual peopl who work at
other job for differ compani the manag fill out time sheet for the fictiti
employe and author them then took the result paycheck to the ghost employe
who cash them and split the proce with the manag it wa thi manag author
in the hire and supervis of employe that enabl him to perpetr thi fraud
employe in payrol account also sometim creat ghost employe in a perfect world
everi name list on the payrol would be verifi against personnel record to make sure
that those person receiv paycheck actual work for the compani but in practic thi
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1556 2011 fraud examin manual
doe not alwai happen thu person in payrol account mai be abl to creat fictiti
employe by simpli ad a new name to the payrol record access to these record is
usual restrict with onli highlevel employe have the abil to make chang to the
payrol these person would therefor be among the most like suspect in a ghost
employe scheme on the other hand lower level employe sometim gain access to
restrict payrol inform and should not be disregard as possibl suspect
exampl
an employe in the payrol depart wa gi ven the author to enter new employe into
the payrol system make correct to payrol inform and distribut paycheck thi
employe manag gave rubberstamp approv to the employe action becaus of a
trust relationship between the two the lack of separ of duti and the absenc of
review made it simpl for the culprit to add a fictiti employe into the payrol system
on wai perpetr try to conceal the presenc of a ghost on the payrol is to creat a
ghost with a name veri similar to that of a real employe the name on the fraudul
paycheck then will appear to be legitim to anyon who glanc at it for instanc if a
victim organ ha an employe name john doe the ghost mai be name john
doer
instead of ad new name to the payrol some employe undertak ghost employe
scheme when thei fail to remov the name of termin employe paycheck to the
termin employe continu to be gener even though the employe no longer work
for the victim organ the perpetr intercept these fraudul paycheck and
convert them to hi own us
collect timekeep inform
the second thing that must occur in order for a paycheck to be issu to a ghost employe
at least in the case of hourli employe is the collect and comput of timekeep
inform the perpetr must provid payrol account with a timecard or other
instrument show how mani hour the fictiti employe work over the most recent
pai period thi inform along with the wage rate inform contain in personnel
or payrol file will be us to comput the amount of the fraudul paycheck
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1557
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1558 2011 fraud examin manual
timekeep record can be maintain in a varieti of wai employe might manual
record their hour on timecard or punch time clock that record the time at which a person
start and finish hi work in more sophist environ comput system can
track an employe hour
when a ghost employe scheme is in place someon must creat document for the
ghost hour thi essenti amount to prepar a fake timecard show when the ghost
wa allegedli present at work depend upon the normal procedur for record hour a
fraudster might write up a fake timecard and sign it in the ghost name punch the time
clock for the ghost and so on the prepar of the timecard is not a great obstacl to the
perpetr the real kei is obtain approv of the timecard
a supervisor should approv the timecard of hourli employe befor paycheck ar issu
thi verifi to the payrol depart that the employe actual work the hour that ar
claim on the card a ghost employe by definit doe not work for the victim
organ so approv will have to be fraudul obtain often the supervisor
himself is the on who creat the ghost when thi is the case the supervisor fill out a
timecard in the name of the ghost then affix hi own approv the timecard is therebi
authent and a paycheck will be issu when a nonsupervisor is commit a ghost
employe scheme he will typic forg the necessari approv then forward the bogu
timecard directli to payrol account bypass hi supervisor
in computer system a supervisor signatur might not be requir in lieu of thi the
supervisor input data into the payrol system and the us of hi password serv to
author the entri if an employe ha access to the supervisor password he can input
data for the ghost which will appear in the payrol system with a seal of approv
if the perpetr creat ghost who ar salari rather than hourli employe it is not
necessari to collect timekeep inform salari employe ar paid a certain amount
each pai period regardless of how mani hour thei work becaus the timekeep function
can be avoid it mai be easier for a perpetr to creat a ghost employe who work on
salari howev most busi have fewer salari employe and thei ar more like to
be member of manag the salari ghost mai therefor be more difficult to conceal
issu the ghost paycheck
onc a ghost is enter on the payrol and hi timecard ha been approv the third step in
the scheme is the actual issuanc of the paycheck the heart of a ghost employe scheme is
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1559
in the falsif of payrol record and timekeep inform onc thi falsif
ha occur the perpetr doe not gener take an activ role in the issuanc of the
check the payrol depart print the checkbas on the bogu inform provid
by the perpetratora it would ani other paycheck
deliveri of the paycheck
the final step in a ghost employe scheme is the distribut of the check to the
perpetr paycheck might be hand deliv to employe while at work mail to
employe at their home address or most commonli now directli deposit into the
employe bank account if employe ar paid in currenc rather than by check the
distribut is almost alwai conduct inperson and onsit
ideal those in charg of payrol distribut should not have a hand in ani of the other
function of the payrol cycl for instanc the person who enter new employe in the
payrol system should not be allow to distribut paycheck becaus thi person can includ
a ghost on the payrol then simpli pocket the fraudul check when paycheck ar be
disburs obvious when the perpetr of a ghost employe scheme is allow to mail
check to employe or pass them out at work he is in a perfect posit to ensur that the
ghost check is deliv to himself
in most instanc the perpetr doe not have the author to distribut paycheck and so
must make sure that the victim organ send the check to a place where he can
recov them when check ar not distribut in the workplac thei ar usual mail to
employe or deposit directli into those employe account
if the fictiti employe wa ad into the payrol or personnel record by the perpetr
the problem of distribut is usual minor when the ghost employ inform is
enter the perpetr simpli list an address or bank account to which the payment can
be sent in the case of pure fictiti ghost employe the address is often the
perpetr own the same goe for bank account the fact that two employe the
perpetr and the ghost ar receiv payment at the same destin mai indic
payrol fraud some fraudster avoid thi duplic by have payment sent to a post
offic box or a separ bank account
rememb that a ghost employe is not alwai a fictiti person it mai instead be a real
person who is conspir with the perpetr to defraud the compani for exampl some
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1560 2011 fraud examin manual
employe place their rel or spous on the compani payrol when real person ar
fals includ on the payrol the check ar sent to the home or account of these
person
distribut is a more difficult problem when the ghost is a former employe who wa
simpli not remov from the payrol if paycheck ar distribut through the mail or by
direct deposit the perpetr will have to enter the termin employe record and
chang their deliveri inform in compani where paycheck ar distribut by hand or
ar held at a central locat for employe to collect the perpetr can ignor the payrol
record and simpli pick up the fraudul paycheck
falsifi hour and salari
the most common method of misappropri fund from the payrol is the overpay
of wage for hourli employe the size of a paycheck is base on two factor the number
of hour work and the rate of pai it is therefor obviou that for an hourli employe to
fraudul increas the size of hi paycheck he must either falsifi the number of hour he
ha work or chang hi wage rate see falsifi hour and salari flowchart sinc
salari employe do not receiv compens base on their time at work in most case
these employe gener fraudul wage by increas their rate of pai
when discuss payrol fraud that involv overst hour on must first understand how
an employe time at work is record time is gener kept by on of three method
time clock mai be us to mark the time when an employe begin and finish work the
employe insert a card into the clock at the begin and end of work and the time is
imprint on that card in more sophist system comput mai track the time
employe spend on the job base on login code or a similar indic final timecard
show the number of hour an employe work on a particular dai ar often prepar
manual by the employe and approv by hi manag
manual prepar timecard
when hour ar record manual an employe typic fill out hi timecard to reflect the
number of hour he ha work then present it to hi supervisor for approv the
supervisor verifi the accuraci of the timecard sign the card to indic hi approv then
forward it to the payrol depart so that a paycheck can be issu
if an employe fill out hi own timecard it is easi to falsifi the number of hour work
he simpli write down fals inform show that he arriv at work earlier or left later
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1561
than he actual did the difficulti is not in falsifi the timecard but in get the
fraudul card approv by the employe supervisor there ar basic three wai for
the employe to obtain the author he need
forg a supervisor signatur
when us thi method an employe typic withhold hi timecard from those be sent
to the supervisor for approv forg the supervisor signatur or initi then add the
timecard to the stack of author card which ar sent to the payrol depart the
fraudul timecard arriv at the payrol depart with what appear to be a supervisor
approv and a paycheck is subsequ issu
collus with a supervisor
the second wai to obtain approv of a fraudul timecard is to collud with a supervisor
who author timekeep inform in these scheme a supervisor knowingli sign
fals timecard and the employe kick back a portion of the overpaid wage to the
supervisor in some case the supervisor mai take the entir amount of the overpay it
mai be particularli difficult to detect payrol fraud when a supervisor collud with an
employe becaus manag ar often reli upon as a control to ensur proper
timekeep
exampl
a supervisor assign employe to better work area or better job but in return she
demand payment the payment wa arrang by the falsif of the employe
timecard which the supervisor author the employe we re compens for fictiti
overtim which wa kick back to the supervisor
rubber stamp supervisor
the third wai to obtain approv of fraudul timecard is to reli on a supervisor to
approv them without review their accuraci the lazi manag method seem riski and
on would think that it would be uncommon but the truth is that it occur quit frequent
a recur theme in occup fraud scheme is the relianc of perpetr on the
inattent of other when an employe see an opportun to make a littl extra
monei without get caught that employe is more like to be embolden to attempt a
fraud scheme the fact that a supervisor is known to rubber stamp timecard or even
ignor them can be a factor in an employe decis to begin steal from hi compani
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1562 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1563
exampl
a temporari employe notic that hi manag did not reconcil the expens journal
monthli thu the manag did not know ho w much wa be paid to the temporari
agenc the fraudster complet fictiti time report which were sent to the temporari
agenc and which caus the victim compani to pai over 30000 in fraudul wage
sinc the fraudster control the mail and the manag did not review the expens journal
thi extrem simpl scheme went undetect for some time
poor custodi procedur
on form of control breakdown that often occur is the failur to maintain proper control
over timecard in a properli run system timecard that have been author by
manag should be sent directli to payrol those who prepar the timecard should not
have access to them after thei have been approv if thi separ of duti is not
observ the person who prepar a timecard can alter it after hi supervisor ha approv
the timecard but befor it is deliv to payrol for instanc the employe might fill out hi
timecard in eras ink obtain hi supervisor signatur on the timecard and then chang
the hour reflect on the timecard so that he will be overcompens
anoth wai hour ar falsifi is in the misreport of leav time thi is not as common
as timecard falsif but it doe occur with some frequenc incident thi is the on
instanc in which salari employe commit payrol fraud by falsifi their hour a leav
time scheme is veri simpl an employe take a certain amount of time off of work as paid
leav or vacat but doe not report thi leav time employe typic receiv a certain
amount of paid leav per year if a person take a leav of absenc but doe not report it
those dai ar not deduct from hi allot dai off in other word he get more leav
time than he is entitl to the result is that the employe show up for work less yet still
receiv the same pai
time clock and other autom timekeep system
in compani that us time clock to collect timekeep inform payrol fraud is usual
uncompl in the typic scenario the time clock is locat in an unrestrict area and a
timecard for each employe is kept nearbi the employe insert their timecard into the
time clock at the begin and end of their shift and the clock imprint the time the
length of time an employe spend at work is thu record supervisor should be present
at the begin and end of shift to ensur that employe do not punch the timecard of
absent cowork but thi simpl control is often overlook without proper supervis
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1564 2011 fraud examin manual
employe can punch the timecard of absent cowork so that it appear the absent
employe wa at work that dai the absent employe is therefor overcompens on hi
next paycheck
rate of pai
it should be rememb that an employe can also receiv a larger paycheck by chang
hi pai rate an employe personnel or payr oll record reflect hi rate of pai if an
employe can gain access to these record or ha an accomplic with access to them he can
adjust them so that he receiv a larger paycheck
commiss scheme
commiss is a form of compens calcul as a percentag of the amount of
transact a salesperson or other employe gener it is a uniqu form of compens
that is not base on hour work or a set yearli salari but rather on an employe revenu
output a commiss employe wage ar base on two factor the amount of sale he
gener and the percentag of those sale he is paid in other word there ar two wai an
employe on commiss can fraudul increas hi pai 1 falsifi the amount of sale
made or 2 increas hi rate of commiss see commiss scheme flowchart
fictiti sale
establish unobtain sale quota that employe think ar arbitrari will increas the
pressur to establish fictiti perform level if the pressur becom signific the
employe might resort to ad fictiti sale and account receiv to meet the sale
quota
an employe can falsifi the amount of sale he ha made in on of two wai the first be
the creation of fictiti sale the manner in which fictiti sale ar creat depend on
the industri in which the perpetr oper fictiti sale might be construct by the
creation of fraudul sale order purchas order credit author pack slip
invoic and so on on the other hand a culprit might simpli ring up a fals sale on a cash
regist the kei is that a fictiti sale is creat that it appear to be legitim and that
the victim organ react by issu a commiss check to the perpetr
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1565
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1566 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an unscrupul insur agent took advant ag of hi compani incent commiss
which paid 125 for everi 100 of premium gener in the first year of a polici the
agent wrote polici to fictiti custom paid the premium and receiv hi
commiss which creat an illicit profit on the transact for instanc if the fraudster
paid 100000 in premium he would receiv 125000 in commiss a 25000
profit no payment were made on the fr audul polici after the first year
if a salesperson primari compens is base on sale without regard to collect then
there is an incent to produc quantiti rather than qualiti sale it is natur for compani
to push for higher sale level to sustain growth if the salesperson compens is base
sole on quantiti and not on a combin of quantiti and qualiti howev then the
compens incent is misplac thi might creat an atmospher which if coupl
with opportun will produc inflat or fictiti sale
alter sale
the second wai for a fraudster to overst the amount of sale he ha made is to alter the
price list on sale document in other word the perpetr charg on price to a
custom but record a higher price in the compani book thi caus the victim compani
to pai a larger commiss than the perpetr deserv to make these scheme work the
employe might have to intercept and alter the invoic that ar sent to the custom the
invoic the compani send out will reflect a higher purchas price than the custom agre
to so if the custom receiv these invoic he is like to complain about the discrep
the employe mai also overst the revenu receiv from hi custom
alter commiss rate
as mention abov the other wai to manipul the commiss process is to chang the
employe rate of commiss thi would like necessit the alter of payrol or
personnel record which should be offlimit to the sale staff
detect of payrol scheme
independ payrol distribut
ghost employe scheme can be uncov by have personnel other than the payrol
depart distribut the payrol check or paystub and by requir posit identif
of the paye howev as more and more compani ar move to a directdeposit payrol
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1567
with pai stub avail for view onlin handdeliv paycheck or paystub is
becom an obsolet method of detect ghost employe
analysi of paye address or account
if payrol check ar either mail or deposit automat then a list of duplic
address or deposit account mai reveal ghost employe or duplic payment
duplic identif number
becaus each employe is requir to have a governmentissu identif number such
as a social secur or social insur number a list of duplic number mai reveal
ghost employe
overtim author
requir employe to have overtim author by a supervisor have the supervisor be
respons for the timecard and have the supervisor refer the timecard directli to
payrol will aid in reduc overtim abus in addit the payrol depart should scan
the time report and question obviou abus such as onli on employe work overtim
in a depart or excess overtim on a timecard by examin the sourc
document on mai detect unauthor overtim and falsifi hour abus
commiss
commiss scheme can often be detect with the follow techniqu
compar commiss expens to sale figur to verifi linear correl
prepar a compar analysi of commiss earn by salesperson verifi rate and
calcul accuraci inordin high earn by an individu could signal fraud
analyz sale by salesperson for uncollect sale amount
determin proper segreg of duti in calcul of commiss amount
commiss should be independ provid by personnel outsid the sale
depart
contact a random sampl of custom to confirm sale
trend analysi on writtenoff account receiv
stratifi the writtenoff account receiv data and examin it for possibl trend and
pattern for exampl do ani of the follow trend appear
same salesperson
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1568 2011 fraud examin manual
same account period unless onli an annual review of account receiv is
perform
same collector
collect rate by agenc or collector
ani of these trend might indic fictiti account receiv or that onli new or good
account ar be assign to collector or collect agenc
analysi of deduct from payrol check
an analysi of the payrol withhold mai reveal either ghost employe or trust account
abus ghost employe will often have no withhold tax insur or other normal
deduct therefor a list of ani employe without these item mai reveal a ghost
employe
an analysi of withholdingtax deposit mai reveal that trust account tax have been
borrow even for a short period befor the tax ar deposit compar the
disburs date with the deposit date should reveal if the trust account tax have been
borrow addition ani delinqu payrol tax notic from the tax author should
serv as a red flag to potenti trust account tax borrow
other detect method
other method for detect ghost employe includ
review compani email address directori to ensur that all employe receiv
paycheck have a compani email address issu by the it depart
compar employe name address and social secur number as well as direct
deposit bank account number to determin if there ar ani unexpect duplic
compar employe payrol record to human resourc employe file to ensur social
secur number and name match
examin payrol check for dual endors
prevent of payrol scheme
there ar two basic prevent measur for payrollrel fraud segreg of duti and
period payrol review and analysi
segreg of duti
the follow duti should be segreg
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1569
payrol prepar
payrol disburs into payrol and withhold tax account
payrol distribut
payrol bank reconcili
human resourc department function
if payrol is prepar by personnel not respons for it distribut and reconcili it
will be difficult for anyon to successfulli add ghost employe thei will also be prevent
from borrow the trust account tax becaus thei will not have access to the disburs
function in smaller compani thi function is often handl outsid the firm at penni
per employe
after the payrol check ar prepar the transfer of fund from the gener account to the
payrol account should be handl by account the personnel depart should
distribut check and requir identif in exchang for the payrol check thi will
curtail the opportun to add ghost employe to the payrol a suggest form of
identif might be companyissu access pass if avail
if the bank reconcili function for the payrol account is assign to someon other than
those in the abov describ function then all the payrol function have been segreg
no on is abl to add ghost employe or borrow the withhold tax without the
opportun for discoveri by someon els
period review and analysi of payrol
period an independ review of the payrol might reveal that intern control ar not
work as design compar deposit date with date of payrol disburs or transfer
mai reveal ghost employe an occasion independ payrol distribut mai reveal
ghost employe
the exist of the follow mai indic the presenc of ghost employe
more than on employe with the same address
more than on employe with the same govern identif number
more than on employe with the same account number automat deposit
employe with no withhold
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1570 2011 fraud examin manual
indic of payrol fraud
in addit the follow audit program will help spot red flag to payrol distribut fraud
and help with instal control procedur
ar personnel record maintain independ of payrol and timekeep function
is the payrol account function independ of the gener ledger function
ar chang to payrol not made unless the personnel depart send approv
notif directli to the payrol depart
ar refer and background check for new hire
ar all wage rate author in write by a design offici
ar sign author on file for employe whose wage ar subject to special
deduct
ar bonus commiss and overtim approv in advanc and review for
complianc with compani polici
ar sick leav vacat and holidai review for complianc with compani polici
ar appropri form complet and sign by employe to show author for
payrol deduct and withhold exempt
is the payrol period check against the personnel record for termin
employe fictiti employe etc
is a time clock us for offic employe as well as factori worker
if a time clock is us ar timecard 1 punch by employe in the presenc of a
design supervisor and 2 sign by a supervisor at the end of the payrol period
ar timecard and product report review and compar with payrol distribut
report and product schedul
ar payrol regist review and approv befor disburs ar made for 1
name of employe 2 hour work 3 wage rate 4 deduct 5 agreement with
payrol check and 6 unusu item
ar all employe paid by check out of a separ bank payrol account
ar payrol check prenumb and issu in numer sequenc
is access restrict to unissu payrol check and signatur plate
ar check drawn and sign by design offici who do not 1 prepar payrol 2
have access to the account record or 3 have custodi of cash fund
ar payrol check distribut by someon other than the depart head or the person
who prepar the payrol
is the distribut of the payrol rotat period to differ employe without
prior notic
is the payrol bank account reconcil by a design employe who 1 is not involv
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1571
in the prepar of payrol 2 doe not sign the check or 3 doe not handl the check
distribut
do payrol bank account reconcili procedur includ compar the paid check to
the payrol and scrutin cancel check endors
ar the payrol regist reconcil to the gener ledger control account
is a liabil account set up for all wage that have remain unclaim for a certain
period of time if ye 1 have these wage been redeposit in a special bank account
and 2 is identif requir to be present at the time of their subsequ
distribut
ar distribut of hour direct and indirect to activ or depart review and
approv by supervisori personnel
ar actual payrol amount review and compar to budget amount and ar
varianc analyz regularli
do adequ procedur exist for time and accur prepar and file of payrol
tax return and relat tax
ar employe benefit plan contribut reconcil to appropri employe
censu data
ar adequ detail record maintain of the entiti liabil for vacat pai and
sick pai ar thei reconcil to the gener ledger control account period
expens reimburs scheme
employe can manipul an organ expens reimburs procedur to gener
fraudul disburs expens reimburs ar usual paid by the compani in the
follow manner an employe submit a report detail an expens incur for a
busi purpos such as a busi lunch with a client airfar hotel bill associ with
busi travel and so forth in prepar an expens report an employe is usual requir
to explain the busi purpos for the expens as well as the time date and locat in
which it wa incur support document for the expens typic a receipt should be
attach to the report in some case cancel check written by the employe or copi of a
person credit card statement show the expens ar allow in lieu of receipt the
report must usual be author by a supervisor in order for the expens to be reimburs
the four most common type of expens reimburs scheme ar mischaracter
expens overst expens fictiti expens and multipl reimburs
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1572 2011 fraud examin manual
mischaracter expens reimburs
most compani onli reimburs certain expens of their employe which expens a
compani will pai for depend to an extent upon polici but in gener businessrel
travel lodg and meal ar reimburs on of the most basic expens reimburs
scheme is perpetr by simpli request reimburs for a person expens by
claim that the expens is businessrel see mischaracter expens flowchart
exampl of mischaracter expens includ claim person travel as a busi trip
list dinner with a friend as busi develop and so on employe submit the
receipt from their person expens along with their expens report but concoct busi
reason for the incur cost the fals expens report induc the victim organ to
issu a check reimburs the perpetr for hi person expens
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1573
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1574 2011 fraud examin manual
in case involv airfar and overnight travel a mischaracter can sometim be
detect by simpli compar the employe expens report to hi work schedul often
the date of the socal busi trip coincid with a vacat or dai off detail
expens report allow a compani to make thi kind of comparison and ar therefor veri
help in prevent expens scheme
a common element to mischaracter expens scheme is the failur to submit detail
expens report or ani expens report at all some compani allow employe to simpli
turn in receipt without explain the busi purpos of the expens reflect in the
receipt thi make it exceedingli easi for an employe to turn in for exampl a receipt
from a restaur and receiv a check to reimburs him for a busi dinner other
compani provid employe with compani credit card andor procur card and
allow employe to spend compani fund without provid detail inform justifi
the purchas and sometim not even requir receipt requir detail inform
mean more than just support document it should mean precis statement of what wa
purchas as well as when where and for whom the purchas wa made
exampl
a fraudster submit credit ca rd statement as support for expens but he onli submit
the top portion of the statement not the port ion that describ what wa purchas over
95 percent of hi expens that were reimbur sed were of a person rather than a busi
natur
even when detail expens report ar requir it mai be difficult to detect a
mischaracter expens reimburs scheme for exampl suppos a travel salesman
goe on a trip and run up a larg bar bill on night in hi hotel save hi receipt and list
thi expens as busi entertain on an expens report noth about the time
date or natur of the expens would readili point to fraud and the receipt would appear to
substanti the expens short of contact the client who wa allegedli entertain there
mai be littl a victim organ can do to identifi the expens as fraudul
overst expens reimburs
instead of seek reimburs for person expens some employe overst the cost
of actual busi expens see overst expens flowchart thi can be
accomplish in a number of wai
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1575
overst expens
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1576 2011 fraud examin manual
alter receipt
the most fundament exampl of an overst expens reimburs scheme occur
when an employe doctor a receipt or other support document to reflect a higher
cost than what he actual paid the employe mai us whiteout a ballpoint pen or some
other method to chang the price reflect on the receipt befor submit hi expens
report if the compani doe not requir origin document as support the perpetr
gener attach a copi of the receipt to hi expens report alter ar usual less
notic on a photocopi than on an origin document for precis thi reason
busi should requir origin receipt and ink signatur on expens report
as with other expens fraud overst expens reimburs scheme often succe
becaus of poor control in compani where support document ar not requir for
exampl fraudster simpli lie about how much thei paid for a busi expens with no
support avail it mai be veri difficult to disprov an employe fals expens claim
overpurchas
anoth wai to overst a reimburs form is the overpurchas of busi
expens thi method is typic us by employe seek reimburs for travel
expens assum an employe is schedul to make a busi trip to anoth citi the
employe purchas an airlin ticket far in advanc of the trip when rate ar low when it is
close to the dai of the trip the employe purchas anoth ticket to the same destin
thi ticket will be more expens than the first on to further jack up the price the second
ticket might includ sever stop and layov on a veri circuit rout the employe
remov the passeng receipt coupon from the second ticket then return it for a full
refund he actual fli on the first less expens ticket he purchas but attach the
receipt from the more expens ticket to hi expens report
overst anoth employe expens
overst expens reimburs scheme ar not onli commit by the person who
actual incur the expens sometim thei mai be commit by a cowork who handl
or process expens report
exampl
a petti cashier white out other employe request for travel advanc and insert larger
amount the cashier then pass on the legitim travel advanc and pocket the excess
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1577
thi kind of scheme is most like to occur in a system where expens ar reimburs in
currenc rather than by a check sinc the perpetr would be unabl to extract hi cut
from a singl check made out to anoth employe
order to overst expens
final some employe knowingli falsifi their own report but do so at the direct of
their supervisor the employe mai be threaten with loss of their job if thei do not go
along with the scheme sometim the supervisor split the proce of the fraud with hi
subordin in other case the excess monei goe into a slush fund or is us for some
other busi purpos that is not in the compani budget the supervisor who engag in
these scheme often believ thei ar realli act in the best interest of their compani
exampl
a sale execut instruct hi salesmen to inflat their expens in order to gener cash
for a slush fund thi fund wa us to pai bribe and to provid improp form of
entertain for client and custom
fictiti expens reimburs
employe sometim seek reimburs for wholli fictiti expens instead of
overst a real busi expens or seek reimburs for a person expens an
employe just invent an expens and request that it be reimburs see fictiti
expens flowchart
produc fictiti receipt
on wai to gener a reimburs for a fictiti expens is to creat bogu support
document such as fals receipt the emerg of person comput ha enabl some
employe to creat realisticlook counterfeit receipt at home these counterfeit ar
often veri sophist even includ the logo of the store where good or servic were
allegedli purchas comput ar not the onli mean of creat support for a fictiti
expens some employe us calcul tape other cut and past old receipt from
supplier and some even us profession printer to gener fictiti receipt
unfortun not all compani requir receipt to be attach to expens report check
written by the employe or copi of hi person credit card bill might be allow as
support in lieu of a receipt some employe write person check that appear to be for
busi expens then photocopi these check and attach them to reimburs request
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1578 2011 fraud examin manual
in actual noth is purchas with the check thei ar destroi after the copi ar
made the perpetr end up receiv a reimburs from hi employ without ever
actual incur a busi expens the same method can be us with credit card where
a copi of a statement is us to support a purchas onc the expens report is file the
perpetr return the item and receiv a credit to hi account
obtain blank receipt from vendor
if the perpetr doe not creat receipt thei can be obtain from legitim supplier in
a number of wai some employe request blank receipt from waiter bartend taxi cab
driver etc these person fill in the blank receipt to creat busi expens a
fraudster might also have a friend spous rel etc who can provid receipt for
busi expens that never realli occur
exampl
an employe girlfriend work at a restaur near the victim organ thi
girlfriend valid credit card receipt and gave them to the fraudster so that he could
submit them with hi expens report
in some case a fraudster will steal an entir stack of blank receipt from a hotel restaur
etc then fill them in and over time us them to verifi fictiti busi expens
claim the expens of other
anoth wai perpetr us actual receipt to gener unwarr reimburs is by
submit expens report for expens that were paid by other for instanc an employe
might save the receipt from a meal that wa paid for by anoth parti then request
reimburs for the meal himself
multipl reimburs
the least common of the expens reimburs scheme involv multipl
reimburs thi type of fraud involv the submiss of a singl expens more than
on time the most frequent exampl of a multipl reimburs scheme is the submiss
of sever type of support for the same expens
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1579
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1580 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an employe would us for exampl an airlin ticket stub and a travel agenc invoic on
separ expens report so that he could be reimburs twice for the cost of a singl flight
the fraudster would have hi divis presid author on report and have the vice
presid approv the other so that neither would see both report addition the
perpetr allow a time lag of about a month between the file of the two report so that
the duplic would be less notic
in case where a compani doe not requir origin document as support some employe
even us sever copi of the same support document to gener multipl reimburs
rather than file two expens report employe mai also charg an item to the compani
credit card save the receipt and attach it to an expens report as if thei paid for the item
themselv the victim organ therefor end up pai twice for the same expens
detect of expens reimburs scheme
detect expens reimburs fraud involv two basic method the first of these is a
review and analysi of expens account the second detect method is a detail review
of expens report
review and analysi of expens account
gener expens account review us on of two method histor comparison or
comparison with budget amount a histor comparison compar the balanc
expend thi period in relat to the balanc spent in prior similar period when
perform thi review consid chang to the market servic or other compani
oper
budget ar estim of the monei andor time necessari to complet the task thei ar
base on past experi with consider for current and futur busi condit
therefor when compar actual and budget expens determin inordin expens
or inaccur budget estim is import
detail review of expens report
overal the best detect method is a detail review of employe expens report thi
method requir that the fraud examin have at the time of the examin a calendar and
a copi of the employe schedul for the relev period the examin should be familiar
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1581
with the travel and entertain polici of the compani addition the follow two
step mai help to detect and deter employe expens abus
requir employe to submit their expens report for a detail review befor payment
is reimburs if an employe know that hi expens report will be thoroughli
review he will be less like to includ fraudul expens on the report
period audit travel and entertain account thi is particularli effect shortli
befor employe perform review
prevent of expens reimburs scheme
detail expens report submiss and review
detail expens report should requir the follow inform
receipt or other support document
explan of the expens includ specif busi purpos
time period expens occur
place of expenditur
amount
it is not enough to have the detail report submit if thei ar not review a polici
requir the period review of expens report coupl with examin the appropri
detail will help deter employe from submit person expens for reimburs
financi transact asset misappro priation inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1601
asset misappropri inventori and other asset
employe target inventori equip suppli and other noncash asset for theft in a
number of wai these scheme can rang from steal a box of pen to the theft of
million of dollar worth of compani equip the term inventori and other asset is meant
to encompass the misappropri scheme involv ani asset held by a compani other
than cash
misus of inventori and other asset
there ar basic two wai a person can misappropri a compani asset the asset can be
misus or it can be stolen simpl misus is obvious the less egregi of the two asset
that ar misus but not stolen typic includ compani vehicl compani suppli
comput and other offic equip
exampl
an employe made person us of a compani vehicl while on an outoftown assign
the employe provid fals inform both written and verbal regard the natur of
hi us of the vehicl the vehicl wa return unharm and the cost to the perpetr
compani wa onli a few hundr dollar nevertheless such unauthor us of a
compani asset doe amount to fraud when a fals statement accompani the us
on of the most common exampl of the misus of compani asset occur when an
employe us compani equip to do person work on compani time for instanc an
employe might us hi comput at work to write letter print invoic or do other work
connect with a busi he run on the side in mani instanc these side busi ar
of the same natur as the employ busi so the employe is essenti compet with
hi employ and us the employ equip to do it
the cost of inventori misus
the cost of inventori misus ar difficult to quantifi to mani individu thi type of
fraud is not view as a crime but rather as borrow in truth the cost to a compani
from thi kind of scheme is often immateri when a perpetr borrow a stapler for the
night or take home some tool to perform a household repair the cost to hi compani is
neglig as long as the asset ar return unharm
asset misappropri inventori and oth er asset financi transact
1602 2011 fraud examin manual
on the other hand misus scheme could be veri costli take for exampl the situat
discuss abov in which an employe us compani equip to oper a side busi
dure work hour sinc the employe is not perform hi work duti the employ
suffer a loss in product if the low product continu the employ might have to
hire addit employe to compens which mean more capit divert to wage if the
employe busi compet with the employ then lost busi could be an addit
cost unauthor us of equip can also mean addit wear and tear caus the
equip to break down sooner than it would have under normal busi condit
addition when an employe borrow comp ani properti there is no guarante that he
will bring it back thi is precis how some theft scheme begin despit some opinion to
the contrari asset misus is not alwai a harmless crime
theft of inventori and other asset
while the misus of compani properti might be a problem the theft of compani properti is
obvious of greater concern loss result from larceni of compani asset can run into
the million of dollar most scheme where inventori and other noncash asset ar stolen
fall into on of four categori larceni scheme asset requisit and transfer scheme
purchas and receiv scheme and fals shipment scheme
larceni scheme
the textbook definit of larceni is feloni steal take and carri lead ride
or drive awai anoth person properti with intent to convert it or to depriv owner
thereof the unlaw take and carri awai of properti of anoth with intent to
appropri it to us inconsist with latter right 1 thi definit is so broad it
encompass everi kind of asset theft in order to gain a more specif understand of the
method us to steal inventori and other asset the definit of larceni ha been
restrict for the purpos of classifi asset misappropri the term larceni is meant
to refer to the most basic type of inventori theft the scheme in which an employe simpli
take inventori from the compani premis without attempt to conceal the theft in the
book and record see noncash larceni flowchart in other fraud scheme employe
mai creat fals document to justifi the shipment of merchandis or tamper with
inventori record to conceal miss asset la rceni scheme ar more blunt the culprit in
these crime take compani asset without try to justifi their absenc
1 black p 792
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1603
most noncash larceni scheme ar not veri complic thei ar typic commit by
employe warehous personnel inventori clerk ship clerk etc with access to
inventori or suppli mani employe simpli carri compani asset awai in open view of
other employe peopl tend to assum that their friend and acquaint ar act
honestli when thei see a trust cowork take someth out of the workplac most
peopl assum that the culprit ha a legitim reason for do so
asset misappropri inventori and other asset financi transact
1604 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a univers faculti member wa leav hi offic es to take a posit at a new school thi
person wa permit to take a small number of item to hi new job but certainli exceed
the intent of the school when he load tw o truck full of univers lab equip and
comput worth sever hundr thousand doll ar the perpetr simpli pack up these
stolen asset along with hi person item and drove awai
unfortun in all too mani case the cowork of the perpetr ar fulli awar that he
is steal compani asset yet thei refrain from report the crime there ar sever
reason that employe might ignor illeg conduct such as a sens of duti to their friend
a manag vs labor mental poor chann ls of commun for whistleblow or
intimid of honest employe by the thief when highrank personnel ar steal
from their compani employe often overlook the crime becaus thei fear thei will lose
their job if thei report it in some case the cowork mai be assist in the theft
exampl
a school superintend wa not onli pilfer school account but wa also steal school
asset a search of hi resid reveal a cell ar fill with school properti a number of
school employe knew or suspect the superintend wa involv in illeg deal but
he wa veri power and peopl were afraid to report him for fear of retali as a
result he wa abl to steal from the school for sever year
iron employe who steal inventori ar often highli trust within their organ
becaus these employe ar trust thei mai be given access to restrict area safe
suppli room or other area where compani asset ar kept thi access make it easi for
these employe to steal
it can be unwis for an employe to physic carri inventori and other asset off the
premis of hi compani thi practic carri with it the inher risk and potenti
embarrass of be caught redhand with stolen good on hi person some
employe avoid thi problem by mail compani asset from the victim organ to a
locat where thei can retriev them without fear of be observ
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1605
exampl
a sparepart custodian took sever thousand dollar worth of comput chip and mail
them to a compani that had no busi deal with the custodian employ he then
reclaim the merchandis as hi own by take the step of mail the stolen inventori
the fraudster allow the postal servic to unwittingli do hi dirti work for him
the fals sale
in mani case corrupt employe util outsid accomplic to help steal inventori the
fake sale is on method that depend upon an accomplic like most inventori theft the
fake sale is not complic the accomplic of the employeefraudst pretend to bui
merchandis but the employe doe not ring up the sale the accomplic take the
merchandis without pai for it to a casual observ it will appear that the transact is
a normal sale the employe bag the merchandis and mai act as though a transact is
be enter on the regist but in fact the sale is not record the accomplic mai
even pass a nomin amount of monei to the employe to complet the illus a relat
scheme occur when an employe sell merchandis to an accomplic at an unauthor
discount
employe also sometim enlist accomplic to return good that the employe ha alreadi
stolen thi is an easi wai for the employe to convert the stolen inventori into cash
asset requisit and transfer
asset requisit and other document that allow noncash asset to be move from on
locat in a compani to anoth can be us to facilit the theft of those asset
employe us intern transfer paperwork to gain access to merchandis that thei otherwis
might not be abl to handl without rais suspicion these document do not account for
miss merchandis the wai fals sale do but thei allow a person to move the asset from
on locat to anoth in the process of thi movement the thief steal the merchandis
the most basic scheme occur when an employe requisit materi for some work
relat project then make off with the materi in some case the employe simpli
overst the amount of suppli or equip it will take to complet hi work and pilfer
the excess in more ambiti scheme the employe might invent a complet fictiti
project that necessit the us of certain asset he intend to steal
asset misappropri inventori and other asset financi transact
1606 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an employe of a telecommun compani us fals project document to request
approxim 100000 worth of comput chip allegedli to upgrad compani
comput know that thi type of requis on requir verbal author from anoth
sourc the employe set up an elabor phone scheme to get the project approv the
fraudster us hi knowledg of the compani phone system to forward call from four
differ line to hi own desk when the confirm call wa made it wa the
perpetr who answer the phone and author the project
dishonest employe sometim falsifi asset transfer form so thei can remov inventori
from a warehous or stockroom the fals document allow the employe to remov
merchandis from the warehous but instead of us it for a workrel purpos the
perpetr simpli take it home the obviou problem with thi type of scheme is that the
person who order the merchandis will usual be the primari suspect when it turn
up miss
exampl
a manag request merchandis from the compani warehous to be displai on a
showroom floor the piec he re quest never made it to the showroom becaus he load
them into a pickup truck and took them home in some instanc he actual took the
item in broad daylight and with the help of anoth employe thi individu thought he
wa immun from detect becaus the merchandis wa request via comput us a
manag level secur code the code wa not specif to ani on manag so there
would be no wai of know which manag had order the merchandis unfortun
for the thief the compani wa abl to record the comput termin from which the request
origin the manag had us hi own comput to make the request which led to hi
undo
purchas and receiv scheme
dishonest employe can also manipul the purchas and receiv function of a
compani to facilit the theft of inventori and other asset it might seem that ani
purchas scheme should fall under the head of fals bill which were discuss
earlier there is howev a distinct between the purchas scheme that ar classifi as
fals bill and those that ar classifi as noncash misappropri
financi transact asset misappro priation inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1607
if an employe caus hi compani to purchas merchandis that the compani doe not
need thi is a fals bill scheme the harm to the compani come in pai for asset for
which it ha no us on the other hand if the asset were intention purchas by the
compani and later misappropri by the perpetr thi is classifi as an inventori
larceni scheme here the compani lose both the valu of the merchandis and the us of
the merchandis
falsifi incom shipment
on of the most common exampl of an employe abus the purchas and receiv
function occur when a person charg with receiv good on behalf of the victim
companysuch as a warehous supervisor or receiv clerkfalsifi the record of
incom shipment if for exampl 1000 unit of a particular item ar receiv the
perpetr indic that onli 900 were receiv by mark the shipment short the
perpetr can steal the 100 unit that ar unaccount for
the obviou problem with thi kind of scheme is the fact that the receiv report doe not
match the vendor invoic which will like ca us a problem with payment in the exampl
abov if the vendor bill for 1000 unit but the account payabl voucher onli show
receipt of 900 unit of merchandis then someon will have to explain where the extra 100
unit went
some employe avoid thi problem by alter onli on copi of the receiv report the
copi that is sent to account payabl indic receipt of a full shipment so the vendor will
be paid without ani question the copi us for inventori record indic a short
shipment so that the asset on hand will equal the asset in the perpetu inventori
instead of mark shipment short the perpetr might reject portion of a shipment as
not be up to qualiti specif the perpetr then keep the substandard
merchandis rather than send it back to the supplier the result is the same as if the
shipment had been mark short
fals shipment of inventori and other asset
to conceal theft of inventori and other asset employe sometim creat fals ship
document and fals sale document to make it appear that the inventori thei take wa sold
rather than stolen see fals shipment of inventori and other asset flowchart the
document that tell the ship depart to releas inventori for deliveri is usual the
asset misappropri inventori and oth er asset financi transact
1608 2011 fraud examin manual
pack slip by creat a fals pack slip a corrupt employe can caus inventori to be
fraudul deliv to himself or an accomplic the sale reflect in the pack slip
ar typic made to a fictiti person a fictiti compani or an accomplic of the
perpetr
on benefit of us fals ship document to misappropri inventori or other asset is
that the product is remov from the warehous or storeroom by someon other than the
perpetr the victim organ unknowingli deliv the target asset to the
perpetr of the scheme
fals pack slip allow inventori to be ship from the victim compani to the
perpetr but alon thei do not conceal the fact that inventori ha been misappropri
in order to hide the theft fraudster mai creat a fals sale on the book so it appear that
the miss inventori wa ship to a custom depend on how the victim
organ oper the perpetr mai have to creat a fals purchas order from the
buyer a fals sale order and a fals invoic along with the pack slip to creat the
illus of a sale
the result is that a fake receiv account goe into the book for the price of the
misappropri inventori obvious the buyer of the merchandis will never pai for it
how do employe deal with these fake receiv in some case the employe simpli let
the receiv ag on hi compani book until it is eventu written off as uncollect
in other instanc he might take affirm step to remov the saleand the delinqu
receiv that resultsfrom the book
exampl
an employe gener fals invoic and deliv them to the compani warehous for
ship the invoic were then mark deliv and sent to the sale offic the
perpetr remov all copi of the invoic fr om the file befor thei were bill to the
fictiti custom
anoth common wai to get rid of delinqu receiv that result from theft scheme is
to write off the receiv to account such as discount and allow bad debt expens or lost
and stolen asset
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1609
asset misappropri inventori and other asset financi transact
1610 2011 fraud examin manual
instead of creat complet fictiti sale some employe underst legitim sale so
that an accomplic is bill for less than deliv the result is that a portion of the
merchandis is sold at no cost in a typic scenario a salesman fill out ship ticket
which ar forward to the warehous after the merchandis is ship the salesman
instruct the warehous employe to return the ship ticket to him for extra work
befor thei ar sent to the invoic depart the salesman then alter the ship
ticket reduc either the quantiti of merchandis sold or the price per unit sold
writeoff ar often us to conceal the theft of asset after thei have been stolen in some
case howev asset ar written off in order to make them avail for theft for instanc
an employe with the author to declar inventori obsolet can write off thi inventori as
scrap onc asset ar design as scrap it is often easier to misappropri them
fraudster mai be allow to take the useless asset for themselv bui them or sell them
to an accomplic at a greatli reduc price or simpli give the asset awai
conceal inventori shrinkag
when inventori is stolen the kei conceal issu for the perpetr is shrinkag inventori
shrinkag is the unaccountedfor reduct in the compani inventori that result from theft
for instanc assum a comput retail ha 1000 comput in stock after work on dai
an employe load 10 comput into a truck and take them home now the compani onli
ha 990 comput but sinc there is no record that the employe took 10 comput the
inventori record still show 1000 unit on hand the compani ha experienc inventori
shrinkag in the amount of 10 comput
shrinkag is on of the red flag that signal fraud the goal of the perpetr is to proce
with hi scheme undetect so it is in hi best interest to prevent anyon from look for
miss asset thi mean conceal the shrinkag that occur from asset theft
inventori and other asset ar typic track through a twostep process the first step
the perpetu inventori is a run count that record how much inventori should be on
hand when new shipment of merchandis ar receiv for instanc thi merchandis is
enter into the perpetu inventori similarli when good ar sold thei ar remov from
the perpetu inventori record in thi wai a compani track it inventori on a daytodai
basi
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1611
period a physic count of asset on hand should be made in thi process someon
actual goe through the storeroom or warehous and count everyth that the compani
ha in stock thi total is then match to the amount of asset reflect in the perpetu
inventori a variat between the physic inventori and the perpetu inventori total is
shrinkag while a certain amount of shrinkag mai be expect in ani busi larg
shrinkag total mai indic fraud
alter inventori record
on of the simplest method for conceal shrinkag is to chang the perpetu inventori
record so that it will match the physic inventori count thi is also known as a forc
reconcili of the account the perpetr simpli chang the number in the perpetu
inventori to make them match the amount of inventori on hand for exampl the
employe might credit the perpetu inventori and debit the cost of sale account to bring
the perpetu inventori number into line with the actual inventori count instead of us
correct entri to adjust the perpetu inventori some employe simpli delet or cover
up the correct total and enter new number
there ar two side to the inventori equat the perpetu inventori and the physic
inventori instead of alter the perpetu inventori a perpetr who ha access to the
record from a physic inventori count can chang those record to match the perpetu
inventori return to the comput store exampl assum the compani count it
inventori everi month and match it to the perpetu inventori the physic count should
come to 990 comput sinc that is what is actual on hand if the perpetr is someon
charg with count inventori he can simpli write down that there ar 1000 unit
on hand
fictiti sale and account receiv
when the perpetr make an adjust entri to the perpetu inventori and cost of sale
account as discuss abov there is no sale transact on the book that correspond to
these entri in order to fix thi problem a perpetr might enter a debit to account
receiv and a correspond credit to the sale account so that it appear the miss
good have been sold
of cours the problem of payment then aris becaus no on is go to pai for the good
that were sold in thi transact there ar two rout that a fraudster might take in thi
circumst the first is to charg the sale to an exist account in some case employe
asset misappropri inventori and oth er asset financi transact
1612 2011 fraud examin manual
charg fake sale to exist receiv that ar so larg that the addit of the asset that
the perpetr ha stolen will not be notic other corrupt employe charg the sale to
account that ar alreadi ag and will soon be written off when these account ar
remov from the book the perpetr stolen inventori effect disappear the other
adjust that is typic made is a writeoff to discount and allow or bad debt expens
writeoff of inventori and other asset
write off inventori and other asset is a rel common wai for employe to remov
asset from the book befor or after thei ar stolen thi elimin the problem of
shrinkag that inher exist in everi case of noncash asset misappropri
physic pad
most method of conceal deal with alter inventori record either chang the
perpetu inventori or miscount dure the physic inventori in the altern some
employe try to make it appear that there ar more asset present in the warehous or
stockroom than there actual ar empti box or box fill with brick or other
inexpens materi for exampl mai be stack on shelv to creat the illus of extra
inventori
detect of inventori scheme
statist sampl
compani with inventori account typic have enorm popul of sourc
document statist sampl allow the fraud examin to inspect kei attribut on a
smaller portion or sampl of those document for exampl the examin mai select a
statist valid random sampl of purchas requisit to determin that all requisit in
the sampl select were properli approv statist sampl enabl the examin to
predict the occurr rate for the popul and therefor determin with some accuraci
the error rate or the potenti for fraud
other item that mai be sampl on a statist basi includ the follow
receiv report
perpetu inventori record
raw materi requisit
ship document
job cost sheet
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1613
the attribut test for on the abovement document might includ a specif date
item or locat
perpetu inventori record
unexplain entri in the perpetu record might reveal embezzl loss
ar all the reduct to the perpetu inventori record explain by sourc document
such as sale invoic approv to remov to scrap inventori or spoilag
ar all increas in perpetu record explain by sourc document such as receiv
report
ship document
inventori theft mai be uncov by answer to question such as
ar all sale properli match with a ship document
ar ani ship document not associ with a sale
is inventori disappear from storag
physic inventori count
physic inventori count can sometim give rise to inventori theft detect howev
becaus other explan satisfi inventori shortag such as shrinkag histor analysi
of inventori is usual necessari furthermor if the onli method us to detect inventori
fraud is the yearend physic count the perpetr will have had all year to devis
conceal method to circumv potenti detect
analyt review
by us an analyt review inventori fraud mai be detect becaus certain trend
becom immedi clear for exampl if the cost of good sold increas by a
disproportion amount rel to sale and no chang occur in the purchas price
quantiti purchas or qualiti of product purchas the caus of the disproportion
increas in cost of good sold might be on of two thing 1 end inventori ha been
deplet by theft or 2 someon ha been embezzl monei through a fals bill scheme
ie submit invoic and collect the payment for inventori that wa never deliv
an analyt review of all the compon part of the cost of good sold should indic to
the examin where to direct further inquiri for exampl assum that the type of
inventori purchas is the same and there is no chang in the manufactur process or
purchas price if sale and cost of sale chang from 5650987 and 2542944 to
asset misappropri inventori and other asset financi transact
1614 2011 fraud examin manual
6166085 and 2981880 respect what is the data tell the examin to begin sale
have increas by 912 percent wherea cost of sale increas by 1726 percent the profit
margin ha decreas by 3 percent from 55 to 52 percent base on thi data the fraud
examin might want to look further at the compon of inventori such as begin
inventori purchas and end inventori if begin inventori wa 1207898
purchas were 2606518 and 2604972 respect and end inventori wa 894564
then an inventori matrix would look like the follow
year 1 year 2 percentag chang
begin inventori 1207898 1271472 526
purchas 2606518 2604972 006
good avail for sale 3814416 3876444 163
end inventori 1271472 894564 2964
cost of sale 2542944 2981880 1726
inventori purchas as a percentag of sale have declin from 4613 to 4225 percent
from thi exampl on can hypothes that 1 inventori purchas were purpos
increas in year on onli to be liquid in year two 2 the increas sale in year two
were unexpect and the purchas of inventori did not keep pace with the sale or 3 there
might be some fraud scheme in inventori if by interview the examin is unabl to
ascertain a reason explan such as 1 or 2 abov then further examin of the
end inventori mai be warrant
the fraud examin mai next look at the differ in the physic inventori procedur to
see if that creat a more or less accur inventori count at the end of either year on or
year two if there is no other logic explan then further investig into these and
other inventori account mai be necessari to explain the anomali occur in inventori
computergener trend analysi
the comput can be us to facilit obtain list of item with specifi attribut for
exampl in a lumberyard oper the comput can be program to list all purchas
of four by four cedar fenc post eight feet in length examin all the sourc document that
ar repres by the list by examin the sourc document for each of these
purchas the examin can plot trend to determin the occurr of the follow or
other pattern
financi transact asset misappro priation inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1615
search scheme
purchas by vendor if the same vendor is receiv favor treatment
inventori level by type and date if inventori is be purchas at it reorder point or if excess
inventori is be order
inventori ship by address if the vendor address match either an employe address or
the address of anoth vendor
cost per item if discount ar properli credit to purchas
direct labor by item if there ar excess labor hour be ad to a particular job
or item
direct materi by item if materi ar properli charg to the job too much or the
wrong materi
overhead per inventori item if overhead is be properli appli and appli onli onc
dispos then reorder if usabl inventori is be prematur design as scrap
shortag by inventori item if there is inventori theft or the reorder system is not
function
return and allow if there is an unusu high incid of return and
allow
sale allow if sale allow ar not properli credit to promot
allow
buyer if the buyer is not act within scope of author
detail audit program
the follow audit program will also be help in establish inventori control
do adequ detail written inventori instruct and procedur exist do inventori
procedur give appropri consider to the locat and arrang of
inventori
do inventori procedur give appropri consider to identif and descript
of inventori
is the method of determin inventori quantiti specifi eg weight count
is the method us for record item count adequ eg count sheet
prenumb tag
ar inventori tag us if ye 1 ar thei prenumb 2 is account for
inventori tag adequ and doe it includ control with respect to tag us unus
and void
ar adequ procedur in place to identifi inventori count ensur that all item
have been count and prevent doubl count
ar obsolet slowmov or damag inventori properli identifi and segreg
is the inventori reason identifi for proper classif in the account
record eg descript stage of complet
ar inventori count subject to 1 complet recount by person independ of the
on involv in the initi count 2 recount onli of merchandis have substanti
valu or 3 spot check by supervisori personnel
asset misappropri inventori and oth er asset financi transact
1616 2011 fraud examin manual
ar count perform by employe whose function ar independ of the physic
custodi of inventori and recordkeep function
do proper account control and procedur exist for the exclus from inventori of
merchandis onhand that is not properti of the client eg custom merchandis
consign in
do proper account control and procedur exist for the inclus in inventori of
merchandis not onhand but the properti of the client eg merchandis in
warehous out on repair consign out
will ident inventori item in variou area be accumul to allow a tie in total
count to a summari list subsequ to the observ
is the movement of inventori adequ control eg ship and receiv
activ suspend dure the physic count to ensur a proper cutoff
ar signific differ between physic count and detail inventori record
investig befor the account and inventori record ar adjust to match the
physic count
will inventori at remot locat be count
will special count procedur or volum convers be necessari eg item
weigh on scale
how will workinprocess inventori be identifi
how will the stage of complet of workinprocess inventori be identifi
ar there ani other matter that should be note for the inventori count 2
prevent of inventori scheme
there ar four basic measur which if properli instal and implement mai help
prevent inventori fraud thei ar proper document segreg of duti includ
approv independ check and physic safeguard
proper document
the follow item should be prenumb and control
requisit
receiv report
perpetu record
2 georg georgiad audit procedur new york harcourt brace profession publish 1995
financi transact asset misappro priation inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1617
raw materi requisit
ship document
job cost sheet
howev not all inventori requir the purchas of raw materi in these case the
proper document might take the form of prenumb and control ticket and
receipt for sale
segreg of duti
the follow duti should be handl by differ personnel
requisit of inventori
receipt of inventori
disburs of inventori
convers of inventori to scrap
receipt of proce from dispos of scrap
independ check
someon independ of the purchas or wareh function should conduct physic
observ of inventori the personnel conduct the physic observ should also be
knowledg about the inventori
physic safeguard
all merchandis should be physic guard and lock access should be limit to
author personnel onli for exampl strateg placement of secur guard mai aid in
the detect and deterr of potenti theft scheme electron method mai also be
us such as camera and surveil devic the effect of ani devic will
howev depend on the employe knowledg that physic safeguard control ar adher
to and on the type of inventori avail for misappropri
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1701
briberi and corrupt
briberi
gener briberi and corrupt ar offbook fraud that occur in the form of kickback
gift or gratuiti to govern employe from contractor or to privat busi
employe from vendor for a detail discuss of the legal element of briberi and
corrupt pleas see the law section of the fraud examin manual
at it heart a bribe is a busi transact albeit an illeg or uneth on a person
bui someth with the bribe he pai what he bui is the influenc of the recipi
briberi scheme can be difficult and expens though thei ar not nearli as common as
other form of occup fraud such as asset misappropri briberi scheme tend to
be much more costli
briberi mai be defin as the offer give receiv or solicit anyth of valu to
influenc an offici act the term offici act mean that tradit briberi statut onli
proscrib payment made to influenc the decis of govern agent or employe
mani occup fraud scheme howev involv commerci briberi which is similar to the
tradit definit of briberi except that someth of valu is offer to influenc a
busi decis rather than an offici act of govern commerci briberi mai or mai
not be a crimin offens for exampl in the unit state there is no gener feder law
prohibit commerci briberi in all instanc howev there ar statut prohibit
briberi of employe of financi institut to influenc a loan therefor the law of your
particular jurisdict and the fact of the case will determin whether briberi in the privat
sector mai be prosecut crimin commerci briberi can often be pursu in the civil
court as breach of fiduciari duti or conflict of interest see the legal section for
more inform
accord to ernst young 11th global fraud survei drive ethic growthnew market
new challeng corrupt is still a signific problem for busi and execut
particularli due to the drive for compani growth despit the multitud of anticorrupt
legisl and increas enforc effort around the world corrupt is still preval
briberi scheme gener fall into two broad categori kickback and bidrig scheme
kickback ar undisclos payment made by vendor to employe of purchas
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1702 2011 fraud examin manual
compani the purpos of a kickback is usual to enlist the corrupt employe in an
overbil scheme sometim vendor pai kickback simpli to get extra busi from the
purchas compani bidrig scheme occur when an employe fraudul assist a
vendor in win a contract through the competit bid process
kickback scheme
kickback in the commerci sens ar the give or receiv anyth of valu to influenc
a busi decis without the employ knowledg and consent kickback scheme ar
usual veri similar to the bill scheme describ in the asset misappropri section
thei involv the submiss of invoic for good and servic that ar either overpr or
complet fictiti see kickback flowchart
kickback ar classifi as corrupt scheme rather than asset misappropri becaus
thei involv collus between employe and vendor in a common type of kickback
scheme a vendor submit a fraudul or inflat invoic to the victim organ and an
employe of that organ help make sure that a payment is made on the fals invoic
for hi assist the employeefraudst receiv a payment from the vendor thi
payment is the kickback
kickback scheme almost alwai attack the purchas function of the victim compani so it
stand to reason that these fraud ar often undertaken by employe with purchas
respons purchas employe often have direct contact with vendor and therefor
have an opportun to establish a collus relationship
exampl
a purchas agent redirect a number of order to a comp ani own by a supplier with
whom he wa conspir in return for the addit busi the supplier paid the
purchas agent over half the profit from the addit order
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1703
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1704 2011 fraud examin manual
divert busi to vendor
in some instanc an employeefraudst receiv a kickback simpli for direct excess
busi to a vendor there might be no overbil involv in these case the vendor
simpli pai the kickback to ensur a steadi stream of busi from the purchas
compani
if no overbil is involv in a kickback scheme on might wonder where the harm li
assum the vendor simpli want to get the buyer busi and doe not increas hi
price or bill for undeliv good and servic how is the buyer harm the problem is
that have bought off an employe of the purchas compani a vendor is no longer
subject to the normal econom pressur of the marketplac thi vendor doe not have to
compet with other supplier for the purchas compani busi and so ha no
incent to provid a low price or qualiti merchandis in these circumst the
purchas compani almost alwai end up overpai for good or servic
exampl
a travel agenc provid free travel and entertain to the purchas agent of a retail
compani in return the purchas agent agr eed to book all corpor trip through the
travel agent the victim compani estim that it paid 10000 more for airfar over a
twoyear period by book through the corrupt travel agenc than if it had us a differ
compani
onc a vendor know it ha an exclus purchas arrang it incent is to rais
price to cover the cost of the kickback most briberi scheme end up as overbil
scheme even if thei do not start that wai thi is on reason why most busi code of
ethic prohibit employe from accept undisclos gift from vendor in the long run
the employe compani is sure to pai for hi uneth conduct
overbil scheme
employe with approv author
in most instanc kickback scheme begin as overbil scheme in which a vendor submit
inflat invoic to the victim organ the fals invoic either overst the cost of
actual good and servic or reflect fictiti sale the vendor in a kickback scheme
gener seek to enlist the help of an employe with the author to approv payment of
the fraudul invoic thi author ensur payment of the fals bill without
undu hassl
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1705
exampl
a manag wa author to purchas fix asset for hi compani as part of a leasehold
improv the materi he or dere were of a cheaper qualiti and lower price than what
wa specifi but the contract he negoti did not reflect thi therefor the victim
compani paid for highqual materi but receiv lowqual materi the differ
in price between the true cost of the lowqual materi and what the compani paid wa
divert back to the manag as a kickback
the abil of the employe to author purchas and thu to author fraudul
purchas is usual a kei to kickback scheme if the fraudster can author payment
himself he doe not have to submit purchas requisit to an honest superior who might
question the valid of the transact
fraudster lack approv author
while the major of kickback scheme involv person with author to approv
purchas thi author is not an absolut necess when an employe cannot approv
fraudul purchas himself he can still orchestr a kickback scheme if he can circumv
account payabl control in some case all that is requir is the file of a fals purchas
requisit if a trust employe tell hi superior that the compani need certain materi
or servic thi is sometim suffici to get a fals invoic approv for payment such
scheme ar gener success when the person with approv author is inattent or
when he is forc to reli on hi subordin guidanc in purchas matter
corrupt employe might also prepar fals voucher to make it appear that fraudul
invoic ar legitim where proper control ar in place a complet voucher is requir
befor account payabl will pai an invoic on kei is for the fraudster to creat a purchas
order that correspond to the vendor fraudul invoic the fraudster might forg the
signatur of an author parti on the purchas order to show that the acquisit ha been
approv where the payabl system is computer an employe with access to a
restrict password can enter the system and author payment on fraudul invoic
in less sophist scheme a corrupt employe might simpli take a fraudul invoic
from a vendor and slip it into a stack of prepar invoic befor thei ar input into the
account payabl system a more detail descript of how fals invoic ar process
can be found in the bill scheme section
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1706 2011 fraud examin manual
kickback scheme can be veri difficult to detect in a sens the victim compani is be
attack from two direct extern a corrupt vendor submit fals invoic that induc
the victim organ to unknowingli pai for good or servic that it doe not receiv
intern on or more of the victim compani employe wait to corrobor the fals
inform provid by the vendor
other kickback scheme
bribe ar not alwai paid to employe to process phoni invoic some outsid seek
other fraudul assist from employe of the victim organ for instanc
inspector ar sometim paid off to accept substandard materi or to accept short
shipment of good
repres of compani wish to purchas good or servic from the victim
organ at unauthor discount sometim bribe employe with bill author
the corrupt employe make sale to their accomplic at greatli reduc ratessometim
even sell item at a lossand in return thei receiv a portion of the discount
kickback payment
it should also be note that everi bribe is a twosid transact in everi case where a
vendor bribe a purchas there is someon on the vendor side of the transact who is
make an illicit payment it is therefor just as like that your employe ar pai bribe as
accept them
in order to obtain the fund to make these payment employe usual divert compani
monei into a slush fund a noncompani account from whic h bribe can be made assum
that bribe ar not author by the briber compani he must find a wai to gener the
fund necessari to illeg influenc someon in anoth organ therefor the kei to
the crime from the briber perspect is the di version of monei into the slush fund thi is
a fraudul disburs of compani fund which is usual accomplish by the write
of compani check to a fictiti entiti or the submit of fals invoic in the name of a
fals entiti payment to a slush fund ar commonli code as fee for consult or other
servic
it is common to charg fraudul disburs to nebul account like consult
fee the purchas of good can be verifi by a check of inventori but there is no
inventori for these kind of servic it is therefor more difficult to prove that the
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1707
payment ar fraudul the discuss of exactli how fraudul disburs ar made
can be found in the section on check tamper and invoic
bidrig scheme
as we have said when on person pai a bribe to anoth he doe so to gain the benefit of
the recipi influenc the competit bid process in which sever supplier or
contractor ar vy for contract in what can be a veri cutthroat environ is tailormad
for briberi ani advantag on vendor can gain over hi competitor in thi arena is
extrem valuabl the benefit of insid influenc can ensur that a vendor will win a
soughtaft contract mani vendor ar will to pai for thi influenc
in the competit bid process all bidder ar legal suppos to be place on the same
plane of equal bid on the same term and condit each bidder compet for a
contract base on the specif set forth by the purchas compani vendor submit
confidenti bid state the price at which thei will complet a project in accord with
the purchas specif
the wai competit bid is rig depend larg upon the level of influenc of the
corrupt employe the more power a person ha over the bid process the more like
the person can influenc the select of a supplier therefor employe involv in bid
rig scheme like those in kickback scheme tend to have a good measur of influenc
or access to the competit bid process potenti target for accept bribe includ
buyer contract offici engin and technic repres qualiti or product
assur repres subcontractor liaison employe or anyon els with author
over the award of contract
bidrig scheme can be categor base on the stage of bid at which the fraudster
exert hi influenc bidrig scheme usual occur in the presolicit phase the
solicit phase or the submiss phase of the bid process see bidrig
flowchart
the presolicit phase
in the presolicit phase of the competit bid processbefor bid ar offici
sought for a projectbriberi scheme can be brok en down into two distinct type the first
is the need recognit scheme where an employe of a purchas compani is paid to
convinc hi compani that a particular project is necessari the second reason to bribe
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1708 2011 fraud examin manual
someon in the presolicit phase is to have the specif of the contract tailor to
the strength of a particular supplier
need recognit scheme
the typic fraud in the need recognit phase of the contract negoti is a conspiraci
between the buyer and contractor where an employe of the buyer receiv someth of
valu and in return recogn a need for a particular product or servic the result of
such a scheme is that the victim organ purchas unnecessari good or servic from
a supplier at the direct of the corrupt employe
there ar sever trend that mai indic a need recognit fraud unusu high
requir for stock and inventori level mai reveal a situat in which a corrupt
employe is seek to justifi unnecessari purchas activ from a certain supplier an
employe might also justifi unnecessari purchas of inventori by write off larg number
of surplu item to scrap as these item leav the inventori thei open up space to justifi
addit purchas anoth indic of a need recognit scheme is the defin of a
need that can onli be met by a certain supplier or contractor in addit the failur to
develop a satisfactori list of backup supplier mai reveal an unusu strong attach to a
primari supplier an attach that is explain by the accept of bribe from that
supplier
specif scheme
the other type of presolicit fraud is a specif scheme the specif of a
contract ar a list of the element materi dimens and other relev requir for
complet of the project specif ar prepar to assist vendor in the bid
process tell them what thei ar requir to do and provid a firm basi for make and
accept bid
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1709
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1710 2011 fraud examin manual
on corrupt scheme that occur in thi process is the fraudul tailor of
specif to a particular vendor in these case the vendor pai off an employe of the
buyer who is involv in prepar specif for the contract in return the employe
tailor the specif to accommod that vendor capabl so that the contractor is
effect assur of win the contract
the method us to restrict competit in the bid process mai includ the us of
prequalif procedur that ar known to elimin certain competitor for instanc
the bid mai requir potenti contractor to have a certain percentag of femal or minor
ownership there is noth illeg with such a requir but if it is place in the
specif as a result of a bribe rather than as the result of other factor then the
employe ha sold hi influenc to benefit a dishonest vendor a clear case of corrupt
some employe distort the requir of contract by claim the specif call
for a solesourc provid or noncompetit procur thi caus competit bid
to be disregard and the contract to be award to a particular supplier the supplier
typic charg a much higher price than the compani could have obtain through
bid solesourc or noncompetit procur justif mai also be us to
elimin competit and steer contract to a particular vendor
exampl
a requisition distort the requir of a contract up for bid claim the
specif call for a solesourc provid base on the requisition inform
competit bid wa disregard and the cont ract wa award to a particular supplier
a review of other bid receiv at a later date show that certain materi were avail
for up to 70000 less than what the compani paid in the solesourc arrang the
employe had help divert the job to the contractor in return for a promis of futur
employ
anoth form of specif fraud is bid split entiti ar often requir to solicit
bid on project over a certain dollar amount in order to avoid thi requir employe
might break a larg project up into sever small project that fall below the mandatori
bid level onc the contract is split the employe can award some or all of the
compon part to a contractor with whom he is conspir
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1711
a less egregi but nevertheless unfair form of bidrig occur when a vendor pai an
employe of the buyer for the right to see the specif earlier than hi competitor the
employe doe not alter the specif to suit the vendor but instead simpli give him a
head start on plan hi bid and prepar for the job
the solicit phase
in the solicit phase of the competit bid process fraudster attempt to influenc
the select of a contractor by restrict the pool of competitor from whom bid ar
sought in other word a corrupt vendor pai an employe of the purchas compani to
ensur that on or more of the vendor competitor do not get to bid on the contract in
thi manner the corrupt vendor is abl to improv hi chanc of win the job
on type of scheme involv the sale repres who deal on behalf of a number of
potenti bidder the sale repres bribe a contract offici to rig the solicit
ensur that onli those compani repres by him get to submit bid it is not
uncommon in some sector for buyer to requir bidder to be repres by certain sale
or manufactur repres these repres pai a kickback to the buyer to
protect their client interest the result of thi transact is that the purchas compani is
depriv of the abil to get the best price on it contract typic the group of
protect vendor will not actual compet against each other for the purchas
contract but instead engag in bid pool
bid pool
bid pool is a process by which sever bidder conspir to split contract up and ensur
that each get a certain amount of work instead of submit confidenti bid the vendor
discuss what their bid will be so thei can guarante that each vendor will win a share of the
purchas compani busi for exampl if vendor a b and c ar up for three
separ job thei mai agre that as bid will be the lowest on the first contract bs bid will
be the lowest on the second contract and cs bid will be the lowest on the third contract
none of the vendor get all three job but on the other hand thei ar all guarante to get
at least on furthermor sinc thei plan their bid ahead of time the vendor can conspir
to rais their price thu the purchas compani suffer as a result of the scheme
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1712 2011 fraud examin manual
fictiti supplier
anoth wai to elimin competit in the solicit phase of the select process is to
solicit bid from fictiti supplier thi give the appear of a competit bid
situat when in fact onli on real supplier bid on the job furthermor the real
contractor can rais hi price sinc the other bid ar fraudul and sure to be higher than
hi own in effect the bid from fictiti supplier serv to valid the exagger quot
from the real contractor
other method
in some case competit for a contract can be limit by sever restrict the time for
submit bid certain supplier ar given advanc notic of contract befor bid ar
solicit these supplier ar therefor abl to begin prepar their bid ahead of time with
the short time frame for develop bid propos the supplier with advanc knowledg of
the contract will have a decid advantag over hi competit
bribe purchas offici can also restrict competit for their coconspir by solicit
bid in obscur public where other vendor ar unlik to see them again thi is
done to elimin potenti rival and creat an advantag for the corrupt supplier some
scheme have also involv the public of bid solicit dure holidai period when
those supplier not in the know ar unlik to be look for potenti contract in more
blatant case the bid of outsid ar accept but ar lost or improperli disqualifi by
the corrupt employe of the purchas
frequent when a vendor bribe an employe of the purchas compani to assist him in
ani kind of solicit scheme the cost of the bribe is includ in the corrupt vendor bid
therefor the purchas compani end up bear the cost of the illicit payment in the
form of a higher contract price
the submiss phase
in the actual submiss phase of the process where bid ar proffer to the buyer sever
scheme mai be us to win a contract for a particular supplier the princip offens tend
to be abus of the seal bid process competit bid ar confidenti thei ar of cours
suppos to remain seal until a specifi date at which all bid ar open and review by
the purchas compani the person or person who have access to seal bid ar often
the target of uneth vendor seek an advantag in the process
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1713
exampl
gift and cash payment were given to a major owner of a compani in exchang for
preferenti treatment dure the bid process the supplier who paid the bribe wa
allow to submit hi bid last know what price hi competitor had quot or in the
altern he wa allow to actual see hi competitor bid and adjust hi own
accordingli
vendor also bribe employe of the purchas for confidenti inform that will help
them prepar their bid other reason to bribe employe of the purchas includ ensur
receipt of a late bid or falsifi the bid log to extend the bid open date and to control bid
open
econom extort
econom extort case ar the pai up or els corrupt scheme basic the flip
side of briberi scheme instead of a vendor offer a payment to influenc a decis an
employe demand that a vendor pai him in order to make a decis in that vendor favor
if the vendor refus to pai he face some harm such as a loss of busi with the
extort compani in ani situat where an employe might accept bribe to favor a
particular compani or person the situat could be revers to a point where the employe
extort monei from a potenti purchas or supplier
exampl
a plant manag for a util compani start hi own busi on the side vendor who
want to do work for the util compani were forc by the manag to divert some of
their busi to hi own compan y those that did not plai ball lost their busi with
the util
illeg gratuiti
illeg gratuiti ar similar to briberi scheme except there is not necessarili an intent to
influenc a particular busi decis befor the fact in the typic illeg gratuiti
scenario a decis is made that happen to benefit a certain person or compani the parti
who benefit from the decis then give a gift to the person who made the decis the
gift could be anyth of valu an illeg gratuiti doe not requir proof of an intent
to influenc
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1714 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a citi commission negoti a land developm ent deal with a group of privat investor
after the deal wa approv the commission and hi wife were reward with a free
intern vacat all expens paid
at first glanc it mai seem that illeg gratuiti scheme ar harmless as long as the busi
decis in question ar not influenc by the promis of payment but most compani
ethic polici forbid employe from accept unreport gift from vendor on reason
is that illeg gratuiti scheme can and do evolv into briberi scheme onc an employe
ha been reward for an act such as direct busi to a particular supplier an
understand might be reach that futur decis benefici to the supplier will also be
reward addition even though an outright promis of payment ha not been made
employe mai direct busi to certain compani in the hope that thei will be reward
with monei or gift
method of make illeg payment
certain tradit method of make illeg payment fall into the hierarch pattern
describ below
gift travel and entertain
most briberi corrupt scheme begin with gift and favor commonli encount
item includ
wine and liquor consum
cloth and jewelri for the recipi or spous
sexual favor
lavish entertain
paid vacat
free transport on corpor jet
free us of resort facil
gift of the briber inventori or servic such as construct of home improv
by a contractor
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1715
cash payment
the next step usual involv cash payment howev cash is not practic when deal
with larg sum becaus larg amount ar difficult to gener and thei draw attent
when thei ar deposit or spent the us of currenc in major transact might itself be
incrimin
check and other financi instrument
as the scheme grow illicit payment ar often made by normal busi check cashier
check or wire transfer disguis payment on the payer book appear as some sort of
legitim busi expens often as consult fee payment can be made directli or
through an intermediari
hidden interest
in the latter stage of sophist scheme the payer might give a hidden interest in a joint
ventur or other profitmak enterpris the recipi interest might be conceal
through a straw nomine hidden in a trust or other busi entiti or mere includ by an
undocu verbal agreement such arrang ar veri difficult to detect and even if
identifi proof of corrupt intent might be difficult to demonstr
loan
three type of loan often turn up in fraud case
a prior outright payment fals describ as an innoc loan
payment on a legitim loan guarante or actual made by someon els
an actual loan made on favor term such as interestfre
payment of credit card bill
the recipi transport vacat and en tertain expens might be paid with the
payer credit card or the recipi might forward hi own credit card bill to the payer for
payment in some instanc the payer simpli let the recipi carri and us the payer card
transfer at other than fair market valu
the corrupt payer might sell or leas properti to the recipi at far less than it market
valu or might agre to bui or rent properti at inflat price the recipi might also
sell an asset to the payer but retain titl or the us of the properti
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1716 2011 fraud examin manual
promis of favor treatment
promis of favor treatment commonli take the follow form
a payer might promis a government offici lucr employ when the recipi
leav govern servic
an execut leav a privat compani for a relat govern posit might be
given favor or inflat retir and separ benefit
the spous or other rel of the intend recipi might also be emploi by the
payer compani at an inflat salari or with littl actual respons
detect of briberi scheme
red flag of briberi scheme
most briberi scheme ar detect thr ough tip from honest and disgruntl cowork or
vendor these alleg can be evalu through analysi of the red flag associ
with the suspect peopl or transact
the corrupt recipi
a person take payoff or embezzl fund often exhibit the follow characterist
the big spender thi is the most common wai to detect corrupt recipi some
recipi spend their monei less conspicu by pai off debt or pai down
mortgag
the gift taker an offici or execut who regularli accept inappropri gift is often
on suscept to larger payment
the odd coupl corrupt payer and recipi often appear to have veri friendli
social relationship frequent outsid contact particularli between parti who do not
appear to have much in common might be a sign of deeper and more troublesom ti
between the parti
the rule breaker thi is often the most signific characterist a person take
payoff will often take action on hi own or direct a subordin to bend break or
ignor standard oper procedur or rule to benefit the payer particular attent
should be direct toward those who insert themselv into area in which thei ar
normal not involv or attempt to assert author or make decis for which thei
ar not respons
the complain a corrupt recipi often make excus for defici in the payer
servic such as poor qualiti late deliveri or high price look for higher price
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1717
extra payment or commiss approv by the suspect becaus these might be the
sourc of kickback fraud
genuin need greed rather than need seem to be the motiv factor in most case
occasion howev legitim pressur such as ill of famili member or drug
addict can induc particip in an illeg scheme
the corrupt payer
like the recipi of briberi payment the payer will also demonstr certain identifi
characterist
the gift bearer the businessperson who routin offer inappropri gift provid
lavish busi entertain or otherwis tri to ingrati himself is often the on
offer still more valuabl induc
the sleaz factor the corrupt payer is frequent a person known or suspect in the
industri to be involv in payoff or other fraudul activ
the toosuccess bidder a supplier who is consist award work without ani
appar competit advantag might be provid underthet incent
poor qualiti higher price particularli after the corrupt relationship ha been seal the
qualiti of product and servic provid by the payer might deterior and price
increas
the oneperson oper in certain industri small close held compani that do not
have the report and intern control requir of their larger publicli held
competitor resort to payoff as a mean of market advantag be alert for
independ sale repres consult or other middlemen becaus thei ar
favor conduit for funnel and conceal illeg payment
gener purchas
the follow practic mai indic that singl sole sourc vendor ar be favor or
competit bid polici ar not be follow
materi ar not be order at the optim reorder point
order ar consist made from the same vendor
establish bid polici ar not be follow
the cost of materi ar out of line
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1718 2011 fraud examin manual
presolicit
restrict in an organ solicit document that tend to restrict competit ar
a red flag exampl of restrict condit includ
specif and statement of work that ar tailor to fit the product or capabl
of a singl contractor
prequalif procedur that restrict competit
unnecessari solesourc or noncompetit procur justif
contain fals statement
sign by unauthor offici
bypass necessari review procedur
other red flag in the presolicit phase includ
a buyer who provid inform or advic to a contractor on a preferenti basi
new vendor that ar ad to the qualifi list for no appar reason
statement of work specif or solesourc justif that ar develop by or
in consult with a contractor who will be permit to bid
consult who assist in the prepar of the statement of work specif or
design and ar later permit to work on the contract as subcontractor or consult
project that ar split into smaller contract to avoid review
inform that is releas by firm particip in the design and engin to
contractor compet for the prime contract
requir that ar split up so contractor can each get a fair share and can rotat
bid
specif that ar not consist with similar procur in the past
bid solicit
the follow ar exampl of suspici activ that might signal fraud in the bid
solicit phase
the time for submit bid is limit so that onli those with advanc inform have
adequ time to prepar bid or propos
on contractor receiv confidenti inform that is not reveal to hi competitor
the conduct of a bidder confer which permit improp commun
between contractor who then ar in a posit to rig bid
the failur to ensur that a suffici number of potenti competitor ar awar of the
solicit by
us obscur public to publish bid solicit
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1719
publish bid solicit dure holidai period
bid solicit that ar vagu as to the time place or other requir for submit
accept bid
inadequ intern control over the number and destin of bid packag sent to
interest bidder
improp commun between purchas and contractor at trade or profession
meet
improp social contact between purchas and contractor repres
a purchas agent who ha a financi interest in the busi of a contractor
a purchas who discuss possibl employ with a contractor
the purchas assist a contractor in the prepar of hi bid
a contractor be refer to a specif subcontractor expert or sourc of suppli by an
employe of the purchas organ
the failur to amend a solicit to includ necessari chang or clarif in the
bid such as tell on contractor of chang that can be made after the bid
the falsif of document or receipt so that a late bid is accept
ani indic of collus between bidder
the falsif of a contractor qualif work histori facil equip
or personnel
bid submiss or contract accept
red flag in the submiss and postsubmiss phase of the bid process includ the
follow
procur that ha been restrict to exclud or hamper ani qualifi contractor
the improp accept of a late bid
a bidder who alwai bid last on contract and consist win them
the falsif of document or receipt to get a late bid accept
bid that ar chang after other bidder pri ce ar known thi is sometim done by
mistak deliber plant in a bid
a low bidder who withdraw to becom a subcontractor of a higher bidder who get
the contract
collus between bidder
bidder who reveal their price to on anoth
bid tend to be award in a geograph pattern or in a notic rotat
bid for a particular type of work ar alwai award to a particular compani
fals certif by a contractor
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1720 2011 fraud examin manual
the falsif of inform concern contractor qualif financi capabl
facil ownership of equip and suppli qualif of personnel and
success perform of previou job etc
method of prove corrupt payment
there ar three basic wai to prove illeg payment identifi and trace them by audit step
turn an insid wit or secretli infiltr or record ongo transact an audit might
focu on the point of suspect payment or receipt or both as a veri gener proposit
suspect onbook scheme ar best approach from the point of payment and offbook
scheme ar most easili identifi at the suspect point of receipt or through the us of an
insid wit or surveil
the busi profil analysi
the busi profil begin the examin process it identifi prospect wit and
target as well as relev document and transact and should provid lead as to
whether an onbook or offbook scheme is be us
inform of the suspect busi should be obtain about the organ personnel
monei flow pattern sourc of avail fund relat expenditur etc locat of bank
account financi condit and recordkeep system thi inform can be obtain
through interview of employe custom and competitor busi bank account and
loan record financi statement tax return busi report compani and busi
public file
how is the busi organ legal and structur
know thi inform help determin what record ar avail corpor
partnership etc and where to go to get them
who ar the kei personnel associ with the enterpris
thi help to identifi potenti wit and inform as well as possibl subject kei
posit includ the owner of the busi the peopl directli involv in the suspect
transact includ secretari and cleric staff present and former employe the
number cruncher the bookkeep outsid account and tax prepar outsid
consult sale repres and independ contractor a popular conduit for
payoff and competitor often eager wit who can identifi lead to sourc of off
book fund such as custom and rebat practic
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1721
what is the monei flow pattern involv in the suspect transact
trace the flow of fund in the suspect transact is import where doe the monei
come from and where doe it go inform about the sourc of fund can provid lead
as to whether an onbook or offbook scheme is be emploi and the locat of
offbook account expenditur relat to the suspect transact might cover
onbook payment
determin all sourc of fund with the follow question
what good or servic doe the busi provid
who ar it custom or client
what mode of payment is us cash or check
what other sourc of fund ar avail such as rebat from supplier and shipper
or proce of insur claim liquid sale sale of asset and loan
identifi all expenditur associ with the suspect transact with the follow
what disburs ar made to third parti such as commiss sale agent
consult subcontractor supplier and shipper
did the busi have ani extraordinari expens dure the suspect time period such
as extra commiss advertis allow payment made by a manufactur to the
retail custom to assist the custom in meet it advertis expens or inventori
loss
how ar the expens and disburs paid by cash or by check from which
account
doe the busi maintain an account or fund us to pai miscellan expens if
so where is it locat who keep the record and who sign the check or author
payment
how ar travel and entertain expens reimburs from which account
what is the compani polici toward busi gift what gift were given to the suspect
andor recipi how were thei paid for which record ar maintain regard
them
where ar the compani bank account
find out where the busi deposit it receipt thi is quickli determin from the bank
stamp on check deposit from custom identifi all compani account by bank account
number and author signatur
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1722 2011 fraud examin manual
what is the financi condit of the busi
thi data might provid evid of a motiv for the fraud or the fruit thereof
what is the compani recordkeep system
what kind of record doe the compani keep for how long and where ar thei kept who
maintain them
sourc of inform for the busi profil
princip employe and record of suspect busi
peopl suspect of make illeg payment might submit to an interview particularli if
thei ar confid that the payment ar well hidden interview should also includ other
kei employe includ the financi personnel involv in the suspect transact
particularli those who have sinc left the compani us the busi profil as a guid to
question
custom and competitor
in a kickback case the custom agenc is the employ of the person take payoff
and is also the victim of the crime custom and competitor can provid valuabl
inform about the payer busi oper particularli concern the payer regular
bank account which can be identifi through cancel check the custom might also
have invoic and ship document that might lead to offbook fund
bank and lend institut
the businesss banker might have credit applic financi statement loan file and
bank account inform that might help the examin
busi report compani
dun bradstreet and other commerci report compani dissemin basic inform
about the size structur sale and employe of the busi inform about larger
compani is found in standard poor and other busi directori other inform
on public record inform is locat in the sourc of inform chapter in the
investig section of the fraud examin manual
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1723
prove onbook payment
there ar three basic method for conceal onbook payment of bribe andor kickback
thei ar fictiti payabl ghost employe and overbil the follow ar the
examin step for identifi and trace these payment
fictiti disburs scheme
in order to examin onbook payment obtain the follow record from the entiti
suspect of make the illeg payment
bank account inform
all record of payment cancel check wire transfer receipt receipt for the
purchas of cashier check and monei order and withdraw slip
check regist
account statement
sale backup document
purchas order
invoic
document show receipt of good order
account book and record
examin the cash disburs journal and ledger the most import of the abov
inform and often the onli inform need is the bank account inform begin
by examin the check check regist andor the cash disburs journal and pai
particular attent to the follow
payabl and expens charg to the account cust omer on which the illicit payment were made if
the examin suspect that kickback were paid on sale to the abc corpor for
exampl look at the payabl and expens charg to that accountcustom
payment for servic check payment for servic such as sale commiss or
consult fee which do not requir the deliveri of good and need rel littl
document to obtain payment
anomal charg for the busi an exampl of anomal payment can be those
for design fee paid by a compani that is engag in busi that normal would not
requir such servic
the endors on the check thi might be by signatur or more commonli by a stamp
in the name of the busi paye note the ident of the endors some corrupt
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1724 2011 fraud examin manual
recipi have been known to endors such check in their own name
the locat where the check wa negoti if not obviou from the endors identifi
the bank where the deposit wa made by check the depositori bank stamp on the
back of the check the geograph locat of the depositori bank is an import lead
that can connect the check to the suspect recipi determin the depositori bank
ident is critic to obtain the recipi bank account inform
check with a second endors a typic indic of a phoni payabl check is on paid
to and endors by a busi which is then endors by an individu therebi
permit it to be cash or deposit in a person account in similar fashion a check
payabl to a third parti can be sign over to the issuer of the check
cash not deposit check payabl to a busi gener a for deposit onli stamp
appear on the back of deposit check although thi is not alwai the case most
bank have a code stamp that indic whether the check wa cash or not these
code vari and can be obtain from the bank where the check wa negoti
check that fall into an unexplain pattern an exampl of a suspici payabl scheme is
on where check ar drawn onc a month in an amount equal to some percentag of
the sale against which thei ar charg and ar not otherwis explain such a pattern
might indic a kickback scheme if an examin of the check themselv doe not
yield ani clear lead compar the variou record of payment with the backup
document note particularli the follow circumst
the absenc of document the absenc of document to support a particular
payment can includ
no invoic appear in the file for a payment to a supplier or contractor
no receipt to indic that materi paid for were deliv
no consult work product to substanti consult fee paid
discrep discrep between payment inform and backup document
can includ
a check payabl to a supplier in an amount differ than hi invoic
a check payabl to a person or entiti differ than that identifi on the invoic
anomali in support document anomali in the backup document can includ
invoic from sever supplier in differ name that
have the same busi address
ar sign by the same person
return to a post offic box
unnumb or sequenti number invoic an exampl of an invoic scam us invoic
number 101 102 and 103 which ar date 30 dai apart of cours it is highli
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1725
unlik that a legitim busi would refrain from issu invoic in the interim
alter copi of origin can be made for conceal alter of origin
document exampl can includ alter or photocopi of backup paper
locat and other inform on the invoic that tie it to the suspect recipi if the abov
step still do not yield ani suspect payment return to the check regist and cash
disburs journal to look for discrep between the entri and the check or
backup document or their absenc the regist and journal might also indic
the purpos of payment made by wire cashier check or cash
trace procedur
when a suspect payment ha been isol begin the trace process rememb that the
phoni payabl might go directli to the recipi deposit in a shell account or through an
intermediari account person or entiti it might even be convert to cash by the payer and
the cash given to the recipi
in instanc where the ident of the individu recipi is not clear from the face of the
check as in check payabl to a busi entiti do the follow
examin the back of the check note where the check wa deposit and the account
number if avail if the check is not endors the bank will still be abl to locat the
account to which it wa deposit through it own intern record
obtain the record of the account where the check wa deposit the signatur card
and the monthli account statement will show the nomin account holder in the case of
busi account the bank should also have a copi of the corpor resolut or
partnership agreement author the account
if the ident of the individu recipi is still not clear check the public file requir
of busi entiti to determin ownership corpor document articl of
incorpor annual report and some other basic document and limit partnership
might also be file in some jurisdict at the counti level the fictiti name index
busi licens file telephon bill record and even util bill record can also
lead to the ident of the princip
if the origin check is miss or ha been destroi a microfilm copi can be obtain
from the bank on which the check wa drawn the bank where the check wa deposit
will also have a microfilm copi of the check unless the exact date of deposit and the
ident of the depositori bank ar known it will be veri difficult to locat it
payment by wire transfer or cashier check can be trace to the recipi a wire
transfer from an account appear on that account statement as a debit memo often
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1726 2011 fraud examin manual
abbrevi as dm the wire transfer request should show the name of the purchas
the paye and the bank and account number to which the fund were transfer the
sender receiv a copi of thi request and the bank also maintain a copi which is
usual file by date
the bank retain copi of a cashier check will identifi the paye the bank also keep
the negoti check when it is return for payment it will contain the endors
and show where it wa negoti bank usual file cashier check by number make
it necessari to know the approxim date thei were issu to link them to the
purchas look for a cashier check or wire transfer on the date of suspect cash
withdraw check to cash or check to the issu bank rememb that such
instrument can be purchas for cash from ani bank not onli from the bank where the
payer account is locat
if the trail describ abov lead to an intermediari the entir process must be repeat
ghost employe scheme
illicit fund can be gener by funnel phoni salari payment to fictiti or former
employe or by make extra payment to present salari employe who then either
return them to the payer or pass them on to the recipi thi is in addit to ghost
employe scheme us for embezzl describ previous to trace such payment
payrol and employe list personnel file employ applic tax withhold form
and payrol check should be obtain from the suspect payer compani
attempt to identifi the ghost through the follow step
compar a list of all current and former employe from the personnel offic to the
payrol list note discrep determin whether ani employe have fail to execut
tax withhold form or have not elect to receiv ani health benefit or other
option withdraw such as enforc save plan the absenc of such elect is
often an indic that the employe doe not exist
a regular employe normal salari might also be inflat or more commonli travel
and expens reimburs might be pad to gener illicit fund look for unusu
disburs from the account in which such check ar deposit
onc a suspect paycheck ha been identifi determin whether the check wa cash or
deposit note the endors the bank and account where the check wa deposit
determin whether there ar ani second endors that might transfer the check to the
ultim recipi
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1727
overbil scheme
as describ abov illicit fund might be ad to legitim payment for good or servic
provid by actual supplier subcontractor engin and agent with the addit
amount be pass on by the supplier or return to the payer usual in cash for
distribut
obtain the same record requir for trace phoni payablesbank account inform
backup document and account recordsfrom both the origin payer and the
intermediari note the follow indic of suspect payment to the intermediari
notat on invoic or other bill document break out extra or special
charg particularli those that requir no deliveri of good for payment
discrep between the purchas order or invoic amount and the amount of
payment particularli note invoic that appear to have been alter or copi
unusu larg amount appear on particular bill or bill that break a consist
pattern of amount schedul or purpos
disburs from the intermediari might be cover in the same wai as in other on
book scheme such as by mean of phoni payabl direct cash withdraw or
disburs charg to miscellan account such as travel or entertain the
trace process is the same as in ani onbook scheme rememb that the overbil entiti
will usual add it own fee for provid such servic therefor the disburs
come from it account might not be in the same amount as the addit payment made
to it
prove offbook payment
identifi and trace offbook payment is usual more difficult than locat onbook
scheme success gener depend upon identifi the sourc of the fund or account
from which payment can be trace out us an insid wit and focus on the point
of receipt the sourc of offbook fund might be locat by the follow
indirect evid of unrecord sale on the suspect compani book and record
the suspect compani book and record might reflect unusu cost and expens not
associ with the businesss known sale such as rental payment for an undisclos
warehous ship document reflect deliveri to an unlist custom and
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1728 2011 fraud examin manual
commiss paid to sale agent in a region where sale ar not report these indic
possibl unrecord sale
unbalanc ratio of cost to sale
the cost of produc and sell a particular item usual bear some fix relationship to
the revenu it gener a signific imbal in such a ratio such as in a situat where
twice the suppli ar order than ar need to produc the report sale and the extra is
not locat in inventori indic possibl unrecord transact thi techniqu is us
to identifi unreport sale by bar and restaur
investig in the marketplac
custom of the suspect busi whose payment might have been divert to offbook
account might have record includ cancel check which would reflect such sale and
the bank and account to which the fund were deposit custom might also reveal cash
payment that could be us to creat a slush fund addition competitor might be
awar of other custom and transact that could lead to evid of offbook sale
prove payment in cash
the follow techniqu can be us to prove cash payment circumstanti or to
corrobor testimoni of such payment by an insid wit
match evid of cash withdraw or disb ursement by the payer with correspond
deposit expenditur or visit to a safe deposit box by the recipi
look for the purchas of cashier check trav eler check or wire transfer payabl to
the recipi at or shortli after cash withdraw or disburs also look for a
correl between cashgener transact and monei wire or courier servic
which ar sometim us to send cash
if the scheme is ongo consid the us of visual or electron surveil if your a
member of law enforc or try to introduc an undercov agent or implement a
sting oper
unexplain or unusu cash disburs or withdraw particularli from a busi
that doe not normal deal in cash might itself indic illicit transact or
corrobor such testimoni to be effect the examin must identifi and rebut all
legitim explan which usual requir interview the payer
focu the investig on the suspect recipi as discuss below
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1729
examin from the point of receipt
often the onli practic approach to identifi and trace illeg payment is to focu on
the suspect recipi particularli if the person make the payment is unknown on
person is suspect of take from mani the payment ar in cash or from offbook fund
and so on
the financialbehavior profil
the financialbehavior profil is outlin in the trace illicit transact chapter in
the investig section of the fraud examin manual the financi profil will identifi
most illicit fund deposit to account or expend in signific amount it will not reveal
rel small currenc transact particularli if thei were for conceal activ
consum or unusu onetim expens such as medic bill the financi profil
might give inaccur or fals neg read unless such activ ar identifi thi is
done through prepar of the behavior profil dure the interview be alert and review
document for sign that the target ha
a drug andor alcohol addict
a gambl habit
loan shark or other privat debt
a girlfriend or boyfriend support by the target
extraordinari medic expens
signific regular cash expens for entertain andor travel
the behavior profil might also provid evid of a possibl motiv of the crime such
as larg debt as well as addit evid of illicit fund for exampl if the suspect spent
signific amount of cash and had no correspond cash withdraw from disclos
bank account or no admit sourc of cash incom there must be other undisclos
sourc of incom
the suspect recipi
an interview should almost alwai be request with the target us the
financialbehavior profil as a guid pin down the target incom asset and account
if the wit claim to have legitim sourc of larg sum of currenc determin the
follow
what wa the sourc of the cash
what wa the amount of cash on hand at the start point of the investig at the
end of each year thereaft and on the date of the interview
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1730 2011 fraud examin manual
where wa the cash kept
why wa the cash not deposit in a financi institut or invest
who knew about the cash
what record of the cash exist
what were the denomin
when and for what wa ani of the cash spent
will the subject consent to an inventori of the remain cash dure the interview if
not why not if so the cash should be count at least twice in the presenc of anoth
examin a list of serial and seri number should also be made
if the wit testifi that suspect fund were legitim loan proce ask
who wa the lender
when wa the loan made
what wa the amount of the loan
what wa the purpos of the loan
wa the loan repaid
how wa the loan document
also attempt to interview the subject spous separ although on spous gener will
not be requir to testifi against the other spous can be an import sourc of lead
informationif handl carefulli
thirdparti wit
potenti thirdparti sourc includ busi colleagu person associ banker
broker real estat agent account and tax prepar exspous and romant interest
particularli former romant interest subject often boast to their close associ of their
new wealth or entertain them with the fruit thereof casual remark by a subject to a
colleagu and repeat to an examin have undon the suspect even when intens
audit have fail follow the financialbehavior profil format to the extent feasibl of
cours no singl thirdparti wit is like to possess all thi inform but a complet
pictur can be assembl from bit and piec provid by a number of such sourc
trace illicit transact
other techniqu for trace illicit payment can be found in the trace illicit
transact chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin manual
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1731
conflict of interest
conflict of interest scheme gener constitut violat of the legal principl that a
fiduciari agent or employe must act in good faith with full disclosur and in the best
interest of the princip or employ a conflict of interest occur when an employe
manag or execut ha an undisclos econom or person interest in a transact that
advers affect that person employ as with other corrupt fraud conflict scheme
involv the exert of an employe influenc to the detriment of hi compani in briberi
scheme fraudster ar paid to exercis their influenc on behalf of a third parti conflict of
interest case instead involv selfdeal by an employe
if an employe engag in a transact that involv a conflict of interest then the
employe might also have breach hi fiduciari duti to hi employ an agent employe
ow a fiduciari duti duti of loyalti to the princip employ the agent must act sole in
the best interest of the princip and cannot seek to advanc person interest to the
detriment of the princip
breach of fiduciari duti is a civil action that can be us to redress a wide varieti of conduct
that might also constitut fraud commerci briberi and conflict of interest the element
of proof of breach of fiduciari duti ar consider simpler than fraud and do not requir
proof of wrong intent as in conflict of interest the wrongdoer must reimburs the
princip for ani loss and pai over profit earn even if the princip suffer no loss
the vast major of conflict of interest case occur becaus the fraudster ha an undisclos
econom interest in a transact but the fraudster hidden interest is not necessarili
econom in some scenario an employe act in a manner detriment to hi compani in
order to provid a benefit to a friend or rel even though the fraudster receiv no
financi benefit from the transact himself
in order to be classifi as a conflict of interest scheme the employe interest in the
transact must be undisclos the crux of a conflict case is that the fraudster take
advantag of hi employ the victim organ is unawar that it employe ha divid
loyalti if an employ know of the employe interest in a busi deal or negoti
there can be no conflict of interest no matter how favor the arrang is for
the employe
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1732 2011 fraud examin manual
ani briberi scheme we discuss in the previou section could occur as a conflict of
interest the onli differ is the fraudster motiv for instanc if an employe approv
payment on a fraudul invoic submit by a vendor in return for a kickback thi is
briberi if on the other hand an employe approv payment on invoic submit by hi
own compani and if hi ownership is undisclos thi is a conflict of interest
the distinct between the two scheme is obviou in the briberi case the fraudster
approv the invoic in return for a kickback while in a conflict case he approv the invoic
becaus of hi own hidden interest in the vendor asid from the employe motiv for
commit the crime the mechan of the two transact ar practic ident the
same dualiti can be found in bidrig case where an employe influenc the select
of a compani in which he ha a hidden interest instead of influenc the select of a
vendor who ha bribe him
conflict scheme do not alwai simpli mirror briberi scheme though there ar a number
of wai in which an employe can us hi influenc to benefit a compani in which he ha a
hidden interest thi section will discuss some of the more common conflict scheme
purchas scheme
purchas scheme ar veri similar to the bill scheme discuss in the asset
misappropri section so it will be help at thi point to discuss the distinct we have
drawn between tradit bill scheme and purchas scheme that ar conflict of
interest
while it is true that ani time an employe assist in the overbil of hi compani there is
probabl some conflict of interest the employe caus harm to hi employ becaus of a
hidden financi interest in the transact thi doe not necessarili mean that everi fals
bill will be categor as a conflict scheme in order for the scheme to be classifi as a
conflict of interest the employe or a friend or rel of the employe must have some
kind of ownership or employ interest in the vendor that submit the invoic
thi distinct is easi to understand if we look at the natur of the fraud why doe the
fraudster overbil hi employ if he engag in the scheme onli for the cash the scheme is
a fraudul disburs bill scheme if on the other hand he seek to better the
financi condit of hi busi at the expens of hi employ thi is a conflict of
interest in other word the fraudster interest lie with a compani other than hi employ
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1733
when an employe falsifi the invoic of a thirdparti vendor to whom he ha no relat
thi is not a conflict of interest scheme becaus the employe ha no interest in that vendor
the sole purpos of the scheme is to gener a fraudul disburs
on might wonder then why shell compani scheme ar classifi as fraudul
disburs rather than conflict of interest after all the fraudster in a shell compani
scheme own the fictiti compani and therefor must have an interest in it rememb
though that shell compani ar creat for the sole purpos of defraud the employ
the compani is not so much an entiti in the mind of the fraudster as it is a tool in fact a
shell compani is usual littl more than a post offic box and a bank account the fraudster
ha no interest in the shell compani that would caus a divis of loyalti he simpli us the
shell compani to bilk hi employ shell compani scheme ar therefor classifi as fals
bill scheme
a short rule of thumb can be us to distinguish between overbil scheme that ar
classifi as asset misappropri and those that ar conflict of interest if the bill
origin from a real compani in which the fraudster ha an econom or person interest
and if the fraudster interest in the compani is undisclos to the victim compani then the
scheme is a conflict of interest
now that we know what kind of bill scheme ar classifi as conflict of interest the
question is how do these scheme work after our lengthi discuss about distinguish
between conflict and fraudul disburs the answer is somewhat anticlimact the
scheme work the same either wai the mechan of a bill scheme whether conflict or
fraudul disburs do not chang see conflict of interest flowchart
exampl
a purchas superintend de fraud hi employ by purc hase item from a certain
vendor at inflat price the vendor in thi case wa own by the purchas
superintend but establish in hi wife name and run by hi brother the perpetr
interest in the compani wa undisclos the vendor would bui item on the open market
then inflat the price and resel the item to the victim compani the purchas
superintend us hi influenc to ensur that hi employ continu do busi with
the vendor and pai the exorbit price
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1734 2011 fraud examin manual
fraudster also engag in bidrig on behalf of their own compani the method us
to rig bid ar discuss in detail in the briberi section and will not be dealt with in depth
here briefli state an employe of the purchas compani is in a perfect posit to rig
bid if he ha access to the bid of hi competitor sinc he can find out what price other
vendor have bid the fraudster can easili tailor hi own compani bid to win the contract
fraudster also sometim us bid waiver to avoid competit bid outright
exampl
a manag process sever unsubstanti bid waiver in order to direct purchas to a
vendor in which on of hi employe had an interest the conflict wa undisclos and the
scheme cost the victim compani over 150000
in other case a fraudster might ignor hi employ purchas rotat and direct an
inordin number of purchas or contract to hi own compani ani wai in which a
fraudster exert hi influenc to divert busi to a compani in which he ha a hidden
interest is a conflict of interest
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1735
uniqu asset
not all conflict scheme occur in the tradit vendorbuy relationship sometim
scheme involv employe negoti for the purchas of some uniqu typic larg asset
such as land or a build in which the employe had an undisclos interest it is in the
process of these negoti that the fraudster violat hi duti of loyalti to hi employ
becaus he stand to profit from the sale of the asset the employe doe not negoti in
good faith to hi employ he doe not attempt to get the best price possibl the fraudster
will reap a greater financi benefit if the purchas price is high
for exampl an employe in charg of negoti miner leas on land that he secretli
own is obvious in a posit of compromis there will be no financi motiv for thi
employe to negoti a favor leas on behalf of hi employ
turnaround sale
a special kind of purchas scheme sometim us by fraudster is call the turnaround
sale or the flip in thi type of scheme an employe know hi employ is seek to purchas
a certain asset and take advantag of the situat by purchas the asset himself usual in
the name of an accomplic or shell compani the fraudster then turn around and resel
the item to hi employ at an inflat price
exampl
a chief execut offic conspir with a former employe sold an offic build to the
ceo compani what made the transact suspici wa that the build had been
purchas by the former employe on the same dai that it wa resold to the victim compani
and for 12 million less than the price charg to the ceo compani
sale scheme
there ar two princip type of conflict scheme associ with sale of good or servic
by the victim compani the first and most harm is the undersel of good or servic
just as a corrupt employe can caus hi employ to overpai for good or servic sold by a
compani in which he ha a hidden interest so too can he caus the employ to undersel to a
compani in which he maintain a hidden interest
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1736 2011 fraud examin manual
underbil
mani employe who have hidden interest in outsid compani sell good or servic to
these compani at belowmarket price thi result in a diminish profit margin or even a
loss for the victim organ depend upon the size of the discount
exampl
an employe dispos of hi employ real esta te by sell it below fair market valu to a
compani in which he had a hidden interest caus a loss of approxim 500000
write off sale
the other type of sale scheme involv tamper with the book of the victim compani to
decreas or write off the amount ow by the compani in which the employe ha a hidden
interest for instanc after an employe compani purchas good or servic from the
victim organ credit memo mai be issu against the sale caus it to be written off
to contra account such as discount and allow a larg number of revers entri to
sale mai be a sign that fraud is occur in an organ
exampl
a plant manag assist favor client by delai bill on their purchas for up to 60
dai when the receiv on these client account becam delinqu the perpetr
issu credit memo against the sale to delet them the plant manag issu new invoic
on the sale after the old receiv were taken off the book in thi wai the receiv
could be carri indefinit on the book without ever becom past due
other scheme
in other case the perpetr might not write off the scheme but simpli delai bill thi
is sometim done as a favor to a friendli client and is not an outright avoid of the bill
but rather a dilatori tactic the victim organ eventu get paid but lose time valu
on the payment which arriv later than it should
busi divers
a number of employe end up start their own busi which compet directli with
their employ while still emploi by the victim organ these employe might
begin siphon off client for their own busi thi activ clearli violat the
employe duti of loyalti to the employ and frequent violat the compani intern
polici there is noth unscrupul about free competit but while a person act as a
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1737
repres of hi employ it is certainli improp to try to undercut the employ and
take hi client normal standard of busi ethic requir employe to act in the best
interest of their employ
resourc divers
some employe divert the fund and other resourc of their employ to the develop
of their own busi thi kind of scheme involv element of both conflict of interest
and fraudul disburs
exampl
a vice presid of a compani author larg expenditur to develop a uniqu type of
new equip us by a certain contractor anoth firm subsequ took over the
contractor as well as the new equip shortli after that the vice presid retir and
went to work for the firm that had bought out the contractor the fraudster had manag
to us hi employ monei to fund a compani in which he eventu develop an interest
while these scheme ar clearli corrupt scheme the fund ar divert through the us
of a fraudul disburs the monei could be drain from the victim organ
through a check tamper scheme a bill scheme a payrol scheme or an expens
reimburs scheme for a discuss of the method us to gener fraudul
disburs pleas refer to the asset misappropri section
financi interest in compani under perpetr supervis
sometim an employe will have a direct or indirect financi interest in a compani under
hi supervis for exampl account sometim hold stock in a compani thei audit
these problem often occur in govern
financi disclosur
manag ha an oblig to disclos to the sharehold signific fraud commit by
offic execut and other in posit of trust manag doe not have the
respons of disclos uncharg crimin conduct of it offic and execut
howev if and when offic execut or other person in trust posit becom
subject of a crimin indict disclosur is requir
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1738 2011 fraud examin manual
the inadequ disclosur of conflict of interest is among the most seriou of fraud
inadequ disclosur of relatedparti transact is not limit to ani specif industri it
transcend all busi type and relationship
appear of conflict of interest
a final type of conflict of interest is the appear of such exampl includ ownership in a
blind trust in which the employe ha no author to make invest decis or an
extern auditor own a minor interest in a compani that is audit by the auditor firm
such matter ar rare prosecut as crimin offens
detect of conflict of interest
conflict of interest ar probabl on of the most difficult scheme to uncov therefor
no fast and easi detect method exist for thi type of fraud some of the more common
method that can be us ar tip and complaint comparison of vendor address with
employe address review of vendor ownership file review of exit interview
comparison of vendor address to address of subsequ employ polici requir
certain employe to provid the name and employ of immedi famili member and
interview with purchas personnel for favor treatment of on or more vendor
tip and complaint
if a particular vendor is be favor then compet vendor mai file complaint
addition employe complaint about the servic of a favor vendor mai lead to the
discoveri of a conflict of interest
comparison of vendor address with employe address
if nomine or relat parti ar us as owner of vendor then the busi address of the
vendor mai match that of the employe also look for post offic box address for
vendor thi detect method is similar to that us for locat phoni vendor
review of vendor ownership file
when a vendor is select a complet file of the ownership of that vendor should be kept
thi is particularli import for close held busi if the vendor is requir to updat
the file annual then chang in ownership will also be disclos a comput comparison
of the vendor ownership and the employe file mai reveal conflict of interest
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1739
review of exit interview and comparison of vendor address to address of subsequ employ
if a review of an employe exit interview yield the name and address of the subsequ
employ then a simpl comparison of that name and address with the vendor file mai
reveal conflict of interest wherein the employe ha obtain employ from
a contractor
interview of purchas personnel for favor treatment of on or more vendor
employe ar gener the first to observ that a vendor is receiv favor treatment
therefor by ask employe if ani vendor is receiv favor treatment the examin
mai discov conflict of interest that would otherwis have gone unnot anoth
question that mai be ask of employe is whether ani vendor servic or product ha
recent becom substandard
polici requir certain employe to provid the name and employ of immedi famili member
where accept by law a product audit test mai be to requir member of manag
as well as member of the procur depart to provid detail inform
regard the name and employ of all immedi famili member and household
member compar the name and employ of famili member to the current posit
of the employe mai lead to inform that would requir further investig to
determin whether a conflict of interest exist
prevent of conflict of interest
organ should establish polici clearli de fine what constitut a conflict of interest
and prohibit ani such entangl by offic director employe or other agent of
the organ a polici requir employe to complet an annual disclosur statement is
an excel proactiv approach to deal with potenti conflict compar the disclos
name and address with vendor and custom list mai reveal real conflict of interest or
the appear of such furthermor these statement will reinforc in employe the idea
that engag in conflict of interest is unaccept and will result in sever consequ
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1801
theft of intellectu properti
futurist alvin toffler identifi inform as the highest valu commod for the new
millennium he specul that multin corpor secur depart might evolv
into privat armi to protect their compani asset where host countri cannot
the world ha inde becom a more complex and competit place individu corpor
organ have becom more power than some entir nation and the balanc of
econom power ha shift to the corpor within which idea and inform have
becom the most highli prize asset inde with more valu than a compani product
or physic asset
to a consider degre busi administr and societi as a whole have come to
depend on the effici and secur of inform technolog result in inform
acquir a new and distinct valu that cannot be protect in the same wai as
tangibl object
inform exist in mani form and it secur is achiev by implement a process of
risk assess and commensur control to ensur the preserv of
confidenti ensur that inform is access onli to those author to have
access and that thei can onli us it for specifi purpos
integr safeguard the accuraci and complet of inform and process
method and
a vailabl ensur that author user have access to inform and associ
asset when requir
intellectu properti is a catchal phrase it is us here to denot knowledgebas asset
and capit includ inform but extend to idea design and innov
howsoev express or record
thi chapter address the broad issu relat to the vulner and critic of
inform and other intang properti it advoc a mix of procedur logic and
physic protect measur to combat threat pose by oppon who make it their
busi to try to obtain an advantag by illeg or uneth abus intellectu properti
belong to anoth
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1802 2011 fraud examin manual
competit intellig ci versu espionag
histori is us to the practic of intellig or what the duke of wellington describ as
know what wa over the other side of the hill intellig and espionag transfer
from the militari to a civilian set with the return of servic personnel from world war ii
and integr itself with the econom environ through manag educ which
wa focus on strategi and extern influenc
thi approach to intellig wa formal by on of the earli propon of busi
intellig dr gerald albaum who realiz that compani had a need for a more
organ and systemat method for gather process analyz and report
inform about competitor
ci ha been defin as the analyt process that transform disaggreg competitor data
into relev accur and usabl knowledg about competitor posit perform
capabl and intent yet in todai market thi is not enough compani ar face
with three influenc factor custom competitor and chang these forc ar
modifi the face of corpor strategi drive the compani of todai deeper into
unfamiliar and frighten territori to address these fear compani ar now adopt
organ busi intellig system to monitor the environ in which thei do
busi
ci is a legitim busi function that sit comfort alongsid market and research
and develop as well as gener busi strategi and the newer disciplin of knowledg
manag it help busi to anticip a competitor research and develop
strategi determin it oper cost price polici and financi strength as well as it
capac knowledg about competitor is on of the advantag that can enabl compani
to succe and lead the field in their respect market place
ci ha becom a growth industri that is practic by profession train to us
inform in the public domain or to otherwis util legal avail resourc to
compil inform thi inform is then collat process and dissemin into
intellig that is usabl and ha strateg valu gather intellig is not espionag if
the collect effort is done without recours to crimin method or intent ci practition
mostli work within a code of ethic drawn up by the societi for competit intellig
profession scip thi strict code includ the requir that member identifi
themselv dure an inquiri and do not us decept in their quest for such inform
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1803
to the detriment of the reput of fraud examin and ci profession certain privat
investig and inform broker access financi and crimin inform and other
protect data and gener disregard the law govern data protect convers there
ar firm that will us quit aggress techniqu to investig a client organ
oppon while not conform to the scip code of ethic these techniqu ar not
illeg and firm us these method appear to be prepar to stand by their techniqu in a
court of law thei provid a valuabl servic to their toptier client mani of whom do not
believ that all evid of malpractic is reflect sole in book and record
there is therefor a world of differ between competit intellig and espionag
espionag mai be defin as intellig activ direct toward the acquisit of
inform through clandestin mean and proscrib by the law of the countri against which it is
commit it doe not cover legitim intellig collect and analysi us legal mean
espionag can be further subdivid into industri espionag and econom espionag
industri espionag refer to the clandestin collect of inform by compani and
individu such as inform broker about competitor econom espionag refer to
state sponsor or sanction collect which is often associ with a nation foreign
intellig servic
open sourc of inform
open sourc inform is inform in the public domain or data that is legal avail
to anyon spi do not have to penetr corpor secur measur to obtain thi type of
inform it is avail to anyon who want to collect it the term public howev
doe not necessarili mean free mani sourc have access charg that mai be simpl low
cost copi fee or rather substanti databas expens
the divid line between open sourc inform and other target of corpor
intellig such as trade secret is the right to access a member of the public can obtain
open sourc data openli without fear of legal consequ and the provid of the data
desir or ha no object to it releas into the marketplac trade secret ar the exact
opposit no on but the owner ha the right of access and the owner ha no desir to cast
the trade secret freeli upon the marketplac water the take of trade secret without the
owner permiss violat both state and feder law known as econom industri or
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1804 2011 fraud examin manual
corpor espionag theft of trade secret is a form of busi intellig that goe far
beyond open sourc research
most of the inform sought on ani topic accord to intellig profession is
publicli avail estim go as high as 95 percent as to what is discover in the
public sector
there is onli so much that secur profession can do to limit the open sourc
inform that is avail on an organ some form of inform such as
financi statement of publicli trade compani ar legal requir to be publish other
piec of inform such as product descript or job list ar post out of busi
necess corpor secur profession do not oper in a vacuum the need to protect
an organ secret must alwai be ba lanc against the need or duti to publish
inform on of the first thing secur prof ession must do is realiz that thei cannot
protect everyth
with a thorough understand of how ci practition us open sourc inform
howev secur offic can limit their compani vulner to the disclosur of secret
through accid or neglig the knowledg secur profession will identifi kei
inform asset then review the open sourc inform that is avail on the
compani from a spy perspect to see if the safeti of those asset could be endang
the secur profession will also be abl to work with other depart to limit or edit the
inform that is avail on the organ so that no inadvert gift ar made to
potenti intrud final if a theft of inform should occur understand how open
sourc ar us mai help a secur offic track down the perpetr
why do compani resort to corpor espionag
if so much li out there why do peopl pai for industri and corpor spi why do
thei bother with illeg method why do compani not stick to standard research to learn
what thei need about their competitor and why do thei us intellig agent and analyst
instead of routin research the answer to these question is twofold
first even if the intellig gather adher strictli to us onli open sourc mere fact
do not constitut intellig or knowledg collect raw data bring on onli to the
threshold of the process data must then undergo analysi to be turn into a us
product analysi involv summar compar and explain the data the craft of
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1805
intellig li in the abil of the provid to distil mountain of fact from divers
sourc into a concis product that is action by it consum
the term action mean the product must have the depth charact and qualiti on
which an execut mai base sound decis mere know what on competitor ar
up to fall short of the mark good intellig identifi the action an execut should
take to seiz an opportun or to diminish or elimin a threat it is good to know what the
problem is but far better to know how the problem can be solv even though open
sourc ar avail to the gener public organ still util intellig profession
skill to creat action intellig from the mass of public inform
the second reason organ util intellig profession is that the remain five
percent of need inform is proprietari thi last segment often becom critic to
competit surviv and organ or individu ar sometim will to sidestep the
law to obtain it intellig profession know the trick of the trade for gather
sensit proprietari inform that can give their client a competit edg
while legal protect exist for trade secret and other proprietari inform smart
organ do not passiv reli on the threat of civil action or crimin penalti to
protect their inform asset rather thei take affirm step to erect their own
secur barrier around their critic proprietari inform such barrier dramat
increas the cost never mind the legal liabil of obtain protect inform
if a compani or foreign intellig servic must have the trade secret of a target to
complet the inform pictur thei ar formul thei must be will to invest in
mani case thi mean emploi the servic of intellig profession util
experi and train the intellig profession conduct a campaign or mission us
secur method to protect the collect effort prevent legal repercuss for the client
there is a cost factor involv in intellig gather which tend to keep compani and
corpor spi from rush into covert proprietari intellig activ a wise intellig
campaign will util open sourc at least initi as much as possibl onli when the
effort can go no further and busi need dictat acquir addit inform doe
intellig gather enter the proprietari realm
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1806 2011 fraud examin manual
the bootstrap effect
with an understand of the intellig process it becom clear that open sourc plai
two import role thei mai in some case provid all the basic intellig a compani
need a skill intellig analyst us logic and the principl of infer to summar
compar and explain ani miss piec in other word the compani never ha to ventur
on the high sea of espionag it satisfi itself in the safe harbor of open sourc it learn
what it need to know at low cost and by legal mean
but if penetr the proprietari realm becom necessari open sourc inform
provid a bootstrap for the covert effort the more on know about a subject the easier it
is to discov addit inform on that subject open sourc serv as the homework a
corpor spy doe prior to conduct covert oper in hostil territori
as ani filmmak know the more time spent in preproduct which is rel
inexpens the less time and monei will have to be dedic to product which is veri
expens the profession filmmak doe hi homework befor shoot a foot of film
likewis the profession corpor spy doe not just show up at the target factori at 3
am arm with a crowbar clumsili try to break into the facil
instead the effect spy obtain plan on the layout of the target plant in advanc note
what type of alarm system is in place learn about ani secur patrol and then devis an
appropri penetr plan but unlik a common thief the effect spy set that plan
asid and first consid other optionsless blatant mean that mai exist to ferret out the
soughtaft inform the spy understand that inform is a uniqu commod and
the theft of inform can be accomplish in a number of uniqu wai often
inform can be stolen without the target realiz it copi or photograph can provid
access to sensit fact without requir the sourc document or file to ever be remov
from their owner control burglari someth the polic understand and take great interest
in is not alwai the best wai to steal inform
the intellig pyramid
leonard fuld in hi landmark book competitor intellig argu that open sourc exist at
three level form an intellig pyramid at the base of the pyramid ar fundament
intellig techniqu the second level is compos of basic sourc of inform and
the final level is creativ sourc
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1807
fundament research techniqu
the initi level of the intellig pyramid is compos of fundament research
techniqu which includ research articl in magazin journal or newspap and
consult industri guidebook these fundament sourc of inform allow the spy to
build a partial pictur of the target and equal import to develop checklist of the
inform need to fill in the blank space these checklist ar veri import becaus
no intellig effort should proce without precis goal for a spy to be effect he
must know exactli what is sought vagu expedit for inform will produc vagu
result so a shop list becom an absolut must a competit intellig ci
profession mai spend mani hour meet with a client discuss in exact detail the
specif of the mission if the client is not clear on the object clarifi that issu
becom the first order of busi
basic sourc
after establish clearli defin goal the ci profession craft a collect plan in a well
organ intelligencegath plan the ci profession move up the pyramid collect
addit inform while continu to narrow the focu of hi search after exercis
fundament techniqu the second level of the pyramid involv access basic sourc
these sourc includ some that ar alreadi familiar
govern sourc
sec from the edgar databas wwwsecgovedgarhphtm
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1808 2011 fraud examin manual
10k annual report
10q quarterli report
proxi statement
13d major stock acquisit
14d tender offer
state corpor file
corpor registr
ucc file
regulatori file profession licens etc
officerdirector od databas
industri report and studi
industri analyst report
state industri directori
trade and busi magazin
statist sourc exampl standard rate and data servic advertis
trade associ from the encyclopedia of associ and directori in print
provid by gale industri
databas with stori
thomson research httpresearchthomsonibcom 3500 research report ar
ad to thi sourc daili
datatimesful text newspap
govern sourc
sec file
publicli trade compani ar requir to make certain file with the sec these
document can be extrem help to the spy seek to build a financi profil on the
target inform such as annual and quarterli report on publicli trade compani can be
access for free through the sec edgar system at wwwsecgovedgarshtml
through thi avenu the spy can obtain the target form 10k which contain the
compani incom statement and balanc sheet inform on it debt structur foreign
ownership properti own subsidiari industri descript depreci dilut and
other kei busi inform if the target compani ha file for bankruptci been the
target of a sharehold lawsuit or been su for patent infring thi mai also show up
in the 10k most publicli trade compani must also file 10q which ar statement of
quarterli incom earn per share etc ot her form that ar avail from the sec
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1809
includ proxi statement which provid inform on stockhold vote taken on kei
issu and form 13d and 14d which indic major movement in stock ownership that
ar pend
state corpor file
state requir that compani that do busi within their jurisdict regist each year
with the state govern usual through the secretari of state offic thi requir
extend to all compani oper in the state not just those that ar publicli trade
mani secretari of state websit have enhanc search capabl for busi
organ includ search by entiti name and by name of the person list as a
regist agent offic or director of a corpor thi search capabl allow an
intellig analyst to find all the compani within a state in which a person serv as an
offic or as a director a search can help the ci profession develop a famili tree of the
offic busi interest it becom a us tool for uncov lesserknown or hidden
connect between busi the financi strength of a target busi often li in it
affili or subsidiari which rise to the surfac in an officerdirector search
industri report and studi
state and feder govern period issu industri report and studi on variou
industri rang from applianc manufactur to high technolog compani these
studi provid statist benchmark us to establish where a compani stand in it
industri in addit thei help delin the standard for evalu success compani
in that industri state industri directori special industri issu in magazin like fortun
and forb and directori from trade associ serv the same function
industri analyst report
there ar a number of industri analyst report that ci gather us to estim unknown
figur in a target balanc sheet the standard rate and data servic for instanc provid
inform on advertis rate that mai help a spy benchmark the target expenditur on
advertis an indic of the organ financi health for practic ani industri a
statist sourc exist that serv as a power estim tool for ci analyst
industri analyst report from invest firm when properli research and written ar
akin to have a person intellig brief about the target strive for a balanc
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1810 2011 fraud examin manual
present thei aim to tell both the good and the bad about a compani thei often
contrast sharpli with the compani annual report
electron sourc
electron sourc of data ar some of the most power research tool in the intellig
analyst arsen these resourc which includ cdrom and onlin databas contain
compil of data on bankruptci new busi file telephon directori ucc
file crimin record corpor data and mani other type of inform if on
includ the mani local region and nation newspap avail electron the
research capabl of on intellig analyst sit at hi comput ar truli stagger
larg public or univers librari frequent provid free network access to newspap
magazin and other journalist sourc more inform about electron sourc is
contain in the access inform onlin chapter in the investig section of the
fraud examin manual
multipli effect
analyt softwar produc a multipli effect when process case inform thei
gener output greater than the individu input of inform fact a b c and d
stand by themselv mai offer minim insight but when combin and organ those
fact can gener an understand of what is realli go on in an organ the
analyst notebook by i2 for exampl is popular among polic intellig analyst
becaus it can track pattern and linkag from larg databas further inform about
these type of product is contain in the data analysi and report tool chapter in
the investig section of the fraud examin manual
the function perform by analyt softwar program can easili be translat to busi
intellig need uncov pattern relat to corpor file od search patent and
trademark applic and other divers compil of data that when piec togeth
can indic the potenti direct in which a competitor is head for exampl some
softwar program can be design to cross check patent author extract from a patent
databas against an officerdirector search to show the compani for which kei scientist
serv as director the softwar also gener visual displai of the relationship between
the compani all of thi make the corpor spy task of unearth hidden relationship
and confidenti fact easier
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1811
creativ sourc
the final step in the open sourc intellig pyramid is the us of creativ sourc leonard
fuld list the follow type of inform as exampl of creativ sourc classifi ad
environment impact statement close examin of ucc file proxi and the
build of financi statement
classifi ad
employ advertis in particular can provid valuabl inform about the job
skill that a target compani need and the number of employe it is seek to hire thi
can help a spy infer what kind of new project ar be develop within a compani or
where personnel resourc ar be devot largescal hire could indic that a
competitor ha sign or expect to sign a larg contract in some case employ ad
also point out defect of kei personnel
employ ad also give a spy an indic of what the target compani pai it
employe thi could be valuabl for the spy employ in recruit battl for covet
personnel it could also help the spy identifi employe who mai be suscept to
recruit tactic becaus of low pai or a high rate of employe dissatisfact as
evidenc by a high rate of turnov in a particular depart
environment impact statement
environment impact statement contain larg amount of histor financi and
oper inform the compani file the statement not onli ha to suppli thi
background data on itself but it also ha to explain it propos project in detail those
detail on emiss hazard materi us and possibl accid stem from
oper provid a wealth of fact for analysi by an expert from such analysi a ci
profession can develop an excel pictur on the size and oper capabl of a plant
or compani veri often thi kind of inform can allow on competitor to establish
the date oper will begin at a target plant
ucc file
ucc file in addit to financi data previous discuss provid oper detail by
describ equip and materi that have been purchas or pledg for a loan
sometim previous unknown asset and ti to other busi will be list in the
file ucc file ar made at the counti level or with the secretari of state depend on
the natur of the collater provid as secur in a financ agreement savvi intellig
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1812 2011 fraud examin manual
profession review these document with a finetooth comb for tidbit of inform
that can help them gain an understand of a target busi transact
proxi
develop proxiespeopl who work with the target on a daytodai basishelp ci
profession color in mani necessari detail supplier in particular can be a rich sourc of
insid inform about a target busi supplier spend signific time and resourc
to learn about their custom thei know what a custom order when thei place order
how much thei spend how long thei take to pai their bill and what the busi cycl of
the custom industri is interview with these person can be an invalu sourc of
inform for a corpor spy
pose as a custom
if a spy cannot cultiv or bribe kei employe of a supplier he mai pose as a custom
himself he can exploit the two fundament axiom of corpor espionag 1 all
salespeopl want to make a sale and 2 all salespeopl will do almost anyth to make a
sale includ talk their head off about what theyv done for other custom
in a prospect sale meet the spy arm with busi card and even a brochur
about hi compani convei that he work for a prosper busi he can even pick a
legitim busi with a good db rate and pose as it employe dure the cours of
the meet he can ask what the supplier ha done for other custom he will casual
mention that he ha a friend who work for the target compani how well ha the supplier
serv that busi as an addit enticemen t the spy can place on the tabl impress
look spreadsheet show financi data and product run level and ask if the target
level of busi match these figur the spy tell the salesperson that he just want to see
if the supplier ha the experi necessari to handl hi busi
build financi statement
the on piec of inform desir univers by consum of intellig is the financi
statement at time the balanc sheet becom the holi grail a magic kei that open all
sort of door to understand a busi spi can of cours steal balanc sheet and
other financi document but often the theft is not worth the risk larg publicli own
compani ar requir by law to publish their financi statement thi inform is
freeli avail on the sec edgar databas even larg privat own compani
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1813
frequent leav enough of a paper trail in the public sector that figur out their financi
postur is not terribl difficult more difficulti gener aris when the ci profession
seek to build a financi profil of privat small and mediums compani the financ
in these compani ar usual held close to the vest get in proxim to kei financi
document mai be riski given that a limit number of peopl in these compani have
access
a much safer approach li in estim the balanc sheet with research method everi
good ci specialist know how to perform thi procedur the techniqu form a central tool
in the intellig profession arsen the process by which balanc sheet ar estim
afford an insid look at the open sourc process us by ci profession
it is import to rememb that the financi statement that the ci profession build ar
noth more than estim of a target fi nancial statu confirm those estim by
gather further intellig is an option but the process begin as a refin educ
guess while onli a guess a wellcalcul estim mai provid all the inform need
by the client and thi method involv a consider lower degre of risk than outright
theft of the soughtaft inform
the ci specialist must alwai be awar that financi statement tell onli part of the stori
about a compani he know to evalu them in the light of other inform such as the
histori of the busi the condit of it market technolog develop and the
condit of it supplier quit frankli estim work best when done on manufactur
compani the input and output of a manufactur firm ar easier to spot track and
measur than with servic compani servic compani howev can be compar to
other similar busi by size locat and number of employe if the financi of the
similar compani ar known then an educ infer can be made about the target
financi statement for the purpos of the discuss in thi section and in order to best
illustr the method us by intellig profession the hypothet target will be a
manufactur compani
how incom statement ar calcul
to build the financi of a manufactur firm spi first calcul the incom statement
thei break down an incom statement into three compon 1 revenu 2 cost of good
sold and 3 overhead
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1814 2011 fraud examin manual
revenu estim
revenu estim can come from state air pollut control permit applic hazard
materi permit applic articl in the local press about sale volum state industri
directori or by indirect method on of the most common indirect method for
estim revenu is to count truck activ at a site both receiv and ship over a
given period of time know the ship dimens and retail cost of the compani
product a spy can estim what each truck hold the same goe for railcar and ship or
barg talk to truck driver railroad personnel and longshoremen can also fill in detail
on the size of outgo load and their frequenc in the servic industri revenu estim
ar frequent made by conduct interview with supplier custom or employe of the
target pretext call and social engin might also be us to trick employe into
divulg kei financi inform
cost of good sold
labor cost can be deriv by a spy from wage list in newspap classifi ad and from
wage survei at the local chamber of commerc the state workforc commiss will also
have wage survei for certain occup the number of employe for the target can be
gather from osha occup safeti and health administr record and by
count car in the park lot for each shift
determin indirect labor cost can be accomplish in sever wai the best method is to
consult statist manual for the target ind ustri which give the respect percentag of
direct and indirect labor cost in addit estim the number of manageri and
profession worker enter the plant will suppli a guidelin spi look for clue such as
the type of car that employe drive a saab or a pickup truck the cloth thei wear a
suit or overal and the item thei carri to work briefcas and laptop or lunchbox
the chamber of commerc mai also be abl to suppli the number of salari personnel at
a plant
the type and amount of raw materi us at a plant mai be avail from the state air
pollut control board or the local fire depart hazard materi unit surveil
of truck deliveri to the site is anoth sourc the cost of materi is avail from
supplier or their catalog
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1815
overhead
overhead cost such as advertis deriv from manual discuss earlier such as the
standard rate and data servic calcul util cost is as simpl as call the local
electr ga or water compani while a util compani mai not reveal what the target
consum directli it will disclos what an averag compani of that size in that industri
purchas annual newspap ad and real estat broker serv as sourc on the cost of
leas plant facil the local tax assessor can suppli the valu of properti own by the
target mortgag inform will be avail from real estat record at the counti clerk
offic
debt of the target busi emerg from research ucc file bond rate manual
state econom commiss record if the target is big enough and from the state secur
board file of privat place prospectus
how balanc sheet ar calcul
from these variou sourc a competit intellig analyst can compil a preliminari
incom statement the element of a balanc sheet deriv from the incom statement with
the help of financi tool such as db industri norm and kei busi ratio the
process of deriv the balanc sheet begin by take a known figur for instanc sale
and look up the ratio for the target industri between sale and net worth the
intellig profession simpli need to do some simpl algebra divid the sale figur by
the ratio to deriv the unknown which is the net worth
a similar procedur work for other standard ratio the rule of thumb is that if a person
know the annual sale the line of busi lob the number of employe and how long
a compani ha been in busi then that person will be abl to creat a reason balanc
sheet estim an analyst will compar the estim against known or publish balanc
sheet of similar size compani in the same lob to check accuraci consult expert on
the industri bank loan offic invest analyst provid further confirm
nontradit sourc
a spy or intellig analyst bolster data develop from public record and estim
financi statement by access lesserknown sourc histor archiv center like the
center for american histori at the univers of texa at austin have larg collect of
old telephon directori industri and corpor directori and busi refer work
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1816 2011 fraud examin manual
these materi enabl a research to trace the histori of a busi or a person
associ with that busi thei also serv to track the growth of a busi over time
chang in yellow page list in telephon number and in statist in state
manufactur directori can be chart to show longterm trend for the busi these
archiv also document where a person serv as an offic as a kei employe or ran their
own busi
thomson gale a publish of mani fine refer book ha two work of primari interest
to ci specialist directori in print ha over 16000 entri for everi kind of directori
imagin includ busi and industri directori profession and scientif roster
foreign directori and other list and guid ani good ci specialist know that a good
trade directori save valuabl research time in addit most directori gener run ad
from supplier to the industri so the industri directori serv as an inform refer book
for locat supplier these directori ar also a strong wai to do background research on
an industri and to learn the buzzword and kei concept govern that busi after
review the directori a spy will be abl to talk like an insid
thomson gale also produc the encyclopedia of associ in region nation and
intern edit from these work a ci specialist can locat expert and resourc in
almost ani busi field or manufactur line contact expert for interview by
telephon is a fast inexpens wai to confirm estim and research find from open
sourc the encyclopedia also list annual meet of organ and their kei offic it
serv as a sourc to identifi expert their trade show and relat seminar savvi ci
profession will touch base with profession prior to an annual meet or seminar thei
strike up a profession relationship in advanc so when thei meet at the convent thei
ar in a posit to comfort chat with target profession and draw out kei
inform virtual everi text on competit intellig mention attend trade show
but few mention do the necessari homework befor attend good spi do their
homework on whom to contact by us thomson gale or similar sourc as a start
point
infotrac
spi also do their homework by us infotrac a larg famili of databas from gale
research on thing about these databas that make them especi attract to spi is
that most librari have them avail inhous usual on a cdrom network for us at
no charg sinc thei index abstract and provid full text on hundr of public the
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1817
competit intellig research essenti ha a multitud of field agent work for
them keep in mind the estim that 95 percent of need inform li in the public
domain infotrac databas form a good middl tier sourc the inform that infotrac
commonli provid includ
number of employe
manufactur capac
product line
level of expertis within the compani
market
market posit
kei product
internet particip
product detail
competit advantag
a closer look at databas
there ar three tier of electron databas 1 the internet 2 infotrac databas and
refer work like the million dollar directori on cdrom and 3 commerci
databas such as dialog profound lexisnexi and db dun bradstreet
electron databas
first tier
exampl
the internet
advantag
quick easi to us usual free
disadvantag
chaotic organ inform
not alwai current or reliabl
second tier
exampl
infotrac
million dollar directori
acl
advantag
fairli easi to us avail at larg
public librari usual free access
inform reason reliabl
disadvantag
expens subscript rate so
not alwai practic as an inhous
sourc for secur unit
third tier
exampl
dialog
lexisnexi
db
profound
advantag
most us power search engin
or have vast databas capabl of
highli refin conceptu search
disadvantag
can be veri expens for
intellig and secur unit
howev these databas
repres an emerg tool for the
futur
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1818 2011 fraud examin manual
first tier databas
competit intellig involv more than just surf the net of cours ani ci
specialist will be well acquaint with web search engin like googl yahoo lyco
altavista metacrawl and northern light these engin ar us for locat the
highlight on the internet howev with url constantli chang and the qualiti and
depth of data on the internet be highli variabl the internet is just a first step for ci
work
second tier databas
as indic abov more indepth cleaner and better organ data li in middl tier
databas such as infotrac while hypertext link on the web afford the user the abil to
establish hi own pathwai through inform thi mode of search often lead to
haphazard lengthi and even chaotic journei middl tier databas provid wellorgan
carefulli index data that take less time to search and carri a greater inform
punch becaus intellig frequent ha a short halflif time can be a veri critic factor
for intellig specialist the more quickli a search is complet the more valuabl is the
inform obtain
third tier databas
competit intellig campaign frequent oper under a short time frame find out
if a competitor is about to expand product for instanc mai onli be valuabl if the spy
learn in time for hi employ to beat that rival to the punch becaus time is frequent a
critic factor in an intellig campaign analyst tend to us the third tier of databas as a
central tool those emploi the most sophist search technolog includ dialog
choicepoint db and lexisnexi these databas ar gener abl to provid more
us inform in less time than lower tier altern
newsgroup
spi also util search engin specif gear to scan newsgroup on the internet
these site can contain immens amount of intellig inform when peopl start
chat on the internet thei frequent reveal a great deal about what thei ar work on
exampl of thi type of search engin includ googl wwwgooglecom and supernew
wwwsupernewscom
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1819
db and lexisnexi
db and lexisnexiss busi and market databas emploi convent search
technolog that both fall in the upper tier due to their vast a start point for
research almost ani busi is a db report if the report is lack there is probabl
not much out there on that compani with million of record these databas ar us in
develop histori and background on compani and offic lexisnexi ha so mani
period and transcript on it databas that it is on of the best commerci intellig
databas in the world
i2
as previous mention i2 also figur into the databas equat it can perform pattern
develop function similar to other toplevel databas the trend of do more with
open sourc and squeez addit inform out of them is grow rapidli in the ci
commun the multipli effect discuss earlier is clearli at work inform organ
and crossreferenc intern gener knowledg that can help a client make a decis or
that can support and enhanc further intellig effort
competit intellig websit
in addit to the tool discuss abov ci profession can util a number of websit
that provid free inform about how to conduct busi intellig oper mani
of these site will take a visitor stepbystep through intellig techniqu and strategi
a corpor spy us open sourc what of it
a corpor spy us some or all of the follow open sourc of inform
1 public record regulatori civil crimin
2 annual report
3 telephon directori intern and extern
4 analyst report
5 new account
6 magazin articl
7 construct balanc sheet
8 refer book
9 biograph sourc
10 visual sight and surveil
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1820 2011 fraud examin manual
11 electron databas and cdrom
12 internetweb
all of these materi blend togeth to develop actual action intellig in the
altern thei act as a springboard for gain addit data the question is if all thi
data is out there by default what can a compani do about it
certainli a compani can educ it employe to be care about what thei sai in public
put into print or place on the internet secur train mai also teach them to recogn
pretext telephon call design to obtain insid inform it mai also be benefici to
train employe on how spi us open sourc to gather competit intellig on a
busi employe can be taught not to divulg proprietari data and to think befor thei
speak
the realiti howev is that compani must oper in an open societi not a polic state
the free exchang of idea and inform will be absolut essenti to 21st centuri
commerc the first step in protect sensit corpor inform is to realiz that a
secur manag a secur investig or an intern auditor cannot protect everyth in
the word of john keegan the note militari historian to defend everyth is to
defend noth
a secur profession must identifi the kei piec of intellectu properti belong to the
compani those item whose compromis could caus grave harm to the busi requir
utmost protect know the tool and path in the open sourc sector a spy could us to
cut a swath to thi critic data will be essenti if the secur profession is to effect
protect it from a secur perspect an investig should try to exploit the avail
open sourc himself to see if an avenu of attack can be complet if so the secur
profession can institut countermeasur befor a loss occur
if an inform loss doe occur a secur investig or auditor can attempt to
reconstruct a trail back to a possibl spy with a sound knowledg of open sourc techniqu
favorit target
some of the favorit target of intellig gather includ research and develop
market manufactur and product and human resourc
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1821
research and develop
on would think that research and develop rd would be the most heavili guard
depart in a compani but access to rd inform is surprisingli easi rd
personnel ar almost alwai in the flow of inform the open exchang of inform
is part of the natur of their job thei particip in confer attend trade show and
work with academ institut howev at each of these function thei leav themselv
open for intellig spi to listen mingl and ask question
research who publish their find in industri journal mai inadvert includ detail
of a project on which thei mai be work thi is particularli true in the case of academ
profession who mai be hire by a compani to perform research or conduct a studi more
than on compani ha been surpris to learn that the result of a supposedli confidenti
studi were publish in an academ journal if an academician is hire to conduct research
make sure that he understand that the result ar to be kept confidenti also make sure
that the us of teach assist or graduat student is kept to a minimum and that those
individu understand the confidenti requir
market
insight into a compani market plan is a valuabl gift to a competitor be careless
with vital inform such as test market result promot strategi and plan
introduct date can be disastr
manufactur and product
product manag ar often good sourc of inform also almost anyon answer
the phone on the plant floor can unwittingli provid valuabl inform to a crafti caller
from a competitor
human resourc
intellig profession often pai close attent to help want ad job post and job
announc more omin thei mai us thi inform to arrang a job interview
to get inform about the firm and what the job will entail
although the depart list abov ar some of the favor target of inform
thiev other personnel in an organ can provid enorm amount of us
inform for instanc salespeopl like to talk and ar an excel sourc of inform
on price product innov and market program purchas agent ar help in
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1822 2011 fraud examin manual
divulg supplier inform about what is sell and the cost of raw materi and
servic
how inform is lost
inform thiev util a wide varieti of methodssom legal some notto gain access
to an organ busi secret there ar seven common wai for inform to fall
into the wrong hand thei ar
accid
poor inform secur procedur
recruit spi
decept techniqu
physic penetr of the compani
surveil
comput system penetr
accid
accident loss of inform ar fairli common and occur in a number of wai
public such as newslett or report to sharehold that ar print by a compani
can inadvert provid valuabl inform to it competitor also speech or paper
that ar present at confer ar a danger point organ should implement a
system of review wherebi technic andor secur staff review in advanc all work up for
public or present anoth common sourc of accident leak is the press
execut eager to brag about their compani often reveal more than thei should about
research new product sale level and so on
a compani websit mai also be a sourc of accident leak corpor spi frequent
visit the websit of their target to gather inform that these compani have
unknowingli assembl for them inform such as employe telephon and email
directori financi inform biograph data on kei employe product featur and
releas date detail on research and develop and job post can all be found on
mani corpor websit in some case thi inform give an inform thief direct
access to compani secret in other instanc it help the spy build a profil of hi target that
will be the basi of an intellig campaign busi should pai attent to the
inform that is place on their websit and in other market materi as a gener
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1823
rule of thumb anyth that doe not forward the market mission of an organ
should be remov
poor inform secur procedur
compani that do not have a system in place for protect and dispos of confidenti
inform leav themselv wide open to attack by corpor spi an inform thief
will gener attack on or more of the follow area manual system hardcopi
document computerbas system electron file or personnel peopl emploi by a
compani or associ of the busi below ar a number of techniqu that compani
should implement to protect manual and electron inform
onsit materi that ar target
spi attempt to gather manual system inform by gain surreptiti access to a
target premis common method includ pose as a temporari employe as a vendor
or as a visitor on a plant tour materi that these spi gener target includ the
follow
archiv financi sale data market
in print form
store on comput media
draft document formal document and intern correspond ly on desk
scrap paper in wastepap basket and by copi machin
minut of meet
legal and regulatori file
comput printout
travel document and receipt
patent document
pend lawsuit
paper pertain to merger and acquisit
licens and franchis agreement
special manag report
audit of internet access
bill for databas access
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1824 2011 fraud examin manual
archiv
archiv provid a view of the target perform over time thei offer an excel
sourc for trend analysi even if a visitor on a plant tour is not abl to handl document
he can note their locat and avail for a later penetr
draft document
draft document intern correspond and result formal document mai reveal the
evolut of product design and market plan within a compani
scrap paper
paper thrown awai often contain valuabl inform about preliminari plan and report
hacker dumpster dive for thi sort of inform all the time often in the form of
manual technic specif and instruct these discard document can provid a
road map to penetr comput system thei can also provid insight into evolv
product or busi plan of a target
minut of meet
record of highlevel meet can provid kei insight on corpor strategi invest
polici product develop plan market plan and other crucial inform about a
businesss direct thei can also help the spy identifi kei employe possibl even those
who ar unhappi with the current direct of their own compani or career and who
therefor might be potenti recruit as spi
legal document and regulatori file
legal document rang from trade secret to pe nding litig to summari of regulatori
problem the compani face pend lawsuit often detail problem with the compani
product servic or oper
paper pertain to merger and acquisit have obviou commerci valu the same
goe for licens and franchis agreement special manag report document myriad
challeng the target face for exampl a report mai examin what is wrong with the
compani inventori control system or that the base of part supplier is inadequ
audit of internet access and bill for databas access
audit report on internet access usual from a proxi server log can tell a spy what topic
and site a compani research and which employe ar do it bill for databas
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1825
access of servic like db dialog or lexisn exi reveal compani the target is check
out and do busi with plu topic theyr investig
in addit these audit report often reveal if employe ar steal comput resourc for
their own person end undetect activ over a period of time indic a lack of secur
oversight these employe mai be candid for recruit as insid spi
guard manual system
manual system ar all humanread file and document these includ commonli
overlook item like rolodex and calendar attack on these system rang from pilfer
trash to infiltr a compani in the guis of a clean crew or vendor to outright theft or
burglari reason measur to protect document includ the follow
1 place sensit document in high grade lock file cabinet it might also be
advis to lock sensit document in a safe when not in us and at the end of the dai
lock or safe should be abl to withstand a physic attack of at least on to two hour
2 us a shredder for sensit documentari wast in the altern organ
mai opt to have sensit trash dispos of by a bond wastedispos compani if so
the trash should be secur store until it is collect by that compani
3 receiv and send mail at a secur site option includ mail drop post offic box
or lock mailbox the kei is that the site remain secur
4 provid reason perimet secur for offic us an alarm system add secur
lock to door and window or emploi both
5 pai attent to secur auxiliari materi such as
calendar thei mai note kei event in a sensit matter
special intern telephon directori
notebook and expens log from sensit case
work in progress such as report note and graphic on sensit case
mail list all such list that have proprietari valu should have trap name
place on them as a safeguard a trap name is a fictiti on with an address
that the organ control if mail is ever deliv to the trap name it will be
appar that the list ha been compromis furthermor the natur of the mail
will probabl indic who bought the list and mai help the victim determin where
the secur breach occur
index card and rolodex if thei contain sensit inform
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1826 2011 fraud examin manual
blackboard as well as diagram and chart on easel pad if thei cannot be easili
lock up take a polaroid photo of them and then eras the origin secur these
photograph
computerpap carbon and write tablet that have impress from note on
sensit topic shred them everi dai
comput printout of sensit data keep them lock up and us a shredder to
dispos of them
organ concern about the possibl of corpor espionag should establish
procedur for classifi and mark sensit item and should have provis for their
shortterm and longterm storag as well as their dispos or destruct larg offic
should have a structur logout procedur for sensit file so it is alwai possibl to
determin who had what document as well as where and when thei had it
guard inform store in electron format
electron data present secur problem that do not exist with manual document a
small highdens 12 mb comput disk can hold the equival of more than two regular
size novel cd usb flash drive and other electron storag devic can hold even more
with a singl cd a spy can walk out of a build with thousand of sensit file tuck
into hi shirt pocket furthermor it is fairli quick and simpl to copi even larg file from a
hard drive to a cd or thumb drive employe seek to remov sensit data can even e
mail it to an extern address so that thei never have to physic carri secret inform
out of the premis
sinc cd flash drive and other electron storag devic have extrem portabl
organ must take rigid measur to protect them and prevent unauthor copi of
sensit file onto them the follow guidelin will help organ maintain control
over data store on electron media
write sensit data file to portabl disk back them up with anoth disk lock up
origin onsit and secur store backup offsit furthermor secur storag area
should blend into their surround as much as possibl in order to make the
inform thief job that much more difficult
label sensit magnet media thi should includ both an extern label and an
intern electron label design the file classif the label command in the
properti section of window can do thi
guard against accident erasur file should be set so that accident erasur
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1827
cannot occur thi will also prohibit a techniqu us by some corpor spi wherebi a
sensit disk is delet then the disk which appear to be blank is taken offsit onc
offsit the target file ar undelet
emploi password secur on sensit file mani word processor can place
password protect on file combin with other secur measur thi provid a
fairli good perimet of secur for file softwar that encrypt entir file can also be
purchas
have a consist backup procedur for all file backup sensit file onto disk
design and label for that purpos
do not leav disk contain sensit file unattend or unsecur in larg
offic requir author user of classifi disk to sign them in and out from a
design librarian
scan outgo disk to ensur thei have no delet but recover sensit file
if a disk doe contain such file reformat the disk and then write the nonsensit file
onto the disk
befor dispos of disk cut them up for damag disk contain highli
sensit file it mai be advis to us a degauss on the disk first a degauss
remov all data from the disk so it content cannot be retriev even by undelet
program
organ should also make sure that sensit file ar not kept on hard drive in
addit employe should be train to not leav comput unattend if thei have
sensit inform on them befor employe go to lunch or on break thei should be
requir to place their comput in a secur state
to prevent spi from find valuabl inform in the organ trash sensit
comput printout should be shred and mix with nonsensit shred document
befor dispos
access to sensit inform must be limit to a needtoknow basi organ
should maintain a system such as a supervis access log that enabl secur to track the
inform that each person ha handl if sensit inform is to be transmit over
a modem the file should be encrypt not just passwordprotect although employe
might appreci the conveni thei should not be allow to dial into compani
comput that contain sensit inform from their home ani system contain
sensit inform should be isol
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1828 2011 fraud examin manual
basic principl of spy
recruit spi
in order to obtain insid inform on a target compani a spy will frequent try to
recruit an exist employe of that compani to act as hi agent on the insid an employe
recruit to spy against hi employ is known as a mole the mole agre to betrai the trust
of hi employ by hand over confidenti inform that belong to hi organ
the three most common recruit method ar fals flag recruit recruit by
justif and trap
fals flag recruit
fals flag recruit is among the most common recruit ploi if a spy discov that a
subject ha strong social or polit feel he attempt to twist those feel into an
appeal to help the caus the spy convinc the recruit that provid inform will
help save the environment condit in the amazon will further the interest of the
recruit nativ countri or will provid some ot her worthwhil benefit of cours the actual
intellig product is us for corpor espionag not to help the caus but the recruit
doe not learn that until it too late
anoth method that can be us to gain inform from a recruit is romant or sexual
seduct thi is not as common as the us of social or polit caus as a justif for
misappropri compani secret but it doe happen the spy or an oper doe not
necessarili trade sexual favor for compani secret often all that is need is for an
oper of the opposit sex to show some interest in the subject
recruit by justif
if a spy understand basic psycholog he mai be abl to convinc a recruit that spy is not
amor or immor in hi circumst when recruit by justif the spy look for a
person who think of himself as a victim an employe who is bitter at have been pass
over for a promot for exampl provid an excel prospect for a recruit other typic
target includ employe who feel thei have been underpaid or unrecogn by their
employ and who harbor a great deal of resent becaus of it under the right
condit these employe mai agre with a spy that the time is ripe for them to look after
themselv
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1829
trap recruit
in order to trap an employe of the target so that he is essenti forc to spy on hi
compani the recruit spy will look for some sort of weak in the potenti recruit
common exampl includ excess gambl drug or alcohol abus social unaccept
sexual procliv past crimin convict and wild spend habit
onc a weak ha been identifi in on of the target employe the recruit spy will
do on of two thing if the recruit ha some sort of chemic depend or seriou
financi problem the recruit spy will typic financ the recruit weak to the extent
that the recruit becom depend on the spy favor if the recruit ha someth
embarrass in hi past such as a crimin record the spy will more like blackmail the
recruit to forc her to cooper in most situat the recruit start as a friend help
the target meet hi need but later turn to blackmail to keep the recruit in line
regardless of the method by which an employe is recruit onc that recruit ha stolen or
divulg a secret piec of inform the spy can easili keep that person in line and forc
them to continu spy if the recruit tri to back out the spy simpli threaten to turn the
recruit in to hi employ or the polic the threat of lose hi job or possibl crimin
prosecut is usual suffici to keep an otherwis hesit recruit on a tight leash
counterrecruit train
compromis a person credibl and integr requir a seri of move that ar
gener plai out over a fairli extend period of time the method spi us to turn an
employe can be veri complex and can occur in a multitud of situat no secur offic
can see far enough ahead to forestal everi potenti compromis it is therefor imper
to train employe to report ani suspect recruit effort made against them as earli as
possibl the import of thi statement cannot be overestim kei employe should
be made awar of the most common recruit techniqu which were describ abov
in particular thei should be train to be wari of peopl who
encourag and financ some vice of the employe
express a great deal of sympathi for a caus that is import to the employe
offer to help with a seriou financi problem
attempt to seduc the employe
attempt to blackmail the employe
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1830 2011 fraud examin manual
obvious some of these techniqu involv ve ry person matter that the typic employe
will not feel comfort discuss with their compani that is precis why spi us these
avenu to attack recruit no amount of train will convinc everi employe to bring their
dark secret out into the light but by make employe awar of the wai in which spi
oper an organ mai be abl to help it employe resist their initi overtur thi
sort of train prepar employe to recogn a recruit campaign befor it ha
advanc to the stage at which the employe can no longer back out
after recruit
onc on board the mole receiv train on gather intellig safe and product
thi is not mere an afterthought the success of the mission depend upon it recruit ar
taught what inform thei should target how to collect data safe how to follow secur
procedur how to plant bug and other techniqu that will help them effect extract
inform from the target
target inform
recruit ar typic instruct to provid a specif piec or categori of inform rather
than be allow to indiscrimin retriev whatev secret inform thei happen to
come in contact with the reason is that most recruit lack the technic expertis to identifi
truli import intellig data furthermor most recruit ar not sophist
intelligencegather so the more inform thei attempt to retriev the more like it is
that thei will be detect therefor the control the spy who recruit the mole and direct
her activ typic assign the recruit a narrowli defin inform goal if the mole
successfulli complet thi task her object might be expand to includ other item
method for safe collect data
in order to reduc the likelihood of an intellig campaign be compromis a spy will
gener provid the recruit with some train or instruct on how to safe collect
inform for instanc when a spy target sensit document she gener doe not
steal those document outright it is more effect to copi the document if possibl the
spy still get the inform she need and the victim doe not know that it secret have
been compromis if classifi document were to go miss thi could alert the victim to
the presenc of a spy and caus it to tighten it secur control
most spi do not try to remov comput media with sensit secur label from the site
instead thei copi file from label media onto plain unmark disk or small portabl
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1831
drive that will not attract attent from secur personnel rather than carri sensit
inform off the premis thei might opt to email the file out to a neutral rel
anonym email address
on of a spy main goal is to keep a low profil there ar a number of red flag that
corpor secur might look for if espionag is suspect and an effect spy will try to
avoid exhibit ani of these characterist for exampl a person who consist show
up at work earli or stai late mai make peopl suspici particularli if that individu ha
not in the past work long hour while it mai seem like the best time to steal sensit
inform ar befor or after hour thi activ might actual tip off the victim
in gener recruit ar told not to stand out and to avoid be label as a problem
employe if an investig commenc as a result of ani secur leak the recruit want
to be far down the list of potenti suspect recruit ar also instruct to keep their mouth
shut obvious thei should not discuss their covert activ with anyon els final
recruit ar told to spend their extra incom from spy gradual and in a lowkei manner
the goal is to avoid attract attent
commun between the employe and the control
on of the major rule for an employeespi is that she should not make direct contact with
her control instead the spy and control will typic commun via a system of signal a
chalk mark in a public place an innocu email to a secur address an innoc note left
on a bulletin board graffiti on a wall or a mundan newspap ad when email is us to
transfer document it is usual sent to untrac address or emploi intermediari
known as cutout
when spi must make direct deliveri to their control thei leav document comput
media or film and tape at secur spy drop these drop site can be in park abandon
build behind vend machin or in other similar locat the onli requir ar
access cover secur and the imagin of the spy and hi contact prearrang
signal such as those describ abov ar us to let the control know that an item ha been
left at the site the control mai leav the spy compens at the same site
secur measur for the recruit
spi ar instruct to not leav incrimin evid at their home or at their compani
workspac the goal is to elimin ani evid trail that could lead back to them
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1832 2011 fraud examin manual
furthermor thei do not want to give the target ani indic that it is actual be
infiltr
comput secur measur for a spy can be of particular import recruit ar gener
instruct not to save ani document even for a short time on a hard drive or extern
storag devic without encrypt for ad secur mani corpor spi doubleencrypt
everyth thei steal with two differ system the overrid goal is to leav no
incrimin evid of the intellig campaign and to avoid detect at all cost the
longer the spy can continu hi activ undetect the more damag he can do
plant bug
recruit ar taught where listen devic should be plant in order to gather need
inform and at the same time avoid detect bug ar usual place in meet
room offic of kei employe or other area conduc to the discuss of secret
inform equal import is the decis of where to deploi tape equip the spy
need to place the equip in a remot locat where tape can be safe retriev if
tape is done onsit the spy risk lose the tape if the listen devic is discov
final the spy must know when and how to servic hidden listen devic and how to
safe remov them when the surveil is finish
decept techniqu
in mani case spi ar abl to gather inform from employe of a target without
recruit those employe in the surveil campaign instead the spy trick the employe
into reveal confidenti inform typic scam includ us fake employ
interview pose as a corpor headhunt conduct bogu market research solicit
contract bid on fictiti project and social engin each of these scam is design
to get the employe to reveal sensit inform about hi compani busi
employ advertis
employ wantad ar a great wai for intellig thiev to get exist employe from
a target compani to turn over sensit inform the bogu ad offer great job
opportun to peopl with qualif that match those of a target kei personnel
the employe who answer the ad think thei ar appli for a real job thei expect a
technic interview on what thei do dure the bogu interview the spy will seek to obtain
as much inform as possibl about what the employe do the project thei work on
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1833
the equip thei util etc thi is a veri lowcost collect method if the spy meet
with the employe in a restaur for exampl he is onli out the cost of a meal and the cost
of place the advertis in a highli competit job market fake interview serv as a
power tool in corpor espionag
headhunt scam
in a variat on the fake employ ad scheme a spy call a kei employe of the target
while pose as a headhunt with a client who is interest in that employe the
headhunt ask for a rsum and inform about project on which the employe is
current work an indepth interview by the client can provid addit detail thi
method allow the spy to target kei employe more directli than simpli run fake
employ ad
market research scam
in a market research scam the spy contact compani by telephon pose as a
repres of a wellknown market research compani the spy us a phoni
questionnair design to obtain background data to assist in further penetr of the
compani the spy might in some case attempt to obtain direct intellig data dure the
telephon interview the spy frequent offer the employe a bogu reward of some kind in
return for respond to the questionnair these call tend to aim at lower level worker
who have oper knowledg of the busi but who ar not like to be as defens as
higher level manag
phoni contract bid
anoth indirect method for obtain intellig from human sourc is the call for phoni
bid for instanc a spy might send out an impressivelook request for propos rfp
packag on a construct or manufactur project the rfp state that certain oper
and financi data must be submit as part of the bid thi ruse work veri well when
assess the abil of a compani to manufactur a certain product the bigger the bait the
more inform the target compani is like to reveal the return address on the rfp is a
mail drop which insul the spy from detect the deadlin set forth in the phoni bid
requir help ensur that the spy get the inform he need by the date he need it
on advantag of the scam discuss abov is that the victim remain unawar that thei
have turn over sensit inform to a spy even after the leak ha sprung if there is no
followup over a job interview for exampl the applic simpli think he did not get the
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1834 2011 fraud examin manual
job if there is no feedback on a bid propos the victim think it fail to get the bid in
gener no feedback is expect on market research other than receipt of the promis
gift
infiltr techniqu
a corpor spy mai choos to collect intellig inform himself rather than recruit an
employe of the target factor that weigh in thi decis includ a tight time schedul the
lack of avail recruit or expens constraint the spy might simpli have special
knowledg that make him the best on to do the job
pose as an employe or contract labor
penetr a compani can be veri simpl as indic earlier on common techniqu is to
obtain work as a secur offic or a member of the janitori crew for the victim
organ anyon who saw the movi wall street might rememb charli sheen
charact put on a janitor overal to ga in access to sensit inform at a rival
compani even if the hire compani doe a background check on all potenti employe
usual noth more than a cursori crimin histori search a good corpor spy will rare
have a seriou crimin record it is not like that a spy will be screen out dure a routin
hire process
secur profession often comment that the best spi ar peopl who have advanc
technic knowledg for exampl phd in electr engin or biotechnolog if a spy
need highli technic inform on a competitor he mai have to us a person with an
advanc technic background who know how to identifi andor access the sought after
materi
individu with highlevel technic skill and high secur privileg gener have to be
recruit from within a target organ howev in some intellig campaign a
spy will plant a person with advanc technic credenti in a target compani in a
profession capac that person gain access to the target proprietari inform and
funnel it out to the spy a person who penetr a compani in thi manner is known as a
sleeper an infiltr who work on a longterm basi with an accept cover sleeper
will be discuss in more detail later in thi section
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1835
steal badg
steal or counterfeit employe badg is on fairli common infiltr method util
by corpor spi if badg ar in us at the target site the spy can gener fake a copi
us a desktop publish program contractor badg pattern can be view on worker
eat lunch at local restaur even if the badg have magnet strip the spy mai still be
abl to enter the plant at a highli travel entri point where a guard onli make a quick
visual inspect of secur badg as peopl enter the site allow anyon displai a
badg to enter even if the onli method of entri is by an electron badg scan a spy can
still piggyback in on anoth person badg if the spy displai a badg an employe of the
target can be talk into let him into the facil
steal badg is also an option at bar and nightclub women might leav their purs
and handbag ly about with secur badg protrud in open view men do the same
thing with jacket hung over bar stool a badg purloin on fridai night will probabl not
be miss until mondai onc a spy ha the badg he just past hi pictur on the front
and he readi to go more sophist techniqu includ have someon lift a badg
from an employe purs or jacket the card is pass on to a colleagu who run it through
a magnet card reader thi can be done quickli in the car in a park lot for exampl
the badg is then return to the employe befor anyon notic it is miss later the
magnet imag that wa scan from the stolen card is transfer onto blank id card
stock contain a magnet strip with the addit of an appropri pictur and print
the spy now ha a badg that will get him into the facil and no on know that secur
ha been compromis
mole and sleeper
if a client ha a veri longrang interest in monitor a compani he mai place a spy in that
compani as a perman employe thi employe known as a sleeper keep a low profil
and report to hi control on a regular basi about the oper of the compani thi kind
of spy especi if well school in tradecraft will be extrem difficult to detect with all
the electron spydrop avail through email the sleeper never even ha to risk exposur
by meet directli with hi control
on wai to help prevent the introduct of sleeper is to perform thorough background
check where permit by law on all applic thi mai help detect oper who have
pad their rsum to make sure thei get hire of cours a clever spy will make sure that
there is a convinc refer for everi piec of inform on an oper rsum
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1836 2011 fraud examin manual
a mole function in the same manner as a sleeper the differ between the two is that a
sleeper is a person who is deliber plant as an employe in a compani to extract
inform a mole by contrast is usual an exist employe of the target organ
who is somehow compromis agre to turn over her compani secret to the busi
intellig profession when recruit mole intellig specialist look for employe
who ar stabl enough in their profession and person life to function as spi on a long
term basi as discuss earlier there ar a number of wai to recruit a mole but the prime
motiv is usual greed
place where spi snoop
when spi do infiltr a compani premis thei rare have to break into file cabinet or
desk drawer to get the inform thei need due to lazi ignor or just poor
organiz skill employe often fail to lock up sensit document each night messi
desk ar the rule not the except messi desk ar easier for a spy to rifl through than
neatli organ workstat if document ar remov from a sloppi desktop thei mai
not be miss for quit some time
messi is not confin to document comput often have mound of disk cd and
other media ly unprotect around them note on the side of termin and screen or
in unlock desk drawer frequent broadcast password and user id to anyon who care
to look user manual ly about often have similar inform scribbl insid all thi
clutter is creat by employe who place conveni befor secur compani that do
not enforc clean desk polici and do not requir sensit materi to be lock up ar
ask for troubl employe should be train to report sign that their offic have been
search for exampl paper have been move disk seem to have been shuffl file ar
out of order even when no inform is actual miss
mailroom
the mailroom is on of the corpor spy favorit place to snoop a great deal of
inform can be obtain from the mailroom by make a simpl phone call the spy can
learn where to ship and receiv packag how the target intern bill system work
where to locat employe of the target compani and even the compani feder express
account number a spy can also walk into most mailroom and simpli by act like he is
suppos to be there walk awai with cost center account number telephon directori
copi of intern commun and in some case even correspond and packag
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1837
load dock
despit the fact that mani compani maintain video camera and secur guard patrol at
their load dock these can still be great place to gather intellig and to slip sensit
inform out the door the secur personnel at the load dock ar frequent
contract worker with minim train on how to spot a sophist infiltr
furthermor contract secur personnel mai not be familiar with manag and employe
from other depart a spy can sometim don a badg and a clipboard and move about
the load dock with impun unquest by the secur offic who assum he is
suppos to be there meanwhil the spy is copi down purchas order number address
label data and type of merchandis be ship and receiv
secur guard mai be train to prevent the remov of manual document or softwar
that ar label or colorcod as confidenti howev spi can easili chang label and
cover to a differ color secur offic gener do not have the train to look for
other indic of sensit materi that ar be remov
storag area
spi frequent target storag area for inform becaus thei ar gener low traffic
area thu the risk of be detect is minim if someon doe come into the area while
the spy is there he will have a cover stori handi for exampl he mai sai he is do
research or perform an audit a prop like a clipboard will usual make the
stori convinc
for manual document the spy will check
unlock file cabinet
unlock closet and storag room
area contain archiv microfich record and comput printout
offsit rent storag locker
for comput media he will be on the lookout for
unlock storag area for comput media such as disk tape and extern drive
unsecur media librari
for the open storag of critic equip part or raw materi the spy will note amount
type and transit inform found on the merchandis if the materi ar kept in a secur
area the spy will try to obtain the access code by observ an employe as he enter the
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1838 2011 fraud examin manual
area it is also possibl to sprai entri keypad with an ultraviolet solut that remain
invis to the nake ey the user unknowingli wipe the solut off the kei that he
press when enter the code the spy can determin the kei the user punch by
view the keypad with a portabl ultraviolet lamp
hotel
hotel room ar remark easi to bug and to search whenev a kei corpor player
travel there is a chanc that spi will be listen at her heel by us transact
intellig spi determin which hotel an execut frequent onc that piec of
inform is determin the spy can set up surveil of the target room for exampl
spi frequent bribe hotel staff to allow them to enter hotel room and plant
eavesdrop devic
know where an execut is stai also make it easier to set up fix surveil of the
come and go of visitor to the hotel room or meet room for exampl the spy
can spot the target vehicl and rig it with satellit track to follow hi movement dure
a busi trip
electron and visual surveil ar not the onli spy activ conduc to the hotel
environ if a spy can gain access to an execut room whether by briberi or simpli
by find the door left open by a maid he can copi sensit file from a laptop left in the
room there mai also be sensit document in the room that the spy can photograph
trash in the room wast paper basket is also a potenti sourc of inform
if sensit document ar be deliv by a servic such as up or feder express thei
can be intercept after thei ar deliv to the hotel but befor the target ha receiv
them the spy open the envelop and copi or photograph the content the document
ar then reseal in a new deliveri envelop the invoic is remov from the plastic holder
on the origin envelop and place in the new envelop the spy affix a ship label
which is easi to gener on a desktop program and no on suspect that the messag ha
been intercept
spi can view materi deliv in a convent paper envelop without even open it
there ar special solvent call mail inspector that can be sprai on the outsid of an
envelop that allow the spy to see through the envelop and view the content insid after a
few minut the solut dri and the envelop becom opaqu again with consider
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1839
less sophist the spy can simpli resort to steam open envelop and then reseal
them after she ha read their content it is gener not difficult for a spy to bribe hotel
employe in order to gain to access the target correspond the same is true of
employe of messag and deliveri servic
warn sign of infiltr
if a spy doe hi job properli it will be veri difficult to detect an infiltr gener
organ have a better chanc of prevent infiltr by establish appropri
secur measur such as accompani all vendor while onsit and requir secur
badg for access to sensit area detect can be difficult but there ar some sign that
organ can look for that might indic there is a spy in their midst
employe who ar most like to be recruit as spi ar those who exhibit some sort
of bitter or resent toward their employ be alert for abnorm activ by
employe who seem to feel that thei ar underappreci underutil or ar
treat unfairli
employe who express some sort of polit or moral opposit to an organ
oper mai be suscept to a fals flag recruit
employe who ar undergo a person financi problem frequent associ with
drug addict gambl addict high medic expens or some other person
crisi mai also be vulner to recruit
employe who suddenli undergo a major lifestyl chang bui luxuri item take
exot vacat etc with no appar increas in incom should be watch thi is a
common red flag of fraud scheme but mai also indic an employe who is be paid
for divulg trade secret
employe who frequent work late or come to work earli mai be try to get access
to confidenti materi thi behavior is particularli suspici when the employe in
question work unusu hour as compar to other in hi depart
in some case mole will actual discuss their covert activ with their cowork
employe should be train to report thi as well as other suspici behavior
employe who seem to spend a lot of time in area not necessari to their work
function particularli area where sensit materi ar store mai be attempt to
misappropri compani secret thi should be investig particularli if the employe
is found in these area after hour
similarli employe who attempt to access sensit comput file that ar either abov
their author level or outsid the scope of their work duti might warrant
investig organ should maintain an autom journal that record event
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1840 2011 fraud examin manual
such as attempt access of restrict file
if employe have sensit file save on their hard drive or disk thi mai be a sign
that thei ar misdirect that inform thi is especi true when the employe in
question is not work on or should not have access to the file in question if record
reveal that thi employe ha email the proprietari inform to an offsit locat
thi is anoth indic of inform theft
vendor should be escort at all time when on the organ premis ani time a
vendor is seen loiter unescort around file room offic mail room ship
dock comput media storag area or other sensit zone the incid should be
report as a secur violat and potenti intrus attempt the same is true for
janitori personnel secur guard trash collector and other nonemploye
spi mai come disguis as repairperson janitor deliverymen etc incid in
which servic technician show up without have been call mai indic an
attempt infiltr
employe report of lost secur badg access card password etc could be a sign
that a spy ha stolen these item in order to infiltr a site
obvious if file or comput disk that contain sensit inform ar miss thi
is a clear sign of a theft or misappropri of inform in gener spi will copi
rather than stealproprietari inform but sometim sensit document ar
actual pilfer
employe desk or offic that have been tamper with ar a common sign of
intrus report of stolen materi clearli point to an infiltr but more frequent
intrud will onli rifl through file desk or comput disk choos to copi
sensit inform rather than steal it employe should be train to report
incid where their offic or desk appear to have been mess up even when no
materi have been stolen
secur personnel should log report of person who try to enter a facil without
proper identif or author similarli attempt to piggyback into a facil by
follow a person with author could be a sign of an attempt intrus
report of trespass or other crimin activ near a secur facil mai also indic a
surveil campaign in particular instanc where stranger ar seen loiter around
the outsid of the facil or dig through trash bin could be sign of corpor
spy
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1841
countermeasur
while secur offic cannot turn their organ into impenetr fortress thei can
implement specif countermeasur to thwart a spy attempt at infiltr their compani
materi bear proprietari data should not be store in area visibl to the public if
no other option exist the organ should onli us unlett colorcod
contain as oppos to label a particular file drawer confidenti thi will make
it more difficult for spi to tell where sensit inform can be found
organ should ask about their bank confidenti polici and make sure the
bank doesnt permit teller to access inform on major account without a manag
permiss if the compani ha sensit financi account it should find a bank with
comput system that us mandatori access control such control prevent bank
employe without proper level of privileg from access larg account inform
on larg commerci account should be maintain on a needtoknow basi
secur should establish a procedur for track and lock up sensit data
clean personnel should be properli bond and identifi and their access to the
facil should be control
vendor should have verifi credenti and must be escort by a compani
repres dure their visit
ani proprietari list must be password protect and trap
other gener countermeasur includ educ employe to properli store sensit
data and to question the credenti of anyon visit the site employe should also be
instruct as to what inform thei mai disclos over the telephon
employe should sign nondisclosur agreement in addit the legal depart
should be consult about integr vendor and supplier nondisclosur agreement
into standard contract
transact intellig
just about ani mundan busi transact can offer a potenti inform payoff to a
spy frequent flyer mile document where an execut ha travel credit card receipt
record a trip itinerari and good or servic purchas even video purchas or rent at
a video store ar us for document a target employe tast and procliv ani
on piec of inform by itself ha minim valu properli compil howev thi
inform can provid an extens profil on a target
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1842 2011 fraud examin manual
inform
the seriou corpor spy will develop a network of paid inform who can get thi
monitor intellig for him these inform come from a wide rang of busi
travel agent
airlin reserv personnel
major credit card compani
staff at major internet provid
employe at video music and other entertain outlet
staff of adult entertain provid that the target frequent
telephon compani employe with access to telephon record
employe of commerci databas provid such as dialog and db who have access
to transact record
while the purpos of these inform is not to act as regular spi thei will for a fee
provid transact intellig on a subject that transact inform can have a
critic impact it can tell a corpor spy about
a person vice
detail of busi travel
hotel where the target stai and where she is like to stai again in the futur thi can
be us for set up surveil
whom the target ha call
interest and hobbi anoth wai to edg into the target confid
compani or subject the target ha research
thi type of intellig is realli a hybrid of documentari sourc intellig combin
pure open sourc and grai sourc and humint an insid contact is need to obtain
the inform but onc the contact sell it to a corpor spy the spy can analyz it
without need of addit assist
monitor intellig is veri help in the collect of human intellig if a spy know
a subject hobbi she can see to it that she m eet the target at a restaur convent
etc strike up a convers or possibl a friendship a target employe in thi scenario
becom an unwit sourc of inform
the spy doe not necessarili have to direct these effort at an employe of the target
organ for instanc if the organ us a contractor to microfilm it record the
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1843
spy might attempt to compromis an employe of the contractor or penetr it secur
rather than attack the target organ directli
a spy can also becom hi own insid sourc of transact intellig for exampl if a
spy want to develop a telephon histori on a subject he can send the subject a free phone
card for 60 minut of call time there ar compani that will mail the phone card to
the subject and then track all their call for a small fee less than 5000 thi kind of servic
can be a power intelligencegath devic employe should be train to be wari of
thi kind of scam
decoi websit
the internet offer addit avenu for collect inform on tactic us by spi is
to set up a websit to collect rsum for particular technic specialti includ on the
websit is a questionnair that visitor ar instruct to fill out to aid in place you the
site can also requir visitor to regist for free research servic the inform that the
applic provid make it possibl to keep a log of the link that thei access
it is not difficult to creat a site that target will visit it is simpli a matter of do some
research on hot topic in a particular field the spy creat a site that ha the necessari
metatag for search engin to pick up the titl she fill the site with relev link and
build log softwar into the site to track the link that user access thi can creat a
profil of the user and help the spy determin what he is interest in the spy can even call
user as a followup the user is impress becaus someon from the site took an interest
in him and thi give the spy a natur leadin to pump the subject for inform
a decoi websit might also enabl the spy to gain access to the target comput system
for instanc peopl frequent us the same user id and password for a number of
differ applic becaus it is easier to rememb than have sever differ
password the spy websit might requir visitor to enter a user id and password for the
research servic or to view bogu job post thi inform is store by the websit
and later us to try to gain access to the target comput system decoi websit can also
be set up so that visitor unwittingli download virus or other malici softwar thi mai
not necessarili help a spy gain inform but it can help sabotag a compani comput
system
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1844 2011 fraud examin manual
tell good li
rather than infiltr a compani to extract need inform a spy might mislead
employe of the target so that thei ar induc to divulg sensit inform given the
natur of the data requir it mai be simpler and safer to develop a cover stori and simpli
coax the target employe into reveal inform rather than us an oper to steal
the necessari data thi approach can be a power on especi when the spy ha a
special knowledg or background for exampl if the spy ha train as an electron
engin approach peopl in the circuit design depart of a hightech compani would
have a natur flow or qualiti the kei to thi type of attack is for the spy to be abl to
mislead the target about hi intent in other word the spy ha to be abl to tell
good li
regardless of the spy background the lie that he tell must contain a larg measur of
truth li not built on a foundat of truth falter quickli under skeptic question he
must be familiar with the background of hi stori henc he ha to do hi homework in
advanc if he doe not have a firm knowledg of electron engin he ha to learn
enough about it to carri on a convers well enough to convinc other he know what
he is talk about thi doe not mean the spy ha to be abl to solv complex electr
engin equat he just need to know enough about the subject to keep a
convers go and to steer clear of area of which he is obvious ignor
suppos the spy is after specif on the design of a microprocessor he pose as a sale
engin in a field offic in thi posit he would not be expect to know all the detail of
microprocessor design nevertheless he ha a good pretext for contact someon who is
familiar with the design he could claim for exampl that he is under a time constraint from
a custom and he need some detail to help close a sale to give the call a greater air of
authent he can have the salesman he support on the line too he can also tie in
the call to current event drop the name of a custom who ha been written up in the
trade press in other word he creat an intern consist lie that the employe in the
design depart can accept and believ
if the spy ha to meet with the employe in person rather than over the phone he would
bring the necessari prop these includ
fake id
bogu busi card
product displai
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1845
associ she can call on the telephon dure the meet to back up hi stori
the import factor is to make the target comfort in advanc of the convers he
prepar by studi technic detail about the product and person detail about other
peopl in the compani or the industri these fact ar pepper into the convers with
the target the goal be to get the target to let hi guard down and divulg the sought after
inform
visual surveil against peopl
prerecruit surveil
in develop human sourc spi know that thei should never underestim the
import of do prerecruit surveil on target there ar a number of goal for
thi kind of surveil thei includ
to discov
who thei ar
where thei live
what thei do in their spare time
what thei want to keep secret
who their friend ar
who their enemi ar
to look for
car
home
recreat activ
level of incom and debt
the subject import to the organ
to uncov what thei throw in the trash for exampl
financi paper
medic problem
famili problem
to learn about their enemi such as
exlov
fire employe
polit oppon
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1846 2011 fraud examin manual
competitor
peopl ow monei
to make contact with the target
by find out what he think about hi job famili or life in gener
by determin the degre to which the target will confid in other
brief file on the subject
beyond the fundament of do prerecruit surveil the corpor spy also must
master regular techniqu to monitor ongo oper these techniqu begin with a
brief file on the intend subject if a spy were to follow a kei execut for the compani
the follow would be essenti start detail
name of the subject
photo of the subject
detail descript
known associ
frequent hangout
routin activ and schedul
vehicl us with tag number
type of neighborhood where subject live
street or locat layout
move surveil
the spy ha to be flexibl and imagin in conduct a move surveil for exampl
place a reflect stripe on the back of the subject car make it more distinct at night
lai a cheap wristwatch under the rear tire of the subject car will establish when he
leav the broken face will stop the watch at the time thei depart if a subject goe into a
bar or restaur the spy know to order food or drink and pai for it immedi so that he
can blend in and to be readi to leav at a moment notic
fix surveil
fix surveil while it ha mani advantag over move surveil ha on great
vulner the base from which the surveil is conduct for exampl a van park
across the street from the subject might be spot by the target as well as neighbor and
curiou passersbi in order to camouflag a fix surveil campaign the spy must be
familiar with the surround and choos a cover that will blend in
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1847
email
email is frequent dens with data on compani problem personnel issu statu on
project travel plan and merger activ it is also the most vulner form of comput
inform the vulner aris from the fact that almost anyon in the compani ha
access to the servic liter everybodi fr om temp to the ceo ha an email address
thi wideopen access creat an immens exposur that is compound by the desir for
conveni employe in mani compani ar abl to check their email from home
direct access from offsit via modem can permit compromis of the email server
onc a penetr of an email server occur whether by hack through search engin or
by us a legitim account a spy is in posit to do great harm he can forg an email
address for hi account and send messag about the compani request inform
peopl will respond think he is from audit for exampl when he mai be just a temp
work in custom servic
an intern spy can arrang to intercept sensit email by insert email address into
intern mail list when proprietari or sensit inform is distribut for exampl
to the manag mail list the spy receiv a copi at either an intern or an extern
email site with an extern email address embed into a sensit mail list it is quit
possibl that an intern spy can monitor electron mail long after ceas to work for the
target compani
email secur program can detect unauthor address plant into list so longterm
implant ar not alwai an effect strategi howev when a spy know intens activ
is afoot for exampl on a merger or acquisit shortterm tap into email list can be
veri product
social engin
in a social engin scheme the inform thief manipul peopl into hand over
secret inform through us of trickeri persuas threat or cajoleri the social
engin usual though not alwai oper by phone or email in some case the social
engin obtain direct inform from her victim about a compani busi oper
contract custom list or so on in other case a hacker us social engin to obtain
password or otherwis gain access to a comput system social engin is thought to
plai at least some part in most comput system penetr
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1848 2011 fraud examin manual
there ar a wide varieti of social engin techniqu the onli common denomin
be that the spy attempt to extract confidenti inform from an employe of the
target compani through some form of trickeri or deceit some of the more common
scheme ar describ in the follow section
the neophyt
in on of the most common social engin scheme the spy call the help desk of a
target compani and claim to be a new employe on hi first dai at work the spy complain
that he ha not yet been given a password and so he ha been unabl to start hi comput
and begin work the help desk employe give the spy a password therebi enabl him
to enter the compani system typic the spy doe not call the help desk directli in thi
type of scheme instead he call anoth depart and ask to be transfer to the help
desk so the call appear to be intern
the power broker
in anoth common scheme the attack contact the help desk and claim to be a high
rank compani offici an influenti client or some other impos figur background
search of secur file govern file compani websit or annual report ar
us to choos the fake ident the spy will us the spy us hi fals credenti to bulli
the help desk into hand out password remoteaccess softwar or even some kei piec
of busi inform
the system administr
in thi scheme an inform thief contact a comput user in an organ and claim
to be an it employe of the compani he tell the user that a network problem ha been
identifi with the user comput the spy ask for the password the user log on with
so he can fix the problem most employe ar will to give their password out to a
system administr when request make thi techniqu veri effect in a similar
scheme the spy will pass out a memo on custom letterhead ask user to verifi their log
on inform for secur reason
fraudul survei
fake survei ar anoth common social engin scheme pose as survei taker either
in person or over the internet spi gather inform from peopl about their name
nicknam ag birth date name and birthdai of spous or children pet favorit
hobbi favorit song favorit movi and dozen of other person prefer and
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1849
attribut the theori is that most peopl choos a password that ha some level of person
import the spi take the respons from their survei and try them as password
when thei attempt to break into a system
fake prize
final fake gift certif or sweepstak can be us to get access to a person password
for instanc an employe of a target compani is sent an email gift certif from a fake
vendor the spy ha set up the employe might be told the gift certif is a prize or that it
wa purchas for them by a secret admir in ani event the employe onli ha to access
the vendor websit in order to select the me rchandis he want to bui with hi gift
certif of cours in order to make the purc hase he ha to log onto a special area of the
websit which requir a user id and password the spy in thi scheme is bet that the
employe will us the same user id and password that he us at work
revers social engin
revers social engin creat the impress in the target mind that the spy is
someon who can help them it is actual a form of fals flag recruit the scam can be
perpetr by telephon email or regular mail in a typic scheme the spy pose as a
repres of some softwar compani he send a messag to the target indic that a
softwar product product x that the target own ha a possibl defect the target is
instruct to call the softwar compani the spy with hi user id and password in order to
receiv the fix when the target call the spy obtain hi access code and then pronounc
that hi edit of the product is okai now the spy ha access to that softwar product for
instanc a sensit databas to us at will
counter social engin
there ar a number of secur measur organ can adopt to counteract social
engin scheme while a few technic solut mai help the major of control for
thi type of attack involv train employe to be awar of how social engin work
the data that spi will seek and the inform that employe ar allow to dissemin
help desk employe should be train to ask specif identifi question befor give
out ani inform over the phone the organ should clearli explain the minimum
identif requir that caller must meet befor inform can be distribut a
twofactor authent rule should be mandatori if a caller fail to identifi himself
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1850 2011 fraud examin manual
accord to the authent rule the person take the call should report thi incid to
the secur group as an unauthor intrus attempt
when inform is given out it should be harmless boilerpl inform password or
person identif number should never be distribut over the phone without
concret proof of the caller ident refer to kei administr technic and bill
contact for the corpor internet domain should also be as anonym as possibl if a
compani doe not list it domain administr by titl then a spy mai not know exactli
whom to imperson when he call the help desk techniqu alreadi discuss such as
properli dispos of confidenti trash will also help prevent dumpster diver from come
up with contact inform that thei can us to trick employe
employe awar is anoth kei to fight social engin employe mai be told
what inform to give out and what authent factor to requir but it is anoth
thing to get them to follow these procedur on of the most effect wai to promot
complianc with secur polici is to make peopl awar of threat and actual instanc of
social engin attack some organ maintain intern websit or distribut
employe newslett with stori about secur breach along with prevent tip and
inform
an even more effect awar method is to select test employe secur readi
for instanc secur personnel should call their own organ help desk to see what
inform thei can obtain without identifi themselv it is also a good idea to run the
system administr scam on employe six month after thei have start to see if thei
rememb not to give out their password to random mi call if employe give up
inform without follow procedur thei should get a stern warn about their
secur respons thi type of remind will be rememb far longer than a
train session
cloak and misdirect
while honesti is essenti in busi deal with associ and investor it cannot alwai
be a secur team primari strategi in so me circumst misdirect the oppon is
essenti rather than remain passiv behind the static defens of secur offic
perimet fenc lock and access control a secur manag mai need to creat an activ
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1851
counterattack program such a program ensur that inform thiev ar as misinform
as possibl a misinform oppon is a defeat on
intellig need
good intellig gather is a prelud to ani success counteroffens against industri
espionag agent if a manag doe not know the oppon and their method of attack
effect cloak and misdirect will not be possibl
an effect intelligencegath network need not emploi an armi of spi basic
intellig can be gather from a varieti of sourc which includ print media
commerci databas network with other secur manag exist staff within the
compani and regular secur survei of the busi thi type of ongo lowlevel
intellig program help identifi potenti and emerg secur problem increas the
activ dure period of heighten threat to the busi is not difficult becaus a
preliminari intellig system will alreadi be in place bring on addit personnel and
resourc will not be overwhelm
print media
print sourc should not consist of an unread mountain of journal on the manag desk it
is far more product to subscrib to just a few profession public that ar read and
index secur manag the nation asso ciation of legal investig the legal
investig and the journal of secur administr offer insight on the latest secur
and investig trend
local newspap can provid an overview of gener crimin activ relev to the
busi and area busi journal ar good sourc for account of industri espionag
the secur team should also read employ ad for phoni job interview scheme
databas search
comput databas ar an excel intellig resourc most secur manag do not
have the time to regularli read all the major nation newspap and busi or technic
magazin relev to their client compani howev a secur profession can go to the
public librari for a few hour onc a month and scan magazin databas like infotrac for
compani refer a more effici method is to subscrib to a clip servic which will
scan hundr of articl from a varieti of sourc each month and provid articl
contain ani keyword such as a compani or employe name that have been specifi
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1852 2011 fraud examin manual
manag mai want to explor the costbenef it tradeoff of bui a modem and pc for
their offic that provid immedi access to the grow number of onlin resourc
includ asisnet from the american societi for industri secur wwwasisonlineorg
and a host of new databas in scan such databas the secur manag can run
search on ani refer to the compani na me offic or product as well as on the
follow kei case topic
industri espionag
busi intellig
competitor intellig
the research should read all onlin abstract and save ani articl if further detail ar
requir a pictur will emerg of what is avail in the public domain about the compani
the secur team should then evalu how thi inform could work to an inform
thief advantag
more and more local newspap ar becom electron avail via the internet or
through librari the astut secur manag should us thi resourc to check for local
crimin trend locat mention of the compani and it offic and perform background
investig on secur risk
network
network with other secur profession should not be difficult local chapter of asi
fellow cfe investig organ and former law enforc offic societi
deserv full particip meet of technic societi that ar relev to the busi
mai also be worthwhil even though these meet mai not directli address secur
issu thei provid us intellig about the busi for exampl if a compani
manufactur chemic the secur manag could attend the state chemic societi
meet to learn what is be publicli discuss about her compani and the industri in
gener
exist staf
an organ employe ar often it most neglect intellig tool proper train of
all compani employe foster the passag of vital intellig to the secur manag or
investig for exampl secur offic can report patrol observ such as attempt
by outsid to search the compani trash bin sale staff can identifi incid when
stranger have tri to pump them for inform at a trade show technic personnel
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1853
might report overli friendli member of the opposit sex who ask too mani businessrel
question at the local water hole
commun with senior manag is also essenti if the develop of a new
product line creat new secur risk or problem the secur manag investig or
intern monitor need to know effort to protect a product prior to market releas requir
the coordin of variou compani depart
secur survei
frequent secur survei help reveal potenti weak and new threat to ani
organ thei offer insight on where and how attack might happen and if a compani
suspect that it ha alreadi been infiltr by a spy a secur survei can help determin
how that infiltr could have occur and help focu the investig on the most
probabl techniqu these survei provid the secur profession with a chanc to see
the busi through the ey of an inform thief a percept secur manag
analyz the compani busi in a creativ wai look through a spy ey for pathwai
to inform that might otherwis have been overlook if a manag wish to deceiv
potenti inform thiev secur survei can tell where the pick for a thief ar best
and where to leav the bait
test the perimet
a secur survei should begin at the perimet of the organ the secur
profession need to visual himself as a determin attack do the alarm and video
camera system deter from enter the premis without author how easi is it to
bypass the access control system can badg be obtain without much troubl through
decept or theft ar basic defens fenc lo ck barrier and secur patrol in place
and in good repair
penetr techniqu
the person perform the secur survei should us penetr techniqu at variou
time of the dai to determin when the compani ha the greatest degre of vulner ar
thei abl to easili walk into the plant on the third shift ar vendor allow to wander
about the facil unescort can a visitor or employe walk unchalleng out of the facil
past guard station carri sensit document comput disk or a portabl comput
ar clean personnel properli supervis when onsit
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1854 2011 fraud examin manual
check for unsecur work area
secur personnel should also studi the wai employe work area ar maintain ar
sensit document lock up at night ar the copi machin electron lock down
so a special access card is need to us them do sensit area such as research lab and
comput media librari have their own separ alarm system and access control ar
file cabinet lock at night doe secur do random patrol of the offic area and the
plant at night ar all person in sensit iv area challeng for proper credenti
pretext call
secur offic can determin their organ vulner to certain extern threat
by call their own employe at work it is import to determin what an outsid could
learn by make pretext call do employe accept what thei ar told over the phone at face
valu or do thei verifi to whom thei ar talk befor give out sensit inform
test proprietari list and directori
it is import to make sure that proprietari list ar trap audit of email list should be
period conduct to ensur that no on plant unauthor address ar intern
directori and telephon list distribut in a secur manner is sensit wast paper and
comput media shred and dispos of secur
secur staff awar and line of commun
the organ secur forc should have train in protect proprietari inform
if someth out of the ordinari happen do thei have a mean of commun those
incid to manag is an intellig collect strategi in place will patrol offic
lock up sensit document thei find unsecur and make out a report detail the secur
oversight do thei know how to check for spy drop ar thei taught to observ suspici
activ such as an employe who alwai work late
employe secur train
it should be the goal of everi corpor secur offic to make sure that employe ar
awar of the import of secur and ar train to protect sensit inform what
kind of proprietari inform safeguard do employe learn how regularli do thei
receiv train ar thei encourag to report suspici activ
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1855
multipl layer of secur
there should be multipl layer of secur protect the most sensit inform the
layer should becom progress harder to penetr as on get closer to the most
sensit inform doe the organ have more than on layer of protect for it
inform and is each layer effect or is perimet secur the onli real impedi if
multipl layer exist do thei offer real impedi to spi or ar thei minor hurdl
cloak oper
with good intellig to identifi probabl channel for inform thiev a secur
manag can commenc the cloak of sensit oper fluctuat in traffic offer
industri spi the best indirect insight into a busi chang in the rate deliveri
shipment emiss and the type and amount of trash can reveal a great deal
the cost to mask these fluctuat mai be signific at time appropri guidanc from
senior manag must be a factor in comput the costbenefit tradeoff if the risk to a
product line outweigh the secur cost the secur staff should begin a cloak program
trash and wast dispos
trash and wast dispos ar excel place to start ad a consist amount of
shred nonsensit paper to sensit document wast greatli diminish the chanc of
traffic analysi nondocumentari wast should be secur in a lock hold area from
there it can be sort into uniform shipment modul befor releas to the wast dispos
vendor when the content of wast shipment ar fairli uniform deciph plant
oper from them becom much more difficult
deliveri and shipment
deliveri and shipment should be made on as uniform a schedul as possibl ideal
organ should avoid schedul major deliveri just befor a product manufactur
run thi is just the sort of tipoff corpor spi ar look for maintain adequ
inventori level can go a long wai toward elimin thi problem
if the manufactur process dictat tight part deliveri schedul the us of a common
carrier will at least mask the ident of the supplier to extern surveil util a mix
of common carrier and compani truck help cloak shipment compani driver should be
train to vari their schedul and deliveri rout thei should also be instruct to report
ani suspicion of intellig gather oper
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1856 2011 fraud examin manual
hour of oper and power consumpt
dure highli sensit manufactur test or research oper the hour of
oper and level of power consumpt should be kept as uniform as possibl light
can be left on continu and some kind of aroundtheclock activ can be maintain to
mask sensit oper
emiss
if the heighten activ dure a crisi period will result in addit smoke or steam
emiss the chang should be made as gradual as possibl the kei is to avoid creat
an unusu pattern of activ manag should eas the compani into ani critic period
of oper to avoid draw the attent of the outsid world similarli it should eas
out of the critic period when it is over
food deliveri
if signific number of employe need to work unusu hour in a crisi period the
compani should provid food servic for them from the compani cafeteria increas
food deliveri to the site can indic that someth out of the ordinari is go on
comput eman
if increas comput us creat unusu traffic in eman the compani can start
mask it earli with a buildup of nonsensit process in addit appropri
shield will cut down on eman whenev feasibl
travel plan
travel by kei execut and technic staff offer us intellig inform to a spy
dure period of intens financi activ such as a possibl acquisit or merger meet
can be schedul at neutral locat with short notic to ani outsid parti such as hotel
travel agent and rental car agenc
us the name of lowprofil employe or busi when book room and travel
arrang group travel by kei execut should be minim and the compani should
be sure to stagger the arriv and departur of senior manag at the neutral site execut
should be brief not to discuss sensit matter in their hotel room or on the telephon
in those room when feasibl secur should be present in the execut room when the
execut is out if not feasibl the execut should be train not to leav sensit
inform unattend in their room
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1857
technic staff member travel to research center or facil for factfind purpos
should mix in some nonsensit stop on their itinerari the addit destin will
confus onlook in case of possibl surveil stop at technic or research librari to
do some nonsensit person research can leav a spy unsur about which facil on the
trip wa actual import
misdirect
attempt to compromis employe or inform control demand an immedi
respons the question is whether to simpli shore up secur or us the situat to
misdirect the opposit misdirect involv feed inform thiev fals fact in
order to neutral their intellig effort
care guidanc from senior manag will be necessari if misdirect is determin to
be the best wai to protect the organ the fals fact that ar releas must not come
back to hurt the compani it offic it stockhold or it investor
assum that a misdirect polici is approv and carefulli craft it might work as
follow suppos secur ha detect an employ advertis that appear design
to lure technic staff to phoni interview so thei can be pump for inform secur
can go on the offens to counter thi threat by send technic staff member with
busi intellig train as decoi their goal is to give an impress technic
interview that send the oppon follow dead end lead at the same time the decoi is
abl to gather intellig on what the industri spi ar after thi type of inform
strengthen defens at the target compani
at trade fair convent and technic meet employe should have a prepar stori
to tell industri spi when confront with camouflag question about an industri
process employe can relat inform that sound convinc but that actual lead the
opposit astrai again such misinform must be suffici technic in natur so it
gener releas to the public would not damag the compani
spot fals suitor
a tactic sometim util by busi intellig profession is to initi fals
negoti for the purchas of servic product line or portion of the target compani
dure the cours of the negoti the spy attempt to gain valuabl inform about
the target it cost structur product schedul manufactur process etc other
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1858 2011 fraud examin manual
similar tactic that have alreadi been discuss includ spi pose as headhunt
conduct fals employ interview to gather inform and pose as a potenti
custom through the us of bogu request for propos
manag and employe should be train to spot these scheme fals inquiri by
purchas can be termin quickli if organ requir interest parti to
demonstr financi qualif befor commenc with ani highlevel negoti
financi statement of the suitor should be verifi similarli befor repli to ani rfp it
goe without sai that an organ should verifi the exist and interest of the
compani seek propos thi can be easili accomplish by simpli look up the
compani in the phone book or travel to it physic address to verifi that the compani
exist a search of state and counti record can also be conduct to determin if the
compani is legal regist anoth simpl techniqu is to contact other in the relev
industri to see if thei have heard of the suitor compani in case where a spy is pose as a
repres of an exist compani a phone call to thi compani to verifi the
inform in the rfp will help ensur that the request is legitim if evid suggest
that the parti or compani is a fals front secur can again take the opportun to provid
mislead inform to the potenti inform thiev
if employe ar approach by compani interest in hire them similar step should be
taken to ensur that these suitor ar not actual corpor spi fish for inform
employe should be train to report suspici offer by outsid of cours it is
unrealist to expect employe to report everi job offer thei receiv or everi employ
interview thei take what organ can do is train their employeesparticularli those in
possess of kei informationto be wari of the decept tactic spi us it is a good
idea to explain to kei personnel how these scheme ar gener initi and what
inform the spy will be try to obtain hopefulli thi will help employe spot phoni
suitor and report them befor ani meet or bogu interview ar conduct in the
altern employe mai at least be wari of suspici question dure bogu interview
and know enough not to divulg sensit inform
in addit to train kei employe to spot decept techniqu it mai be advantag
to train these employe in some of the simpl method thei can us to determin if a suitor
is legitim such as verifi it phone number or address contact other in the
industri or simpli call the compani number in the phone book if on is list to
verifi the time of an interview these ar step that employe can take without have to
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1859
tell their employ about outsid job offer and which might uncov a corpor espionag
campaign
vendor and supplier
secondari interview of supplier and vendor by corpor spi pose a problem a
compani rare ha direct control over what it supplier and vendor tell third parti so
supplier and vendor should be given inform on a needtoknow basi onli
proper train of purchas agent is also help supplier of highli critic compon
or servic need to be signatori to nondisclosur agreement if intellig reveal a
supplier to be a major leak the shortterm answer mai be send misinform through
that supplier the longterm solut would be termin legal action or both
technic articl and public
articl publish by technic staff can creat cavern hole in an inform secur
program staff mai unintention leak sensit inform as part of an innoc
academ exchang the same is true for public speak engag a polici of pre
public review by secur personnel and technic manag is an absolut must
while prepubl review of articl and speech ar certainli appropri
organ should not us technic articl and speech as a method for dissemin
misinform there ar other mean for conduct a counterespionag campaign that
trammel less on issu such as freedom of express the right to academ inquiri and the
right to be fairli inform
consult
consult can be a sourc of leak and their access to confidenti or sensit inform
should therefor be kept on a needtoknow statu their activ should be
compartment as much as possibl as with vendor and supplier consult can be
fed misinform if thei ar suspect of leak data to a competitor
if highli sensit inform must be discuss with a consult it mai be advis to
place the discuss in a context that limit the consult knowledg of insid
inform for exampl an expert can tell you what the melt point of a semiconductor
materi is but thei do not necessarili need to know why you need to know that
inform obvious the need to pro tect inform must be weigh against the
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1860 2011 fraud examin manual
busi need of consult to have access to inform and a free flow of idea in order
to be abl to perform their work effect
deal with employe who ar leav
technic employe who give notic that thei ar leav their job while work on highli
sensit project should be transfer to nonsensit project until their termin date
all employe as well as vendor contractor consult temporari help etc should be
requir to sign nondisclosur agreement at the time of their hire when employe ar
leav an organ thei should be remind of their oblig to protect the
organ secret even after their employ end it is a good idea to have employe
sign a statement at their exit interview in which thei affirm that thei understand and will
compli with the term of the nondisclosur agreement thei have sign
if reliabl intellig reveal that an employe intend to sell the organ proprietari
inform place mislead inform in hi hand mai dilut some of the impact
plant technic gossip in the compani lunchroom for exampl mai be an effect
method for misinform an employe
hacker
if hacker or inform thiev penetr the comput system secur should give them
someth to munch on the idea is to place worthless highli technic sound file on
the compani system if someon sign on from an offsit locat and start to download
on of these file secur is notifi and an investig begin
the same tactic appli to pc sensit data should be place on disk and lock in a safe
when not in us bogu file contain misinform can be left on the hard drive for
pry ey if a secur manag realli want spi to take the bait she can add password
protect to the system to protect the bogu file the fact that the file ar protect help
convinc potenti thiev that thei contain valuabl inform the same idea work for a
comput sent out for repair place bogu data on the hard drive prevent servic
technician from steal and sell actual compani trade secret
anoth twist on the same theme is to place document and comput auxiliari item
contain bogu data in the trash auxiliari item includ old disk and cd old magnet
tape us comput paper and other media thi techniqu is an excel method for
manag inform thiev who like to go dumpster dive
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1861
if an employe is suspect of steal comput file that individu should be assign a
comput with a honei pot of bogu technic inform if the inform show up in
the public sector secur will know who is leak the inform
technic surveil
the popular imag of the spy at least as portrai on televis and in the movi is veri
often associ with all sort of hightech gadget everyth from miniatur camera to
exot listen devic to radio wristwatch and telephon hidden in shoe obvious
mani of these devic ar fanci and while thei mai provid interest entertain
thei ar far remov from the real world of corpor espionag
corpor spi do howev emploi variou form of technolog surveil equip
the tool vari accord to the need of the job at hand in gener corpor spi onli
resort to us hightech equip when simpler mean ar not avail to accomplish the
task in some case a miniatur camera might be call for to copi sensit document but
not when a nearbi copi machin can be us to achiev the same result in other instanc a
wiretap mai be need but onli when there is no other mean to monitor a subject
commun sometim satellit track of motor vehicl becom necessari but not
when simpl visual surveil will tell the spy where the subject ha travel in other
word corpor spi that know what thei ar do do not emploi technolog for the sake
of us fanci gadget
when spi do resort to the us of technic surveil equip it is usual to gather
nondocumentari evid or inform that cannot be found through open sourc or in
the target file the method that spi emploi to gather nondocumentari inform
includ 1 take photograph 2 conduct surveil and visual sight 3 listen
to convers 4 monitor comput and comput commun 5 analyz
traffic at a plant and 6 monitor eman from comput and telecommun
equip
nondocumentari inform ha certain advantag it captur chang over time
photograph taken at differ time or process as thei occur videotap electron
surveil can provid the spy with inform that would take mani hour of
documentari analysi to acquir aerial photographi provid a broad perspect on the
manufactur physic plant that is not ordinarili possibl with document alon
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1862 2011 fraud examin manual
intercept comput commun and eman can provid an insid look at the
suppli purchas manufactur and market channel of a target that cannot be
replic by anoth sourc
the fact that a technic activ is possibl doe not mean that it is advis most type of
electron surveil carri potenti seriou repercuss in mani case thei ar clearli
illeg ani prudent spy will emploi technic intellig method with restraint onli
amateur will rush into a surveil oper by bug thi line and that junction box
these novic ignor the fact that the more on bug the greater the chanc of have the
surveil campaign discov in addit a corpor spy with ani season will realiz
that indiscrimin bug produc too much signal traffic to analyz
experienc corpor spi know what thei ar look for and devis carefulli protect
collect plan befor initi their surveil campaign thei know that the more time
spent plan the more like it is that their electron surveil will go undetect and
the greater the intellig yield will be the rule most bi profession us for protect
electron surveil includ the follow
if devic such as microphon or video camera ar to be left onsit those devic must
not be traceabl back to the spy or the client the mark on the equip must not
establish a trail on which to build an investig experienc spi us gener equip
avail from multipl sourc
wire tap and their associ devic must blend into their surround so noth appear
out of the ordinari to the layperson smart spi do not us contrapt that can easili be
identifi as bug
radio transmitt must not send signal in those part of the electromagnet spectrum that
ar in common commerci us profession avoid us cellular telephon band cb
channel or am or fm radio channel for covert transmiss thei also find out if the
target site us commerci twowai radio frequenc and avoid us those band
a compet spy doe not leav a hard wire connect between the wiretap and the place
where he conduct listen if someon locat the tap all that person would have to do is
trace the hard wire line to locat the spy
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1863
if the spy conduct offsit recept of comput eman and signal the recept
vehicl or site should have suffici camouflag or should be adequ disguis to avoid
ani notic or detect
a good spy never reveal anyth about an intellig campaign to anyon except her
client even after the job is finish
onc a job is finish and a report ha been written and deliv to the client a spy
destroi all documentari evid of the campaign
aerial photographi
though it origin lie in the militari sector aerial photographi ha emerg as a valuabl
tool in busi intellig googl earth a free onlin tool that enabl user to obtain an
aerial photo of properti by satellit ha made gather thi type of intellig quit easi
addition there ar privat aerial photographi firm that have fairli complet neg
for land in their servic area these firm also accept special assign to photograph
specif ground area on a schedul specifi by the client aerial photographi is us by
spi to gather inform on a competitor construct or expans product to
measur the size of it shipment or to determin the number of employe that the
compani ha work among other thing
bug and wiretap
hidden microphon wiretap and other form of electron surveil equip have
becom extrem common wai for intellig profession to keep tab on their
competit the spy ha two primari consider in a wiretap campaign where to
insert the surveil equip and which of the variou technolog to emploi
the insert point
in identifi the insert point the spy not onli ha to choos an area where proprietari
inform is like to be discuss or displai on comput screen but also where
background nois and electron interfer remain minim spi frequent choos area
with proxim to comput and telecommun equip carri proprietari data as
an insert point
spi mai also target area conduc to employe convers thi can includ ani place
insid or outsid the target compani where kei personnel gather and chat exampl
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1864 2011 fraud examin manual
includ smoke area recreat area such as bar loung and coffeehous employe
cafeteria relax area exercis room and meet room to target particular
oper such as inform servic spi might wire the offic of kei manag which
ar like to provid access to a larg portion of human inform flow
the technolog
in determin which technolog to emploi the spy must factor in environment
condit such as light if video surveil is emploi nois level and distanc from
the sourc other factor includ the risk of the sens devic be discov power
suppli problem and access to the devic for servic after instal
common electron eavesdrop devic includ
dropin telephon bug
carbon microphon
magnet or dynam microphon
electret microphon
spike microphon
caviti microphon
low power consumpt transmitt
infin transmitt
shotgun or parabol microphon
cellular telephon receiv
video camera and transmitt
satellit track of vehicl
it is not difficult at all for spi to purchas electron listen equip the internet for
exampl ha a number of site that advertis vast inventori of equip rang from
audio devic to miniatur video camera to satellit track system most of these site
urg their custom to us their merchandis onli in a legal appropri manner and
advertis the equip for purpos like check for intrud or ensur on own
privaci in truth howev these devic can and ar us by corpor spi to pilfer the
proprietari secret of their target
some of the more common form of surveil equip ar discuss in the follow
section
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1865
satellit track system
in most satellit track system a small transmitt is surreptiti attach to the
subject vehicl common hide area includ the trunk insid fender or under the rear
bumper the transmitt commun with global posit satellit gp and convert
the coordin of the vehicl onto a map the spy onli need access to the internet and a
password to enter a special privat home page where he can view map that show the
vehicl locat and path these system ar capabl of gener event list and plaintext
histori of where the vehicl ha travel a variat on thi track design is that in some
satellit track softwar the system creat a trail of electron breadcrumb on the map
displai the map can be a power tool in track the movement of execut and kei
compani employe
dropin telephon bug
spi frequent us dropin telephon bug which have the advantag of blend in with
everydai exist telephon equip dropin bug ar simpli insert into the handset
devic on a normal telephon the target conv ersat ar transmit to a remot
receiv where thei ar record
dropin bug ar rare detect becaus most peopl never bother to unscrew the plastic
cover on the handset and perform a detail check of the intern compon thu a
dropin telephon bug offer minim risk of exposur to the spy when a spy ha access to
the physic premis of a target and want to be abl to listen to convers on a
particular telephon line thi devic is usual the chosen method of surveil
carbon microphon
carbon microphon while larger than most spy audio devic provid good pickup if
properli hidden and locat thei offer excel coverag of fix locat smoke room
employe loung and other gather spot as with other form of listen equip
these microphon ar usual equip with a transmitt that relai intercept
convers offsit to a record thi is much safer from the spy perspect than
maintain a record onsit with a remot transmitt even if the microphon is
detect the record materi cannot be locat or recov by the target
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1866 2011 fraud examin manual
magnet and electret microphon
magnet or dynam microphon can be veri small thei ar us when a microphon
need to be close to the speaker and hidden insid someth small electret microphon
also provid good close rang coverag both type of microphon ar smaller than the
standard carbon microphon though thei tend to offer a lower rang of coverag
spike and caviti microphon
spike and caviti microphon work best when the spy ha access to an adjoin area and
need to penetr hi surveil into the next room for exampl if a spy ha free rang in
a util room next door or in an adjac hotel or motel room a spike microphon can be
insert through the adjoin wall to monitor convers in the target room thi type
of microphon is so small at it insert point that it is virtual undetect to the casual
observ
infin transmitt
infin transmitt ar a special kind of devic that can be activ from a remot locat
onc an infin transmitt ha been insert in a phone a spy can call that telephon from
anywher in the world and turn it into a listen devic unknown to the parti present
the telephon becom a hidden microphon
shotgun or parabol microphon
for listen to convers at a long distanc shotgun microphon parabol
microphon devic and laser audio detect equip can overhear even quiet
discuss provid background nois is not too high the spy ha to be mind of have
adequ cover to protect the listen post
wiretap
wiretap involv splice a listen or record devic into a wire such as a telephon
wire a pbx cabl an alarm system or a local area network cabl that is us for
commun by the target standard phone system in particular ar veri vulner to
wiretap tap ar usual place at the telephon box in the basement of build on
line outsid build or on telephon pole junction box near the target offic the
differ type of wiretap that can be util includ hardwir wiretap soft wiretap
record wiretap and transmit wiretap
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1867
warn sign of bug
covert eavesdrop mai be difficult to detect particularli becaus most peopl do not
know what sign to look for jame m atki nson of the granit island group on of the
lead technic surveil countermeasur firm in the us ha compil a list of 27
warn sign that might indic that an organ is the target of an electron
eavesdrop campaign1 those red flag ar list below
other seem to know your confidenti busi or trade secret thi is the most
common indic of a bug campaign
inform discuss in secret meet or contain in secret bid doe not remain
secret confidenti meet ar among the most popular target of corpor spi
peopl seem to know about your organ activ when thei should not
strang sound or volum chang ar detect on your phone line thi is a common
byproduct of wiretap or activ of a similar listen devic
you notic unusu static pop or scra tching on phone line thi is anoth
common sign of a wiretap or bug
you can hear sound come from your phone handset when it is hung up thi is
typic caus by a devic call a hook switch bypass which turn a telephon
receiv into an eavesdrop microphon and speaker and allow a spy to monitor
convers near the phone usual within 20 feet
your phone ring and nobodi is on the other end of the line but you hear a veri faint
tone or a highpitch squeal and beep thi is an indic of a slave devic or line
extend be us on your phone line thi is also a kei indic of a harmonica bug
or infin transmitt be us
you hear a tone on your line when your phone is off the hook by us an extern
amplifi
an offic radio suddenli develop strang interfer thi could be caus by
eavesdrop devic that us frequenc within or just outsid the fm radio band
these signal tend drift and will quiet fm radio in the vicin of the bug to check for
bug look for transmiss at the far end of the fm radio band and at ani quiet area
along the fm band if the radio begin to squeal slowli move it around the room until
the sound becom veri high pitch the radio should be set to the mono function
rather than stereo as thi will increas it level of sensit
a car radio suddenli start get weird keep in mind that the antenna us by a car
1 thi list is provid courtesi of jame m atkinson and the granit island group 127 eastern avenu
291 gloucest ma 01930 978 5463803 wwwtscmcom email jmatktscmcom
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1868 2011 fraud examin manual
mai be and often is exploit by an eavesdropp and that such usag might interfer
with radio transmiss
an offic televis suddenli develop interfer eavesdrop devic can tend to
interfer with televis recept
your offic appear to have been burglar but noth wa taken someon could
have enter the premis in order to plant a listen devic
electr wall plate cover outlet switch smoke alarm and light fixtur
appear to have been move slightli these ar among the most popular locat for
hide listen devic which requir that the plate be remov watch for slight
variat in the color or appear of the power outlet or light switch as these ar
often swamp out by an eavesdropp
a dimes discolor appear on an offic wall or ceil thi is a sign that a
pinhol microphon or video camera ha been instal
on of your vendor give you an electron devic such as a desk radio alarm clock
cd player or small televis these gift frequent contain secret eavesdrop
devic
a small bump or deform ha appear on the baseboard by the floor thi is a
strong indic that someon mai have conceal covert wire or a microphon
imbed into the adhes that hold the mold to the floor
a smoke detector clock lamp or exit sign in your offic or home look slightli crook
ha a small hole in the surfac ha a quasi reflect surfac or otherwis appear to
have been tamper with these item ar also common place for conceal bug
certain item just appear in your offic without anyon know how thei got there
typic item to watch for and bewar of ar clock exit sign sprinkler head radio
pictur frame and lamp thei mai contain listen equip and could have been
place in your offic by a spy
drywal dust or debri is found on the floor next to a wall thi could be a sign that a
pinhol microphon or video camera ha been instal nearbi
small piec of ceil tile or grit ar found on the floor or on a desk also a crack
chip or goug ceil tile sag ceil tile or ceil tile not properli set into
track mai be observ thi indic that a ceil tile ha been move possibl becaus
someon ha instal a technic surveil devic abov your ceil
phone compani truck and util worker seem to be spend a lot of time near your
home or offic these worker could actual be corpor spi in disguis
telephon cabl plumb or air condit repair peopl show up to work when no
on call them thi is a veri common method for an eavesdropp to plant a bug
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1869
servic or deliveri truck ar often park nearbi with nobodi in them these vehicl
mai be listen post for spi in particular look for vehicl that have ladder or pipe
rack on the roof have tint window and ar larg enough to conceal a person in
the back
your door lock suddenli do not feel right thei becom sticki or thei fail
altogeth thi is evid that the lock ha been pick manipul or bypass by
an intrud
furnitur appear to have been move slightli and no on know why eavesdrop
devic ar commonli hidden behind or insid furnitur
thing seem to have been rummag through but noth is miss thi could be a
sign that someon ha been look through your paper perhap even copi them
befor return them to your work area the most common rummag target ar
the back of desk drawer the bottom of file cabinet closet and dresser drawer
an eavesdropp send you a copi of your privat convers as simpl as it seem
thi is the strongest indic and solid proof of eavesdrop an eavesdropp will
sometim send a victim a copi of a privat convers thei intercept in an attempt
at blackmail or in an attempt to terror or just stalk the victim thi is commonli seen
in civil lawsuit crimin court case marit problem sharehold disput custodi
battl and other situat where on side ha a posit of weak and is
psycholog try to undermin their oppon
preliminari search procedur
if an organ suspect that wiretap ha occur there ar a number of preliminari
search procedur that the layperson can perform thi section is not design to make the
reader an expert at countersurveil techniqu profession who offer those servic
can easili be locat howev it is quit feasibl for an ordinari person to conduct a basic
search for wiretap equip when conduct an inspect for electron
surveil equip be mind of safeti concern never reach into electr box or
outlet unless you ar sure the power is off and do not grasp bare wire unless you know
thei ar not live
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1870 2011 fraud examin manual
know your devic
wiretap devic for the most part look like hobbyist electron circuit board the
major differ is that thei ar much smaller than the circuit board of the past satellit
track equip is usual hous in small metal box about the size of a paperback
book thei requir small antenna that have to face toward the sky
inspect telephon
if the mouthpiec or earpiec on telephon handset have screwoff plastic cover remov
them and make sure no transmitt or unusu look compon ar attach to the
microphon condens also examin the mark on the condens unit do thei match a
condens from a similar telephon kept in a secur area if the mark ar significantli
differ have them check by a repres from the telephon manufactur
if the cover on the handset is on solid piec of plastic look at the two screw that hold the
plastic plate on if the screw have scratch on them eg from a screwdriv remov the
screw and take the plate off examin the condens for sign of tamper or for
miniatur transmitt
examin the back or undersid of the telephon look for unusu compon tape or
held by a magnet to the back metal plate also look for unusu wire protrud from the
phone thi mean ani wire other than the regular plastic sheath cord that is found on
all telephon if these examin ar neg then the telephon is probabl secur
if you still suspect the presenc of a listen devic do not attempt to disassembl the main
part of the telephon you mai damag the unit instead look at the screw hold down
the main bodi of the phone to the metal plate if those screw show sign of tamper
have someon from the manufactur examin the unit
it is also a good idea to inspect the wall box where the telephon attach to the wall
carefulli remov the cover and check for ani electron compon insid in a normal
wall box you should onli see wire and screw point where the wire ar ti togeth
extran compon could be electron listen devic if you ar not sure whether
the item you have identifi is actual a transmitt or microphon contact a qualifi
2 the granit island group a technic surveil countermeasur firm provid photograph of some
electron surveil equip on it websit wwwtscmcomwhatistscmhtml
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1871
countermeasur expert the phone compani or a repres from the phone
manufactur
interfac box
the interfac box is a grai box typic locat on the side of the build if a busi
oper in a multipl occup structur the interfac box mai be locat in a util closet
close to the compani offic in order to ex amin the interfac box unscrew the side of
the box that is design for custom access look insid with a flashlight all wire in the
box should look the same us the color red blue green yellow and black you might see
some stripe wire but that is fine there should also be a line come into the side of the
box from the telephon compani what you should be look for is a transmitt or some
form of unusu wire that doe not appear to come from the telephon compani and doe
not lead into your build or offic thi could indic a wiretap
abov the ceil
if an open space exist abov the ceil in your offic access that area and look around
with a flashlight be on the lookout for everyth from sophist transmitt to tape
record that ar crude hook into telephon line if listen devic have been place
in an attic or in a crawl space abov the ceil thei probabl have not been elabor
camouflag it should not be exceedingli difficult to spot surveil equip in these
area
it is a good idea to have the light turn on in the room below while you search overhead
if someon ha drill hole in the ceil to insert a microphon the light should shine
through the ceil and you will be abl to detect the hole surveil personnel frequent
drill multipl hole befor select just on as a listen spot or insert a miniatur video
camera
other place to search
us a flashlight to look through the grill panel cover all air condit duct for
transmitt or listen devic carefulli inspect all electr outlet by remov the cover
plate and look insid with a flashlight examin ani central util closet for unusu
wire and electron devic look for sign of debri on the floor under outlet or light
switch thi might indic that someon ha remov the wall plate to insert a listen
devic ani time duct outlet plate light fixtur or similar item have been search and
replac their orient and screwhead posit can be design with ultraviolet
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1872 2011 fraud examin manual
marker by shine an ultraviolet light on the screw it is easi to tell if the panel have
been remov thi techniqu make it much easier to determin if someon ha tamper
with those item sinc the last search
look under desk and tabl in all offic space for electron devic or wire that seem out
of place do not tear your offic apart while conduct your search feel your wai around
and explor with your hand look under and behind couch and sofa it is especi
import to close examin furnitur in area where peopl ar like to sit and chat the
tabl and credenza in meet room should be check on a regular basi
check ani televis set radio lamp telephon comput clock smoke detector or
sprinkler head in the room if ani area ar serv by cabl tv be sure to check out the
cabl line convert box line splitter and connector for anyth that seem out of place
ani electron item and wire that ar not essenti should be remov as unus wire
can be us for eavesdrop
comput
alwai check the back of comput for monitor devic tape to the back panel
examin all connect between the comput and the outsid world line to printer
network cabl line to peripher devic or line to monitor pai attent to ani
connector that have been place between the comput and it extern line these
connector mai look like thei perform a legitim function but if the extern line could
have been plug directli into the comput find out why the interfac wa insert and
who put it there
the area immedi around the comput should be check for unusu wire electron
box or devic ani closet or room dedic to hous network equip such as
hub router cabl rig or network monitor gear need close examin by a
qualifi network technician to make sure no alien electron devic ar present
video surveil
the role that video camera plai in the corpor espionag campaign ha sever
dimens microcamera place in a room of comput screen can focu on individu
screen and result in the tape of password login user manual text specif error
messag content of document and keyboard overlai dure mani hour of transact
camera can be us to monitor activ on receiv and ship dock plant
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1873
microcamera can track activ on product line or present in meet room thei
can also captur execut or kei employe at embarrass moment such
document can later be us for blackmail
video camera with a time and date stamp on the footag offer a mean of determin the
secur activ in the compani time of secur patrol access to special area like lab
the empti of secur wastebasket and other activ can all be track thi
inform can aid a spy in penetr restrict or sensit area
photograph camera
almost as ubiquit as the bug the miniatur camera plai a lead role in the canon of
spycraft mani a motion pictur ha shown the spy whether af ter militari or industri
secret bent over document quickli snap the shutter with the tini camera avail
todai industri spi can sneak out of a compani premis with numer secret tuck
awai in a purs or shirt pocket
minicamera
with the advent of copi machin in almost everi american busi the need to emploi
the minicamera to captur inform from document dramat declin becaus
mani sensit document ar store in electron format comput media such as disk
cd usb flash drive and other storag devic have also erod the need for film
camera some applic do howev still exist for the minicamera document such as
map schemat diagram and engin draw frequent cannot be easili copi due
to their size the minicamera is a viabl option for captur the inform on these item
conceal stationari camera with larg roll of film have larg been replac by video
camera film is difficult to replac at hidden sensit site it is also expens to process
videotap is cheap need no process and ca n be record offsit far from the video
cameratransmitt thu even if the target compani discov the hidden video camera
the footag will remain safe in the spy control
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1874 2011 fraud examin manual
infrar film
infrar film ha valu when surveil is done under veri low light or when the spy need
to examin damag or eras document even the content of burn document can be
detect under the right condit with infrar film
digit camera
as digit camera becom smaller in both cost and size thei mai becom a more
formid tool in the corpor spy arsen digit imag ar captur on a small disk
whose content can be load into a comput the imag can be enhanc and manipul
us variou softwar program therebi offer excel resolut the disk carri the
stolen imag can be carri off and on premis with littl chanc of detect
for ani good spy a good digit camera is the mainstai in hi surveil arsen even if
extens aerial photograph ar taken observ of the target site at ground level is
essenti from the ground view mani featur like sign letter on the side of vehicl
the configur of build and street licens plate and other import detail becom
visibl photograph of kei employe of the target can also be valuabl inform in mani
intellig campaign
to avoid attract attent the intellig specialist gener us telescop or reflect
lens to zoom in on detail from a safe distanc in build a visual file on a plant site a
spy will take ground level photograph from around the entir circumfer of the target
area he will even photograph crt and comput screen that ar visibl through window
to aid in analyz photograph at a later date the specialist will catalogu all photograph
as to
subject matter
datetim of dai
direct of shot
number in a sequenc of shot
import featur in shot
thi data can be store in a databas like microsoft access photograph themselv can
be incorpor into the databas by scan them into the comput from a flat glass
scanner or by load them from a digit camera photograph imag excerpt from
videotap surveil aerial photograph and relev diagram document imag or
draw can be also integr into on databas for extens analysi analyt
investig databas like i2 allow for the organ of visual data a databas gener
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1875
variou narr report chart diagram and chronolog the opportun for an
inform multipli effect ar tremend
cellular telephon
anyon who conduct a sensit or confidenti convers on a cellular telephon is
either highli naiv or plain foolish these transmiss ar transpar to the secret servic
of all govern ani amateur with a receiv can also pick up cellular commun
most corpor spi will as a matter of cours scan cellular frequenc around a target
plant thei will also focu in on cellular telephon call by execut and kei employe by
simpl physic surveil a spy can observ an execut pull out hi cellular telephon in
the car in a restaur or in the groceri store thi will alert the spy to begin monitor the
target cellular frequenc employe should alwai keep in mind that someon could be
listen to their convers sensit inform should not be convei by cellular
phone as with other surveil equip the tool necessari to monitor cellular
telephon convers ar easi to come by
monitor comput eman
digit comput process inform with a seri of 0s and 1s these two digit do not
translat to on and off state but rather to high and low current these current caus
pixel on a comput screen to fire produc high voltag puls that eman into the
surround environ comput eman form a detect and decod pattern a
detector or receiv known as a van eck unit can reproduc keyboard entri on a
comput screen even from a consider distanc
a van eck unit consist of a direct antenna logic circuit and two adjust oscil
on for the vertic and on for the horizont with proper adjust a van park
across the street equip with a van eck receiv can decod the eman from a
keyboard oper insid a neighbor build devic like cpu tape drive disk
drive and commun devic all gener electromagnet radiat which van eck
receiv can detect
to prevent competitor from monitor comput eman organ can shield
their comput equip and transmiss line a process known as tempest while thi
process is us extens in the militari and by certain defens contractor the cost
involv prevent mani privat sector busi from emploi tempest procedur
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1876 2011 fraud examin manual
tape record
the best place for a spy to place a tape record is offsit far awai from the microphon a
transmitt locat with the microphon send a signal to an offsit receiv that is
connect to the tape record thi precaut ensur that a compromis of the
microphon will not result in captur of the tape record can also be hook up directli
to telephon in order to record tap phone convers
all that is necessari to creat a crude wireless phone tap is a capacitor to block the dc
voltag from the telephon line wire in seri with a small am or fm transmitt across
the telephon wire pair an am or fm radio plug ged into a tape record pick up the signal
by take the output from the radio audio ja ck a profession would not us thi kind of
tap but a secur investig ha to be on the lookout for the amateur spy too some
employe want to get insid inform to gain an advantag over their cowork
bug the bosss telephon is a good wai to do it
comput system penetr
in some case inform thiev will attempt to extract inform by penetr a
compani comput defens thi can be part of an organ intellig campaign or in
some case it is simpli a random attack by a hacker bent on mischief for more inform
on how outsid attempt to penetr comput system see the comput and internet
fraud chapter in the financi transact section of the fraud examin manual
investig an inform theft case
most corpor espionag case begin with the discoveri of the offens someth is
miss or inform is out in the public sector the critic first step is find out how
the sensit inform wa compromis k now how the data went out the door often
reveal who stole the secret for exampl if a trap list becom compromis the
organ will know the list ha been compromis becaus it receiv a mail from
the mail envelop and it content the organ will be abl to determin who bought
the list by check the compani intern record it will be possibl to determin who had
access to the list within the compani so simpli by know how the leak occur and that
someon bought the list two avenu of inquiri ar alreadi establish the compani that
mail the list should be contact and an intern investig of peopl who had an
opportun to compromis the list should be commenc
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1877
the first step in ani corpor espionag investig is to determin the mean of the
compromis investig should attempt to rule out accident and procedur caus first
in respons to a compromis the secur investig or auditor will need to do a survei to
see if inadequ measur ar the caus factor onc the compani neglig is rule
out the investig can focu on potenti suspect
most investig should begin with the pe rson closest to the sensit inform and
then work outward for exampl if a market list were stolen it would make the most
sens to first look for suspect among the group that manag the list background
investig on these employe should be run check to see if ani of those employe
have risk factor that would make them like recruit for corpor spi risk factor
includ recent financi or lifestyl chang that appear out of the ordinari red flag that
particularli stand out ar employe who suddenli seem to spend a lot more monei or work
a lot of extra hour that do not seem particularli necessari given the employe job
if the member of the closest circl pass muster the investig move outward to
consid other employe vendor custom and visitor for exampl a secur offic
might examin visitor log to see who ha visit the market group recent gener
servic personnel like the clean crew the copier or comput repairperson or a deliveri
person who ha regular access to the area should also be consid suspect it is a good
idea to look for record or observ of suspici activ such as peopl come in at
unusu hour be in place not necessari for their work pump employe for
inform or access comput file
if the investig fail to develop ani lead on employe vendor or visitor then look to
decept techniqu reinterview employe in the affect area to find out if thei
receiv ani suspici telephon call email or redirect mail process at or near the
time of the loss also be sure to ask employe if anyon ha approach them for
inform at trade show or in social situat
if decept doe not appear to have been the avenu of attack the next consider
should be physic penetr of the site review surveil videotap of recent traffic in
and out of the affect area for intrud pretend to be employe again interview
employe mai uncov memori of person who appear suspici
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1878 2011 fraud examin manual
obvious an investig would also check intern record for ani incid of crimin
activ onsit at or near the time of the loss such activ could includ a burglari or theft
that appear unrel to inform secur at the time it could be a trespass charg
or disorderli conduct on compani properti do not overlook intellig or incid
report of secur personnel on activ such as peopl try to get into the trash
dumpster and loiter about the park lot conduct a secur survei at thi stage is
also a good idea it will help the investig detect weak in the organ physic
secur and mai help point out how an intrud could have enter the site
after exhaust all other option consid the possibl of surveil against the site if
sensit detail ar go out the door electron eavesdrop van eck monitor or
comput system penetr could be to blame the respons to electron eavesdrop
should be a physic inspect of the affect area and perhap the engag of a tscm
sweep as outlin later in thi section at the same time research all record regard work
order or vendor access to the affect area thi document mai help identifi who
plant the devic
program for safeguard proprietari inform spi
compani should develop a program for safeguard proprietari inform spi busi
should seek out a corpor inform offic cio to develop and manag an spi
program an altern is to hire a secur manag consult to develop a program
and then maintain it on a yearli basi in either case the cio should have inform
manag skill and be knowledg about trade secret protect
task forc
to coordin a companywid spi program a task forc should be assembl the task
forc should includ manag and staff from depart that deal with proprietari
inform such as research and develop and product the team should also
includ repres from corpor secur human resourc record manag data
process and legal
the process should begin by determin what inform should be protect the task
forc should identifi those area that give the compani it competit edg such as qualiti
of the product servic price manufactur technolog market and distribut on
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1879
wai of accomplish thi is to ask the team if you were our competitor what inform
would you like to know
onc these sensit area have been identifi the primari focu should be on the
inform secur procedur for each depart thei should identifi where
proprietari inform is kept and survei the risk if such inform is lost to
a competitor
employe awar
an effect program must educ employe about secur awar employe should
understand that their profession growth and wellb depend on the success of the
compani it should be made clear that the success of the compani is directli ti to the
protect of inform and data employe should be taught how to respond to
telephon inform request a procedur should be set out wherebi inform
request ar sent to public relat or some other depart
nondocumentari commun should also be protect employe need to know that
thei ar account for what thei sai whether it be over the phone or at a social gather
employe should never discuss confidenti busi inform at airport restaur or
ani place thei could be overheard thei should also be instruct about us a laptop
comput wherev there mai be a chanc it could be read in public by someon shoulder
surf
regular remind of the import of inform secur should be publish regularli
in compani newslett on bulletin board or in memo
nondisclosur agreement
all employe should sign a nondisclosur agreement everyon involv with the compani
should sign such an agreement includ subcontractor and their employe cleric staff
consult and temporari besid the legal valu a comprehens nondisclosur
agreement send a signal to employe that the compani ha a tough attitud toward
prevent leak it might also be necessari to have supplier and distributor sign
nondisclosur agreement although supplier and distributor have to receiv inform
about certain aspect of a busi employe deal with them should be made awar of the
potenti for misus of the inform and should be instruct to provid them with onli
the inform that is essenti for them to do their job
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1880 2011 fraud examin manual
document classif
document classif is also an import area in a protect plan work close with
each depart proprietari document should be classifi accord to the level of
secur that best meet the compani need s for instanc document mai be label
privat for personnel matter and move up to restrict for price or market
inform trade secret or highli sensit inform might be label author
access onli note and draft of document should also be safeguard or destroi when
the final document is complet
visitor
visitor access should be close monitor visitor should be requir to sign in and out in
a logbook and thei must be escort by their host at all time and should not be allow
into area where there might be sensit inform
offic
engin and execut offic should alwai be lock to discourag brows theft or
the plant of an eavesdrop devic kei to offic door should be kept secur
keep proprietari inform and comput disk in lock cabinet greatli reduc the
risk of theft
mainten worker
manag should design secur personnel or someon to monitor mainten work
done in area in which there might be sensit inform we have all seen scene in
movi where the hero or villain gain access to confidenti inform by walk into a
build or offic pose as a mainten worker
meet room
page system background music speaker and unus wire can be us for eav
drop ani electron item and wire that ar not essenti should be remov a
mirror and a light affix to a flexibl handl can be us to search for record and
transmit devic in air duct after the search when the duct grill ar replac their
orient and screwhead posit can be design with ultraviolet marker by shine
an ultraviolet light on the screw it is easi to tell if the panel have been remov meet
room should be lock when not in us if blackboard or flip chart ar us thei should
not face the window or the blind should be close to prevent observ from telescop
or binocular
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1881
quiet room
a quiet room mai cost anywher from 15000 to 200000 but the cost mai be justifi
depend on the risk involv a quiet room is acoust shield and radiofrequ
shield the room can also be equip with intrus monitor sensor and closedcircuit
televis camera
commun equip
cellular or cordless telephon must not be us to discuss sensit busi matter these
devic ar radio transmitt and ar frequent monitor by both hobbyist and
profession inform broker
electron mail and voicemail
for knowledg hacker email and voicemail system ar easi target
confidenti inform should not be left on a voicemail system likewis it should never
be left on a home answer machin hotel often offer voicemail for their guest these
system requir no password to gain access to and should never be us for sensit
inform author michael stedman report that when he want to interview robert
gate the former director of the us central intellig agenc cia he call the hotel
where gate wa stai and wa given a room number stedman said he wa astonish
when he punch the room number into the phone and suddenli found himself listen to
gate messag that had been left on the hotel voicemail servic
to prevent thi kind of espionag instruct staff famili and friend to never leav anyth
but routin messag on voicemail tell them to onli leav return number or better yet us
a beeper or pager make sure voicemail is clean out daili
comput system
password ar the most common defens against comput intrus but to be effect
thei must be us along with good control procedur password should be as complex as
the user can memor but never less than six random alphanumer charact the
compani must chang password regularli and close them out as soon as an employe leav
the organ manag should train em ploye to log off termin befor leav
them unattend the compani can also instal an automat logoff program wherebi a
termin that is not in us for a certain number of minut will be automat log off
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1882 2011 fraud examin manual
a secur encrypt devic can be emploi to protect confidenti file especi when
transmit them by modem encrypt techniqu found in popular softwar packag
avail at a local comput store ar probabl not secur enough these program ar in
wide us and ar usual no match for a sophist hacker if file ar not encrypt thei
mai be vulner to anyon with access to your comput
a compani should also consid the us of viru scan softwar on of the best
safeguard against virus or ani other kind of data loss is to have a secur backup
procedur
mani compani have not yet figur out what to do with the electron data store in their
system while some form of paperwork file or shred system mai be in place often
electron inform is organ accord to each user person system and delet
onli when the individu choos to do so even when file ar delet savvi comput
expert can often recreat the eras materi thi mean that everyth sent through the
comput from a birthdai greet to a smoke gun document is be preserv
thi is potenti crippl in the event of a lawsuit lawyer ar becom awar of the
storag of data and ar request electron evid in mani case lawyer pour
through backup of document long ago thought delet find incrimin memo such as
i know thi mai be illeg but do it anywai or pleas destroi thi evid often such
document result in the case be settl for more than it mai realli be worth becaus the
compani doe not want to run the risk that such document will inflam the juri into
award larg punit damag
compani should institut procedur for decid what should be kept and what
shouldnt also backup file should be kept under lock and kei on 8mm tape can hold as
much as 1500 box of inform anyon can grab such a tape and easili sneak it out of
the build
fax document
sensit document should not be sent through the fax machin unless both machin ar
equip with a highlevel encrypt devic some fax machin ar equip with a
storag and retriev system similar to that of voicemail system from a remot number
you enter a pin number and store fax can be sent to anoth machin thi allow a
competitor to be abl to retriev those fax as well
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1883
video encrypt
teleconferenc is grow in popular unfortun satellit teleconferenc signal
can be receiv by million of home satellit dish owner some of whom have deliber
tune in to find out thing thei shouldnt teleconferenc should onli be us when there
is an encrypt system in place that will fulli scrambl both the video and audio signal
corpor telephon exchang
privat branch exchang pbx ar locat in a compani tel ephon closet where wire
mount neatli and predict upon row after row lead to corpor execut offic and
other area of interest to competitor these room should be but seldom ar lock and
physic secur peopl with tool belt go in and out with littl notic from anyon
keep the eavesdropp out is easier than try to detect hi handiwork
exampl
in on case a surveil team found that an execut phone line had been tamper
with thei instal a motion detector in the telephon closet the alarm sent reportonli
signal to an alarm central station after two week the central station record reveal a
pattern of earli morn visit to the closet on mondai and thursdai surveil wa
set up and the eavesdropp wa caught
anoth good idea is to have an escort for anyon enter the area the ident of the
worker should also be verifi
computerdriven pbx or switch present numer opportun for eavesdrop
us an onsit or offsit control termin the inform thief can hide invis wiretap
among million of softwar instruct code the hidden code for exampl could caus a
second phone line to connect to a target phone line and termin into a hidden tape
record
an appropri train investig should regularli print out the user configur
instruct pai particular attent to those extens that ar like to be of interest to
eavesdropp the investig can look for modifi instruct code
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1884 2011 fraud examin manual
trade show and public event
sale materi trade show exhibit and the text of speech should be carefulli review
for inform that a competitor might find us employe should be instruct not to
sai anyth to anyon that thei would not sai directli to a competitor dure show
employe should not leav demonstr materi or sensit document unattend
new design model have been stolen dure their transport in or out of a show
foreign travel
corpor execut travel out of the countri should be especi cautiou mani
foreign govern ar unleash huge and sophist intellig gather oper
execut should us encrypt system on all voic fax or modem transmiss thei
should also assum that their room ar bug and act accordingli
technic surveil countermeasur tscm survei
if an organ ha a reason suspicion that it ha been bug it mai be advis to
engag an expert to conduct a technic surveil countermeasur tscm survei
commonli refer to as debug tscm is design to help the organ achiev
two goal 1 to detect the presenc and lo cation of technic surveil equip and
2 to identifi exist and potenti secur weak
tscm profession should never be contact from the area where suspect bug ha
taken place as thi could alert the spy to the fact that hi oper ha been discov
instead it is recommend that organ contact tscm profession from a secur
phone fax or comput that is locat far awai from the target area heavili us public
telephon ar probabl the most secur method for make contact messag should not
be sent from the home phone or comput of compani employe becaus thei might
also be under surveil in no event should an organ discuss suspicion of
wiretap or technic surveil on a cellular phone
in choos tscm profession a compani should make sure that the profession ar
compet in electron and have extens knowledg of design engin and
mainten thei must also be train in eavesdrop techniqu practic in rf radio
frequenc alloc and propag and knowledg about all techniqu of
modul electr wire and instal principl
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1885
befor conduct an actual tscm survei expert start with a preinspect survei and
vulner sweep of the target premis the tscm team usual requir a full set of
facil blueprint as well as a visual inspect of the premis so that thei can obtain a
complet understand of the inform that spi might target where the organ is
vulner and how spi might attempt to penetr the inform secur system thi
phase of the project can take sever dai as the tscm specialist test for weak in the
facil perimet secur network and commun system alarm system video
surveil system and other secur compon
onc a vulner analysi ha been complet and the organ risk have been
assess the tscm search can proce a tscm survei or sweep is a comprehens
examin of a facil design to make sure that the facil is free of ani form of
technic surveil equip thi includ electron visual and physic examin
of the site typic the sweep begin with an rf examin in which all radio
eman ar analyz to determin their sourc an electron enhanc search will
then be conduct to locat item or devic that were not detect from the rf search a
physic examin will be perform to locat clandestin devic such as record
microphon and transmitt the team will also examin the phone and the phone line
to detect bug tscm search ar not onli conduct on busi premis but mai also
includ the vehicl cellular phone comput equip and resid of kei employe
tscm sweep ar sensit oper that should be conduct with as much secreci as
possibl it is best to limit the number of person within the organ that ar notifi of
the oper becaus it is alwai possibl that there is a mole within the compani onc
again the compani doe not want to tip off the spy to the oper tscm oper
normal oper under a cover stori to explain their presenc at the facil when possibl
sweep ar schedul after hour to limit the number of personnel who encount the team
as with other contractor tscm expert shou ld be accompani at all time dure
their sweep
although tscm survei can be expens if a compani believ that it is the victim of
corpor espionag it mai be the onli wai to help track down the sourc of the leak
of inform
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1886 2011 fraud examin manual
prevent employe theft of proprietari inform
a compani can spend year develop a competit advantag over it competitor that
advantag can be elimin in an instant by employe walk out the door
when employe leav a compani there is usual littl if ani attent paid to where thei
go afterward howev if a compani begin to notic that a rival is suddenli take awai it
busi it should sit up and take notic often employe leav on compani for anoth
and take with them the knowledg of how that particular compani oper it price
polici it manufactur method it custom and so on when employe share what
thei have learn with a competitor the competit edg is lost
todai work forc is extrem mobil employe rare start with on compani and stai
until retir on top of that compani ar continu downsiz and lai off
employe in most case experienc employe have littl choic but to go to work for a
competitor or begin consult in their field cutback and fire do littl to foster an
attitud of loyalti among employe
employe awar
employe must be educ as to what inform is proprietari it is hard to protect
someth if no on know what need protect a secret formula mai be easi to identifi
but employe ar often not awar that subject thei mai be discuss over lunch in a
crowd restaur ar also trade secret that would prove invalu to a competitor it
doe not help that the court and legal scholar cannot decid on what constitut
proprietari inform definit of what is a trade secret depend on the organ and
the industri exampl of trade secret includ everyth from note in the margin of an
employe manual to a procedur for ty a fish lure in addit differ jurisdict
have differ law defin what can or cannot potenti be a trade secret
gener to establish a trade secret a compani ha to show that the inform is not
known in the industri that the compani ha made effort to keep it confidenti and that
the inform give the compani some sort of competit edg just becaus inform
is confidenti doe not make it a trade secret under the law howev even though
inform mai not be a trade secret as that term is defin under the statut it should
be protect by employe again the best test for decid what is confidenti inform is
to ask yourself if the inform would provid an advantag to the competit
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1887
nondisclosur and noncompetit agreement
a nondisclosur agreement is a written agreement that employe should sign as soon as
thei start work it usual provid that all proprietari confidenti or trade secret
inform the employe learn must be kept confidenti and must not be disclos to
anyon a noncompetit agreement is an agreement wherebi the employe agre not to
work for compet compani within a certain period of time after leav
gener motor corpor began requir it seniorlevel execut to sign these
agreement shortli after a wellpublic case against on of the compani former
purchas execut gm accus the execut of take million of dollar worth of
proprietari inform to hi new employ volkswagen gm accus him of push up
strategi meet befor he left so that he could gather even more data the employe
deni the charg gm conclud after thi happen that the us of noncompetit
agreement could help prevent a similar occurr
howev the us of nondisclosur and noncompetit agreement is not an overal
solut there ar sever legal problem with us these agreement as mention earlier
there is no clear definit of what constitut a trade secret in some instanc it can be
extrem difficult to determin what belong to the compani and what belong to the
employe
noncompetit agreement also have a varieti of problem first court in some
jurisdict have held that such agreement ar against public polici becaus thei limit
the futur employ of a person theref or in these jurisdict noncompetit
agreement ar unenforc other uphold the agreement but onli if thei ar part of an
otherwis valid employ agreement in these case the employ agreement and the
noncompetit agreement must be sign at the same time or the noncompetit
agreement is unenforc in addit if the employe is an at will employe who is not
cover by an employ agreement ani noncompetit sign by such an employe
would be unenforc
although nondisclosur and noncompetit agreement can be excel tool for
prevent the loss of confidenti inform to competitor their us is limit and legal
counsel familiar with employ law for the specif jurisdict should be consult
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1888 2011 fraud examin manual
howev mani profession sai that the real valu of such agreement is not their legal
power but their abil to creat the right imag thi includ make certain that
employe and outsid clearli understand that the compani is seriou about prevent the
loss of proprietari inform and will do everyth thei can to pursu those individu
who ar steal inform
make sure employe know when not to speak
often employe ar will to abid by nondisclosur agreement but thei do not
understand that the inform thei ar commun mai be confidenti for instanc a
softwar compani employe who work on product updat attend a trade associ
meet and entertain the other attende with war stori about the develop process
and what thing work and what didnt the employe wa later reprimand and seem
genuin unawar that the inform he had provid wa proprietari inform of
great valu to the compani competitor
exit interview
on of the most effect wai to protect a compani trade secret and confidenti
busi inform is to conduct an exit interview dure the exit interview the depart
employe should be specif advis about the compani trade secret and confidenti
busi inform and the oblig not to disclos or us such inform for her own
benefit or the benefit of other without the express written consent of the compani the
employe should be given a form to sign state that dure the exit interview the employe
wa onc again inform that ani proprietari inform should not be disclos and that
the employe agre not to disclos ani such inform without the consent of the
compani
protect the trade secret of other
in the rush to protect it trade secret from competitor mani compani forget the other
half of the equationprev their employe from appropri the proprietari
inform of competitor
if a compani hire an employe from a competitor it should realiz that it mai be open
itself up to a lawsuit for theft of proprietari inform such claim ar expens to
defend and the loss can be substanti even befor the juri verdict
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1889
exampl
diametr medic inc a usbas medic equip provid wa forc to abort a
30 million initi public offer after ppg indu stri inc file a lawsuit alleg theft of
trade secret and patent infring diametr deni the charg but the accus
were enough to prevent the public offer from go through
a compani doe not have to be actual awar that the employe is us proprietari
inform there mai be liabil for will blind that is compani execut had
reason to suspect that an employe could be us confidenti inform but did noth
to investig or prevent it
exampl
novopharm inc wa found guilti by a court in vancouv british columbia of steal
trade secret from it rival apotex inc court document state that a biochemist left
apotex and secretli join novopharm bring with him valuabl trade secret under
the verdict novopharm must pai damag of more than 37 million the judg found
that the chief execut offic lesli dan close hi ey to what wa go on around
him dan deni the judg character
human resourc personnel should ask potenti employe whether thei ar subject to ani
agreement that bar them from compet with ani current or former employ if the
employe is subject to ani such agreement a copi of the agreement should be forward to
the legal depart befor ani hire decis is made
if compani seek to us confidenti inform from former employe of competitor
then it mai run a greater risk of lose it inform to competitor in the long run as
discuss abov the most import element of ani confidenti inform protect
program is the cooper of the employe if the employe of a compani see that
manag ha a polici of pump new hire for knowledg about competitor it is
unlik that the employe will take pride or interest in protect the compani trade
secret
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1890 2011 fraud examin manual
legal issu relat to theft of intellectu properti
the econom espionag act of 1996 titl 18 us code 18311839 make the theft of
trade secret a feder crimin offens under thi statut the depart of justic ha
sweep author to prosecut trade secret theft whether it is in the unit state via the
internet or outsid the unit state thi statut is discuss in more detail in the chapter
on law relat to fraud in the law section of the fraud examin manual
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1901
extern fraud scheme ar those commit by outsid organ typic by individu or
group of individu against organ fraud scheme commit by outsid usual
occur in industri therefor the rest of thi section is organ by type of industri start
with financi institut fraud becaus some scheme ar commit by collus between
an organiz insid and an outsid some fraud can be classifi as both intern and
extern scheme
financi institut fraud
financi institut includ bank save and loan credit union and other feder
insur repositori financi institut fraud is also known by the more gener term of
bank fraud check fraud and credit card fraud as it appli to both merchant and financi
institut is discuss in a separ chapter
a bank is defin as an organ engag in ani or all of mani financi function such
as receiv collect transfer pai lend invest deal exchang and
servic via safe deposit custodianship agenc or trusteeship monei and claim to
monei both domest and internation thi broad concept appli to institut such
as central bank for cooper exportimport bank feder intermedi credit bank
feder land bank invest bank and mortgag lender
embezzl scheme
embezzl is defin as the wrong take or convers of the properti of anoth for
the wrongdoer benefit misappl often accompani embezzl but is a separ
and distinct offens misappl is the wrong take or convers of anoth
properti for the benefit of someon els
type of embezzl scheme
there ar variou embezzl scheme that have been util over time the follow
exampl ar not an exhaust list but ar rather a summari of the more commonli
emploi scheme
financi institut fraud financi transact
1902 2011 fraud examin manual
fals account entri
employe debit the gener ledger to credit their own account or cover up custom
account theft
unauthor withdraw
employe make unauthor withdraw from custom account
unauthor disburs of fund to outsid
employe cash stolencounterfeit item for outsid accomplic
pai person expens from bank fund
an offic or employe caus the bank to pai person bill then caus amount to be
charg to bank expens account
theft of physic properti
employe or contractor remov offic equip build materi and furnish from
bank premis
move monei from custom dormant or inact account
person with appar author creat journal entri or transfer order not initi by
custom to move monei among account dormant or inact account ar those that show
littl or no activ often contact with the account holder by confirm letter or
telephon contact is not possibl such account ar to be transfer to dual control and
record in an inact account ledger state statut usual provid for escheat or
forfeitur to the state after a period of year
unauthor unrecord cash payment
a director offic or employe caus cash to be disburs directli to self or accomplic
and doe not record the disburs
theft and other unauthor us of collater
custodian steal sell or us collater or repossess properti for themselv or
accomplic
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1903
detect method
there ar sever method by which embezzl can be detect gener if the dollar
amount of the embezzl scheme is small enough such that the financi statement will
not be materi affect embezzl fraud can be most effect detect through the
review of sourc document
if the scheme is so larg that the financi statement of the institut ar affect then a
review of the sourc document will serv to confirm or refut an alleg that an
embezzl scheme ha occur or is occur gener for larg embezzl the
most effici method of detect is an analysi of the financi statement which is also a
review of document
loan fraud
loan fraud is a multifacet activ that includ es sever type of crimin activ larger
loan fraud scheme often involv real estat lend and collus between insid and
outsid loan fraud repres the highest risk area for financi institut although the
number of occurr might be small the dollar amount per occurr tend to be larg
financi institut failur as a result of real estat loan fraud
loss report by financi institut across the globe ar in the billion of dollar most
financi institut invest heavili in real estat transact a substanti portion of these
loss relat to real estat loan
common loan fraud scheme
loan to nonexist borrow
fals applic perhap with inaccur financi statement ar knowingli or
unknowingli accept by loan offic as the basi for loan these type of loan fraud can
be perpetr by peopl either extern to the lend institut extern fraud or by
offic director or employe of the victim institut intern fraud
sham loan with kickback and divers
loan offic will sometim make loan to acco mplice who then share all or part of the
proce with the lend offic in some instanc the loan ar charg off as bad debt
in other instanc the bogu loan ar paid off with the proce of new fraudul loan
financi institut fraud financi transact
1904 2011 fraud examin manual
doublepledg collater
borrow pledg the same collater with differ lender befor lien ar record and
without tell the lender
reciproc loan arrang
insid in differ bank caus their bank to lend fund to the other or sell loan to
other bank with agreement to bui their loansal for the purpos of conceal loan
and sale
swap bad loansdaisi chain
in a daisi chain a bank bui sell and swap it bad loan for the bad loan of anoth
bank creat new document in the process it purpos is to mask or hide bad loan
by make them look like thei ar recent and good
link financ
larg deposit ar offer to a bank usual br oker deposit on the condit that loan
ar made to particular person affili with the deposit broker high return ar promis
but the loan ar longer term than the deposit hot monei sometim kickback ar paid
to the broker or banker
fals applic with fals credit inform
sometim loan applic provid fals inform about their credit situat andor
overst their asset
singlefamili hous loan fraud
in thi scheme unqualifi borrow misrepres person creditworthi overst
abil to pai and misrepres characterist of the hous unit such act mai includ
report inflat incom move debt into a depend name report inflat squar
footag of the collater or even bribe an apprais to valu the home at a higher amount
than the market valu
construct loan
construct lend ha differ vulner than other perman or interim lend
more risk ar associ with constructi on project than with alreadybuilt project
construct fraud scheme ar numer the more common ar relat to estim of
cost to complet develop overhead draw request and retainag scheme
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1905
estim of cost to complet
when borrow approach a lend institut for construct financ thei typic
have a develop plan complet with an engin report apprais and budget for
construct cost the construct cost budget is by definit an estim as the project
is built out the budget will be revis to reflect actual expens budget ar delin by
specif line item such as slab exterior glass grade landscap and tenant
improv as the project proce certain over and underbudget cost ar incur
these cost should be repres by a chang order
if the loan agreement ha been properli document and enforc no materi
differenti from the budget should occur without the lender knowledg and consent
howev the developerborrow might misrepres the true natur of the under or
overbudget amount to mislead the lender the architectengin and the lender inspector
should examin all budget chang the impact of chang order might result in the loan
becom out of balanc cost to complet exce avail loan and equiti fund
gener develop hide or conceal their overbudget construct cost in two common
place the first place is conting and the second is to remov alloc from tenant
improv and appli them to shell construct
most budget contain a conting line item in the event actual cost exce the budget
amount unfortun mani develop and lender do not monitor the total impact on
remov alloc from the conting budget in addit save ar not alloc to
the conting line item when underbudget cost ar realiz it is also common to rob on
account to make up for a shortfal in anoth account gener tenant finish is estim at
a particular dollar amount per squar foot thi allow the develop consider latitud in
negoti with tenant
howev befor the entir space ha been leas and the construct cost have been
incur the amount alloc to tenant improv remain budgetari if the develop
is allow to realloc amount from thi budget line to shell construct then when it
come time to negoti leas and finish out the space the develop might be short of
avail fund if the tenant finish is treat as a holdback and not to be realloc or
disburs except for it intend purpos then there is a greater chanc of the loan not
becom overdisburs cost to complet exceed the avail financ
financi institut fraud financi transact
1906 2011 fraud examin manual
develop overhead
it is not uncommon in construct financ to have a budget line item for develop
overhead also call gener condit thi is a ripe area for abus the purpos of develop
overhead is to suppli the develop with oper capit while the project is under
construct thi overhead alloc should not includ a profit percentag as the
develop realiz profit upon complet
in essenc the overhead budget is as if the lender is make two type of loan a real estat
loan and a work capit loan for the overhead unfortun there is seldom if ever ani
separ underwrit for the overhead portion the overhead is mere ad as a
construct cost whose ultim collater is the properti and not some other shortterm
collater histor troubl construct loan or foreclosur due to fraud have been
total disburs in the develop overhead categori
draw request
construct loan advanc ar gener support by draw request a draw request is the
document substanti that a develop ha incur the appropri construct
expens and is now seek reimburs or direct payment a typic fraud scheme in
thi area involv request advanc on the loan for inappropri cost such as person
expens andor construct cost for an unrel project draw request provid the
greatest opportun for a develop to commit fraud against the lender becaus the lender
reli upon the develop document
gener a draw request or pai applic is made onc a month and is submit on a
standard form such as the on promulg by the american institut of architect aia
the request should be accompani by the follow document
paid invoic for raw materi
lien releas from each subcontractor
inspect report
cancel check from previou draw request
bank reconcili for construct draw account for previou month
loan balanc form demonstr that the loan remain in balanc
chang order if applic
wire instruct if applic
proof of develop contribut if applic
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1907
the document requir as support for each draw request will vari depend on the
payment method such as direct dual payment disburs agent wire transfer or
reimburs ani miss or alter document is a red flag that someth is amiss
with the draw request all advanc on the loan should be adequ document
some or all of the follow step should be perform befor advanc fund on a
construct loan these step ar not repres as be allinclus but rather the
preliminari disburs question that the disburs parti should address
examin the draw and determin if suffici support document ha been
submit
reconcil the amount request with the approv budget account for ani
differ
determin that the amount request have been properli inspect and approv
determin if the proper lien releas have been submit for work perform
reconcil ani chang order with the approv budget determin if the chang order
have been approv
prove the cleric accuraci of the document submit
ensur that work complet ha been inspect by the lender architectengin
determin if there ar ani request for soft nonconstruct cost and whether thei
ar appropri
determin if there ar ani budget chang if so what ar thei for have thei been
approv
prepar a cost to complet estim to determin that the loan remain in balanc
if tenant improv fund have been request establish that there is a sign leas
on file is the request appropri for the term and condit of the leas ha the
leas been approv
if homeown option fund have been request establish that there is a sign
purchas contract on file is the request appropri for the term and condit of the
contract ha the contractpurchas been approv
examin payment request and determin if there ar new or previous undisclos
subcontractor if so determin why
ensur that the titl updat ha been receiv
retainag
the final area of major concern in construct lend is retainag retainag is the amount
withheld from each draw request until such time as the construct is complet and the lien
financi institut fraud financi transact
1908 2011 fraud examin manual
period ha expir there ar at least two reason why construct loan contain a retainag
provis the first reason is to keep the contractor interest in the project until all the work
ha been complet and accept by the owner the amount of the retainag repres
part if not all of the contractor profit therefor if the profit is not paid until the project
ha been complet then presum the contractor will complet the assign on time
and on budget
the second reason for the retainag is to ensur that the work of subcontractor is
complet and that the gener contractor pai the subcontractor so that no lien ar file if
the gener contractor fail to pai the subcontractor then the subcontractor will probabl file
a lien on the project if the retainag will not be releas until such time as the lien period
ha expir then there ar at least some fund avail to defrai the cost of fight the lien
or make a duplic payment becaus the gener contractor might have embezzl the
first payment without pai the subcontractor
red flag of loan fraud
there ar sever red flag of loan fraud mani time the sch em ar perpetr in tandem
with other scheme so what appear to be a red flag for on scheme might in fact lead the
fraud examin to on or more scheme
nonperform loan
although thi inform might not be avail to all a nonperform loan is not
perform for some reason on of those reason might be that a fraud scheme ha or is
occur
fraud scheme result in a nonperform loan includ
fraudul apprais the cash flow cannot support an inflat loan and therefor debt
amount
fals statement the loan wa made on fals or fraudul present assumpt
equiti skim there wa never ani intent to make the underli loan payment
construct overbudget item the overbudget amount might be a conceal method for
other scheme such as embezzl misappropri or fals statement
briberi the loan wa made becaus the lender receiv a bribe or a kickback from the
borrow
land flip the purpos of the loan wa to financ the seller out of a properti that ha
an artifici inflat valu
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1909
disguis transact transact that ar sham transact without substanc made
to conceal other ill
high turnov in develop personnel
on of the first sign to look for particularli in construct lend is whether or not the
real estat develop is experienc a higherthannorm employe turnov typic
when a develop experi a high degre of turnov someth is wrong with the
intern oper thi is often a preambl for other problem to come
high turnov in tenant mix
if the tenant mix in a commerci project such as a retail center or an offic build is
suddenli undergo a major chang there might be some problem with the manag of
the project or with the method of alloc the passthrough expens such as util or
mainten in addit a declin in the tenant mix might be an indic that the defer
mainten for the project is not be properli attend to
increas chang order
an increas in the number of chang order or amount on chang order might be an
indic that construct chang have taken place that would alter the origin plan
project to such an extent as to render the underwrit inappropri chang order can
have the same impact on a project as alter the origin document as with anyth that
is contract for on a bid basi chang order could also be an indic of collus
bid chang order might be an indic that the origin project wa not feasibl and
short cut ar shore up other problem area chang order should be approv by the
architect and engin on the project in addit to the lender inspector
miss document
miss or alter document is a red flag for ani type of fraud scheme becaus
conceal is a kei fraud element miss document ar a definit giveawai miss
document ar of particular concern in construct lend experi ha shown that
seldom is a complet draw request submit without some miss document
loan file
miss document in the loan file ar anoth indic that thing might be amiss it is
import to determin if miss document have been misplac or were never receiv a
waiver of certain document is on common wai for lender to conceal fraud scheme
financi institut fraud financi transact
1910 2011 fraud examin manual
document for real estat loan is fairli standard list below ar some of the more
import document that should be present in the loan file
apprais
architect or engin report
assign of leas and rent
assign of limit partnership note
assign of takeout commit
attornei opinion letter
avail of util water sewer ga and electr
budget
complet schedul
copi of leas exist or if project is preleas commit letter
disburs notic if requir
easement
environment impact studi
ingress and egress
inspect report lender inspector
insur binder lender should be loss paye
letter of credit if applic
list of gener and subcontractor
loan agreement
plan and specif
promissori note from limit partner to partnership if applic
road dedic
soil report
subscript agreement similar to limit partnership note if applic
survei
takeout commit if applic
titl polici includ instruct letter from close
zone
disburs file
copi of all check issu at close
lien releas issu at close architect engin etc
loan close statement
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1911
draw request
draw request form aia form or it equival
bank reconcili gener contractor disburs account
cancel check if gener contractor pai subcontractor copi of the cancel
check should be includ in the follow draw
inspect report lender inspector
lien releas for each subcontractor for the previou draw
loan balanc form the lender should prepar some form of reconcili to ensur
that with each draw the loan remain in balanc item of particular concern ar interest
tenant finish and retainag
receipt for all item submit on the draw request form
titl updat from the titl compani
wire transfer instruct from the lender to the gener contractor disburs
account
in addit to the normal loan file the lender should requir a continu report from the
borrow for exampl the borrow could be requir to report annual financi condit
coupl with a tax return miss document in these followup file might indic that the
project or the borrow is have difficulti that might be the result of a fraud scheme
loan increas or extens replac loan
a loan be continu extend and loan increas be made simultan might
indic that the real estat project cannot support the debt servic typic the loan
increas ar to pai for the interest and extens fee thi red flag might also indic that
the loan wa made to a relatedparti or made as a loan to hasten a sale or other transact
in other word the loan wa not properli underwritten
if the loan is increas and extend sever time it might indic that higher apprais ar
be obtain on a madeasinstruct basi loan increas and extens might be the
method us by the lender to conceal a nonperform loan
howev accord to william t thornhil cfe a consult in the field of financi
institut fraud fraud perpetr tend to write a new loan or credit facil to replac an
exist or old loan becaus thei ar awar of the fact that a rewrit mai attract loan review
loan administr or intern audit attent accordingli replac loan ar now
increasingli us rather than a simpl rewrit of a loan
financi institut fraud financi transact
1912 2011 fraud examin manual
cash flow defici
the actual cash flow of a commerci project is a veri tell red flag if the project is
experienc an unexplain cash flow defici then an intern fraud scheme might be
the caus the project cash flow might reflect ani of the abov scheme
chang in ownership makeup
a chang in the ownership makeup commonli refer to as busi divorc might
indic fraudul activ it is not uncommon to have a work partner and an equiti
monei partner when the two partner becom disench with their relationship and
seek a separ it might suggest thing have gone sour
disguis transact
transact disguis to conceal their true natur often involv the lender and either an
exist custom or new custom bank personnel will sometim engag in fraudul
scheme to forego the requir to record addit loan loss reserv on method
emploi is to sell oreo other real estat own properti to an exist custom or
a new custom in exchang for make a new loan on anoth unrel project in other
word the bank is ty on transact to anoth quid pro quo
anoth method of conceal the true natur of a transact is to conduct the transact
through nomine for exampl the bank might be requir to recogn an addit loan
loss reserv due to the lack of perform on a particular loan the borrow might or
might not be a good custom of the bank regardless of the statu of the custom the
bank might request that the project underli collater be sold to anoth parti the
financ to be arrang by the bank the borrow can form a new entiti nomine or shell
compani to purchas the properti a new gener higher apprais is obtain and the
properti is sold in thi illustr the avoid of loss requir the particip of the
bank personnel the borrow and the apprais
real estat fraud
gener defin real estat fraud is ani fals represent coupl with intent to
deceiv made in connect with a real estat transact there ar sever real estat fraud
scheme includ the real estat loan fraud scheme discuss previous in addit there
ha been a recent growth of mortgag fraudrel incid due to the rise of subprim
lend and the mortgag crisi thi section will further detail those real estat loan fraud
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1913
scheme and will examin sever other real estat fraud scheme includ those stem
from subprim lend and the mortgag crisi the scheme examin includ
loan falsif
forg document
apprais fraud
straw buyer
mortgageback secur fraud
equiti skim
properti flip
ident theft perpetr in conjunct with a real estat transact
builderbailout scheme
seller assist scam
shortsal scheme
chunk or shot gun
foreclosur rescu scam
most real estat transact requir more monei than ani singl individu or entiti can
intern financ therefor most of these transact ar financ to some extent
becaus these transact requir borrow monei expert ar need these expert
includ apprais lender and auditor
loan falsif
it is illeg to provid fals document to verifi incom or asset to make misrepresent
in a loan applic and to knowingli process a fals loan applic common type of
loan falsif includ alter bank statement alter or fraudul earn
document fraudul letter of credit fabric letter of gift misrepresent of
employ misrepresent of loan purpos alter credit score fals social secur
number failur to fulli disclos borrow de bt or asset and broker us the ident
of prior custom to obtain loan for custom unabl to qualifi
accord to the mortgag asset research institut mari ninth period case report
to the mortgag banker associ fals statement made in loan applic ar the
most common aspect of mortgag fraud scheme in fact fals statement in the loan
applic ar the most report suspici activ relat to mortgag fraud accord to
the financi crime enforc network fincen thi is becaus most perpetr
financi institut fraud financi transact
1914 2011 fraud examin manual
could not execut mortgag fraud scheme without falsifi loan applic and
support document
ident fraud which is the misrepresent of data underpin on ident such as
us on social secur number is a common mortgag fraud scheme involv the
improp us of identifi data in fact fincen report in 2009 that ident fraud
occur in three percent of the sampl mortgag fraud report
the individu in the best posit to us a person identifi inform for purpos of
commit mortgag fraud ar industri insid ident fraud scheme mai be perpetr
by mortgag broker in possess of person identifi inform provid by a
legitim borrow and unbeknownst to him us over and over again
ident fraud scheme ar also perpetr by invest club organ who collect
person inform from member and then us it without their knowledg to purchas
properti
in other case real estat agent mortgag broker crimin andor other industri insid
provid a stolen social secur number of an individu with good credit to an individu
with bad credit who wish to purchas a home and help creat a credit histori under the
bad credit borrow name
final straw borrow ar often provid with stolen or falsifi social secur number
and driver licens to us in origin loan thi scenario involv a highlevel of
collus between all parti to defraud the lender
the follow red flag mai identifi mortgag contain fals or mislead inform
an item other than cash is us for the down payment ie gift rent credit sale of
person properti repay of loan etc
borrow purchas properti from employ or landlord
borrow ha a nonpurchas spous
borrow purchas invest properti doe not own current resid
new home is too small for propos occup
the onli list of employ address is a post offic box
borrow purchas privat resid properti ha an unreason commut from
subject properti to hi employ
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1915
borrow level of educ is inconsist with employ
borrow ag is inconsist with the sta ted employ or the number of year
emploi
borrow is selfemploi or hi offic phone number is the same as their work number
when compar borrow asset and liabil ar inconsist
buyer is downgrad
loan applic is handwritten or incomplet
forg document
sinc w2 form bank statement titl commit leas tax return and similar
document other than the loan applic ar us to verifi incom and asset inform
such document ar routin falsifi alter or forg to perpetu mortgag fraud
scheme in 2009 forg document were the most report mortgag fraud scheme
accord to fincen
apprais fraud
the role of the apprais
the apprais perform an independ properti valuat for the new or old owner
apprais should be licens thei should also be certifi by an independ profession
associ there ar sever profession associ for real estat apprais a list of
these organ can be found at the end of thi section it is import particularli in
regard to complex commerci properti that the apprais experi and credenti be
carefulli scrutin
fundament of real estat apprais
real estat transact assum a will buyer and will seller fraud can occur when the
transact break down or the expert assist is not at arm length mani fraud scheme
have a fals apprais report as a condit preced sever differ kind of report ar
us by apprais thei ar summar below
letter form report
the letter form report is us when a client is familiar with the area and support data
therefor is not necessari the report consist of a brief descript of the properti the
type of valu sought the purpos serv by the apprais the date of valu the valu
conclus and the signatur of the apprais thi form gener is not us by financi
institut for credit decis
financi institut fraud financi transact
1916 2011 fraud examin manual
short form report
the short form report is us by financi institut usual for residenti real estat loan
sometim refer to as consum loan the report vari from on to four page and
consist of check sheet or space to be fill in by the apprais about pertin properti
data
narr report
the narr form includ all pertin inform about the area and the subject properti
as well as the rational for the estim valu it includ map photograph chart and
plot plan financi institut us narr report to support real estat lend and
invest decis on larg commerci real estat transact ani other type of
apprais report ie letter form or short form on these complex transact would like
be consid inadequ
determin valu
valu is compris of four element util scarciti demand and transfer real estat
apprais assign three type of valu to properti thei ar
fair market valu
thi is the price the properti would bring if freeli offer on the open market with both a
will seller and a will buyer estim
sale price
sale price is the price paid for the properti it might be higher or lower than fair market
valu actual
loan valu
loan valu is the percentag of a properti va lue fair market valu or sale price a lender
can or might loan a borrow
valuat method
sale comparison approach
the sale comparison approach lend itself to the apprais of land resid and other
type of improv that exhibit a high degre of similar and where a readi market
exist compar to the other approach thi method ha great influenc on residenti
portfolio valuat thi method is the least complic to understand and appli
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1917
subject properti is compar with similar properti that is either offer for sale or ha
recent sold item evalu includ time of sale locat of sale or offer for sale physic
characterist and improv adjust ar made to the valu of compar
properti either plu or minu on the basi of differ between them and the subject
properti relev item might be an overs lot a view a busi street or access
the cost approach
the cost approach gener doe not exert much influenc on the apprais final valu
estim it serv as a benchmark against which the sale comparison and incom
approach ar measur the cost approach is more accur for new properti it view
the valu of a parcel as the combin of the land valu if vacant and the cost to construct
a new build on the given date less the accru depreci the exist build would
suffer in comparison with the new build
the cost approach ha five step
estim the land valu as though vacant and avail for develop to it highest
and best us us the sale comparison approach
estim the replac or reproduct cost of the exist improv as of the
apprais date
estim the accru depreci amount suffer by the improv from all caus
physic deterior andor function or extern obsolesc
deduct the accru depreci from the replac cost to find the estim of valu
of the depreci improv
add the improv depreci valu to the land valu to arriv at the valu of the
properti
the abov is the most frequent us cost approach method it involv the cost associ
with rebuild with modern method design and materi that would most exactli replac
the exist build reproduct cost is a costapproach us to estim the cost to
reconstruct a replica of the build it gener is us onli when deal with uniqu
construct or for testimoni in court
the incom capit approach
under thi approach the properti valu is base on it capac to continu produc
incom thi method is particularli valuabl for the valuat of complex commerci
properti the net incom the properti produc is an import consider net incom
financi institut fraud financi transact
1918 2011 fraud examin manual
is the amount of monei over the remain life of the properti and it improv that a
fulli inform person us good manag is warrant in receiv
incom capit is the mathemat process of estim the present valu of incom
properti base on the anticip annual net incom it will produc kei to the applic
of thi approach is the capit rate that is us there ar three type of capit
rate interest rate recaptur rate and overal capit rate interest rate is the rate of return
earn on invest capit recaptur rate is the rate of return origin invest fund
provid the owner overal capit rate is a combin of the interest and recaptur
rate
fraudul apprais
fraudul apprais result from ani number of situat some of which ar
intent us of an incompet apprais
stack the deck by give the apprais improp or fals assumpt to us in
arriv at the valu such as
assum zone will be chang for a higher and better us when in fact zone will
not be chang
assum unrealist high vacanc and low expens rate
assum unrealist high incom sell price or absorptionth rate at which
vacant space will becom rent
otherwis influenc the apprais eg pai abovemarket fee or promis
futur busi
direct collus with the apprais to commit fraud
us for fraudul apprais
to obtain approv on margin or substandard loan to attain or exce goal in order
to be promot or receiv commiss bonu or rais
to justifi extend or renew a bad loan to avoid recognit of a loss that might
defer commiss promot bonu or rais
to avoid advers public and regulatori manag and sharehold disapprov
becaus of excess loss
to avoid recognit of a loss on real estat own and to permit addit capit
infus
to crimin gain monei
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1919
red flag of madeasinstruct apprais
the apprais us never ha been us befor is not on an approv list ha no
profession credenti or those offer ar of question credibl
apprais fee is unusu high
invalid compar ar us
support inform is miss insuffici or contradictori
market data doe not support the price and absorpt figur us to arriv at valu
detect fraudul apprais
to detect unrealist or bogu apprais the fraud examin should address the follow
1 read the apprais doe it match the document in the file
leas
compar
absorpt rate
residu valu
capit rate
legal descript
2 is there suffici demand for the project to ensur absorpt of the properti into the
marketplac
3 ar there uniqu characterist of the project that will ensur a competit advantag
over other project
4 is the project sensit to chang in local econom condit
mortgag fraud
fraud ha alwai been a constant presenc in the mortgag industri and it appear to be on
the rise there ar a number of like factor contribut to thi appar increas includ
a rapid declin in the rate of home price appreci an increas in unemploy and an
increas in aggress lend practic all of these factor either reduc incent or
made it more difficult for borrow to meet their mortgag oblig which ultim led
to an increas in loan default
financi institut fraud financi transact
1920 2011 fraud examin manual
the recent mortgag crisi ha led to an increas in fraud for sever reason on reason is
that the declin hous market affect mani in the mortgag industri especi those
paid by commiss dure such declin individu ar more like to commit fraudul
act to maintain their current standard of live in addit the declin market provid
an ideal environ for perpetr to emploi numer scheme that fit perfectli with
down market ie an increas number of foreclosur declin hous price and
decreas demand such down market characterist place pressur on home builder
seller and lender which fraud perpetr will attempt to exploit
the growth of subprim lend pave the wai for fraud
subprim lend refer to a varieti of credit instrument lender provid to peopl who do not
qualifi for the best market interest rate usual due to weaken credit histori there ar
mani type of subprim mortgag includ
interestonli mortgag
pickapay loan
228 adjustabler mortgag
optionadjustabler mortgag
over the past decad the subprim market grew dramat flourish as the vehicl by
which lender fund loan to borrow who would gener not qualifi for tradit
loan accord to industri newslett insid mortgag financ wall street gener 18
trillion in subprim loan from 2000 to 2007 in 2006 analyst estim that 25 percent of
all mortgag origin in the unit state were subprim and by 2007 14 percent of all
outstand mortgag indebted in the unit state wa subprim in natur by 2010
with the passag of the doddfrank wall street reform and consum protect act and
the announc of well fargo to discontinu it subprim lend divis the
percentag of subprim mortgag in the unit state is expect to declin significantli
as well fargo wa the largest lender in the unit state it is possibl that the percentag
of subprim mortgag will fall to nearli 0
correspond with the growth of the subprim lend industri wa a substanti increas
in the number of mortgag fraud case the rise in fraudul activ is the result of sever
factor includ the growth of autom loan process and the growth of mortgag
broker origin loan these condit coupl with veri lucr possibl creat an
industri that that is veri attract to untrustworthi individu or in other word fraudster
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1921
autom loan process
the growth of autom loan process contribut to the increas in mortgag fraud
becaus the natur of such transact is faceless the us of the internet to receiv and
process loan applic ha grown and in such case the lender never meet the
borrow thi process creat an environ suscept to fraudul activ
mortgag broker origin loan
the increas number of mortgag broker origin loan ha also plai a part in the
rise number of subprim fraud case histor mortgag loan were origin by the
loan offic at the bank mortgag lender howev start reli on thirdparti origin
tpo to broker their loan product broker could be paid a commiss rather than a
salari an option that work well for minim capit mortgag lender
as a result the industri ha seen the evolut of mortgag broker
as market for mortgag becam more competit bank with their own retail loan
offic also start emploi these thirdparti wholesal origin todai mortgag
broker ar the largest distributor of mortgag product for mortgag lender and bank it
is estim that twothird of all origin ar from wholesal tpo mortgag broker
rather than retail loan offic
mortgag brokerorigin loan ar vulner to fraud primarili becaus until recent
there were no nation standard for the licens and oversight of mortgag broker
howev on juli 30 2008 presid bush sign into law the secur and fair enforc
for mortgag licens act of 2008 safe act which is part of the hous and
econom recoveri act of 2008 design to provid uniform licens standard
nationwid the safe act requir all state to have in place a system of licensur meet
minimum standard for mortgag loan origin ie anyon who take a residenti
mortgag loan applic or who offer or negoti term of a residenti mortgag loan
applic for compens or gain begin juli 31 2009
mortgag fraud scheme
straw buyer
straw buyer ar loan applic who mortgag fraud perpetr us to obtain home loan
but who have no intent to occupi the properti thei ar bui or to pai back the loan
perpetr often us straw buyer to hide the ident of the true borrow that did not
qualifi for the mortgag
financi institut fraud financi transact
1922 2011 fraud examin manual
the follow red flag mai occur in a straw borrow transact
at close discov that the check is from someon other than the parti to the
contract
borrow resid in differ state than purchas properti which is describ as a
primari resid
quit claim deed is us veri close to loan close
invest properti repres as owneroccupi
a thirdparti sign on the borrow behalf
name ad to purchas contract
parti to the transact ar relat
there is no sale agent involv
there ar indic that the properti seller default
exist of a high fico score
gift us for down payment despit the presenc of good asset
equiti skim
equiti skim is a scheme wherebi an individu entiti or group of individu purchas
on or sever singlefamili home typic the financ is for a percentag of the
purchas price eg 8090 percent and the owner invest the balanc of the purchas price
as equiti the home isar then rent
the owner collect the rent from the tenant but fail to make the mortgag payment
when owner have withheld mortgag payment that equal the amount of the invest
equiti thei can then either resum payment or allow the mortgag to be foreclos
although the mortgag might eventu be foreclos the owner have recoup their
origin invest plu ani rental payment not appli to the mortgag in addit the
owner receiv state and feder tax benefit dure the hold period thi scheme is
most success with nonrecours mortgag
although equiti skim eventu collaps and the purchas risk be su for
defici if the loan were recours the scheme continu to be practic it ha becom
an increas problem as mani residenti home ar auction and bulk purchas ar
encourag
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1923
properti flip
properti flip ha been around for a long time it is well known in the real estat industri
as a wai to make a profit by bui low and sell high and it is not necessarili illeg
flip is perfectli fine when all represent of the properti condit and valu ar
true and accur howev flip can also be a fraud for profit scheme that mai lead to
substanti loss and other devast consequ
properti flip is the process by which an investor purchas a home and then resel it at a
higher price shortli thereaft for exampl an investor bui a hous in need of work for
250000 in juli renov the kitchen and the bathroom and landscap the yard at a cost
of 50000 and then resel the hous two month later the time it take to make the
renov for a price that is reflect of the market for a hous in it updat condit
thi is a legitim busi transact and there ar numer individu and group in
the real estat market who make an honest live flip properti
howev properti flip becom illeg and fraudul when a home is purchas and
resold within a short period of time at an artifici inflat valu the kei in determin
whether a flip is illeg is to watch for a signific increas in valu over a short period of
time that cannot be justifi a properti that sell twice in the same dai at an increas of
100000 is hard to justifi
an illeg properti flip is usual depend on an apprais report that ha artifici inflat
the valu of the properti the borrow mai review the apprais without inspect the
properti complet unawar of the market valu in that properti neighborhood the
borrow mai also be a straw borrow or an accomplic
nomine or strawman loan
loan made in the name of a straw borrow or agent have no substanc while the
ident of the real borrow is undisclos to the lender
mortgag pull
for the purpos of disguis loan exceed a bank legal limit loan ar made to a
partnership member who by prearrang then invest in a singl riski ventur in a total
amount exceed the lend limit in realiti the singl borrow is the partnership and the
collater is the partnership properti mort gagepul might involv fraudul loan
applic and payoff to the individu partner for particip
financi institut fraud financi transact
1924 2011 fraud examin manual
ident theft
an ident theft scheme is defin as the assumpt of someon els ident for fraudul
purpos ident theft is recogn as on of the fastest grow crime in the us recent
ident theft report from credit report compani corpor databas and commerci
data broker indic a substanti rise in case of ident theft in conjunct with mortgag
loan fraud
two exampl of ident theft scheme involv mortgag fraud includ the fraudul
acquisit of a person home and the fraudul origin of a loan on a properti
belong to anoth person
phantom sale
phantom sale scam ar particularli harm becaus thei involv the fraudul acquisit of
a homeown properti by file a fraudul deed thi scam doe not happen at the
origin of the loan but rather it mai occur without the homeown knowledg
decad after the properti wa origin sold
the perpetr identifi a properti typic belong to an estat or an outofst
owner that is own free and clear he then creat a fictiti quit claim deed which
purport to grant all right and titl on the properti to the fraudster the true owner
signatur is forg on the deed and the scammer file it in the real properti record onc
the deed is file he appli for and execut a loan on the properti us a straw borrow
often the valu is inflat he pocket 100 percent of the loan proce and disappear
phantom second lien
in a variat of the phantom sale scheme a person assum a homeown ident and
take out an addit loan or a second mortgag in the homeown name if there is not
enough equiti in the home to warrant a second loan an inflat apprais is obtain thi
scheme involv a high level of collus between a loan offic an apprais and a
titl agent
some red flag to help identifi ident theft aris dure the mortgag lend process
includ
a chang of address notic is file immedi
the apprais valu is inflat
there is no prior lien payoff reflect on the hud1 settlement statement
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1925
document ar forg or there ar discrep between the borrow document
signatur
the record owner live abroad or is deceas
mail or email sent to the borrow is return as undeliver even though
transact continu
builderbailout scheme
a builder bailout scheme usual occur when a builder ha sold the major of home in a
tract but is left with a few that ar unsold the builder mai be suffer from financi
difficulti with these linger home and mai need to sell them quickli in order to pai off
delinqu debt to dispos of the remain properti the builder mai undertak a
varieti of scheme that mai includ but ar not limit to the us of hidden seller financ
or inflat properti valu
some builder also includ lavish incent in the transact to lure buyer such incent
usual involv a form of down payment assist so that a borrow can purchas a home
without ani equiti contribut
other concess or incent that might be offer to potenti buyer includ manag
the properti as incomegener invest properti absorb ani neg cash flow
for the first 12 to 36 month guarante mortgag payment for the first 12 to 36 month
or other turnkei servic and guarante even though the properti mai remain vacant
builder mai also agre to pai the buyer a substanti rebat that is not disclos to
the lender
get concess from the seller is not new and it is not necessarili fraudul the
simpl test to determin whether or not the transact is illeg is to ask ar these
concess disclos and have thei been approv by the lender
a scheme involv a legitim buyer
some builder engag in builder bailout scheme find margin legitim buyer whose
intent is to occupi the properti and make the payment the follow is an exampl of thi
type of scheme
the market valu for a builder n ew construct home is 200000
a borrow want to bui the hous but doe not have the necessari down payment 10
percent or 20000
financi institut fraud financi transact
1926 2011 fraud examin manual
the builder offer to sell the hous for 220000 and provid silent seller financ
there is a verbal or undisclos agreement that the silent second will be forgiven after
close
the builder obtain an inflat apprais for 220000 thi inflat is typic below
fraud threshold and just enough to creat equiti for the borrow
the buyer is steer to a particip broker and titl compani
the buyer qualifi for a 90percent ltv 200 000 which actual repres the true
purchas or sale price the buyer in these scenario is often qualifi for the loan base
on materi misrepresent
the buyer close on a loan for 200000
the seller get hi origin ask price of 200000 and forgiv the seller financ
the lender now ha a 100percent ltv loan
if the properti goe into default the lender ha no equiti especi if the market
continu to declin
a scheme involv a straw borrow
other builder seek straw borrow who ar often induc with norisk invest
properti ownership sometim the straw borrow is affili with the builder in anoth
variat of thi scheme the builder fail to complet construct but obtain a straw
borrow and an inflat apprais to origin a loan
a builder bailout scheme involv a straw borrow mai plai out as follow
the builder recruit a straw borrow to purchas the properti for no monei down and
cash back at close
the builder obtain an inflat apprais that is us as a basi for the loan amount thi
inflat loan amount will allow the builder to recoup hi expens pai a fee to the straw
and keep the loan current for two to four year thi might appear on the hud1
statement as a disproportion commiss to a real estat agent 30 percent who in
turn split it with the builder
the borrow is steer to a particip broker and titl compani and is qualifi
base on materi misrepresent
the builder offer to manag the properti for the borrow with the promis of four
year with no mortgag payment
the properti mai remain vacant and the neighborhood mai be deterior
the loan remain current for a period of time but then goe into delinqu
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1927
sellerassist scam
sellerassist scheme ar more like to occur when home sale have declin and
seller ar motiv to sell these scheme ar base on inflat apprais after the buyer
obtain an inflat mortgag and purchas a home at the inflat valu the seller give the
buyer a rebat howev the rebat is not disclos to the lender and as a result the lender
loan more monei than the properti us to secur the loan wa worth if the buyer
default which gener happen the lender cannot sell the properti and recov the loan
monei
in addit to the red flag associ with apprais fraud note abov the follow
trigger mai indic the exist of seller assist scam
the seller is desper to sell the properti
the contract appear to be for substanti more than it is worth
the buyer ha alreadi select the apprais
the buyer insist on us a specif apprais
the sale price reflect properti appreci in an area where properti valu ar
declin
decept short sale
short sale which ar a viabl mean to avoid forecl osureoccur when the lender agre to
accept a lesser amount than the balanc on the loan most lender will entertain the idea of a
short sale becaus for the lender the foreclosur process is timeconsum and expens
thei would rather avoid the cost associ with a foreclosur so that the bank doe not
have to take the properti in as a nonperform asset and try to sell it borrow ar
recept to short sale becaus thei keep foreclosur off their credit report howev
becaus short sale usual involv properti that that ar sold for extrem low price thei
also provid fraudster with opportun to obtain cheap properti to us in the
advanc of other scheme
with the recent rise in foreclosur the inventori for potenti short sale will increas as
will the opportun for scammer to obtain cheap properti to us in the advanc of
other scheme the short sale scenario us by fraudster allow them to obtain these
properti inexpens under fals pretens thi is gener accomplish by acquir an
undervalu apprais
the follow ar red flag suggest the exist of a shortsal scheme
financi institut fraud financi transact
1928 2011 fraud examin manual
the fraud occur well after the loan origin in the lender workoutserv
depart
the properti is face foreclosur
the hous is stage to obtain an undervalu apprais
the seller will onli sign the sale contract at the dai of close
no offici letter or document exist to provid proof that the short sale ha
been approv
there ar multipl sale contract
the properti is immedi or concurr resold at a price that is higher than the
discount valu
multipl hud settlement statement exist that do not mirror the econom basi of
the transact
payment made to the seller ar not disclos on the hud settlement statement
after the properti is in default or foreclosur there ar chang in ownership but there
is neither a new mortgag nor the dismiss of the foreclosur suit
commun with the shortsal lender ar restrict
chunk and shot gun
chunk
chunk scheme typic involv an unsophist borrow who is recruit to purchas
a properti and who deal exclus with a recruit the recruit collud with a mortgag
broker who gather the complet loan applic and submit them to multipl lender
for approv the borrow mai not even be awar that the recruit and loan offic have
submit the applic to multipl lender multipl approv ar provid all for the
same properti and all without know that other loan ar be close and fund
simultan on the same properti
the assist of an apprais and a titl agent ar usual requir for a chunk scheme to
be success the recruit often act as the borrow power of attornei poa in
attend the multipl close and often is the on who pocket the loan proce over and
abov what is due to the legitim properti seller the borrow is left with numer loan
from variou lender further the lender ar not suffici collater as there ar
multipl claim as first lien holder creditor
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1929
shot gun
shotgun is a fraud scheme in which a mortgag broker send multipl home equiti line of
credit heloc loan on the same properti to differ lender at the same time the
borrow good credit the us of state in come product offer on mani heloc and
the lender determin of the properti valu base on the equiti in the home rather
than on an apprais all facilit a fast close process to ensur that all applic will be
process dure the same timefram due to the delai between the date the loan ar
close and the date the lien ar file in the courthous lender ar not awar of the other
lien when make their underwrit decis each lender believ it is first in line with
it lien
characterist of shotgun or chunk
thei mai involv on titl compani that willingli close each loan
the mortgag broker mai have power of attornei for the borrow
thei mai involv forgeri of the borrow signatur on multipl close packag
unbeknownst to the borrow
there mai be multipl lender inquiri on a credit report in a short period of time
foreclosur rescu scam
unfortun as more homeown struggl with potenti foreclosur more will fall prei
to foreclosur rescu scam there ar some legitim foreclosur assist program in
which the homeown is offer shortterm financ that pai off the delinqu debt thi
allow homeown to stai in their home as tenant until thei can repair their credit and
obtain longterm financ howev there ar also mani fraudul program
foreclosur rescu scam come in two primari variat phantomhelp scam and bailout
or rescu scam
phantomhelp scam
in a phantomhelp scam the scammer promis to save the homeown credit or get him low
monthli payment instead the homeown pai thousand of dollar in fee and the
scammer either doe noth or file bankruptci on behalf of the borrow and abscond
with the fee
financi institut fraud financi transact
1930 2011 fraud examin manual
bailout or rescu scam
in a bailout scam also call a rescu scam the homeown is trick into convei the deed
to hi hous to the fraudster and ultim lose both the hous and ani equiti a bailout
scam unfold when a homeown is solicit with an offer of privat nonqualifi short
term financ that will pai off a delinqu debt and allow the homeown to stai in hi
home while hi credit is repair as part of the agreement which is usual verbal the
homeown is convinc by the investor that to qualifi for the shortterm financ the
homeown will need to convei titl to the properti as collater onc the fraudster obtain
the titl he sell the properti at fair market valu pai off the debt and skim the equiti
that wa ow to the homeown
some other characterist of bailout scam includ the follow
the rescuer reli on a lender fund to accomplish the scam
the rescuer recruit other borrow to purchas the rescu properti onc he ha
obtain their titl the borrow mai think that he is bui a legitim invest
properti or the borrow could be a straw who is paid to purchas turnkei invest
properti
the borrow is steer to a mortgag broker or perhap the rescuer himself is a
mortgag broker and qualifi for a mortgag to purchas the properti at the fair market
valu not the amount that is due on the outstand loan unbeknownst to him the
borrow is qualifi base on misrepresent in other case the straw is
compens for hi particip in the scheme
collus with a titl compani is critic the homeown is instruct by the rescuer to
go to a particular titl compani or the rescuer convinc the homeown to execut a
power of attornei poa give the rescuer author to close the transact or
paper ar close at the homeown hous in a kitchen close either wai the
homeown is in essenc deed hi properti to the rescuer borrow gener in
these case the homeown doe not understand what is be sign the proce pai
off the default loan and the equiti goe to the rescuer
the straw walk awai from the transact while the legitim new owner borrow
discov that the tenant cant keep up with the rent payment and ha deplet hi cash
reserv to keep the loan current the titl compani fail to pai off the old debt and the
origin lender start foreclosur procedur immedi
mani state ar aggress pass legisl to protect homeown in foreclosur from
these scam
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1931
homeown fall for foreclosur rescu scheme becaus
the market is satur with rescu servic that ar fraught with li decept
exagger and pressur
the homeown is often trust and doesnt believ that someon would lie to him
the homeown is kept in the dark about the foreclosur process perhap becaus he is
told to ceas all contact with the lender foreclosur depart
the homeown mai be desper to save hi home and believ there is littl time to
act
the homeown mai lack financi sophist
foreclosur rescu scam red flag
red flag associ with foreclosur rescu scam includ
these scam often prei on elderli or longtim resid with larg amount of equiti
the borrow either a straw or legitim borrow receiv a remodel allow
from a recruit outsid of close
the underwrit ha note on the close instruct that a copi of the purchas
contract must be provid at close so unbeknownst to him the seller sign a purchas
contract at close or the seller name is forg in order to meet that condit
the seller on the transact is delinqu or in foreclosur
the hud1 settlement statement indic that most of the seller equiti outsid of the
mortgag payoff is go to a thirdparti
new account fraud scheme
fraud is much more like to occur in new account than in establish account special
effort must be taken to properli identifi the potenti new custom screen criteria
should be establish and enforc by everyon handl new account prompt decis
action is necessari to manag andor close appar problem account
fals identif
new account crimin ar actor thei us fals identif to open new account and
steal monei befor fund ar collect by the bank fals identif is easili purchas
busi account us stolen check
some bank custom defraud busi institut by open a new busi account us
check stolen from anoth busi the fraudster then withdraw the fund and close the
account
financi institut fraud financi transact
1932 2011 fraud examin manual
person account us fraudul check
a similar scheme is to open a new person account with two check drawn by other peopl
the check ar either forg or stolen the fraudster then deposit on and take cash for
the other shortli thereaft the fraudster write check to overdraw the deposit amount
prevent
a relationship with a financi institut should never be establish until the ident of a
potenti custom is satisfactorili establish if the ident cannot be establish the
relationship should not be establish
person account
no account should be open without satisfactori identif such as
a local issu driver licens with a photograph
a passport or alien registr card togeth with
a colleg photo identif card
a major credit card verifi the current statu
an employ identif card
an outofarea driver licens
a current util bill from the custom place of resid eg ga electr
telephon
consid the custom resid or place of busi ness if it is not in the area serv by the
bank or branch ask why the custom is open an account at that locat
follow up with call to the custom resid or place of employ thank the
custom for open the account disconnect phone servic or no record of employ
warrant further investig
consid the sourc of fund us to open the account larg cash deposit should
be question
for larg account ask the custom for a prior bank refer and write a letter to the bank
ask about the custom
check with servic bureau for indic that the custom ha been involv in
question activ such as kite incid and nsf situat
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1933
the ident of a custom can be establish through an exist relationship with the
institut such as some type of loan or other account relationship
busi account
busi princip should provid evid of legal statu eg sole proprietorship
partnership or incorpor or associ when open a busi account
check the name of a commerci enterpris with a report agenc and check prior bank
refer
follow up with call to the custom busi thank the custom for open the
account disconnect phone servic warrant further investig
when circumst allow perform a visual check of the busi to verifi the actual
exist of the busi and that the busi ha the capabl of provid the servic
describ
consid the sourc of fund us to open the account larg cash deposit should be
question
sinc teller ar oftentim the frontlin defens in prevent check fraud it is import
that thei receiv train that will allow them to identifi fraudul check
teller should
be awar of magnet rout number
look for check with number lower than 200
be awar of the date that the account wa open
have easi access to the signatur card
look for perfor edg on the check
be awar of what is accept identif
recogn forgedalt identif
recogn forg negoti instrument
be familiar with pattern of behavior relat to potenti culprit
overli polit
nervou
aggress and hurri
financi institut fraud financi transact
1934 2011 fraud examin manual
detect
some of the more common red flag of potenti new account scheme ar
custom resid outsid the bank trade area
dress andor action inconsist or inappropri for the custom state ag
occup or incom level
new account request immedi cash withdraw upon deposit
request for larg quantiti of temporari check
no order for print check
monei transfer wire fraud scheme 1
wire transfer of fund ar noth newthei began in the 1940 howev with todai
grow emphasi on a cashless societi the number of wire transfer increas each year
typic fraudster who commit thi type of crime ar knowledg about wire transfer
activ have at least on contact within the target compani and ar aggress in carri
out the theft
instantan transfer
wire transfer servic electron move fund worldwid from a financi institut to a
beneficiari account at ani bank point accord to a custom instruct a bank
point is ani institut or busi capabl of receiv electron transact such as bank
save and loan credit union brokerag firm and insur compani on ani dai 2
trillion to 3 trillion move among financi institut the transact ar primarili for
complet interbank purchas and sale of feder fund purchas sell and financ
secur transact disburs loan proce or repai loan and conduct real estat
busi
although these technolog enhanc oper and increas the effici of the financi
institut thei also provid a tremend opportun for crimin who learn to
manipul the electron environ for their person gain wire transfer fraud is a
particularli danger risk to a businesss solvencyon major wire fraud can destroi ani
1 the editor wish to thank jame incaprera cfssp cp p and joyc c lambert phd cia cpa for their
assist in prepar thi section mr incaprera is the louisiana investig manag for bank on in new
orlean la and dr lambert is a professor of account at the univers of new orlean
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1935
firm accord to the multist share and analysi center singl loss averag
100000 to 200000
common scheme
dishonest bank employe
peopl who have access to correct account identif inform can transfer monei
improperlyinsid wire fund to themselv andor relat parti
misrepresent of ident
peopl pose as custom have us pretext call to obtain correct account inform
from the bank peopl pose as wire room employe in anoth bank or a branch offic
order transfer to dummi account in anoth bank
system password secur compromis
peopl have legitim access to sensit account and daili code inform for a limit
time for exampl comput consult effect improp transfer through unauthor
access
forg author
bank offic and custom author oral or written is improperli obtain or
forg peopl forg order to transfer monei to their own account when the recipi
account is actual in the name of someon els
unauthor entri and intercept
unauthor personnel gain access to the wire room and it equip or the actual
transmiss is intercept and alter
prevent and detect wire transfer fraud
fraud examin and auditor need to advis manag on wai to prevent and detect
wire transfer fraud
busi audit and other control
everi firm of cours must have written polici and procedur for wire transact in
addit fraud examin or auditor should conduct unannounc audit of those
transact follow ar other exampl of wire transfer control
make sure the person author the wire transfer isnt the individu who order it
financi institut fraud financi transact
1936 2011 fraud examin manual
requir those order transfer to have secur password
maintain and keep a current list of those order wire transfer and a log of
all transfer
requir vacat of person who handl wire transfer
requir that reconcili of account affect by wire transfer be perform by
person not involv with the wire transfer process
keep all confidenti inform about firm account and wire transfer in safe room
secur with lock give comput kei card to these room to author personnel
onli shred trash
busi frequent perform vendor audit but often neglect to audit their bank wire
transfer control a fraud examin should evalu these area
pick a sampl of transact and review the log of the call made back to the bank
point to verifi their authent you mai listen to the tape record of the actual
author to ensur complianc with callback rule
review document of past wire transfer activ from bank statement or bank
onlin transact histori for a daili debit and credit match of each transact
obtain written confirm of transact from the wire transfer provid to
determin the timeli of their receipt by your firm
promptli reconcil problem caus by the usual custom of end all wire transfer for
a dai in the midafternoon some custom believ thei should receiv credit and
interest on fund receiv at the end of a dai howev wire transfer made after the
afternoon close time arent credi ted until the next busi dai
bank audit
financi institut should ensur the follow safeguard when transfer fund
provid custom with uniqu code that ar requir to author or order wire
transfer
maintain and updat list of employe author to perform wire transfer transact
compil audit trail of incom and outgo wire transact as well as the employe
respons for each portion of the transact
review all wire transfer transact at the end of each dai to ensur that the origin
transfer instruct were execut correctli
make sure the busi to which the fund ar transfer ar contact to ensur
authent of fund transfer request if the busi ar contact by phone the
phone number us should be the origin number given by the custom when the
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1937
account were open and not the phone number provid by the caller who
request the transfer
dont execut wire transfer sole from fax instruct again verifi authent by
phone the origin number given by the custom when the account were open
and not the number provid by the caller who request the transfer
requir that all account affect by wire transfer be reconcil by bank employe not
involv with the wire process
ensur the inhous wire oper manual is avail onli to author personnel
and secur when not in us especi after hour clean crew employe could
help themselv to client pass code and other confidenti inform
record all incom and outgo call for wire transfer instruct
carefulli screen wire transfer personnel applic
reassign to other depart wire transfer employe who have given notic that thei
ar resign but still have some time left with the compani
requir all employe involv in the transfer of fund to take at least five consecut
dai of vacat each year assign their duti es onli to other transfer depart staff
member dure their absenc
make sure bank employe never disclos sensit inform over the telephon
until the caller ident and authorizati on have been verifi to the custom
inform file
separ duti among wire employe who transmit or receiv request for fund these
employe shouldnt also verifi the accuraci of the transact
train employe on proper intern control fraud awar and the import
of protect inform share alert issu by govern agenc and
profession group
autom teller machin atm fraud
an atm is a dispens facil from which the holder of a debit card can draw cash the
facil can also perform other servic such as deposit fund and check account
balanc but the most popular us ha been to dispens fund fraud scheme have been
perpetr involv the unauthor us of atm facil scheme includ
theft of card andor unauthor access to pin number and account code for atm
transact by unauthor person
employe manipul
counterfeit atm card
financi institut fraud financi transact
1938 2011 fraud examin manual
counterfeit atm machin
exampl
a former citibank employe wa sentenc to 41 month in prison for mastermind a
scheme to steal 200000 in cash from sever of the bank atm the comput expert
wa the no 2 offici in citibank atm secur depart and program the
bank monei machin to issu monei and not leav ani record of the transact thi
wa done by remot access the compani mainfram comput er and instruct it to put
particular machin in test mode
detect
when investig atm scheme look for a lack of segreg of duti between the card
issu function and the person identif pin issuanc
advanc fee fraud
bank find deal that seem too good to be true to gain access to larg amount of monei
deposit at belowmarket interest rate the catch is that the bank must pai an upfront
finder fee to a person claim to have access to the monei in some case desper
institut ar offer access to illeg monei and thei typic do not report the loss of
the advanc fee when the deal fall through more inform on advanc fee swindl can
be found in the consum fraud chapter
exampl
the bank is contact by an agent such as a broker advisor consult promot lawyer
or bank custom offer to provid monei at a belowmarket interest rate for a long
period of time eg 1020 year the agent ask for a larg fee to close the deal the
agent take the fee and disappear the deposit might or might not exist and if thei do
thei seldom equat to the agent represent
red flag
agent request document on bank stationeri or signatur of offic
bank is ask to give nondisclosur agreement to protect agent or other parti
there ar sever complex layer of agent broker and other middlemen
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1939
broker loan
a variat of the advanc fee scheme is the broker loan loan broker appli to either
packag of individu residenti consum loan or singl commerci loan a variat
of a broker loan is the loan particip where the purchas particip in the loan but
doe not purchas the entir loan the fraud scheme associ with broker or
particip loan gener involv sell phoni loan packag or sell particip in
loan that have not been properli underwritten gener a larg fee is charg for these
broker loan
with residenti loan packag the broker sell the packag take the monei and disappear
broker loan ar gener not sold with ani recours to the broker therefor the
purchas must look to the borrow and the underli collater for debt satisfact with
loan particip the lead bank gener perform the underwrit howev thi doe
not reliev the particip bank from it oblig to perform it own due dilig if the
particip bank doe not independ examin the document and perform it own
due dilig then fraud scheme on the part of the sell institut ar possibl
letterofcredit fraud
most letterofcredit fraud aris from foreig n trade and contract letterofcredit fraud
can be perpetr by beneficiari us forg or fraudul document present to the
issu bank with a demand for payment the document howev must conform to the
term of the letterofcredit agreement
exampl
an american export might offer to sell good to an oversea import when term ar
arrang a letter of credit is obtain in the export favor confirm by a bank near the
export locat the actual export never occur and the request for payment is bogu
insideoutsid fraud
outsideinsid fraud is an area where fraud is increas in which the employe insid
might be coopt through a bribe or a threat of violenc against the insid or a famili
member sometim the insid is a bank teller who agre to cash certain item as long as
the item look reason and ar below a cash limit other time the insid is a proof
oper or sorter oper who insert document directli into the comput system to
financi institut fraud financi transact
1940 2011 fraud examin manual
affect fraudul deposit or the insid is sell copi of document to individu who
us comput techniqu to make fraudul item
account inform fraud
inform is sold to organ ring or insid who us the inform themselv as
financi institut make more servic avail to custom and strive to make them
more usabl inform about custom account relationship resid in mani form such
as 24hour custom oper onlin system print document that ar innoc put in
the trash onli to be retriev or credit card inform on high line card
trade activ
trade activ can be compromis to defraud bank usual perpetr with the
assist of an intern employe or by an employe act alon trade can includ
foreign exchang secur trade loan sale and securit often when thi type of
problem is suspect the investig must turn to trader themselv as the onli sourc to
gather inform
prevent
financi institut like other organ should have standard intern control
measur to assist in the detect and deterr of fraud in addit to normal
procedur such as segreg of duti and budget and actual comparison list below
ar some specif control measur that might enhanc the detect and deterr
of fraud
loan origin underwrit close disburs and servic segreg
by separ all of the function relat to loan a lend institut reduc the
opportun for an individu insid to perpetr loan fraud addition the segreg
provid for at least on if not sever level of independ review to reduc it extern
loan fraud exposur
committe approv of all larg or unusu transact
if a loan committe or a boardofdirector committe is respons for approv loan
and other larg or unusu transact then insid will have a more difficult time
perpetr larg fraud and the transact submit by extern fraudster will be subject
to anoth layer of independ review
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1941
transfer journal entri and order review
regularli review all transfer journal entri and order as with an expens review if a
routin but unschedul review occur from time to time then the fraudster lose the
vehicl for conceal
independ review of loan
an independ review of loan provid a nonpartisan approach to all loan transact
either the intern or extern auditor or other consult can perform thi independ
review that allow for a second opinion on loan transact the review should be
consist and perform on a regular basi to help establish loan loss reserv typic
thi loan review is establish for loan for more than a certain dollar amount such as
25000 or 100000
manag review of writeoff
excess writeoff ar a form of conceal for phantom loan conflict of interest and
embezzl therefor if all writeoff ar subject to manag review befor thei ar
written off then manag reduc the potenti environ for fraud
routin examin of offic account
routin examin of offic account might prevent fraud scheme such as wire transfer
fraud embezzl withdraw from dormant account conflict of interest and so on
thi review can be perform when the offic is on mandatori vacat
proper lend polici
employe should be train in the proper and regul lend polici of the institut
ani deviat from the polici will be red flag and will help to prevent loan fraud from
both intern and extern perpetr
document requir for standard transact
deviat from normal or proscrib document should be an automat red flag who
better to recogn a potenti fraud than the employe routin handl the
document therefor employe should be welleduc in proper document for
the transact thei ar handl
financi institut fraud financi transact
1942 2011 fraud examin manual
inform verif for exampl loan applic
fraud potenti could be elimin or at the veri least detect befor compani suffer
damag if the employe know how to verifi inform for exampl if the loan offic
advis a potenti borrow that the inform submit on financi statement will be
verifi the borrow will be less like to submit fals or fraudul financi statement
addition if a teller advis a depositor that the deposit will be verifi befor cash is paid
out then the incid of split deposit can be reduc
employe train
fellow employe ar gener the first peopl to recogn unusu transact or behavior
chang of other employe these might be earli indic that a fraud ha or will soon
begin employe and manag should be properli train to recogn these symptom
for exampl bank teller should be adequ school in split deposit scheme new
account offic in new account scheme and so on
standard procedur
an institut can provid a low fraud environ by standard procedur in sensit
area as detail below
loan applic process
inform requir for loan approv
credit report request
apprais accept from preapprov list of vendor
inspect report on construct draw loan
conflict of interest disclosur statement
routin confirm call for
wire transfer
construct vendor
confirm of regist secur with registrar or transfer agent
period physic inventori of secur
suspici activ report
effect april 1 1996 the offic of the comptrol of the currenc occ requir
nation bank to submit a suspici activ report sar under certain circumst 12
cfr 2111 as amend sar ar requir in each of the follow instanc
there is a known or suspect crimin violat involv the bank and the bank ha a
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1943
substanti basi for identifi respons bank personnel
there is a known or suspect crimin violat involv the bank the amount
involv is 5000 or more and the bank ha a substanti basi for identifi a possibl
suspect
there is a known or suspect crimin violat involv the bank and the amount
involv is 25000 or more if the amount in volv is 25000 or more even if the bank
doe not have a substanti basi for identifi a suspect
ani transact aggreg 5000 or more that wa conduct or attempt to be
conduct through the bank when the bank ha reason to suspect that the fund involv
potenti monei launder ar design to evad ani regul under the bank
secreci act or involv comput intrus
ani transact aggreg 5000 or more that wa conduct or attempt to be
conduct through the bank when the bank know that the custom is oper as an
unlicens monei servic busi
in most case the sar must be file within 30 dai of the date of detect other financi
institut have similar report requir includ
feder deposit insur corpor fdic 12 cfr 353
offic of thrift supervis ot 12 cfr 563180
nation credit union administr ncua 12 cfr 748
feder reserv board frb form 2230
more inform about the bank secreci act and other report requir can be
found in the monei launder section
doddfrank wall street reform and consum protect act
in the summer of 2010 the doddfrank wall street reform and consum protect act
becam law ad new regul for compani that extend credit to consum
exempt small public compani from sarbanesoxlei section 404b make auditor of
brokerdeal subject to pcaob regul and chang registr requir for
invest banker
new regul for compani that extend credit to consum includ
mortgag lender must make a reason effort to ensur the abil to repai befor
issu a loan to consum
financi institut fraud financi transact
1944 2011 fraud examin manual
nonbank entiti will be regul by the feder reserv if thei believ that the
entiti would have a neg effect on the financi system if the compani fail or
it activ would pose a risk to the financi stabil of the us
prohibit the financi incent for subprim loan that encourag lender to steer
borrow into more costli loan includ the bonus known as yield spread
premium that lender pai to broker to inflat the cost of loan prohibit pre
payment penalti that trap so mani borrow into unafford loan
allow consum free access to their credit score if their score neg affect
them in a financi transact or a hire decis give consum access to credit
score disclosur as part of an advers action and riskbas price notic
addition the act creat the financi stabil oversight council to regul risk in the
financi institut industri it is chair by the treasuri secretari and includ the feder
reserv chairman fdic and sec as member of the council the council will have
author to break up larg firm or veto rule creat by anoth new regul call the
consum financi protect bureau the bureau consolid most feder regul of
financi servic offer to consum and sit on the fdic board
applic feder statut
there ar mani feder statut relat to fraud and fals statement involv financi
institut the follow ar some common feder statut emploi in the prosecut
of bank fraud
bank fraud titl 18 us code 1344
section 1344 is the broadest of all bank fraud statut it punish those obtain asset
own or control by a bank by fals or fraudul pretens represent or promis
it cover both insid and all other person even if not affili with the bank
it also appli to check kite and to offshor fraud extraterritori reach bank fraud is a
predic offens under rico racket influenc corrupt organ statut
penalti for bank fraud includ a fine up to 1 million andor imprison of up to 30
year
financi institut reform recoveri and enforc act firrea titl 12
us code 1811 et seq
thi legisl greatli strengthen the prosecutori arm against insid and outsid the
law provis ar applic to ani institutionaffili parti which includ but is not
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1945
limit to director offic employe and control sharehold institutionaffili
parti can includ attornei account and apprais
firrea provid for enhanc civil and crimin penalti for convict of sever bankrel
statut the civil penalti can be 1 million per dai or a total of 5 million for
continu violat or the amount of wrong gain or loss the maximum crimin
penalti is either a fine of 1 million or 30 year imprison or both
crime control act of 1990 titl 12 us code 1821d1719
thi act defin a host of crime and increas the maximum penalti on other offens
for exampl the maximum prison term for financi crime wa increas from 5 year to
20 year these penalti howev do not becom effect for offens commit prior to
the effect date of thi law thu far no court decis have been made regard these
increas penalti thi statut amend the racket influenc corrupt organ
law rico make bank fraud a predic offens under rico
financi institut antifraud enforc act of 1990 titl 12 us code 4 201 et seq
thi statut set out procedur for reward privat parti for report violat and
provid inform concern the recoveri of asset the statut also allow for the
hire of privat counsel to investig and prosecut civil claim
continu financi crime enterpris statut titl 18 us code 225
also known as the sl kingpin sta tute the law provid for fine of up to 20 million
for organiz defend and fine of up to 10 million and up to life imprison for
individu defend receiv 5 million or more dure a 24month period from a crimin
enterpris a crimin enterpris is defin as a seri of enumer crime relat to
financi institut
embezzl misappl and fals entri
titl 18 us code 656 and 657
these section cover theft embezzl or misappl by a bank offic or employe
violat ar punish by up to 30 year in prison andor fine up to 1 million
financi institut fraud financi transact
1946 2011 fraud examin manual
titl 18 us code 1001 1005 1006 1007 1008 1014
these statut includ all provis that punish fals or fraudul statement oral or in
write to variou feder agenc and feder insur financi institut usual these
result from effort to conceal embezzl and misappl
titl 18 us code 1032 conceal of asset
thi statut prohibit ani person from corruptli attempt to conceal asset or imped
their recoveri violat ar punish by up to five year in prison plu fine
particip in the affair of a financi institut by a convict felon titl 12
us code 1829
thi statut bar peopl with bank crime convict from particip in the conduct of
the affair of a financi institut with certain except a know violat might result
in fine of up to 1 million per dai and imprison of up to five year
offer of loan or gratuiti to a bank examin titl 18 us code 212
bank offic director and employe ar prohibit from give a loan or gratuiti to a
bank examin or assist section 213 forbid an examin or assist from accept a
loan or gratuiti both offens ar punish by a fine of up to 5000 or the amount loan
or given and up to a year imprison
receipt of commiss or gift for procur loan titl 18 us code 215
the corrupt give or receiv of anyth of valu to influenc an offic director
employe agent or attornei of a financi institut is punish by fine of the greater of
three time the valu of the thing given or no more than 1 million andor up to 30
year imprison
other feder statut
the follow statut can also be us in connect with the prosecut of fraud
involv financi institut each of these statut is cover in more detail in the law
section
briberi of public offici and witn ess titl 18 us code 201
disqualif of former offic and employe titl 18 us code 207
fraudul us of credit card titl 15 us code 1644
fraud and relat activ in connect with access devic titl 18 us code
1029
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1947
comput fraud titl 18 us code 1030
mail fraud titl 18 us code 1341
wire fraud titl 18 us code 1343
racket influenc and corrupt organ rico titl 18 us code 1961 et
seq
the foreign corrupt practic act fcpa titl 15 us code 78m 78ab 78dd1
78ff
tax evas titl 26 us code 7201
file fals tax return titl 26 us code 72061
fals claim act titl 31 us code 3729 et seq
antikickback act of 1986 titl 41 us code 5158
red flag rule
in 2007 the feder trade commiss ftc issu final rule and guidelin red flag
rule implement section 114 and 315 of the fair and accur credit transact act
facta the red flag rule requir financi institut and certain creditor to develop
and implement a formal written program to identifi detect and respond to red flag of
possibl ident theft
although the red flag rule appli primarili to financi institut thei also appli to ani
creditor with cover account the definit of creditor includ ani entiti that regularli
extend renew or continu credit or that regularli arrang for the extens renew
or continu of credit includ bank in stitut mortgag lender retail util
compani car dealer and debt collector a cover account is an account primarili us for
person famili or household purpos and that involv multipl payment or transact
includ credit card account mortgag loan car loan cell phone account util
account and save account therefor even if a busi is not a financi servic
entiti manag should determin whether the entiti is a creditor under the red flag
rule
to compli with the red flag rule financi institut and creditor with cover
account must implement written ident theft prevent program that ar tailor to each
entiti size complex and natur these organ must also adopt reason
polici and procedur that
identifi relev red flag for cover account and incorpor them into the
prevent program
financi institut fraud financi transact
1948 2011 fraud examin manual
detect red flag that have been incorpor into the prevent program
respond appropri to ani red flag that ar detect to prevent and mitig ident
theft
ensur the prevent program is updat period to reflect chang in risk to
custom or to the safeti and sound of the financi institut or creditor from
ident theft
the red flag rule also provid 26 exampl of possibl red flag that financi institut
and creditor should consid when implement their program the exampl ar list
below
1 a fraud alert
2 notic of a credit freez
3 notic of an address discrep
4 unusu credit activ
5 identif document appear alter or forg
6 id photograph and custom appear appear inconsist
7 inform present by custom and inform on id ar inconsist
8 inform on id is inconsist with inform on file
9 applic appear forg or alter
10 person inform on id is inconsist with extern inform sourc
11 lack of correl between social secur number rang and date of birth
12 person identifi inform is associ with known fraud activ
13 suspici address suppli
14 provid social secur number match number submit by anoth person
15 address or phone number match that suppli by other custom
16 in respons to notic that applic is incomplet custom is unabl to suppli
identifi inform
17 person inform inconsist with inform alreadi on file
18 custom unabl to answer challeng question
19 shortli after chang of address creditor receiv request for the addit of author
account user
20 most of avail credit us for cash advanc jewelri or electron or custom fail
to make first payment
21 inconsist activ pattern
22 previous inact account suddenli becom activ
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1949
23 mail sent to custom repeatedli return as undeliver even though transact
continu on activ account
24 notic that custom is not receiv paper account statement
25 notic of unauthor charg or transact on custom account
26 notic of open a fraudul account for a person engag in ident theft
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11001
check and credit card fraud
check fraud
check fraud is on of the fastestgrow problem affect the nation financi system
produc estim yearli loss of up to 20 billion not onli is the dollar amount
involv in check fraud increas yearli the complex of fraud tool is grow as well
with increas sophist in laser printer more accur color copier and desktop
publish capabl duplic and forg check ha becom more accur and thu
more difficult to detect
due to demand of law enforc prosecutor fail to pursu 75 percent of bank check
fraud case accord to the us govern account offic in larg citi where a
major of resourc ar us to prosecut violent crime the percentag rise to 90 percent
law enforc offici mai neglect report of check fraud feel that busi ought
to be more vigil in detect bad check mani merchant have tri to us the polic and
prosecutor as check collect agenc therefor law enforc and prosecutor ar
often not eager to pursu these case mani badcheckpass ar constantli on the move
as well make prosecut even more difficult
the best solut for financi institut and merchant then is to educ employe to
recogn forg and fraudul check and the scheme behind them merchant and
financi institut should have a strict check accept polici with which all employe
ar familiar when accept check employe should alwai ask for identif and
make sure it is valid mani check passer mollifi store personnel by show them a small
lamin rectangular document with a pictur after look at sever hundr of these
most employe tend not to scrutin them check passer count on thi it is import for
employe to examin each piec of identif close everi time thei ar present
with on
employ must also watch for behavior among employe that could be red flag of insid
check fraud dissatisfact with job pai rate or home life a lack of recognit or lavish
lifestyl or a problem with gambl alcohol or drug ar indic that an employe mai
be commit intern fraud
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11002 2011 fraud examin manual
counterfeit check
an effect check counterfeit oper can turn a simpl 5000 invest into a
1000000 windfal within a 30dai timefram thi can be done without high level of
comput expertis or program simpl check print softwar can be purchas in
almost ani offic suppli store along with blank paper stock and magnet ink cartridg the
overal initi invest consist of a qualiti comput color inkjet printer check format
and micr font softwar magnet ink cartridg and paper stock after make the initi
invest the printer onli have to concern themselv with purchas addit ink
and paper
sign of counterfeit and forg check
a counterfeit will go to great length to make hi check appear to be the genuin articl
howev there ar a few giveawai that a check is counterfeit if the print on the check
doe not seem uniform in textur and color or slant up or down the check is not good
also the transit number in the top right corner must match the electron encod
number at the bottom of the check these number normal do not coincid on alter
check the first three of the electron encod number indic the state and district
offic of the issuer again on forg check these number do not alwai match properli
the check number itself should be found in the encod serial number at the bottom
know that mani merchant regard check with low check number as suspect forger
often attempt to add a digit here again thei mai have difficulti match the ink us to
produc the check a simpl and effect method of detect bad check is to fan a group
of check counterfeit check will sometim stand out as a slightli differ color
check fraud vulner
a particular institut mai be target for check fraud becaus of it locat inadequ
intern control or market strategi that present opportun to savvi check fraud
artist some mutual fund compani for exampl regularli allow custom to open
account by mail a form of commun with mani secur vulner a signific
number of check fraud complaint from a particular geograph area mai indic the
presenc of an activ organ group which warrant law enforc attent
investig assign to a region or institut should keep regular contact with busi
and regul specif inquiri aim to identifi weak develop control and prevent
futur loss analyz the complaint file by other victim of check fraud includ
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11003
retail oper check cash establish and food storesmai reveal common
element of scheme that might not otherwis seem relat
check theft
three type of check theft ar us stolen cancel check to obtain new check check
wash and steal blank check stock
stolen cancel check and statement although a stolen cancel check cant be negoti
it doe have fraud implic us a stolen cancel check a check thief can order
check from a mailord check printer and have them sent to a mail drop address
check can then be written on the new stock and cash onc fals identif ar
acquir
check wash check wash take place to the tu ne of 815 million everi year in the
us and it is increas at an alarm rate check ar stolen from mailroom and
mailbox and then the check is insert into a solut of chemic that can be
purchas at a hardwar store onc the check is dri the fraudster can write in ani
amount and the check ar usual cash without question most check washer alter
check for rel small amount
stolen check stock profession thiev us sophist method steal blank check
stock alreadi encod with custom account inform which make pass the
check even easier corpor check ar the most like target sinc thei ar easili cash
and deposit
check fraud scheme
paperhang
paperhang ar the expert of phoni check pass thei frequent pick a particular
establish or store and observ it secur method ani store that scrutin check
writer identif is not a good target for a paperhang howev thei will observ and
select the least experienc or most lackadais of store employe to whom to pass the
check the paperhang will then ask the clerk for cash back from the transact and make
the check out for an amount greater than the price of the purchas in some case the
check be written ar counterfeit howev in other case the check ar purposefulli
be written on a close account a variat of thi scam is make a fraudul deposit at
a bank and ask for cash back
these expert will go to great length to blend in with the clientel stand out in a crowd
is not to their advantag women ar often quit good as paperhang a mother with
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11004 2011 fraud examin manual
cry children pai with a check is usual not the profil on expect for a bad
checkpass
stop payment order
thi scheme is quit simpl a custom purc hase an expens item with a check and
then notifi hi bank to stop payment savvi check passer mai even contact the merchant
sai the item wa defect and that thei should expect to hear from the custom
attornei meanwhil the check passer sell the item for a tidi profit
anoth scenario is that after purchas the item and notifi the bank to stop payment
the fraudster goe back to the store wish to return the item and receiv a full refund the
merchant refund the amount in cash and the scheme is success
check kite
check kite is on of the origin whitecollar crime it continu to surviv even with a
financi institut abil to detect kite in a kite scheme multipl bank account ar
open and monei is deposit from acco unt to account although the monei
never exist
float make check kite possibl float is the addit valu of fund gener in
the process of collect and aris becaus the current holder of fund ha been given credit
for the fund befor it clear the financi institut upon which it is drawn busi ar
most suscept to check kite if thei have employe who ar author to write check
or make deposit in more than on bank account todai check kite is more difficult
becaus electron technolog ar make the float smaller all the time in mani case
electron debit to an account occur simultan with the transact unless
detect thi process can continu indefinit cover on check written against
insuffici fund with anoth check
demand draft
demand draft can also be us to commit check fraud thi practic involv the misus of
account inform to obtain fund from a person bank account without that person
signatur on a negoti instrument other term for demand draft ar preauthor
draft and telephon draft while there ar mani legitim busi us for demand
draft such as quickturnaround telephon transact initi by airlin and car rental
compani demand draft have been us by decept telemarket who obtain bank
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11005
account inform and withdraw unauthor fund from consum bank account
without their realiz that such withdraw ar occur
thirdparti bill pai servic
the check produc by these thirdparti bill pai servic provid do not includ the
payor signatur instead the signatur line reflect someth such as signatur on file
unauthor check produc by thirdparti payment servic ar not usual detect until
the custom review the monthli bank statement by the time the custom identifi the
unauthor check it is often too late to recov the fund sinc the 24hour window
actual until midnight of the next bank dai for the time return of check ha long
sinc pass these check usual sail right through the check sort oper sinc thei
includ good account inform and sometim even includ good serial number too
often both busi and individu account holder seem unawar of how their account
inform given too freeli to a request parti can be us for fraudul purpos
travel check
the us of travel check is declin signif icantli and will like eventu be replac by
electron option in fact an increas number of vendor in locat throughout
europeand in other part of the worldno long er accept travel check as a valid form
of payment howev for mani travel travel check continu to provid a conveni
payment method while abroad
anyon familiar with travel check know that 100 check ar quit common some
check ring special in the product and distribut of thi type of check commonli
check passer of thi type make small purchas us a fake 100 travel check and
receiv the bulk of the amount back in cash natur thi scheme work well in area that
have a lot of tourist busi ring often pull thi scam sever time in on area in rapid
success
travel check have sever distinguish featur watermark and hologram ar
common as well as microprint and ultraviolet ink there ar basic two method of
counterfeit travel check color copyin g and offset lithographyprint color copi
check lack the rais ink textur that the intaglio print press give most travel check
instead of a textur feel a phoni check will appear slick and flat offset lithograph
reproduct of actual check ar of higher qualiti than colorcopi check howev
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11006 2011 fraud examin manual
neither will have the textur watermark microprint or hologram that the genuin
articl have
payrol check fraud
check procur emploi by payrol check process compani print duplic payrol
check that ar sold to third parti or ar cash by member of the procur organ
to avoid the secur emploi by financi institut the check ar cash at groceri
store and checkcash oper with loos control the check ar usual written for
amount of 300 or less to avoid suspicion of cours check procur have access to
person inform on the legitim recipi of the payrol check and make us of it in
the futur
dumpster dive
often check fraud can be as simpl as retriev bank materi from a trash receptacl
exampl
thirti peopl were charg in a 10 millio n fraud scheme that involv counterfeit
check bank statement and credit card receipt pull out of the trash the defend
who defraud peopl in 17 state us check bank statement credit card receipt and
other document from garbag bin to creat counterfeit check fals driver licens and
fals credit report offici said counterfeit blank check print on highqual color
printer allegedli were us to defraud bank of 2 million
obvious thi type of fraud is easili prevent through proper dispos by bank
merchant and individu of sensit and confidenti materi
scan
scan requir a scanner and a legitim check scanner can be purchas for less than
200 and check ar readili avail without have to actual steal the check check can
then be manufactur by scan a corpor logo from a busi card onto a simpl
businesss check
system password secur compromis
peopl have legitim access to sensit account and daili code inform for a limit
time for exampl comput consult effect improp transfer through unauthor
access
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11007
check fraud ring
sinc the late 1980 foreign crime ring have been the caus of the major of check fraud
in the us most major financi institut attribut more than 50 percent of all check fraud
to organ crime ring in 2007 an intern task forc monitor the mail in africa
europ and north america and intercept billion of dollar worth facevalu of
counterfeit check
the perpetr of organ check fraud activ ar often base in nigeria russia
vietnam and mexico most of the vietnames and mexican ring oper in california
notabl san francisco orang counti and sa cramento the russian and nigerian ring
center in the northeast spread their crimin activ over a wide area and can be found
pass through ani part of the us at ani time while most of these gang ar involv in
drug traffick and violent crime check and credit card fraud ar consid safe crime
the chanc of be arrest and prosecut ar rel low and the penalti ar not
veri harsh
the equip essenti to a check fraud ring ar a laser scanner laser printer and a person
comput easili obtain item the total cost of which is about 1500 these ring us
digit scanner and offset print to counterfeit check the check ar cash by member
of the ring or sold to third parti
most ring special in payrol or other institut check written for amount less than
300 but some group infiltr financi institut collect corpor payrol check
monei order and master origin bank check cash the duplic for between 2000
and 5000
in recent year member of nigerian and vi etnames ring have infiltr or obtain
accomplic in financi institut there thei gather person inform on custom
pass the inform to counterfeit who produc falsifi identif driver
licens credit card etc which is us to open account establish line of credit and
secur loan an organ group mai includ a counterfeit or printer a distributor on or
more provid of fals identif and sever smurf who open fals bank account
or visit checkcash establish to negoti fraudul check
foreign crime ring that practic check fraud ar ethnic homogen and usual not
rigidli structur it is common for onli the leader of these ring to know the extent of the
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11008 2011 fraud examin manual
particip of their subordin the leader of such group ar usual quit intellig
and educ often thei have an extens crimin or busi background and direct the
group activ gang have been known to share member and cooper with on
anoth in the past
check fraud detect
fbi profil of check fraud activ
accord to an analysi by fbi investig in the new york citi area fraudul check
passer us the follow common techniqu
custom attempt to open an account with a corpor check or other third
parti check
custom tri to flatter hurri or confus the teller to draw attent awai from
the transact
custom delai endors a check or produc identif dure peak hour to
frustrat the teller and hurri the transact
custom present for cash a lownumb check drawn on a new account
custom offer foreign document birth certif passport visa or nonphoto
identif social secur card credit card in lieu of photo identif to open an
account or cash a check
custom offer alter or damag identif to open an account or cash a check
custom attempt to cash or convert sever small check into wire transfer gold or
other tender
custom request an except to establish rule to forc the transact
detect techniqu
the cashier or teller is the frontlin defens in prevent check fraud it is import that
thei receiv the train necessari to identifi fraudul check thei should
be awar of magnet rout number
us extra care in examin a check drawn from a nonloc bank and requir
posit identif
examin the date on the check for accuraci of dai month and year do not accept the
check if it is not date if it is postdat or if it is more than 30 dai old
look for check with a check number less than 400 on person check or below 1500
on busi check 90 percent of bad check ar written on account less than on
year old
be awar of font us to print the custom name that ar visibl differ from the
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11009
font us to print the address
be awar that the magnet ink micr us for rout code should appear non
reflect and dull
look for micr code that doe not match the bank district and the rout symbol in
the upper righthand corner of the check
be awar of the date that the account wa open
be awar of stain or discolor on the check possibl caus by erasur or
alter
have easi access to the signatur card
look for perfor edg of the check
be awar that a color copi might reflect odd color at time due to a failur of the toner
to mix satisfactorili
notic absenc of ani design in the background of the check paper
notic absenc of bank logo and the print of the bank name in the regular letter
notic absenc of the address of the bank on the check
be cautiou of inform that is type or stamp
do not accept a check that is not legibl written it should be written and sign in ink
and must not have ani erasur or writtenov amount
be awar of what is accept identif
recogn forgedalt inform
recogn forg negoti instrument
teller should telephon the busi or account offic for approv on suspici
request
be familiar with pattern of behavior relat to potenti culprit
overli polit
nervou
aggress and hurri
check fraud prevent and investig
sinc the feder reserv regul cc wa implement mandat acceler
avail of custom fund check fraud at bank ha increas most bank custom
fund ar avail for withdraw a dai after deposit leav the bank littl time to verifi
the valid of the transact regul cc howev allow bank two dai to make
fund avail most bank provid nextdai withdraw in order to stai competit
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11010 2011 fraud examin manual
addition special secur print techniqu have been develop to make
counterfeit blank check more difficult on of the featur is the us of a pattern of
color that is difficult to separ even with special camera filter and film anoth
techniqu us is scrambl indicia print which is a seemingli random pattern of tini
color dot print on the paper us a color filter to view the check will make a word
or pattern develop
still anoth techniqu which is also us by credit card issuer is to print a microlin on
the check which appear as a solid line when view normal but us a magnifi glass
will show that the line is actual veri small word or letter which ar veri difficult to
recreat with the normal print process other secur measur includ us a three
dimension hologram which is easili identifi by the human ey but is imposs to
reproduc via ordinari copi or print some check have a secur seal on the back of
the check that is visibl when held up to a light reproduct even good on will not
have a seal
check fraud investig
dure a check fraud investig look for the follow
frequent deposit and check
in the same amount
in round number
with check written on the same other bank
frequent atm account balanc inquiri
mani larg deposit made on thursdai or fridai to take advantag of the weekend
larg period balanc in individu account with no appar busi
low averag balanc compar to high level of deposit
mani check made payabl to other bank
bank willing to pai against uncollect fund
deposit not made daili or intact
entiti us receipt that do not indic mode of payment
on or more person check in the cash drawer by the fund custodian
deposit time lag
irregular check endors
amount of deposit doe not agre with daili activ report
inappropri access to signatur plate
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11011
check number paye name date and amount dont agre with entri in the
check regist
void check ar not retain
check ar issu to individu for larg even dollar amount
support document for check is not avail or ha been prematur destroi
cash withdraw with deposit check drawn on anoth bank
there ar sever tip for busi to us when cash busi and payrol check
examin all check insist that the check be sign in front of the clerk compar the
signatur written on the check with the signatur on the driver licens or state
identif
be particularli care with largedollar check present by noncustom
examin all check for sign of counterfeit such as a glossi crayonish appear
and ani lack of detail and sharp
look for sign of alter or erasur es pecial in the signatur or numer and
written amount
compar the bank identif and rout number for a match
the textur of the check should appear smooth a rough document might signal
erasur
be cautiou of inform that is type or stamp
all check except govern issu should have at least on perfor edg
the magnet ink us for rout code should appear nonreflect and dull
look for fade color paper which can indic that the check ha been chemic
bleach
a color copi might reflect odd color at time due to a failur of the toner to mix
satisfactorili
black letter might have a slightli greenish cast when examin under a magnifi
glass
a light color or delic background might fade out when copi
absenc of ani design in background of check paper
absenc of bank logo and the print of the bank name in regular letter
absenc of the address of the bank on the check
overal appear of poor qualiti of print and paper
a payrol check will usual be for an odd amount and will appear neat clean and
usual unfold
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11012 2011 fraud examin manual
teller should telephon the busi or account offic for approv on suspici
request
check fraud prevent tool
check write pen
when a check is written a special pen design to prevent check wash should be us
these pen ar call check write pen and can be found at just about ani offic suppli
store these pen have special ink that will prevent crimin from us solvent to remov
ink from the check when someon tri to wash a check written from these pen it will
either not work therebi leav the check intact or smear the ink and make it appar that
a check ha been wash
individu with busi account ar a much greater risk when it come to check wash
busi have much stricter requir in term of what the compani must do to
protect their check if the busi doesnt follow a strict plan to protect their check it
like that if ani monei is stolen from their account the bank will not return their monei if
an individu ha a busi account thei should make sure that the check ar lock
secur when not in us make sure not to leav blank computerprint check in the
printer or the busi will be equal liabl for the monei that could potenti be stolen
fingerprint identifi
a biometr fingerprint identifi requir the check writer to match fingerprint with the account
holder which ar on file bank report reduct in check fraud of 40 percent after the
machin wa introduc in the mid1990
nonaccount holder who want check cash at bank that have implement thi system
ar requir to put an inkless fingerprint on their check if the check doe prove fals law
enforc will alreadi have evid regard the fraudster ident the cost to a bank
of implement the inkless fingerprint system could be redeem by prevent a singl
instanc of check fraud bank throughout the nation now us thi techniqu to cut
fraud loss
forens document examin
through handwrit an individu can be posit identifi as is the case with dna or
fingerprint when investig check fraud a forens document examin focus on
the signatur and the handwrit itself
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11013
signatur
if the examin were investig a forg signatur he would compar the suspici
signatur to a sampl of the actual on note discrep between the two while on
signatur mai chang over time it would be close to imposs for a forger to duplic a
signatur with on hundr percent accuraci minut identifi characterist mark
peopl write and ar not reproduc
the ebank discoveri system develop by asv technolog emploi signatur
verif softwar us multipl feat ur set extract technolog drawn from
forens scienc the state and qualiti of a signatur twodimension characterist ar
analyz and verifi against sampl the program identifi flourish arc distanc
between letter and up to 100 other featur reject signatur along with the reason for
reject and signatur sampl ar forward to a human for visual verif asv
technolog claim it result match those of the most highli train and accur signatur
verifi
handwrit
like fingerprint handwrit is uniqu to an individu consequ if the narr
portion of the check is handwritten it offer a document examin a greater opportun to
identifi a forgeri
video spectral compar
forens examin us thi tool to test question document the document is examin
for photocopi and liquid paper under a control light sourc letter ad to a
document can be detect with thi devic
electrostat detect apparatu
thi tool allow examin to detect indent write from the top page of a pad of paper up
to five page below the origin the electrostat detect apparatu us photocopi
toner to develop the area of indent after a document ha been cover with an
electr charg plastic film in the best of case when the document is process with
the electrostat devic and the toner imag is develop the write impress ar clearli
defin and highli contrast if the develop write is to be us in an investig or to
demonstr result for the court the examin must turn to electron imag process
technolog for further enhanc
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11014 2011 fraud examin manual
credit card fraud
credit card fraud is the misus of a credit card to make purchas without author or
counterfeit a credit card the us of credit card as a form of payment ha grown
dramat over the past decad with more than 80 percent of us household have at
least on credit card as the industri continu to expand and offer credit to more and more
consum fraud will also grow
credit card fraud is success becaus the chanc of be caught ar small and
prosecut is not assur retail store have identifi credit card thiev and contact law
enforc onli to be turn down for action
credit card scheme
there ar mani differ type of credit card scheme includ sell the card to thiev
famili member us the credit card without author and fraudul obtain a
card statut relat to the misus of credit card gener prohibit the obtain of
properti or servic through the us of a credit card if the us of the card is for ani reason
unauthor the feder statut prohibit the us of fraudul credit card is found at 15
usc 1664 thi statut prohibit us a fraudul obtain credit card to obtain
anyth of valu aggreg 1000 or more and it prohibit receiv anyth of valu
purchas with an illeg credit card a violat mai be fine up to 10000 andor
imprison for up to 10 year
unauthor us of a lost or stolen card
fraudul activ normal occur within hour of the loss or theft befor most victim
have call to report the loss increasingli victim arent even awar that their credit card
ar be fraudul us until thei receiv their monthli statement it is extrem
import that victim report the loss or theft of their card within 60 dai of receiv the
statement with the fraudul charg as thei will not be held respons for ani charg
beyond 50 that occur dure that time frame if the credit card compani is not notifi of
the theft and the card is us the custom will be liabl
organ crime ring
nigerian ring ar especi notori for steal credit card and bank inform from
the mail these articl ar us to gener fals identif document such as driver
licens and social secur card the credit card themselv ar duplic and distribut
to member of the ring the fals id ar then displai dure purchas made with the
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11015
stolen card member of the ring go on spend spree end onli when the credit ha
dri up or the legitim owner report their card as stolen often counterfeit and stolen
card ar expressmail to member of the ring in other part of the countri
advanc payment
consum regul requir credit card issuer to credit custom account immedi
upon receipt of payment thi mean deduct from the balanc of the account befor the
check or other payment instrument ha actual clear the bank a loophol such as thi is
easili exploit by experienc fraud ring
us a forg or counterfeit check an advanc or overpay is made on a stolen credit
card sinc the issuer must credit the payment at the time it is made there is no time to
verifi the authent of the check consequ cash advanc and purchas can be made
immedi thi scheme can be extrem lucr to the perpetr
stolen card number
the internet ha becom a breed ground for individu to obtain stolen credit card
inform the thiev who steal thi inform find credit card or list of credit card
holder and the correspond number to their account thei then make the number
avail to a larger group which us the inform to obtain good and servic in the
name of the cardhold wrongfulli obtain inform mai be post on websit that
origin in foreign countri the intern natur of the fraud make it arduou to deter
or punish on report involv a romanian websit that displai stolen credit card
number of more than 450 individu most from the unit state the list contain
identifi inform of cardhold and wa avail for sever week befor be shut
down
shave and past
ani number of alphanumer charact is slice from the card surfac and other charact
ar attach util fast dry epoxytyp glue thi might be done to put an entir
differ but valid account number on the card or to chang the name
deembossreemboss
in thi scheme the credit card is expos to heat usual from a household iron a candl or
hot water in the microwav plastic card primarili compos of polyvinylchlorid becom
more elast when heat and the emboss alphanumer charact ar remov an
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11016 2011 fraud examin manual
emboss put new number and name on the card thi process will gener creat a
ghost imag
counterfeit card
anoth type of bankcard fraud involv the illeg counterfeit of credit card known as
white plastic card thi scheme util creditcards plastic with emboss account
number and name thi scheme work in conjunct with a corrupt and collus
merchant or a merchant employe other counterfeit card ar manufactur from scratch
us high speed print facil and us in associ with organ crime group
manufactur facil have been trace to the far east
counterfeit oper ar center in taiwan china and hong kong where the
specialti is produc the hologram and magnet strip that appear on mani card forg
hologram ar smuggl into the us and canada by ring member from asia and
distribut throughout both countri a substanti amount of them end up in california
where most of the asian counterfeit oper in the us ar locat not surprisingli
california notabl orang counti experi more credit card fraud than ani area in
the countri
the actual counterfeit process ha been immeasur eas by technolog that allow for
more accur duplic duplic legitim card is still an intric oper
howev magnet strip number hologram and logo must all appear authent
desktop comput emboss tip foil and lamin ar common tool in the
reproduct process perhap most difficult of all to accur reproduc howev is the
hologram most phoni hologram can be sold for between 5 and 15 true hologram us
a lenticular refract process counterfeit ar gener onli reflect materi usual a
foil with an imag stamp on it these decal ar attach to the surfac of the card rather
than fix into the plastic as is the case with legitim card some hologram do not
chang color as legitim on do when view from variou angl counterfeit credit
card ar the most damag scheme of those mention here howev with the increas
us of chip insid the card and the addit of a pin person identif number
counterfeit card ha decreas significantli as a method of bank card fraud in the us
uk and other countri implement thi technolog
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11017
telephonemail order fraud
the fraudster might offer a free trip or other nice prize with the onli catch be that the
winner must have a credit card onc the thief ha the number he can order merchandis or
have monei wire to himself
a great deal of credit card fraud is childishli simpl to complet mani crook have great
success by simpli select a name from the phone book call and pretend to be a
visamastercard repres the victim is told that hi card number mai have been
obtain and us illeg by crimin or a repres of a travel agenc mai call
claim the victim ha won a discount travel packag in ani case the victim is ask to
read the card number off for verif or inclus in the discount deal a surprisingli
larg amount of peopl fall for thi scheme and give out their credit card inform
purchas through catalogu and mail order ar then made us the victim card number
thei mai select an unoccupi address to which their merchandis can be deliv
perhap leav a note ask the deliveri servic to simpli put the packag by the
back door
mail theft
a thief mai steal credit card alreadi appli for by a bank custom and issu by the
bank the thief will then attempt to us the card by pose as the intend recipi
fals applic
perpetr might appli for a new card us inform stolen from a wallet purs or the
trash or by steal a preapprov credit card applic out of the mail or trash also
takeon applic that ar promin in store offer credit card to the public ar
ripe for fraud
credit doctor
credit doctor is the term us for fraudster who sell stolen credit card account number via
newspap ad to peopl unabl to get credit card
true name fraud
new credit card account can be open by individu possess a victim true name
identif such as a driver licens or social secur number the true identif wa
either obtain as a secondari object in the commiss of a more aggress offens
such as robberi or as the primari target of a lesser crime such as pick pocket
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11018 2011 fraud examin manual
nonreceipt fraud
a form of credit card fraud in which the perpetr intercept credit card that ar in transit
between the credit issuer and the author account holder loss attribut to mail theft
have declin significantli as a result of c ard activ program where the cardhold
must call their financi institut and confirm their ident befor the card is activ
keyent counterfeit
when bank began us the cvv for visa and cvc for mastercard secur system
fraudster came up with thi clever ruse in respons the cvv system us a threedigit
number embed in the magnet strip of a credit card identifi it as a legitim issu
credit instrument credit card counterfeit figur out a wai to beat the system howev
by leav the magnet strip uncod or make it unread fraudster forc merchant
handl the transact to enter the credit card number manual thi mean the
transact never fall under the scope of the cvv system
clever bank and credit card offici veri quickli found a patch for thi scheme though the
cvv2 and cvc2 system us a threedigit secur code that is print on the back of
card it is design to valid that a genuin card is be us dure a transact when
a pointofsal po termin read a card ma gnetic stripe visa card verif valu
cvv or mastercard card valid code cvc can be verifi dure the
author merchant us cvv2cvc2 can expect to reduc their chargeback by as
much as 26 percent the number appear in revers ital at the top of the signatur panel at
the end the cvv2 and cvc2 program can also be us to reduc fraud in cardnot
present transact
creditmast
thi softwar program download from the internet allow the user to produc valid
credit card number counterfeit can then put these number to us in phoni card
probe
the fraudster set up a comput program that let him run stolen number through variou
financi institut in the hope that on of them will still honor the number number
that clear ar often sold en mass to counterfeit
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11019
skim
thi scheme requir a devic known as a wedg which store up to 200 credit card
number credit card skim is more frequent in busi where an employe must
leav the custom presenc in order to ru n the transact a restaur patron for
exampl hand hi credit card to a waiter who swipe the card into a wedg while
conduct the legitim transact onc the waiter ha collect enough number he can
either sell them to a counterfeit or simpli produc hi own fake card us the stolen
inform it mai be month befor the custom notic phoni transact on hi
statement make the point of loss veri difficult to determin it follow that the guilti
waiter is therefor unlik to get caught skim can also occur by tap into a line
us to transport credit card data
pretext call
some fraudul actor will call unsuspect custom and pose as bank or credit card
agent the actor will request account inform or other identifi inform from the
victim and us the inform to appli for addit credit card or to us the credit card
to purchas good or servic
account takeov
the fake actor mai take over a victim acco unt by request a chang of address on the
account and then call to report the card lost or stolen the issu bank will then send the
replac card to the new address
institut ident theft and spoof site
fraudul actor mai creat fals internet site pretend to sell good to buyer who
must enter their credit card inform and other person inform in order to make
purchas the seller then us the inform to make fraudul purchas in the name
of the buyer more recent fraudul actor have begun creat affili site of actual
seller or other creditor such as bank the perpetr of the fraud then send email to
exist custom of the actual seller or creator these email inform the unsuspect
custom that there is a problem with hi account and ask the custom to log on to the site
of the compani that the wrongdoer ha copi and to reenter their person and credit card
inform the fraudul actor then us the inform to make purchas
inform on how to commit credit card fraud is readili avail to anyon will to
make the effort to look post on the internet give stepbystep instruct on how to
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11020 2011 fraud examin manual
obtain carbon paper receipt and call creditreport agenc us merchant number the
latter is done in order to verifi that the card is valid and to obtain the amount of credit
avail the fraudster usual watch a store employe dial the number of the agenc
note the number as thei ar dial thei then listen to the employe give the merchant
number thi number can often be found next to regist and can be copi down if in
plain sight the fraudster now ha an excel avenu to test stolen card
the law concern credit card fraud
feder law deal with legal principl surround loss from the fraudul us of credit
card unlik check fraud which is primarili govern by state law credit card fraud is
govern by feder law even so the feder law and regul govern credit card
howev pertain onli to the relationship between the card issuer and the cardhold thu
contract law and the contractu agreement between the merchant and the merchant bank
as well as the merchant bank and the issu bank ar typic what regul the outcom
of fraudul credit card usag
the most import legal principl concern the alloc of loss between credit card
issuer and credit card holder come from regul z of the feder reserv system
which wa promulg pursuant to the feder truthinlend act tila
congress design tila to protect consum therefor it provis gener do not
appli to creditor that extend credit primarili for busi agricultur or commerci
purpos tila howev defer to ani state la w that give greater protect and benefit to
consum so state law that provid consum cardhold more right than feder law will
prevail where there is a conflict
the provis of regul z that ar most re levant to credit card fraud place limit
on a cardhold liabil for unauthor us under tila the term cardhold includ
ani person or organ to which a card is issu for ani purposeinclud a busi
agricultur or commerci purpos thi constitut an except to the gener rule that
most tila provis do not appli to credit card transact for busi agricultur or
commerci purpos
the basic liabil rule provid that the cardhold is not liabl for unauthor us of the
card the card issuer can shift from unauthor us back to the cardhold onli if
the card is an accept credit card ie on that the cardhold ha request and
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11021
sign us or ha author anoth person to us
the cardhold liabil is not more than 50
the card issuer ha given notic to the cardhold of the potenti liabil
the card issuer ha provid the cardhold with a descript of the mean by which
the card issuer mai be notifi of loss or theft of the card either on the period
statement that the issuer send to the consum or on a separ notic that accompani
that statement
the unauthor us occur befor the card issuer ha been notifi that an
unauthor us of the credit card
the card issuer ha provid a method by which the user of the card can be identifi as
the person author to us it
the feder reserv board staff ha interpret regul z to impos the 50 limit to a
seri of unauthor us assum for instanc that a thief steal a credit card and
within a rel short period of time us the credit card to make separ 100 purchas
at three differ store the consum mai maintain that under the feder reserv board
staff interpret the card issuer mai onli impos on 50 charg becaus the transact
were all part of the same seri
guidanc for cardhold
it is in the interest of both the issu bank and the cardhold to minim credit card fraud
although the cardhold monetari liabil for unauthor us of a credit card cannot
exce 50 and mani issu bank do not ev en impos that charg on their custom
cardhold mai have to spend signific time and monei sometim includ legal
expens to refut alleg that thei open credit card account us card in particular
wai or otherwis author transact about which thei have no knowledg and with
which thei have no connect although cardhold mai be awar of the pervas of
ident of theft thei mai be unawar of the consequ or of wai to prevent it or
minim it effect sinc issu bank will not often bear the loss relat to ident theft
that involv credit card bank should inform cardhold of wai to protect both physic
card and the risk of ident theft
bank should send cardhold occasion remind of step that can be taken to safeguard
their credit card ident includ the follow
alwai carri the least amount of credit card with you as necessari
sign credit slip and new credit card as soon as you receiv them
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11022 2011 fraud examin manual
do not suppli credit card inform to unauthor peopl
do not leav credit card unattend with merchant
make it a habit to review credit card statement and immedi report ani
unrecogniz charg
immedi report the loss or theft of ani credit card to the card issuer
obtain credit report annual in order to detect ani suspici activ in which credit
card or other extens of credit have been grant or appli for without
your consent
never reveal account number or other credit card account inform to person
attempt to gain your inform on the telephon after thei repres themselv as
agent of a bank
if you ar awar of suspici activ immedi inform the relev credit report
agenc and have a fraud alert place on your account thi will prevent ani
potenti new creditor from grant new credit without first contact you person
the major credit report agenc and their telephon number ar experian 888397
3742 equifax 8887660008 and the transunion 8008607289
alwai keep credit card receipt in a safe place and destroi them after you have receiv
the bill statement that reflect the charg
if you receiv a credit card you didnt appli for call the issuer and determin why thei
sent the card someon mai have appli in your name and miss the opportun to
steal the card from your mailbox when it arriv
void incorrect receipt and destroi carbon of credit card slip
keep a record of account number expi ration date and phone number and address
of each card issuer so that you can contact them in the event of the loss or theft of your
credit card
do not lend your card to anoth person
do not write your account number on a postcard or the outsid of an envelop
merchant scam
collus occur between the sale peopl and the credit card fraudster to process valid
credit card number on white plastic card thei might also make sever imprint on sale
ticket and fill them in later on
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11023
magnet stripe diagram
as shown in the abov magnet stripe diagram abov two track appear on the credit
card magnet stripe track two is the most wide read it is 40 charact in length is
strictli numer contain the account number expir date a secur code and
discretionari bank data track on is 79 charact in length is alpha numer and contain
the abov inform plu the cardhold name
magnet stripe compromis is a more sophist method of obtain account
inform for fraudul purpos it requir the transfer or encod of legitim
account inform along with a secur code from the legitim magnet stripe to a
counterfeit card with a magnet stripe the full unalt legitim magnet stripe must
be obtain to accomplish fraud by thi method
skimmer ar becom preval in credit card and atmdebit card fraud a skimmer is a
cardread devic similar to the swipe machin us by cashier to valid credit card it
can be purchas at electron store and us by credit card thiev to read data imprint
on inform track within the magnet strip locat on the card in addit crimin
ar us the devic to swipe credit inform from on credit card and put it on anoth
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11024 2011 fraud examin manual
nowadai crimin have gotten even more sophist by place pinhol camera on the
atm to captur the card number as well to watch as the victim enter hi pin into the
keypad
compani credit card
compani credit card ar provid to employe for conveni in conduct of compani
busi no person expens mai be charg on the compani credit card except as
specif author by compani procedur the employe must pai ani charg
person expens promptli compani credit card should not be us to avoid prepar
document for direct payment to vendor where allow by local law charg on
compani credit card for which a properli approv expens report ha not been receiv at
the time of an employe termin of employ mai be deduct from the employe
last paycheck the compani will pursu repay by the employe of ani amount it ha to
pai on the employe behalf
prevent and detect of credit card fraud
the essenti part of ani detect program is the educ of the teller and merchant
who ar respons for handl the transact in a studi by monei magazin it wa
found that 95 percent of store clerk and cashier did not check credit card signatur
while ani of the follow can occur in a perfectli legitim transact these
characterist ar frequent present dure fraudul transact teller and merchant
should be advis to be alert for the custom who
take a card from a pocket instead of a wallet or purs
purchas an unusu number of expens item
make random purchas select item with littl regard to size qualiti or valu
make sever small purchas to stai under the floor limit or ask what the floor
limit is
doe not ask question on major purchas
sign the sale draft slowli or awkwardli
charg expens item on a newli valid credit card
cannot provid photo identif when ask
rush the merchant or teller
purchas a larg item such as a televis consol and insist on take it at the time
even when deliveri is includ in the price
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11025
make purchas and leav the store but then return to make more purchas
becom argument with the teller or merchant while wait for the transact to
be complet
make larg purchas just after the store open or as the store is close
merchant should also be awar of potenti sign of fraud in cardnotpres transact
larger than normal order
order that includ sever of the same item
order made up of bigticket item
rush or overnight ship
ship to an intern address
transact with similar account number
ship to a singl address but transact place on multipl card
multipl transact on on card over a veri short period of time
multipl transact on on card or a similar card with a singl bill
in onlin transact multipl card us from a singl ip internet protocol address
order from internet address that make us of a free email servic
teller and merchant should be awar of the common sign of forg credit card
hologram crude stamp or badli fake with tini bit of aluminum foil
misspel word on the card
alter signatur panel
discolor
glu
paint
cover with white tape
card that appear to have been flatten and restamp
at the consum level the credit card user should rememb the follow
know where your card is at all time
never leav your card unattend at workth re ar more credit card theft in the
workplac than in ani other singl situat
dont leav the store or atm without all of the copi and carbon
dont leav your card in plain sight where other can get the number
dont leav receipt in a public trash can hotel or shop bag
review monthli statement for accuraci and ani item that you might not have charg
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11026 2011 fraud examin manual
review your statement via electron mean rather than wait for paper statement if
possibl cancel paper statement altogeth sinc most fraudster still practic
dumpster dive and will riffl through your trash for old receipt and credit card
statement
sign the back of a new card as soon as you get it and destroi old card that ar outdat
or no longer us
make a list of all of your card and their number thi kei inform is help when
report lost or stolen card store thi list in a highli secur area
be wari of offer that come through the mail
never reveal your card number over the phone to anyon who ha offer you a prize
report miss card immedi
dont reveal person inform such as your address and telephon number
dont allow a salesperson to record your credit card number on your check
keep your card out of the view of other in a store or at a public telephon so thei
cannot read the name and account number
us a tier seethrough contain in your wallet for credit card so it will be easier to
notic miss card
alwai check your card when return to you after a purchas make sure it is your card
if you becom suspici of a telephon call offer or mail solicit report the activ
us the nation consum leagu fraud center onlin fraud report form at
httpssecurenclformsorgnficwebnfichtm
prevent
prevent is the kei to reduc credit card loss sever program can and ar in place to
reduc loss some of them ar
educ program
teller and merchant should be train to be familiar with the secur featur of the credit
card although the major of counterfeit card contain some of the secur featur thei
ar usual not complet and offer indic that the card is not legitim credit card
issuer should take measur to inform their custom about credit card fraud what the
financi institut is do about fraud and how the consum can help
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11027
liaison with law enforc
compani should develop strong liaison with law enforc when a compani receiv
intellig of hot fraud law enforc should be notifi immedi
credit card compani secur initi
both visa and mastercard have initi secur measur to help combat onlin theft the
verifi by visa program protect merchant from fraudrel chargeback on all visa
person debit and credit card transact even when process transact from non
particip issuer verifi by visa also protect consum by requir a password in the
verifi by visa window dure purchas with particip onlin store help ensur
that no on els can us their visa card onlin e at onlin store not yet particip in
verifi by visa the visa credit card will continu to work the same as usual addition
visa work alongsid financi institut and merchant to continu monitor consum
account to detect suspici or unusu activ by take these step visa is abl to work
proactiv to reduc fraudul transact
here ar some of the red flag that mai indic fraudul activ
ship address is differ from the bill address or the ship address ha
suddenli chang
unusu larg purchas compar to normal purchas pattern for the account in
question
chang in name on the account
chang in date of birth or social secur number
mastercard securecod allow credit card holder to regist and set up their own privat
securecod number user of securecod will be automat prompt by their financi
institut at checkout to provid their securecod each time thei make a purchas with a
particip onlin merchant the securecod is quickli confirm by the financi
institut and then the purchas is complet the securecod will never be share with
the merchant it just like enter a pin at an atm mastercard ha also initi the
paypass system in which cardhold can make purchas with a simpl tap rather than
swipe or dip their card thi add a level of secur sinc the card or paypass devic
never leav the cardhold hand
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11028 2011 fraud examin manual
physic secur featur
in respons to the counterfeit problem credit card compani ar master the
possibl of make credit card fraud more difficult some of their program ar
discuss below
visa card featur
the visa logo should have microprint around the border the fine print is bare
readabl without magnif
the fly dove hologram should appear to be threedimension and appear to move
when the card is tilt back and forth
visa emboss account number begin with a 4 and contain 16 digit all digit must
be clean even and the same size and shape if a card ha been reemboss the number
mai appear to be fuzzi as a gener rule of thumb alwai check the hologram it is
easier to spot a reemboss number there
a fly v is an emboss secur charact besid the good thru date if the v
is not italic or it is miss the card is counterfeit howev thi is not a requir
secur featur and mai or mai not be present on the card
if there ar ghost imag of the number behind the emboss on either the front or
back of the card it ha been reemboss if the card ha been reemboss the
hologram might be damag
a fourdigit number must be print below the emboss account number thi four
digit number must match exactli with the first four digit of the account number both
must begin with 4
the visa brand mark appear in blue and gold on a white background it must appear in
either the bottom right top left or top right corner
an ultraviolet sensit dove is visibl on the face of the card when the card is place
under an ultraviolet light
if someon ha tri to eras the signatur panel the word void will be displai
card verif valu 2 cvv2 is a threedigit code that appear on the back of the
card in the signatur panel typic the signatur panel will have a seri of number
but onli the last three digit make up the cvv2 code cvv2 is us primarili in card
notpres transact to verifi that the custom is in possess of a valid visa card
at the time of the sale merchant will request the cvv2 from the cardhold at
checkout and the inform is sent electron to the cardissu bank to verifi it
valid within second the cvv2 result ar return with author if it return
as invalid merchant have the right to stop the transact for ad protect
merchant ar prohibit from keep or store the cvv2 number after the
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11029
transact ha been complet
check the valid date for evid of tamper do not accept an expir card
for more inform about visa secur featur visit their websit at
httpwwwvisacaenmerchantfraudpreventioncardfeaturescfm
mastercard card featur
a larg mc is visibl under ultraviol et light for mastercard the mc secur
charact is no longer permit on newli issu card effect june 1 2006 but mai
continu to appear on card through june 2010
all card must includ the fullcolor mastercard brand mark thi mark mai be below
or abov the global hologram merchant should be awar that the mastercard card
design and the mastercard brand mark mai be orient vertic
the hologram whether on global or debit card can be locat on the front or back of
the card base on the designtyp unless holomag tape is us
mastercard emboss account number begin with a 5 and contain 16 digit the
number must be clear and uniform in size and space and must appear on on line
the first four number of the account number must be the same digit as those print
directli below preprint bin
the front of the card must includ a valid expir date
the signatur panel locat on the back of the card must includ the word mastercard
print in multicolor at a 45 degre angl the last four digit of the account number
must be print in revers ital in the upper right corner of the signatur panel thi is
requir as of june 1 2006 prior to thi the revers ital could be found at the upper
center of the signatur panel
magnet tape must be present and appear smooth and straight with no sign of
tamper holomag tape mai be us in place of the tradit magnet tape
the holomag tape or mastercard hologram must be includ on the back of the card if
it cannot be found on the front
cvc2 number threedigit valid number must be print in revers ital to the
right of the last four digit of the account number as of june 1 2006 the cvc2
number wa requir to be print in revers ital in an adjac white box to the right
of the signatur panel
for more inform about mastercard secur featur visit their websit at
httpwwwmastercardcomusmerchantsecuritywhatcandocardfeatureshtml
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11030 2011 fraud examin manual
american express featur
ultraviolet ink ar us such that when a genuin card is examin with a black light
the letter amex as well as phosphoresc in the portrait of the centurion ar
visibl
the portrait of the centurion is print with a high degre of clariti and detail such as
the portrait on us currenc
erasur or tamper with the signatur panel will caus the wave print background to
appear white or smudg
the card member account number is 15 digit begin with 37 the emboss should
be clear and uniform in size and space
a duplic account number is on the revers of the card to ensur the card number
appear on the front of the card ha not been alter
the preprint nonemboss card identif number cid which is a four
digit number print on the front of the card that is us to ensur that the individu
us the card is actual the owner of the card should alwai appear abov the account
number on either the right or the left edg of the card
the card number or cardmemb name should be print in the same typefac as the
american express typefac
all american express card includ network optima and corpor will bear the
same secur featur outlin here
for more inform on american expresss secur featur visit their websit at
httpswww209americanexpresscommerchantsinglevoiceusengfrontservletrequest
typen avigatepagecardsecurityfeatur
technolog deterr
bank can take advantag of technolog develop to deter credit card fraud these
develop can make both the counterfeit of card and us of valid card more
difficult some of these develop requir veri littl technolog for instanc most
credit card now includ verif code on the back to help merchant match card us
in purchas transact with author cardhold card network also maintain address
and zip code verif servic so that merchant especi those involv in internet or
telephon transact can determin whether the suppos cardhold live at the address
given by the person place the order
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11031
photograph
photograph of the legitim cardhold will deter counterfeit to a degre though thei
have becom increasingli easi for counterfeit to purchas photograph can be alter
but technolog advanc permit digit encod of the cardhold imag on the
magnet strip of the credit card us of thi technolog would requir special process
termin that would add to the cost of fraud detect
hologram
hologram have been us by issuer as secur devic sinc the earli 1980 not long after
implement of thi featur howev it wa found that a veri accur counterfeit
industri wa emerg in asia if on assess the averag credit limit of fraudul card at a
conserv 2000 it take few in circul to add up to consider loss to the issuer
signatur panel
signatur panel usual contain imag of the issuer logo blank or damag signatur
panel ar red flag of forg credit card signatur on the panel and the sale receipt
should alwai be compar for consist while it mai be most merchant polici that
employe compar these signatur it is often ignor
activ of card
in an effort to curb credit card fraud perpetr us the mail compani send new
card in the mail do not activ them until the custom contact the credit card compani
upon contact the credit card issuer then ask the caller for person inform such as
their mother maiden name and birth date or other inform that the ordinari thief
probabl would not have onc the inform ha been satisfactorili answer the card is
activ for us
advanc author
visa recent unveil technolog for analyz card transact both individu and
collect across it network in order to detect emerg fraud pattern when a credit card
is swipe advanc author provid an instantan rate of the transact
potenti for fraud to the cardissu financi institut includ whether the card
number wa among those lost or stolen in a datasecur incid the system is design to
spot situat where multipl account ar associ with fraudul test or some other
type of coordin attack involv multipl account
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11032 2011 fraud examin manual
cybersourc advanc fraud screen
cybersourc advanc fraud screen enhanc by visa is the first ecommerc fraud
detect system enabl with current worldwid fraud trend and global paymentcard
usag pattern that provid a comprehens transact risk assess of activ
combin thi with cybersourc hybrid system neural network and rulesbas
technolog and merchantact data provid ecommerc merchant with target fraud
detect abil cybersourc advanc fraud screen oper around the clock 7 dai a
week 24 hour a dai it effect screen shopper locat anywher in the world and
work with all payment card
the cybersourc advanc fraud screen riskmanag tool us frequent updat
intellig about global paymentcard usag pattern includ onlin and offlin
purchas profil to provid an accur fraud detect servic thi advantag can help
merchant lower fraudrel cost by identifi riski transact and increas consum
goodwil by elimin unintent insult that mai occur from incorrectli declin
order
comput edit
comput edit ar built into some credit card such that if the card is usual us five time
per month and it is us 25 time in on dai the system will prohibit author of
further purchas
card scrutini at point of sale
how often do merchant scrutin your card in mani store thei never get the chanc
consum us the creditdebit card machin at the sale counter and the card never leav
their possess while thi make thing more conveni for the consum it often mean
that the merchant is left hold the bag when a transact is return if on of the kei
author compon is miss signatur expir date author number card
imprint the merchant ha to swallow the loss
internettelephon order
with these transact vendor never have the opportun to see the custom credit
card the onli failsaf selfprotect measur open to them is to postpon deliveri until
the transact ha clear the custom account in our nextdaydeliveri societi
howev thi is mai be detriment to busi for some vendor there ar a coupl of
other option open to merchant
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11033
bewar of order with differ bill to and ship to address unless the item is
intend as a gift
set up free email account with compani like hotmail or yahoo is veri simpl and
allow the user anonym order receiv from free email account should be treat
with extra scrutini
potenti sign of cardnotpres fraud
firsttim shopper crimin ar alwai look for new victim
largerthannorm order becaus stolen card or account number have a limit life
span crook need to maxim the size of their purchas
order that includ sever of the same itemhav multipl of the same item
increas a crimin profit
order made up of bigticket item these item have maximum resal valu and
therefor maximum profit potenti
rush or overnight ship fraudster want these fraudul obtain item as
soon as possibl for the quickest possibl resal and arent concern about extra
deliveri charg
ship to an intern address a signific number of fraudul transact
ar ship to fraudul cardhold outsid of the us
transact with similar account number particularli us if the account number
us have been gener us softwar avail on the internet such as
creditmast
ship to a singl address but transact place on multipl cardscould involv
an account number gener us special softwar or the us of sever of stolen card
multipl transact on on card over a veri short period of timecould be an attempt
to run a card until the account is close
multipl transact on on card or a similar card with a singl ip internet protocol
address more than on or two card could indic a fraud scheme
order from internet address that make us of free email servicesthes email
servic involv no bill relationship and therefor provid neither an audit trail nor
verif that a legitim cardhold ha open the account
financi institut measur
bank and other financi institut have great resourc at their dispos to prevent
fraudul transact mani of them need me reli to enforc their exist polici
new account screen educ personnel to thoroughli check applic
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11034 2011 fraud examin manual
inform compar id inform address and credit report for accuraci
pin activ bank custom ar often requir to provid person identif
number in order to activ their card over the phone caller who ar not abl to
provid the pin number mai have manufactur or stolen the card in question
caller id most peopl call to activ their card will do so from home if the
number on caller id doe not match ani of the telephon number list in the
custom account inform bank personnel should ask some identifi question
cvv2cvc2 implement these system as soon as possibl thei ar among the best
defens financi institut have against credit card fraud
smart card
smart card contain a microprocessor memori chip instead of hologram these card ar
abl to identifi the user through encrypt inform on the chip and must be insert
into a card reader attach to the comput that mean the card cannot be us unless
the purchas is current hold it a pin is also requir for the card so the thief need to
physic have the card and the secur code in order to us it thi allow cardhold
more purchas option as well as increas secur
judg from the past credit opportun for consum will increas over time and
consequ more will fall victim to fraud in the futur the trend will be on card for all
type of financi transact prototyp ar current be develop and test by the
major credit card issuer fraud ring will adjust accordingli and new counterfeit
method will emerg law enforc and investig must maintain a global outlook
when face thi type of fraud as much of it origin outsid the us
electron bill payment and persontoperson payment
increasingli consum ar us electron fund transfer rather than actual currenc or
paper to pai bill or make onlin purchas through onlin servic offer by mani
financi institut an individu can make bank transact us a system call
electron bill payment and present or ebpp individu can pai each other for good or
servic through thi same electron form which is known as the persontoperson or p2p
system
although these system ar still young some expert suggest that thei will plai an import
part in the wai payment ar made accord to the sheshunoff and as pratt public
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11035
electron fund transfer fraud protect ident theft to wire transfer fraud there
is rel low process and custom servic cost for biller while custom can
reduc time and cost in make payment with some ebpp system some custom mai
even be abl to manag their fund more effect electron bill payment ha receiv
faster accept than bill present though accept appear to be depend on the
price of these servic as the ebpp method of payment continu to increas it is
import to be prepar to combat fraud that mai surfac in thi area
electron fund tran fer
the electron fund transfer act efta is intend to protect the right of consum
unlik the state law that govern check or wholesal wire transfer the law concern
electron fund transfer initi from consum account is feder law
as defin in the efta an electron fund transfer is ani transfer of fund other than
on origin by a check or similar paper instrument that is initi through an electron
termin telephon instrument or comput or magnet tape that order or purport to
author a financi institut to debit or credit an account each of the follow would
constitut an electron fund transfer for purpos of feder law
a custom withdraw of fund from the custom own account by us of an atm
a custom transfer of fund from the c ustom check account to the custom
save account at the same financi institut initi by the custom through hi
person comput
a custom transfer of fund from the custom check account to the custom
save account at the same financi institut initi by the custom through the
bank autom telephon servic
a custom us of a debit card to purchas good from a merchant who swipe the
custom card through a pointofsal po devic to author deduct of the
amount of the sale from the custom check account
a custom transfer of fund from hi bank account to a thirdparti initi by the
custom through hi person comput
an employ instruct initi by comput or through a magnet tape to a
financi institut to deposit fund repres an employe pai into the
employe account
a noncustom instruct initi by comput or through a magnet tape to a
financi institut to withdraw fund from the check account of a custom and
transfer the fund of a noncustom bank account
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11036 2011 fraud examin manual
the feder reserv board ha promulg a seri of regul known as regul e
which inform bank of how thei must implement the efta bank must be awar of their
oblig under these law and regul in order both to minim their exposur to
electron fund transfer fraud and to know how to deal with their custom when such
fraud occur under these law and regul ebpp and p2p system will usual qualifi
as electron fund transfer other transact that ar initi by the consum through
comput or telephon instrument without the intervent of bank personnel includ
transact involv debit card and autom teller machin atm transact mai
also qualifi as electron fund transfer
access devic
an access devic includ a card code or other mean of access to a custom account
for the purpos of initi electron fund transfer these includ debit card person
identif number pin telephon transfer and bill payment code and other mean
that a consum mai us to initi an electron fund transfer from hi account a
consum account is consid an asset account such as a demand deposit or save
account establish for person famili or household purpos a credit card is not
consid an access devic sinc it provid access to a credit line rather than to a
consum account the term access devic doe not includ a check or draft us to
captur to micr encod to initi a onetim ach debit for exampl if a custom
author a singl ach debit from hi account by give a check to the merchant so thei
can captur the rout account and serial number to initi the debit the check is not an
access devic if the custom howev provid a paye with a check or with inform
from a check that is physic retain by the consum in order to allow the paye to
captur rout account and serial number inform the result transfer doe constitut
an electron fund transfer
when an access devis is necessari to instruct a financi institut to perform a transfer
the financi institut will be abl to claim that it wa author to debit or credit a
consum account onli if the transfer wa initi through us of an accept access
devic an access devic will qualifi for thi statu onli if the devis wa issu to a person
who request and receiv it
who sign and us it
who author anoth to us the access devic
for the purpos of transfer monei between account or obtain monei properti
labor or servic
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11037
if a consum us an accept access devic to initi a transfer the efta will cover the
transact even though a bank employe ha interven to complet the transact
assum for instanc that smith wish to transfer 100 from her check account to her
save account she ask the teller at her bank to perform the transact the teller
request that smith enter her pin into a cardread devic at the teller station if the pin
is us to initi the transfer the transact is an electron fund transfer
consum initi
notic that the definit of electron fund transfer appli liter onli to consum
transact on might specul that if the consum doe not actual us the termin
the transact is not an electron fund transfer if for instanc a consum desir to
purchas good and hand the merchant a debit card to pai for the transact on might
argu that the consum ha not initi the transact nevertheless the feder reserv
board ha constru the definit to appli to a po termin that captur data
electron in order to debit or credit a consum bank account thi definit is broad
enough to includ the situat in which a merchant physic swipe or insert the
consum debit card through the termin but doe so at the direct of the consum in
ani event the transact would constitut an electron fund transfer under the part of the
definit that includ transfer initi through comput
even though a telephon is not itself an electron termin transfer that the consum
initi by telephon mai be consid electron transfer fund telephon transfer
which like includ fax transmiss fall within the efta if made pursuant to a
prearrang plan or agreement that is enter into between the consum and the financi
institut make the transfer and that contempl period or recur transfer if an
effect agreement exist a transfer that the consum initi by telephon fall within the
efta even though an employe of the bank complet the transfer or the consum
initi the transfer through a facsimil machin or the consum initi the transfer
through the bank audio or voicerespons telephon system
electron bill present and payment
electron bill present and payment ebpp involv the present of bill from on
or more seller of good or provid of servic to a consum through electron mean
and the payment of that bill by the consum also through electron mean some expert
expect ebpp to becom on of the fastest grow applic of electron fund transfer
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11038 2011 fraud examin manual
at present ebpp system vari in organ and complex thei mai involv a
transact between a singl merchant and a custom or the consolid of multipl bill
from differ biller or of multipl payment from differ custom initi ebpp
system were offer by proprietari provid more recent howev bank have begun to
enter the field often by contract out implement of the system to proprietari
provid bank mai have an advantag in market these system becaus consum who
ar like to us these system often have exist relationship with their bank bank
custom therefor mai be more will to trust those institut to handl their account
than to entrust fund to a new entiti with whom thei have no previou or tangibl
relationship
biller direct system
exist ebpp system usual fall within on of two categori biller direct system and
consolidationaggreg system in a biller direct system merchant deal with each
custom individu in a typic transact the custom will enter an internet site that
the biller ha creat there the custom who wish to pai hi telephon bill onlin will
simpli log on to the telephon compani web site enter a usernam and password that
allow the custom to pull up a copi of hi bill review it and instruct the biller to obtain
payment from the custom bank account prior to thi time the custom will have
enter into an agreement with the biller to receiv and to pai hi bill electron the
custom will have creat the usernam and password which qualifi as an access devic
under efta and will have provid the biller with inform about the custom and the
custom account at the financi institut ion from which the biller mai collect payment
typic thi will includ the custom email address the rout number of the
custom bank and the custom account number at the bank in some system the
biller will send an email to the custom indic that a bill is outstand and direct
the custom to the biller websit
after the custom view the inform post by the biller the custom mai approv
the inform and author payment the biller will then initi payment by contact a
payment provid that ha agre to collect payment on behalf of the biller the payment
provid will contact the financi institut that hold the custom account and request
the institut to debit the custom a ccount and remit the proce to the payment
provid the payment provid will then credit the proce minu ani fee to the biller
these payment mai be transfer through an ach transfer or through a paper transfer
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11039
such as a cashier check when the recipi is not abl to receiv payment in an electron
form
person to person p2p payment system
person onlin payment system often call p2p or persontoperson payment system
have becom popular wai for make rel small payment between individu or
between an individu and a busi these payment have becom popular in the onlin
auction market where win bid mai be too small to justifi the us of a credit card or the
seller is an individu who doe not accept credit card payment in 2002 ebai the onlin
auction site acquir paypal the domin provid of p2p servic paypal current ha
more than 164 million account worldwid and is avail in 190 market and 17 differ
currenc the success of proprietari system like paypal ha induc convent bank to
consid enter the p2p arena mani bank have begun to offer similar servic
on restrict of most current p2p system is that thei will onli complet transfer to
person who ar also subscrib to the servic while thi restrict mai help a system to
gain a custom base and reduc fraud by obtain inform about recipi it also
limit the scope of potenti user
a model of p2p paypal
there is a signific opportun for chang and growth in implement sinc p2p
system ar still in their begin stage paypal is domin in the market at thi point so
we will us it as the model of the p2p system for illustr purpos potenti user of the
system must log in to the provid websi te and submit registr inform includ
their name mail and email address and phone number an email is sent from paypal
to the user provid email address with the user password befor initi ani
transfer the user must send that password from the email account that the user indic
at the time of registr thi permit the provid to verifi inform about the user
and reduc the probabl that the user is engag in fraudul activ or ha establish an
account in the name of a fictiti person
in order to make a payment the user enter hi usernam and password along with the e
mail address and payment inform for the recipi user mai author the provid to
withdraw fund from ani of three sourc first the user mai maintain an account directli
with the provid the user mai author the provid to withdraw fund from the user
account at anoth financi institut if the user regist hi bank account as a sourc of
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11040 2011 fraud examin manual
payment the provid will verifi the user control of the account by make two small
deposit to the account in an undisclos amount and requir the user to confirm the
amount of the deposit third the user mai author the provid to charg hi credit card
with the amount of the payment
transfer initi by the user from hi account regist with the provid will constitut
electron fund transfer thi is true even if the provid is not a bank proprietari
provid such as paypal probabl do not qualifi as bank becaus thei do not make
loan thei mai howev qualifi as monei transmitt and mai requir state licens for
that purpos the efta defin an electron fund transfer as a transfer of fund initi
through an electron termin telephon instrument or comput so as to order a
financi institut to debit or credit an account but a financi institut is defin
with suffici breadth to includ institut that do not qualifi as bank a financi
institut for purpos of efta is ani person who directli or indirectli hold an
account belong to a consum and an account is ani asset account establish
primarili for person famili or household purpos therefor electron transfer
initi by a consum to transfer fund from an asset account held by a proprietari p2p
provid would be govern by efta and regul e
type of fraud
there ar sever wai in which fraud mai be perpetr through ebpp and p2p system
sinc password that allow access into custom bank account must be made avail to
third parti also bill that contain signific inform about custom must be pass
through multipl parti potenti sourc of fraud includ the follow
a biller mai send a bill for servic not render or for good never sent
a person who ha obtain inform about anoth person bank account mai
instruct a biller to obtain payment from the other person account
a hacker could obtain password and usernam from an aggreg and us that
inform to direct transfer from a consum bank account
an employe at the site provid ebpp servic that ha been provid a consum
usernam and password for screen scrape purpos could us that inform to
direct transfer from the consum bank account
a bank employe mai us custom inform to direct transfer from a
custom account
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11041
unfortun the financi institut that offer electron fund transfer to it custom
will have difficulti determin the sourc of ani leak of custom inform necessari to
initi a transfer therefor in order to maintain good relat with it custom and to
avoid further liabil a bank mai accept respons for them thu the best strategi for
the bank will be to take measur that reduc the probabl that fraud will materi in the
first place
detect and deterr of electron transfer fraud
consid the limit capac of bank to shift loss from unauthor electron fund
transfer to their custom bank should make effort to minim the incid of fraud
the veri justif for limit consum liabil mai be that bank ar in a superior
posit to learn of and counteract fraudul scheme that ar emploi to effect
unauthor transact bank can take certain initi to secur access devic and
comput from interfer bank can also follow know your custom rule in order to
prevent the issuanc of access devic to individu who ar like to us them fraudul
the follow section provid specif safeguard that bank can perform to reduc the risk
that thei or their custom can becom victim by unauthor electron fund
transfer
issuanc and us of access devic
electron fund transfer fraud often involv individu who us inform to obtain
access to the account of other as a result bank personnel can prevent fraud by exercis
care in the initi decis to allow an individu to access the bank computer servic
bank offer ebpp or p2p system to custom should
confirm phone and mail address on the applic to ensur that thei ar
consist with inform about the applic that is avail from other sourc and
with respect to exist custom consist with current record about these
custom thi mai involv obtain credit report about the applic or obtain
copi of util bill that show the applic address
make sure that the area code on the applic telephon number match the
geograph area for the applic address
send a welcom letter to the address on the applic with the bank return address
so that the letter will be return if the applic is not live at that address
verifi by telephon or addit mail ani chang of address request in the same
wai that you would verifi a new account applic
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11042 2011 fraud examin manual
if a custom report the loss or theft of an access devic cancel the exist card pin
or other form of access and issu a new on
if a custom report that a person previous author to us access devic report no
longer ha that author cancel all card pin or other access devic and issu new
on to the custom
alwai mail pin separ from other inform such as usernam with which
thei ar associ
separ the respons of bank employe who have custodi of inform relat
to access devic from those who have respons for issuanc verif or
reissuanc of pin
ensur that ani commun concern usernam or password is sent in a secur
encrypt format
custom who regist for ebpp or p2p system should be requir to provid
inform indic that thei ar author to us the bank account or credit card
from which payment will be made
us of ach network
when noncustom of the bank ar abl to attain access to inform about an actual
custom fraud mai occur to limit thi possibl bank should perform strict user
authent standard the offic of the comptrol of the currenc occ requir
bank within it jurisdict to uphold a commerci reason method to authent the
ident of a custom bank that us the ach ar also subject to nation autom
clear hous associ nacha rule that requir origin bank to take certain
measur to ensur that the correct custom ha author the transact
nacha ha implement specif rule for internetiniti entri a specif standard
entri class sec code must be us for internetiniti entri that code web must be
us to identifi an ach debit entri to a consum account that a receiv author
through the internet the rule appli to both singleentri and recur debit and requir
odfi that transmit web entri to warrant that their origin have compli with
certain standard that protect the secur of the ach network and consum financi
inform
origin of web entri ar requir to
obtain consum author prior to initi a web entri the author must
provid evid of the consum ident and asset to the author
emploi commerci reason fraudul transact detect system to screen
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11043
entri in order to maintain the risk of fraud differ transact mai requir differ
level of authent depend on the risk level of the transact
us commerci reason fraudul transact detect system to screen entri
in order to minim the risk of fraud differ transact mai requir differ level
of authent depend on the risk level of the transact
establish a secur internet session with each custom us a commerci reason
secur technolog that session must be in place from the time consum enter their
bank inform through the time of the transmiss to the origin includ
ani transmiss to a servic provid such as an aggreg
conduct an annual secur audit to ensur that financi inform obtain from
consum is protect by secur practic and procedur that includ adequ level
of 1 physic secur to protect against theft tamper or damag 2 personnel and
access control to protect against unauthor access and us and 3 network secur
to ensur captur storag and distribut of financi inform
oper of payment system
bank that particip in ebpp or p2p system can take step to detect fraudul
transact either by provid inform to custom or by analyz transact that
have characterist associ with fraud these measur includ the follow
send custom email alert when a new bill arriv or a payment is sent the email
should advis the custom to contact the bank immedi if the bill wa not expect
or the payment wa not author
refus or scrutin ani transact from a payer or recipi who ha been the subject
of a notic from a credit card issuer indic that the person wa involv in an
unauthor credit card transact or unauthor transfer to or from a bank account
ensur that the name on the bank account associ with the p2p account match the
name on the p2p account itself
track and verifi payment of similar amount to the same recipi
sinc p2p system ar frequent us to make payment for onlin activ be awar
of activ that ar typic associ with fraud and scrutin transact with
custom who engag in such activ these activ includ pyramid scheme
onlin auction and sale of item that have a delai deliveri date
protect of internet address
bank or their custom mai becom victim of fraud especi ident theft if thei do
not carefulli monitor the us of their name on the internet fraudul actor mai creat
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11044 2011 fraud examin manual
fals domain name to attract the bank custom and get them to provid inform that
will then be us for illicit purpos thi activ known as cyberclon involv the creation
of a spoof site complet with a domain name close to the domain name of a legitim
bank and contain the real bank logo an email mai be sent ask custom and
potenti custom to log on to the fals domain name those who respond mai be ask
for inform such as account number and credit card number altern individu
mai regist domain name close to the domain name of actual bank and us those site to
market good or servic with which the bank would not want to be associ for instanc
citigroup had a battl with an individu who regist the name citicardcom and direct
user who log in to thi site to an onlin gambl site
prevent of eft fraud in other compani
the inform system audit and control associ isaca recommend sever
step for prevent of eft fraud in compani the follow is a brief overview
defin the eft process and control point
defin eft polici and procedur
ensur physic secur surround all eft compon
implement effect eft applic secur
implement effect network oper system secur
implement effect secur surround eft data
implement effect system log that establish a baselin that can be us to
measur unusu activ
conduct reconcili to allow for the determin of whether data have been
modifi dure ani stage of the eft process
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11101
insur fraud
the insur busi by it veri natur is suscept to fraud insur is a risk
distribut system that requir the accumul of liquid asset in the form of reserv
fund which ar in turn avail to pai loss claim insur compani gener a larg
steadi flow of cash through insur premium steadi cash flow is an import econom
resourc that is veri attract and easili divert larg accumul of liquid asset make
insur compani attract for take over and loot scheme insur compani ar under
great pressur to maxim the return on invest the reserv fund thu make them
vulner to high yield invest scheme
type of insur polici
properti insur indemnifi against pecuniari loss to the insur properti a nd in some
polici to the properti of other for specif loss for exampl from fire theft or auto
collis casualti insur indemnifi against legal liabil to other for injuri or damag to
peopl properti or other defin legal interest becaus of specifi risk or conduct
casualti insur is of sever type such as health disabl life fidel and bond
health insur indemnifi against medic care cost under specifi circumst
disabl insur indemnifi against incom loss under defin circumst life insur
indemnifi for the death of the insur fidel insur indemnifi against econom loss
to the insur becaus of employe dishonesti bond indemnifi against loss to thirdparti
beneficiari when the insur fail to fulfil a specif undertak for the third
parti benefit
insur polici can be market in combin homeown insur and auto
insur polici usual includ featur of both properti and casualti insur some
health insur plan for exampl also might includ disabl benefit provis there
ar a multitud of insur fraud scheme likewis there ar fraud scheme that ar
preval onli in specif insur area the largest amount of fraud is in health care like
all other industri insur is suscept to both intern and extern fraud scheme
insur fraud financi transact
11102 2011 fraud examin manual
extern health care fraud is perpetr by outsid against the compani the two main
type of extern fraud scheme ar those commit by provid such as doctor
institut and home health agenc and claim fraud by the insur health care fraud
a specif variat of insur fraud will be discuss in the next chapter
agentbrok fraud
cash loan and dividend check
a compani employe without the knowledg of an insur or contract holder request cash
a loan or a dividend check and either deposit the check into hi bank account or into a
fictiti account the employe in order to minim hi chanc of be detect
commit a fraudul act might chang the compani policyhold address of record to
either hi address or a fictiti address onc the check is issu the address is then
chang back to the previou address
settlement check
compani employe can misdirect settlement check such as matur endow paid
up etc to the branch offic to their home or to fictiti address the employe can
easili creat a check defalc by chang the address of record prior to the settlement
check issu date thu misdirect the check in question also period an orphan
contract holder might be transfer to hi agenc afford the opportun to improperli
request the issuanc of a settlement check
an orphan contract holder is a policyhold or contract holder who ha not been assign to a
servic agent or the whereabout of thi individu is unknown the servic agent
attempt to locat thi famili group and can possibl influenc them to purchas
addit insur
a cleric support employe might receiv notif that the orphan contract holder doe
not resid at the given address thi will give the support staffer an opportun to chang
the address to either hi home or a fictiti address and possibl creat a fraud
premium fraud
an agent collect the premium but doesnt re mit the check to the insur compani the
insur ha no coverag
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11103
fictiti paye
an agent or a clerk can chang the beneficiari of record to a fictiti person and
subsequ submit the necessari paper to author the issuanc of a check
fictiti death claim
an agent or employe obtain a fictiti death certif and request that a death claim
check be issu the agent receiv the check and cash it
the sale repres can also write a fictiti applic and after the contest
period two year submit a phoni death claim form and obtain the proce the agent by
invest a coupl of thousand dollar could receiv 50000 or more in misappropri
claim
a compani is particularli vulner to thi scheme if the perpetr ha knowledg of the
underwrit procedur such as the limit under which insur can be written without a
medic exam and what should be submit on a death claim
underwrit irregular
equiti fund
equiti fund is the process of us exist premiumpolici valu to financ new
busi so long as the insur is awar of what is be done by the agent and fulli
understand the longrang method of payment on the new contract there is no appar
underwrit irregular
equiti fund techniqu also known as piggyback usual do not produc qualiti
busi furthermor the compani increas the amount of life insur on the book but
receiv littl or no new fund while incur increas sale and administr expens
associ with the issu of that new busi
each jurisdict ha it own requir on piggyback as it relat to replac
insur compani must compli with these regul to prevent be fine or the
possibl that the compani insur licens can be suspend or taken awai for
noncompli
insur fraud financi transact
11104 2011 fraud examin manual
equiti fund irregular might involv improp financi benefit to field personnel as
well as annual incent compens bonus paid to manag if applic the fraud
examin should determin what financi benefit will occur from an improp equiti
transact
misrepresent
misrepresent might occur if a sale repres make a fals statement with the
intent to deceiv the prospect insur in order to knowingli obtain an unlaw gain
fals inform
a compani employe might submit the follow fals inform to obtain unlaw
financi gain
improp medic inform to obtain a better insur rate for the prospect
policyhold for exampl standard to prefer rate
improp date of birth to obtain a cheaper premium on the new polici
improp home address to obtain a cheaper premium for home or automobil
insur
improp drive histori prior to purchas automobil insur to reduc the annual
premium or obtain insur where normal the individu would have to appli through
the risk pool
fictiti polici
a salesman in order to keep hi posit submit fictiti polici to improv hi write
record also prior to an individu leav the compani he write fictiti polici call
tombston case to improv hi commiss pool so that hi compens will be greater
tombston mean an agent liter take name from tombston in a cemeteri and write
new polici
sureti and perform bond scheme
sureti and perform bond guarante that certain event will or will not occur an agent
issu worthless bond to the insur for highrisk coverag in hope that a claim is never
made if a claim is made the agent might pai it off from agenc fund delai the payment or
skip town
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11105
slide
slide is the term us for includ addit coverag in the insur polici without the
knowledg of the insur the extra charg ar hidden in the total premium and sinc the
insur is unawar of the coverag few claim ar ever file for exampl motor club
membership accident death and travel accid coverag can usual be slip into the
polici without the knowledg of the insur
twist
twist is the replac usual by highpressur sale techniqu of exist polici for
new on the primari reason of cours is for the agent to profit sinc first year sale
commiss ar much higher than commiss for exist polici
churn
churn occur when agent fals tell custom that thei can bui addit insur for
noth by us builtup valu in their current polici in realiti the cost of the new
polici frequent exce the valu of the old on
vehicl insur scheme
ditch
ditch also known as owner giveup is get rid of a vehicl to cash in on an insur
polici or to settl an outstand loan the vehicl is normal expens and purchas with
a small down payment the vehicl is report stolen although in some case the owner just
abandon the vehicl hope that it is stolen strip for part or taken to a pound and
destroi the scheme sometim involv homeown insur for the properti that
wa stolen in the vehicl
past post
past post is a scheme in which a person becom involv in an automobil accid but
doesnt have insur the person get insur wait a littl bit of time and then report
the vehicl as be in an accid thu collect for the damag
insur fraud financi transact
11106 2011 fraud examin manual
vehicl repair
thi scheme involv the bill of new part on a vehicl when us part were actual
replac in the vehicl sometim thi involv collus between the adjust and the bodi
repair shop
vehicl smuggl
thi is a scheme that involv the purchas of a new vehicl with maximum financ a
counterfeit certif of the vehicl titl is made show that it is free and clear the
vehicl is insur to the maximum with minimum deduct theft coverag it is then
ship to a foreign port and report stolen the car is sold at it new locat and
insur is also collect for the theft
phantom vehicl
the certif of titl is a document that show the legal ownership of a vehicl even
though it is not absolut proof that a vehicl exist it is the basi for the issuanc of
insur polici collect on a phantom vehicl ha been shown to be easi to do
30dai special
in thi scheme the vehicl owner report the vehicl stolen and hide it just long enough
for the insur compani to settl the claimusu 30 dai onc the claim is paid the
vehicl is abandon by the owner
paper accid
thi scheme involv the invent of an auto accid that onli exist on paper when the
repair cost ar less than 1000 mani insur compani dont bother to send an
investig to examin the vehicl becaus thi is a lowrisk endeavor and no polic ar
involv thi scheme is veri popular within organ crime ring
hit and run
the hit and run is a variat of the paper accid the owner of a previous damag
vehicl call the polic and claim to be the victim of a hit and run accid the result
polic report is us to file an insur claim thi scheme mai also be perpetr after a
singlecar accid with no wit
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11107
stage accid
stage accid ar scheme in which an accid is predetermin to occur on a vehicl
the scheme ar organ by ring and the culprit move from on area to anoth thei
often us the same vehicl over and over which sometim caus their scheme to
be uncov
two vehicl accid
perpetr caus an accid and then lead the innoc driver to believ it hi fault
three or more vehicl accid
perpetr set up an accid in which all the driver ar involv
side swipe
the side swipe is a scheme that reli on opportun in a busi intersect with multipl
leftturn lane the perpetr make the left turn over and over again wait for a driver to
cross into hi lane when a driver final doe the perpetr purpos drive into the
other car wit and polic involv ar help to the perpetr in thi case
drive down
the scheme involv a perpetr wave on a driver attempt to merg in front of him
then intention collid with the merg vehicl after the accid the perpetr
deni have wave on the merg driver
other stage accid
two driver purpos collid where thei will not be observ addit damag mai be
ad to the vehicl after impact the car ar then driven to a road or highwai and
arrang so that the accid appear to have occur there the polic ar then notifi
swoop and squat
a victim of thi scheme will find himself pass by two car while drive the car in the
lead will cut in front of the second forc it to stop abruptli the victim rearend the
second car while the other driver speed awai victim usual accept respons for the
accid think it their fault for not pai attent the rearend vehicl usual
contain the maximum amount of passeng all with injuri
insur fraud financi transact
11108 2011 fraud examin manual
inflat damag
the busi environ and competit for work in the automobil repair industri have
motiv a scheme where some establish inflat the estim cost to cover the
deduct the insur is advis by the repair shop that the shop will accept whatev the
compani author
vehicl identif number vin switch
vinswitch fraud scheme ar the work of profession in which a wreck vehicl is sold
and report as be repair the vehicl is not repair but the vin plate is switch
with a stolen vehicl of the same make and model
rental car fraud
a person doesnt need to own a vehicl to incur automobil fraud there ar sever
scheme that can be perpetr us rental car the most preval involv properti
damag bodili injuri and export fraud
properti scheme
properti scheme usual involv the file of insur claim for properti that never
exist or for inflat loss amount
inflat inventori
properti that is lost through fire is claim on an insur form howev properti that
doesnt exist also find it wai onto an inventori of the properti clai med properti claim
might have been previous sold or never own by the claimant
phoni or inflat theft
a home or car that ha been burglar is the basi for file a claim for recoveri of
moni lost howev as with item destroi by fire abov the item never exist or
were previous sold
paper boat
a claim is file for a boat that sank but actual never exist it is not difficult to regist a
boat that is base on a bill of sale after a period of time a loss is claim for the sink of
the boat it is difficult to prove that the boat didnt exist or wasnt sunk intention
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11109
life insur scheme
fraudul death claim
to obtain reimburs for life insur a death certif is requir howev phoni
death certif ar not that difficult to obtain the person might be veri much aliv and
miss or the person might be dead and the death is past post with small settlement
death claim ar not close scrutin and paid rel easili
murder for profit
thi scheme involv the kill or arrang for the kill of a person in order to collect
the insur the death might be made to look like it wa an accid or a random kill
vanish premium scheme
thi scheme involv insur compani market decept vanish premium life
insur polici the idea of the vanish premium polici is that after a set number of
year of pai the polici premium the polici would be paid off at that point the polici
holder would not have to make ani more payment toward the polici
in realiti though around the time the polici would be paid off the insur compani
would explain that the polici had been revis and that sever more year of payment
would be necessari the polici holder would then be face with a dilemma either ceas
make payment and risk have the polici laps due to nonpay or continu make
the expens payment for sever more year
liabil scheme
in a liabil scheme the claimant ha claim an injuri that did not occur the slipandfal
scam is the most common where a person claim to fall as the result of neglig on behalf
of the insur
red flag of insur fraud
red flag of insur fraud mai includ ani of the follow
the claim is made a short time after incept of the polici or after an increas or
chang in the coverag under which the claim is made thi could includ the purchas
insur fraud financi transact
11110 2011 fraud examin manual
of a schedul properti or jewelri floater polici or more than on dure the time
befor the loss
the insur ha a histori of mani insur claim and loss
the insur earlier ask hi insur agent hypothet question about coverag in
the event of a loss similar to the actual claim
the insur is veri pushi and insist about a fast settlement and exhibit more than
the usual amount of knowledg about insur coverag and claim procedur
particularli if the claim is not well document
in a burglari loss the claim includ larg bulki properti which is unusu for
a burglari
in a theft or fire loss claim the claim includ a lot of recent purchas expens
properti or the insur insist that everyth wa the best or the most expens
model especi if the insur cannot provid receipt owner manual or other
documentari proof of purchas
in a fire loss claim properti that would be person or sentiment to the insur and
that you would expect to see among the lost properti photograph famili heirloom
or pet is conspicu by it absenc
a larg amount of the properti wa purchas at garag and yard sale and flea market
or otherwis for cash and there ar no receipt the insur will usual be unabl to
recal exactli where these sale took place or by whom
the insur cannot rememb or doe not know where he acquir the claim
properti especi unusu item andor he cannot provid adequ descript
on the other hand the insur alreadi ha receipt and other document wit
and duplic photograph for everyth the claim is too perfect
document provid by the insur is irregular or question such as
number receipt ar from the same store and date differ or sequenti
document show sign of alter such as date descript or amount
photocopi of document ar provid and the insur cannot produc
the origin
similar handwrit or signatur or the insur appar handwrit on
differ receipt invoic gift verif apprais etc
the amount of tax is wrong either for the price of the properti or for the date
appear on the receipt
receipt invoic or ship document do not have paid receiv or other
ship stamp
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11111
in a theft or loss awai from home the insur wait an unusu long time befor
report the theft to the polic
the insur is abl to give the polic a complet list of lost properti on the dai of
the burglari or shortli after
the amount of the claim differ from the valu given by the insur to the polic
in a busi inventori or incom loss claim the insur doe not keep complet
book or the book do not follow accept account principl
the physic evid is inconsist with the loss claim by the insur
in a burglari loss there is no physic evid of break and enter or a
burglari could not have occur unnot under the circumst
in a fire loss
the appar caus and origin of the fire is inconsist with an accident caus and
origin or there is evid of the us of an acceler
the remain of the properti do not match the claim properti
the premis do not show sign of have contain the claim properti or the
amount of properti will not fit into the space where the insur sai it wa
physic damag to the insur car is inconsist with it have been in a collis
with an uninsur car
the insur ha discard the claim damag properti befor the adjust can
examin it
the cost of the claim properti over the period of time it wa allegedli acquir
seem to exce the insur financi abil to purchas it
the insur refus or is unabl to answer routin question
the insur provid support evid and document that cannot be
corrobor
inform on a life applic is veri vagu or ambigu as to the detail of health
histori date place of treatment name of physician or hospit or specif diagnosi
applic fail to sign and date the applic
pertin question on the applic ar not answer such as incom other insur
carri hazard duti or aviat or fly activ
the insur ha excess insur either shown at the time of applic or develop
through an underwrit report of databas inform
earn incom doe not warrant the amount of insur be appli for
the applic date of birth as shown on the applic is much earlier than shown
with other carrier or in previou applic or polici
the agent is put on a great deal of pressur to have the polici issu becaus of the
insur fraud financi transact
11112 2011 fraud examin manual
larg amount appli for but is go over the underwrit head in order to do so
work out of the system
the physician report is veri vagu on detail of past medic histori and doe not
coincid with the inform shown on the applic
a death claim is present in which the death ha taken place outsid of the countri
the signatur on the applic for insur doe not appear to be the same signatur
as shown on an author at the time of the claim
a claimant or claimant attornei attempt to limit the type of inform to be relat
by a sign author which is a standard author us by the compani
an attornei is immedi brought into a contest death claim attempt to
interfer with the investig and to withhold inform requir by the compani
a contest death claim that is report as an accident death could possibl be a
suicid fatal accid involv onli on vehicl a hunt accid an accident
shoot while clean a weapon or repair same etc
an autopsi report disclos a differ height and weight than what is shown on the
recent applic auto or hous fire death dental record do not coincid with those
dental find as shown by an autopsi report
record ar miss on a patient who wa confin to a hospit or record ar miss
on a patient from a physician offic
the death claim packag sent to the insur compani is too well packag and
complet in everi detail with support document document that wa not
initi request or requir by the insur compani wa voluntarili sent such as
newspap report burial certif shipment of the bodi from on countri to the
home countri
the routin audit of a design insur group show a signific increas of ad
employe whose name do not show up on the payrol
gunshot wound or stab were inflict by the insur as the aggressor or were
selfinflict
polic accid report were submit by the claimant
pressur for speed of handl claimant want to stop by the offic to pick up hi
check as were leav for vacat in the morn
a seri of prescript number from the same drug store dont coincid
chronolog with the date of the prescript
an automobil fire in a veri remot rural area with no wit but the driver claim an
electr shortag in the engin compart caus the entir car to be gut
by flame
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11113
preliminari inform for a busi fire loss or home fire loss indic consider
financi difficulti and financi pressur be brought upon the owner and the fire is
suspici in natur andor origin
an employe within the claim oper of an insur compani is known to have a
drink problem drug problem financi pressur or is have seriou marit
difficulti or have an affair and irregular start to appear
on burglari loss from a busi or especi a home the investig observ that
the remain content at the scene ar of much inferior qualiti than that which is be
report stolen there is no indic of indent in the pile of the carpet where
heavi item of furnitur or equip were to have been place there ar no hook or
nail on the wall where valuabl pictur might have been hung entranc or exit ar
too small to take a larg item through without labori disassembl it
ani inform on a claim that ha been file if it is determin that there is deliber
coverup or fals statement contain therein
a disabl incom protect claim is file and it is determin that the claimant had
recent purchas numer expens item on credit and had them all cover by
credit ah insur coverag
public transport accid in which there ar more passeng claim file than there
were passeng at the time of the accid
a wit to an accid or incid deliber tri to hide from investig rather
than come forth and tell the truth
an offici document of find is in complet conflict with the fact in the case and
there is no explan for thi conflict of fact photograph or other document do not
substanti the report find
computergener detect report
comput can be us to gener detect report that provid the fraud examin with
good lead to possibl fraud
address similar report
address similar report electron compar multipl check go to the same address
thei ar extrem us becaus thei might show a check defalc or fund go to
anoth insur compani broker or fictiti paye
insur fraud financi transact
11114 2011 fraud examin manual
download of file
comparison of issu file to disburs file can determin if fund ar be us to
place new polici by us the equiti of old polici for exampl computerassist
audit tool and techniqu caatt ar us to download and compar electron file
such as compar the administr file on group busi to the social secur file to
determin if the compani is pai out monthli payment on peopl who have pass awai
electron confirm
mail disburs in forc or laps premium chang of address etc to verifi that
compani record agre with policyhold record
except or manual overrid report
computer report that list all except to normal electron process all human
intervent can appear on a period manag inform report and be testcheck
by manag it is imper that manag review on an ongo basi all except
report for possibl fraud
worker compens fraud
worker compens law requir employ or their insur plan to reimburs an
employe or on hi behalf for injuri that occur on the job regardless of who is at fault
and without delai of legal proceed to determin fault the injuri mai be physic such
as a broken limb or mental such as stress
common scheme
scheme ar gener broken into four categori premium fraud agent fraud claimant
fraud and organ fraud scheme
premium fraud
misrepres inform to the insur by employ to lower the cost of worker
compens premium
employe classif
worker compens rate vari depend on the job classif of an employe
employe that have a higher risk for injuri on the job will have a higher premium rate
cleric employe have a lower probabl for an injuri than for exampl truck driver or
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11115
construct worker and accordingli their premium should be lower therefor to lower
their premium rate an employ might intention misclassifi employe
understat of payrol
the premium for a specif job classif is base on the total payrol for that
classif the employ mai underst the amount of the payrol for higher risk
classif
exampl
two men in massachusett plead guilti to charg of conspiraci and mail fraud in
connect with a fraudul scheme to re duce worker compens claim for a
construct compani the men fals report that worker in highrisk trade were
engag in less danger occup in order to lower premium thei also conceal
million of dollar on the compani payrol from the insur compani therebi avoid
worker compens payment on those dollar
exampl
a bois coupl found themselv respons for a 71049 judgment after be accus of
misreport payrol in their drywal busi two former employe tip off investig
that thei were be paid with check bear differ compani name
half of their payrol monei wa paid by an insur drywal compani and the other half
came from on that wa not insur worker compens claim came from the
compani that wa pai premium
geograph locat of the insur oper
premium rate differ significantli base on geograph locat from state to state an
employ might have a storefront locat or a po box in a state that ha lower rate a
multist employ mai list all of it employe as oper in the state that ha the lowest
rate
histori of past loss
the modif or mod factor is a multipli that is us to determin premium rate
the multipli is deriv by compar the employ claim histori with other employ
claim histori in the same industri the higher the claim loss the higher the mod and
thu the higher the premium a new busi will start with a neutral mod for that type of
insur fraud financi transact
11116 2011 fraud examin manual
busi employ that have a high mod factor mai becom a new busi that doe
not have a mod establish and thu have lower premium than it should
corpor gerrymand
the risk pool assign to an employ will accept ani busi no matter what the claim
experi is howev it doe not have to accept ani employ that ow premium some
employ will creat a new corpor entiti in order to obtain coverag or to avoid higher
premium due to past heavi loss
exampl
fireman fund insur wa award a 15 million judgment against a hollywood
entertain compani in a suit involv a worker compens fraud scheme the
entertain compani set up a shell corpor to pose as a startup product compani
need insur the ruse allow the compani to get worker compens at much
lower rate than if fireman fund had known who thei were actual insur the
entertain compani then manipul the coverag to other film in which it had an
interest again at significantli lower rate
forg document
some employ will forg or alter prior certif show coverag in order to collect
payment for work done or as proof of coverag to author
agent fraud
pocket premium
agent issu certif of coverag indic the custom is insur but never forward
the premium to the insur compani
conspir to reduc premium
agent mai alter the applic for coverag complet by the employ in order to be abl
to offer a lower premium to hi client
the agent mai also improperli advis the employ as to how to complet the applic
the agent mai also advis the employ to transfer a group of employe into a lower risk
classif to avoid the experi modifi
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11117
while the employ mai not be awar that the scheme ar a violat of law sinc the
employ sign the applic he can be charg for hi part in the scheme howev
unknow
claimant fraud
misrepres the circumst of ani injuri or fabric that an injuri occur
injuri fraud
in thi type of fraud fals inform about the injur worker is submit to the worker
compens carrier the report describ the injuri and state the employe is either total
or partial disabl and either unabl to work or onli abl to work parttim in mani of
these scheme the fraud is help along by a doctor who for a fee will provid a fals
diagnosi and fals medic record for phoni treatment
the employe mai stage an accid and fabric an injuri or actual have an accid and
then exagger the injuri
exampl
a former personnel supervisor for the citi of lo angel wa charg with embezzl
fund from the citi worker compens system it wa charg that she provid
inform to a doctor that enabl him to submit almost 500000 in fake claim for
medic servic that were supposedli provid to citi employe the supervisor wa also
alleg to have work on her own alter the computer personnel record and then
author payment of 300000 in bogu disa biliti claim to her friend and rel
exampl
a firefight in washington wa arrest for insur fraud relat to worker
compens payment he had receiv the man claim he fell off a ladder and injur
hi knee while work as a meat cutter in a groceri store he collect temporari disabl
benefit and receiv medic treatment for six month complain of pain and tell
doctor that he could bare walk at the same time the man wa train with hi citi fire
depart as a reserv firefight the train consist of strenuou exercis such as
heavi lift and an hour of physic train each dai
insur fraud financi transact
11118 2011 fraud examin manual
secondari employ
employe who ar collect worker compens benefit mai also secur a job with
anoth employ either parttim or fulltim the employe mai fake hi ident or
assum someon els ident to receiv compens
organ fraud
organ fraud scheme ar compos of the unit effort of a lawyer a capper a doctor
and the claimant thi scheme is us not onli in worker compens case but also in
other medic fraud such as automobil injuri
the lawyer
lawyer ar usual the organ of the scheme and the on who will profit the most
the major of worker compens case ar accept on a conting fee basi if no
settlement is award then the lawyer will not be paid thi is a high volum busi and
the lawyer do not want the case to be litig thei ar reli on the insur
compani desir to settl as quickli as possibl
the lawyer will entic the claimant into secur their servic by promis a larg
settlement from the insur compani the claimant mai or mai not have to undergo the
medic test sinc the onli requir of the claimant is that thei be insur the lawyer
will then refer the injur parti to a doctor for treatment
the capper
capper also known as runner or steerer ar us to recruit patient for the scheme thei
mai be emploi by either the attornei or doctor and ar paid either on a percentag of the
total take or on a per person basi for bring in patient capper mai approach patient
at unemploy compens line work site scene of accid or at ani other type
of organ gather with promis of enrich patient ar brought into the scheme
exampl
in august of 2010 the last member of a group of 51 suspect in miami florida wa
arrest for insur fraud and other crime the insur fraud includ clinic worker
and owner who hire runner to recruit auto accid victim as well as stage auto
accid particip when thei ran out of legitim accid victim runner receiv
500 to 700 per patient and the estim fraudul claim from thi scheme exceed
4 million
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11119
the doctor
doctor mai be organ or player in the scheme but must be a part of it in order for it
to work properli doctor ar us to lend authent to the scheme and thei ar well
compens for their effort the doctor bill for servic that thei mai or mai not render
as well as for unnecessari servic in addit if patient have regular health insur
doctor mai doubl bill for the servic if an injuri is the result of an automobil accid
that occur while the patient wa on the job the doctor mai bill all three insur
compani the worker compens carrier the employe health insur and the
automobil carrier
becaus of coordin of benefit claus in most insur contract the insur
compani will coordin the benefit to the extent that the maximum amount paid will be
100 percent of the injuri howev the doctor will not let the patient health insur
compani know that the injuri is workrel or accidentrel and thu the claim mai be
overpaid sinc both claim ar paid at their full liabil
most of the treatment render will be offic visit xrai vascular studi physic therapi
and spinal manipul in some case hospit employe will be part of the scheme and
allow the us of the facil fraudul
red flag
document that have obvious been alter whiteout or erasur is evid
document that ar improperli fill out with entri in the wrong place or inform
that doesnt make sens
claim file where the carrier indic no record of coverag
poor qualiti photocopi of document that should be origin document
small payrol for larg contractor or employe leas oper
payrol figur report to insur that disagre with payrol report for other
purpos
claim for employe injuri inconsist with that employe classif
industri or construct enterpris with a work forc report to be in lowrat
categori
new corpor on ongo job
most of the employe from an employ with a high experi suddenli becom
employe in a new busi
agenc emploi larg number of support staff and onli ha on licens agent
insur fraud financi transact
11120 2011 fraud examin manual
the agent onli accept cash or monei order for premium
no polici is receiv after an extend time
no bill is receiv for premium
employ review of the applic indic that it is inaccur
the reclassif of the individu employe into a lower classif
the employ begin to declar a smaller payrol
claimant that have or ar
disgruntl soontoretir or face disciplinari action or layoff
involv in season work that is about to end
taken unexplain or excess time off prior to claim injuri
taken more time off than the claim injuri seem to warrant
no wit to the accid
accid that occur in an area where the employe normal would not be
work especi if it a highrisk area
delai the report of an accid
new on the job or have a histori of shortterm employ
a histori of injuri
inappropri or lack of medic treatment for injuri
experienc financi difficulti
chang physician when a work releas ha been issu
frequent chang medic provid
demand for quick or earli settlement
never at home after a seriou injuri or can onli be reach by return
telephon call
unusu familiar with worker compens procedur
consist uncoop
receiv mail at a post offic box or at an address differ from employ or
depart of motor vehicl
soft tissu injuri that ar hard to prove
incapacit but seen in activ that requir full mobil
independ medic exam that reveal conflict medic inform
a histori of self or famili employ have a trade or work in a cash busi
injuri that occur in an area where the employe would normal not be work
injuri that would not normal be the type the employe should have
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11121
injuri that occur on a late fridai afternoon or ar report on a mondai morn
if injuri ar report mondai morn the injuri could have result over
the weekend
activ involv in contact sport or physic demand hobbi
date of disabl or absenc from work that doe not coincid with the physician
date of disabl or date of treatment
unprofession diagnost terminolog
misspel medic terminolog throughout the medic report or hospit record
a pattern of accid claim by an individu or famili member
claimant that repeatedli doesnt show up for hi request independ physic
examin or is not home when the regularli schedul nurs stop by for therapi
the claimant attornei is known for handl suspici claim
attornei report hi represent began on the dai of the report incid
same doctor and attornei ar known to handl these type of case
claimant complain to the insur compani ceo in order to press for payment
the attornei threaten further legal action unless a quick settlement can be made
the attornei inquir about a settlement earli into the life of the claim
wholesal claim handl by law firm and multipl class action suit
date of the accid ar vagu or contradictori
treatment for the injuri follow previou firsttim visit to a provid
same provid alwai bill for extra time or extra consider on a claim
provid is work through an attornei
provid is reluct to commun with the insur compani
provid share the same patient with the same colleagu
provid refer patient to specif other provid
provid prescrib unnecessari suppli andor care by a specif provid
medic record ar can
medic record ar out of sequenc and miss date of servic
differ handwrit with same date of servic
lost burn or stolen record when request
progress note consist reflect that the patient ha a high degre of pain yet hi
condit is improv or progress as plan
inconsist diagnosi for the treatment render
provid bill on a holidai or sundai
conflict medic report
claim ar photocopi
insur fraud financi transact
11122 2011 fraud examin manual
claim for other patient ar ident
bill or harass the insur compani for payment
claimant address is differ on the claim form than it is on the enrol file
premium fraud investig tip
review the applic for coverag for complet and accuraci
if the busi is claim to be new then it should be verifi that it is inde new and
no mod factor have been establish
review the underwrit of the applic for suspici activ if the compani is a
larg compani and ha a small payrol verifi the number of employe as well as their
classif
review claim to determin if thei ar consist with the type of employ report
and the number of employe claim
conduct an onsit audit of their payrol and relat record for the polici period as well
as to determin where their princip place of employ is locat
observ if there ar too mani cleric employe or other low risk occup that
make up the calcul lead you to believ that the record ar misstat
analyz the financi statement when avail to determin what payrol expens
actual ar compar to what is report
review accid and injuri report for suspici activ
conduct surveil as need to observ and document variou activ
document find and report the result of the activ as requir
claimant fraud investig tip
in spite of the possibl indic of fraud medic treatment must be secur
immedi but an investig should be open immedi if there is a suspicion of
fraud
the manag who is respons for the area where the injuri occur should initi an
investig on each report accid
as soon as possibl the accid should be discuss with the employe
obtain a sign statement from the employe as soon as the employe is abl to do so
in obtain a sign statement the follow question should be answer as
applic
what wa the employe do just prior to the accid and after the accid
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11123
wa the employe carri out hi regular duti and in the manner thei should
normal be conduct
had the employe been properli instruct as to how to safe perform the duti
when and by whom
did thei work in accord with these instruct
did anoth employe caus the injuri
wa the equip or machineri properli guard and in good condit
wa the equip suit for the purpos it wa be us
wa the workplac properli light
what were the housekeep condit in the area
doe the work be done by the injur employe differ in ani wai from that be
perform by other employe
is there a safer wai that hi oper can be perform
wa the injur employe in good health when he report to work on the date of
the accid
have an independ medic examin perform to document the ill the person
perform the exam should photograph the patient obtain a copi of the patient photo
identif such as a driver licens and obtain the patient signatur
the follow question should be ask
ar you disabl from work
ar you now work parttim fulltim or not at all
what ar your daili activ
what is your activ level with regard to your abil to walk jog run drive swim or
particip in sport activ or hobbi
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11201
health care fraud
accord to the center for medicaid and medicar servic cm total health care
expenditur ar estim to have reach approxim 25 trillion by the end of 2009
and ar project to rise to over 45 trillion by 2019 and compris 193 percent of gross
domest product gdp per person health spend is expect to reach over 8600 by
the end of 2011 and is project to increas to 13400 by the end of 2019
health care spend continu to increas much faster than the overal economi thi gap
between health care spend and the overal economi is on of the main reason that fraud
in the health care industri is so preval accord to the us govern account
offic gao the most common estim of health insur fraud is 10 percent of our
total health care spend howev becaus no on know exactli what the figur is the
figur ha also been estim to be from 310 percent per year health care provid
perpetr the major of thi fraud
law relat to health care fraud
numer crimin and civil feder and state law ar avail in the prosecut of health
care fraud in addit regulatori agenc ar also avail for licensur action
feder crimin law
health insur portabl and account act
as part of the health insur portabl and account act hipaa of 1996
congress made a number of chang to the feder crimin code in fact the promulg
of hipaa wa the first massiv sweep to wipe out health care fraud
the act establish sever crimin statut relat specif to health care fraud under
hipaa there ar five feder crime direct at health care fraud specif hipaa made
it illeg for anyon to knowingli and willfulli
carri out a scheme to defraud ani health care benefit program 18 usc 1347
steal or embezzl ani fund properti or monei of a health care benefit program 18 usc 669
make fals statement relat to health care matter 18 usc 1035
obstruct a crimin investig of a health care offens 18 usc 1518
health care fraud financi transact
11202 2011 fraud examin manual
more specif under section 1347 which establish a feder offens of health care
fraud it is illeg for anyon to
knowingli and willfulli
execut or attempt to execut
a scheme or artific intend to
defraud a health care benefit program or
by fals or fraudul mean obtain monei or properti own by or under the
custodi or control of ani health care benefit program
the term health care benefit program as us in these statut is defin to mean ani public or
privat plan or contract affect commerc under which ani medic benefit item or
servic is provid to ani individu and includ ani individu or entiti who is provid a
medic benefit item or servic for which payment mai be made under the plan
or contract
the act also provid that a judg order a person convict of a feder health care offens
to forfeit ani properti that can be trace from the proce receiv from the offens more
inform concern these statut is set out in the law section
moreov pursuant to it purpos in provid fund to combat health care fraud hipaa
launch the fraud and abus control program which
coordin feder state and local law enforc program to control fraud and
abus as applic to medicaid program
conduct investig audit evalu and inspect as thei relat to deliveri and
payment for medicaid servic
modifi and establish safe harbor provis
issu advisori opinion and special fraud alert and
provid report and disclosur requir of advers action under the health
care fraud and abus data collect program
furthermor as part of the implement of hipaa the secretari of the depart of
health and human servic hh wa direct to creat the health integr and
protect data bank hipdb the hipdb is a report mechan that allow user to
access and review final advers action taken against practition provid and supplier
access to the data bank howev is limit to feder and state govern agenc and
health plan
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11203
the medicar and medicaid antikickback statut 42 usc 1320a7bb
the medicar and medicaid antikickback statut also known as the feder healthcar
antikickback act mai also be us to combat healthcar fraud thi statut prohibit an
individu from make payment to induc the purchas of healthcar good or servic that
will be paid for by a feder health care program specif the statut prohibit
the know and will
payment or receipt of ani form of remuner includ kickback bribe and
rebat
to induc someon to recommend or to purchas order or recommend ani servic that
mai be paid for under a feder health care program
the statut encompass a veri broad arrai of activ that can be classifi as medicaid
fraud it appli to all feder fund health care program not just medicaid
the statut crimin penal individu who actual receiv as well as those who mere
solicit medicaid remuner so long as the defend intent is know and will and
hi mean of involv includ the receipt or solicit of the kickback the crime is
prosecut but gener it is difficult to determin whether the defend intend to act
knowingli and willfulli and neither knowingli nor willfulli is defin in the statut
thu their interpret ar left for the court to deciph and thi ha inher led to
discrep in determin a defend intent
the follow exampl ar type of activ that typic violat the medicar and
medicaid antikickback statut
payment for medicaid patient referr
payment from a selfreferr joint ventur to investor for medicaid patient referr
involv in a consign agreement wherebi perform under the agreement is
base upon a percentagebas compens scheme
a physician who perform littl or no servic to medicaid patient yet receiv larg
amount of monei for refer those patient to hospit under ostens servic
contract
the stark law physician selfreferr
the stark law also known as the physician self referr law attempt to limit the abil of
physician to profit from their referr by prohibit physician from refer
medicaremedicaid patient for design health servic dh entiti with which the
health care fraud financi transact
11204 2011 fraud examin manual
physician or hi immedi famili member ha a financi relationship the law wa pass in
two phase
stark i wa enact as part of the omnibu budget reconcili act of 1989 it prohibit
a physician from refer a patient to a clinic laboratori with which he or an immedi
famili member ha a financi relationship
stark ii provid addit amend and expand the referr and bill prohibit
to addit design health servic it strengthen stark is prohibit on physician
referr from certain design health servic dh entiti with which the physician or
hi immedi famili member ha a financi relationship
as relat to medicaid stark ii prohibit a physician in exchang for a payment of equiti or
reduct of debt without an except to make
a medicaid referr
a medicaid claim or
compens arrang
in addit to these codifi requir state often supplement the feder requir
with more stringent state requir for exampl in pennsylvania physician ar
prohibit from make ani automat referr whether thei ar enunci in direct or
indirect agreement with other health provid
despit the gener rule that physician cannot profit from their referr there ar sever
except and safe harbor provis to protect physician from make certain referr in
part these except includ referr to and from physician in the same group practic
same inoffic ancillari servic prepaid plan legitim person servic arrang
and physician recruit
although stark ii appear to mimic the medicar and medicaid antikickback statut the
two law ar differ first unlik the antikickback act which appli to all individu
stark ii onli appli to physician and their famili member second where the medicar
and medicaid antikickback statut provid crimin penalti for it violat stark ii is
codifi as a civil statut and therefor onli impos monetari penalti suspens and
termin final under stark ii each medi caid entiti provid item or servic for
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11205
payment must compli with report requir and disclos inform relat to the
entiti ownership invest and compens arrang
violat of stark ii mai subject a defend to 15000 for each servic improperli bill
or claim 100000 for particip in a circumvent arrang or scheme exclus
from particip as a provid in medicaid program andor a penalti of 10000 each dai
report is delinqu
fals claim and statement
though there is a statut specif design to combat fals claim in connect with
health care benefit program the feder fals claim statut mai be us to combat certain
type of health care fraud some exampl of fals claim and statement includ
falsifi contractor qualif
fals certif or assur
fals record or invoic
invoic from nonexist compani
claim made in duplic or alter invoic
bill for fictiti employe
bill for good and servic not provid
inflat cost or substitut of cheaper good
although these statut ar discuss in more detail in the law section of the fraud
examin manual thi discuss will provid a brief overview of the main fals claim and
statement statut us to combat health care fraud includ fals statement under
section 1001 the crimin fals claim act and the civil fals claim act
fals statement 18 usc 1001
although there ar a number of feder statut that prohibit make fals claim and
statement to the feder govern the term fals statement usual refer to the feder
fals statement statut laid out in section 1001 of titl 18 unit state code briefli
state the law prohibit a person from ly to or conceal inform from a feder
offici
under section 1001 a fals statement can be oral written sworn or unsworn sign or
unsign the fals statement howev must be about a materi fact and it must be
health care fraud financi transact
11206 2011 fraud examin manual
capabl of influenc the outcom of the agenc action the element of a typic section
1001 violat ar set forth below
the defend made a fals statement or us a fals document
that wa materi
regard a matter within the jurisdict of ani agenc of the unit state
with knowledg of it falsiti
the crimin fals claim act 18 usc 287
thi statut make it illeg to present or make ani fals fictiti or fraudul claim
against ani agenc or depart of the unit state the crime is complet when the
claim is present and payment of the claim is not an element of the offens
to establish violat of thi statut the govern must establish all of the follow
element
the defend made or present
ani claim that wa fals fictiti or fraudul
the defend knew the claim wa fals fictiti or fraudul
violat of thi statut mai be imprison not more than five year and subject to a fine of
250000
the civil fals claim act 31 usc 3729 et seq
the fals claim act 31 usc 3729 through 3733 is a civil statut that gener
provid liabil for fals statement and represent made to an offic or employe of
the feder govern as the civil counterpart to the crimin fals claim act it provid
a separ civil caus of action that mai be taken in addit to a crimin prosecut
the civil fals claim act provid in part that a person who violat it provis is liabl
to the govern for ani trebl damag it sustain and a civil penalti of 5000 to 10000
per fals claim
the penalti for violat of the act rang from 5000 to 10000 plu up to three time
the amount of the govern damag in addit violat mai be suspend from
particip in medicaid program
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11207
in addit to allow the govern to recov penalti and damag for fals claim
the civil fals claim act allow a privat parti to prosecut a civil action against the
perpetr on behalf of the govern thi is call a qui tam action and is discuss in
further detail below
the most commonli prosecut act under the statut result from the follow
the receipt of fals or fraudul claim paid by the govern
the us of fals or fraudul record or statement to avoid payment to the govern
to bring an action under the civil fals claim act stem from medicaid fraud there
must be a fals statement or represent in connect with either of the follow
the wrong dispos of medicaid asset
solicit or payment of medicaid claim
even if a state medicaid program is admini stere exclus by the state becaus the
program is subsid with feder fund all fals or fraudul claim submit to the
state medicaid program fall within the guis of the civil fals claim act as claim against
the feder govern
the follow exampl ar typic violat under the civil fals claim act
physician bill for servic provid by resid as if the servic were perform by
the physician
bill for upcod medic servic cover by medicaid
market and sell bundl test necessa ry and unnecessari test to refer
physician who then bill medicaid at a higher rate than author
misdiagnos medicaid beneficiari as have medic condit and then bill for
servic that wouldnt otherwis be cover
comput fraud
section 1030 of titl 18 us code mai also be us to combat health care fraud scheme
involv comput under thi section ani scheme that us a comput as the instrument
or vehicl by which fund could be illeg transfer or us a comput to obtain
confidenti inform mai be prosecut
health care fraud financi transact
11208 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an insur compani employe gener a fals claim in the compani comput make a
fraudul payment to a friend who then share the bounti with the employe
monei launder
the monei launder statut mai also be effect in deter and punish individu
who commit health care fraud section 1956 of titl 18 us code crimin financi
transact involv proce of unlaw activ properti qualifi as the proce of
illeg activ if it is deriv from a specifi unlaw activ which hipaa amend to
includ health care offens
us the feder monei launder statut is benefici becaus thei allow the govern
to seiz properti through civil forfeitur ie the govern mai seiz properti befor
judgment to ensur it will be secur until a hear can be held
the text of the monei launder statut can be found in the law section of the fraud
examin manual
other feder statut
the follow feder law ar also commonli us in the prosecut of health care fraud
case more detail on each of these statut can be found in the law relat to fraud
chapter in the law section of the fraud examin manual
mail and wire fraud titl 18 usc 1341 1343 mail and wire fraud make it a crime
to us the mail or wire commun to perpetr a scheme to defraud a victim of
monei or properti eg present a fals claim to medicar state health plan or privat
insur
conspiraci titl 18 usc 371 titl 18 usc 286 section 286 make it a crime for
two or more peopl to agre or conspir to defraud the unit state by obtain or
aid in obtain payment or allow of ani fals fictiti or fraudul claim
obstruct of feder audit titl 18 usc 1516 thi statut origin pass in 1988
make it a feloni for anyon to influenc obstruct or imped a feder auditor in the
perform of hi offici duti thi statut is relev to health care fraud becaus
audit ar the main tool us by the govern to monitor healthcar provid
perform and ar gener the first step in ani health care fraud investig
racket influenc and corrupt organ rico statut titl 18 usc 19611968
rico outlaw the invest of illgotten gain in anoth busi enterpris the
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11209
acquisit of an interest in an enterpris through certain illeg act and the conduct of
the affair of an enterpris through such act
electron fund transfer act titl 15 usc 1693n section 1693n appli to paperless
monei transfer between account and in gener it attach crimin liabil to the act
of give fals or inaccur inform under the bank law and regul and
fail to provid inform requir under the bank law and regul
civil remedi
there ar mani feder statut that victim of health care fraud can us to obtain relief the
fals claim act and rico both provid for civil remedi in addit to crimin penalti
in addit on of the most effect remedi is avail under the civil monetari
penalti law 42 usc 1320a7a under thi law administr action can be invok
against provid who defraud ani feder fund program by file fals claim or other
improp bill practic ani person includ an organ agenc or other entiti
but exclud a beneficiari who violat the law is subject to civil monetari penalti
violat can be fine up to 10000 for each medic servic that wa fraudul
repres and thei mai be exclud from particip in govern program
state statut
although fraud is illeg in everi state not all state have specif legisl against insur
fraud law such as grand theft scheme to defraud or fraud by decept must be
us to charg offend nineteen state have pass legisl that specif prohibit
insur fraud although the effect vari accord to the provis in each statut
for exampl in some state health insur fraud is illeg but there is no immun to the
insur compani for report fraud
the nation associ of insur commission naic adopt the insur
fraud prevent model act the kei provis includ
mandatori report of fraud
immun from prosecut for report fraud
make insur fraud a feloni under state law
requir a fraud warn on claim form
requir antifraud initi includ mandatori special investig unit
restitut to the victim
health care fraud financi transact
11210 2011 fraud examin manual
regulatori board
sinc most medic practition ar requir to be licens by their state to practic the
regulatori board have jurisdict over the license and can take action when appropri
the regulatori board will take action when the patient health is in jeopardi fraud ha
been commit continu educ requir ar not met or other similar
circumst in most instanc when a license is convict of fraud it is not automat
that hi licens is suspend or revok a separ action and investig must be
complet for that to happen in mani case howev when there is not enough evid
to sustain a crimin convict the licens board mai be abl to take action and offer
relief
run and cap legisl
mani state have enact legisl to prevent attornei from us runner or capper to
solicit busi although state disciplinari rule gener prohibit thi practic veri few
attornei have receiv ani substanti sanction some state such as california have taken
the initi to crimin run and cap
under a california law pass in juli 1993 insur compani now have the right to bring
a lawsuit against ani person who hire runner or capper to procur client or patient to
obtain worker compens benefit in code 19717 thi action need not be brought
in the insur compani name instead the insur compani can act on behalf of the
peopl of the state of california
fraud by the insur compani
fraud commit by insur compani includ some of the follow
submiss of fals document and improp bill
mishandl claim
failur to pai legitim claim
charg unapprov rate
request rate increas base on fraudul data
us illeg or decept tactic to sell insur
failur to give fee break
patient screen
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11211
submiss of fals document
if the insur compani act as an intermediari for the payer such as medicar then the
insur compani commit fraud when it improperli bill the govern or submit fals
cost report or audit
mishandl claim
mishandl claim also aris primarili in the area of an insur compani act as an
intermediari administ the insur program of the payer the insur compani is
under a duti to try to detect fals claim although it is imposs to detect everi fraudul
claim if a compani bypass it own claim verif procedur it can be guilti of fraud
failur to pai legitim claim
the insur compani or carrier is requir to pai ani claim that is properli submit
contain all the requir the inform absent of fraud and ha benefit avail an
insur compani might commit fraud when claim ar consist reject even though
the requir inform ha been submit mani state have regul regard the
amount of time an insur compani ha to pai a clean claim on that ha all the
need inform even if an insur ha commit fraud in the past and for some
reason or anoth is still an insur the insur compani must still adjud a valid
claim
charg unapprov rate
some state requir insur compani to obtain approv on their premium rate until
the approv is receiv the rate cannot be charg to the insur an insur compani
mai improperli begin charg the unapprov rate befor it is allow to
request rate increas base on fraudul data
similar to the abov insur compani or carrier need regulatori approv for rate
increas us cost data to justifi their increas in order to get their rate hike thei mai us
fraudul cost data
decept or illeg sale practic
insur compani mai promot or condon decept or illeg sale practic in order to
increas sale the most common exampl is to disguis an insur polici as a save plan
or invest
health care fraud financi transact
11212 2011 fraud examin manual
failur to give fee break
an insur compani mai be guilti of fraud if it fail to pass on fee break it negoti
with it provid the alleg overcharg occur when an insur compani negoti a
discount on a medic bill if the compani doe not pass along the discount the consum
copay is made on the full price rather than the discount price and the consum
end up pai a higher percentag of their bill than thei should for exampl if a bill is
1000 and a 50 percent discount is negoti the consum 20 percent portion should
equal 100 if the compani doe not pass along the discount the consum pai 20 percent
of the full 1000 or 200
patient screen
in the manag care environ becaus so much emphasi is place on prevent care
some insur compani mai be reduc their risk by limit their insur to onli
healthi patient
detect
detect of fraud commit by an insur compani mai includ the follow
review complaint by insur
compar financi statement data to data us to request rate
compar rate charg with rate approv
compar discount negoti with provid with the amount allow on the claim
and coinsur charg
review reject member to determin if underwrit guidelin were abus
employe claim fraud
employe of insur especi claim examin and custom servic repres can
present addit problem to the fraud examin due to their abil to access claim and
subscrib file the fraud perpetr can be almost limitless
claim fraud us the employe contract
claim fraud us anoth insur contract number
claim payment us a rel contract
claim adjust system
payment for cancel contract or deceas insur
improp paye
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11213
claim fraud us the employe contract
claim employe gener have access to claim data and claim form thei can sometim
adjust claim or pull someon claim chang the claimant contract number and have the
claim process
claim fraud us anoth insur contract number
employe who have access to insur enrol file can locat an insur with a similar
name as the employe from there the employe onli ha to complet a claim form and
submit the claim through the regular process system the employe onli ha to put hi
own address in order to receiv the payment
claim payment us a rel contract
employe can fabric claim and submit them under a rel contract number
claim adjust system
claim that ar legitim paid incorrectli need to be adjust an adjust examin can
adjust a claim for fraudul purpos also
payment for cancel contract or deceas insur
if an adjust ha access to the enrol file he mai run across a deceas insur by
submit or process a claim befor cancel an examin can manipul the claim
system and divert payment to himself
improp paye
a claim approv overrid a claim payment system and pai out claim to improp paye
the claim approv insert her son and daughterinlaw as paye check ar submit to
other than the insur address
detect
the follow step can be us to determin if a compani is deal with an employe who
is defraud the system
pull highdollar claim payment for insur investig all unusu pattern by
verifi servic
review printout for special paye code to search for employe
review printout for a high number of adjust claim per insur
health care fraud financi transact
11214 2011 fraud examin manual
review printout of recent cancel contract for unusu claim activ just prior to
cancel
onc unusu activ ha been identifi follow normal investig procedur
review address chang list for employe name or unusu activ
agent fraud
nearli all insur compani us the servic of a broker or agent extern to the firm
unfortun the best interest of the insur compani ar not alwai serv sever
scheme have been identifi that can be classifi as fraudul
phoni group
agent will set up bogu compani in order to sell health insur to individu at
group rate
phoni or nonexist polici
rather than go to the troubl of set up a bogu compani mani agent will sell a
phoni polici and take the monei and run
medic underwrit fraud
the broker will write a polici know that the client ha preexist condit that would
prevent accept for coverag
elig fraud
a broker mai seek to add inelig famili member girlfriend or associ to a group
polici by repres them as employe
anoth elig fraud is where a broker mai sell a lowcost group polici to an
organ that emploi a small percentag of peopl with seriou health problem a
better rate can be obtain by separ healthi peopl from sick peopl the broker split
off the unhealthi peopl in their own group place the coverag with an insur of last
resort such as a carrier that is given favor tax statu in exchang for issu coverag
to anyon
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11215
erisa fraud
the employe retir incom secur act regul all trust account held by an
employ for the purpos of pai benefit such as retir annuiti or health and life
polici under the act if an insur compani believ that a plan administr is
engag in violat of the act it is requir to report the matter to the us depart
of labor as an exampl a corpor mai us fund collect from employe through
payrol deduct to financ daili oper of the compani
payment induc
these scheme involv broker furnish group coverag to individu who would not
otherwis qualifi for such polici by ad them to legitim group or establish a
fictiti group for the purpos of obtain waiver andor cheaper rate the broker
profit not onli from the normal sale commiss but also from a surcharg or bill
fee that is ad to the publish premium that is collect from the polici holder by the
broker in anoth scenario a broker mai charg a markup for ad employe to a
legitim group
switch polici
thi scheme involv the agent tell the custom that thei ar obtain on polici
take the premium for that polici and then bui a cheaper polici with less coverag
instead the agent then pocket the differ
provid fraud
provid fraud is a fraud perpetr by medic practition medic supplier or medic
facil on patient or custom in order to increas their own incom by illicit mean
the potenti for fraud involv provid ha grown with the increas us of comput
equip in gener bill addition provid possess the knowledg of medic
techniqu procedur and terminolog need to avoid be question by claim
handl personnel more insur compani ar contract directli with provid for
bill arrang leav patient out of the loop in addit patient ar usual
reluct to accus physician of wrongdo becaus thei reli on the provid continu
servic and becaus when provid engag in fraudul practic thei often forgiv ani
outofpocket expens the patient incur
health care fraud financi transact
11216 2011 fraud examin manual
roll lab
a roll lab is a mobil laboratori that solicit insur to particip in health screen test
at no cost to the insur these lab ar usual locat in semitrail park at health
club spa shop center or on vacant properti
patient ar contact by telephon for a free physic exam subsequ to exam the
insur compani is bill for eight to 10 claim total 800010000 for a singl date
of test perform by multipl provid addit claim ar bill for later servic date
even though no more test is done the lab move to anoth locat prior to the patient
receiv the test result to avoid detect
the provid market their servic in mani wai on wai is to rent offic space in a
doctor offic for on dai and then test all of that doctor patient the test equip
itself might arriv in a truck or van and move from on offic to anoth anoth method
involv set up a temporari oper in a shop center roll lab ar also set up at
health spa with all member test at no charg the most common method howev is to
simpli set up a small offic for a temporari period and us telephon solicit
clinic lab
clinic lab have devis fraudul bill practic to encourag physician to order
unnecessari test on patient the scheme caus specif blood test to be includ in a
panel of frequent order test the order physician pai noth or a nomin fee for
the extra test the test ar then unbundl and bill separ by the lab to govern
payer and insur compani
supplier
ambul transport
fraudul bill for ambul transport can includ bill for more mileag than
incur for trip never taken or for noncov trip
infus care
fraud scheme involv infus care treatment includ
servic bill at abnorm high rate in comparison to cost
bill for noncov patient
bill in excess of physician prescript
bill for unnecessari treatment
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11217
kickback given to the prescrib physician
durabl medic equip supplier
fraud scheme perpetr by supplier of durabl medic equip frequent involv
falsifi prescript
excess suppli
equip not deliv or bill befor deliveri
bill for equip rental after equip wa return
noncov suppliesfor exampl incontin care kit
milk supplement scam
lymphedema pump
scooter scam
home health compani
fraud involv home health care compani gain nation exposur after the feder
govern investig of abc home health care wa releas at the time of the
investig abc wa the largest privat held home health care provid in the unit
state in 1994 abc made some 78 million visit and bill medicar 6159 million
among the type of fraud identifi at abc were
medic record were alter to make it appear that patient continu to need home
health visit
manag direct employe to continu vi site patient who in the employe
opinion did not qualifi for home health care becaus thei were not homebound
a manag direct a nurs to record visit that were never made
a manag forg physician signatur on plan of care
if a care plan wa sign by a physician employe would alter the number of visit
abc reportedli charg medicar for the cost of acquir other home health agenc
by pai owner a small sum up front and the balanc in salari under the form of
employ agreement
manag direct employe to market abc and it servic with the intent of charg
medicar for cost that were not reimburs
pharmaci
fraud scheme stem from pharmaci transact includ
merchandis substitut someth of valu for a prescript drug
bill for brand name drug but dispens gener drug
health care fraud financi transact
11218 2011 fraud examin manual
bill beyond amount prescrib
bill for drug not prescrib
bill for a highpric gener drug but dispens a lowerpr gener drug
packag size differentialbil thirdparti payer for the price of drug purchas in
small packag size when thei were purchas at less cost in larger quantiti
black market purchasingpurchas drug at significantli reduc rate then
dispens at regular price
chiropractor
dishonest chiropractor mai engag in fraud scheme such as
bill for servic never render or unnecessari servic
bill for multipl famili member
purchas individu contract for their patient
bill for physic therapi servic when contract doe not cover chiropractor
bill for excess servic
exampl
while certain treatment by chiropractor ar usual not cover by insur similar
treatment by physician mai be cover to correct thi perceiv inequ some
chiropractor have set up medic corpor and then hire medic doctor as employe
the chiropractor is ceo of the corpor and ha total discret of how the fund ar
disburs the net result of thi setup is that a medic doctor give the stamp of approv
to charg that might not otherwis be paid and the chiropractor reap the profit
chiroshenanigan
patient for life
charg annual fee that exce 5000 practic manag firm teach chiropractor
how to build milliondollar practic in as littl as two year the literatur advis the
chiropractor not to tell patient the result of their initi exam or how long thei will need
treatment until theyv been indoctrin into the benefit of lifelong chiropract care
further thei promot care of infant that will continu for the lifetim of the patient
patient who question the continu of treatment ar given the guilti treatment it a
choic you have to make depend on how import your health is to you
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11219
patient dont seem to be cure until the insur benefit run out when benefit ar
renew in the next calendar year the symptom return and a new seri of treatment
begin until benefit run out again
patient recruit practic
some chiropractor us question recruit practic to lure new patient into their
practic these might includ
coupon for free meal where the benefit of chiropract care ar explain
advertis for free initi care
booth at health fair mall and spa offer free screen
treatment for nonspin condit
at on time chiropractor onli treat spinal problem howev mani chiropractor now
claim that thei can treat ani medic condit includ cancer hernia pneumonia
anemia and heart condit for exampl on chiropract pamphlet state if you ar
suffer from kidnei diseas the logic cours is to visit your chiropractor he will
examin your spine to see where your troubl is
other question chiropract treatment
other type of question chiropract treatment includ
surrog test where the leg of a mother is flex to diagnos her child ill
spinal manipul of newborn babi to get over the trauma of birth
spinal manipul to treat epilepsi asthma bedwet and learn disabl
appli kinesiolog wherebi diseas can be diagnos by test muscl with the help
of particular food or nutrient
analysi of xrai to identifi homicid tendenc
the creation of a treatment plan prior to examin
spinal manipul begun at an earli ag to prevent cancer
iridolog or the examin of patient ey for mark that will indic what
diseas the patient ha or will get
a magnet devic place over the thymu gland to diagnos nutrient defici
red flag
warn sign that a chiropractor mai be engag in dishonest practic includ a
chiropractor who
take full spine or repeat xrai
health care fraud financi transact
11220 2011 fraud examin manual
prescrib treatment befor a medic histori or physic ar taken
solicit famili member
promis to prevent diseas through regular checkup
promis no outofpocket expens for patient
end treatment when their insur benefit ar exhaust but recontact patient for
mainten treatment when their benefit ar renew
podiatrist
like other medic provid uneth podiatrist mai
bill for servic never render
bill for noncov servic
provid kickback to supplier
ophthalmologist
ophthalmol ogist mai engag in fraudul practic such as
bill for servic never render and noncov servic
bill for unnecessari servic
psychiatrist and psychiatr clinic
fraud scheme commit by psychiatrist and psychiatr clinic can includ
bill for servic never render
bill for noncov servic such as weight loss servic or biofeedback
bill for servic under psychiatrist name when the servic wa actual perform by
a noncov but licens provid such as a drug counselor or minist
bill for servic perform by an unlicens employe
admit patient with fals diagnos
anesthesiologist
dishonest anesthesiologist mai bill for more time than wa render
dental fraud
fraud involv dental provid might includ bill for
xrai that were not taken
crown that were not cement
amalgam for teeth that were not fill
teeth that were not extract
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11221
fill for teeth that have previous been extract
more fill than a person can possibl have
allergist
fraud scheme involv allergist can includ bill for
allergi test not perform
unnecessari servic
allergi shot not given
infertil treatment
infertil treatment is gener not a servic cover by insur howev some lessthanhonest
provid will bill such servic as hormon replac therapi in order to
be paid
impostor provid
an impostor provid is a provid who doe not exist but bill fraudul claim a variat
on thi scam involv assum the identifi of a deceas provid and practiceor put
togeth a group of licens providersand fraudul bill under the group provid
identif code
investig tip
to help determin whether a provid is an impost
call the telephon number on the bill to determin if the provid exist howev keep
in mind that a fictiti provid mai actual have rent a locat and establish a
telephon number
contact the applic licens board or state to determin if the alleg provid wa
licens to practic in the area at the time the servic wa allegedli provid
check the provid social secur number or tax identif number if list on
the bill with the applic licens board
visit the provid physic address to determin if it is valid if it is speak to the
superintend to determin the tenant for that address
contact the postal inspector to verifi what mail is be drop at that address
health care fraud financi transact
11222 2011 fraud examin manual
fals diagnos
when a provid know that a servic is not cover he mai us fals diagnos or
procedur code manipul to get a claim for the servic paid exampl of common
servic not cover ar
annual physic examin
school physic
weight loss program
stop smoke program
investig or experiment procedur
cosmet surgeri
in addit physician mai justifi the order of expens xrai or other diagnost
servic by fals purport that a need exist to make such diagnost inquiri the
servic ar render but becaus is the claim for the servic is base on fals inform
and is us to deceiv the insur compani it is consid a fals claim
red flag of provid fraud
warn sign that a provid is engag in fraudul practic includ
pressur for rapid adjud of claim
threat of legal action for delai in make payment
frequent telephon inquiri on claim statu
assert provid who demand samedai claim payment and special handl
charg submit for payment with no support document avail such as x
rai or lab result
us of a po box as return address
insur address on claim form is the same as provid
routin not special treatment for patient live more than 150 mile from
the provid
refer physician and provid of servic in same profession corpor
medic record that have been alter
medic record that have addit informat ion attach that would make an appar
noncov servic now cover
miss page of medic record that would cover the period of time under review
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11223
fraud by the medic staff
employe of provid also have an opportun to steal and cover up theft of cash thei
can submit fraudul claim for patient and divert the payment to themselv if thei ar
cover under insur thei can also us their own contract to submit fraudul claim
for mani employe care render by their employ doctor to them or their famili is
free but claim mai be file and assign not accept
anoth scheme involv the provid offic call in order for unneed prescript
drug to pharmaci onc the drug ar pick up thei can be sold for exampl in a case
involv collus between a medic offic employe and an elderli ladi in a retir
commun the elderli ladi had develop a busi sell the drug purchas from the
employe to her friend and neighbor in her commun if the employe is in collus
with an insur the fraudster can collect not onli from the sale of the drug but also from
the proce of insur claim
kickback in the health care industri
kickback in the health care industri can come from sever sourc the medic
commun is face competit that it ha not face in the past and monetari offer to
prospect patient have been difficult to refus for exampl in on south florida
commun incent such as free transport to medic facil shop center and
refresh ar common
exampl of kickback ar
payment for referr of patient
waiver of deduct and copay
payment for insur contract
payment for vendor contract
payment for referr of patient
provid in an area of high competit will pai from 50 to 500 to capper or runner for
recruit new patient in addit patient mai receiv 50 if thei refer a patient to a
provid the provid make up for the kickback in the unnecessari bill of medic
expens or fals claim in addit provid will pai kickback to other physician for
patient referr
health care fraud financi transact
11224 2011 fraud examin manual
waiver of deduct and copay
most insur contract requir patient to pai a deduct and copay for servic
render on of the reason for have copay is to make insur take an activ part
in the financi respons for their care to attract patient howev provid will
forgiv the patient outofpocket expens but will make up for it in addit servic that
ar bill to the insur compani
payment for insur contract
physician with patient who ar face longterm care or lifetim treatment such as dialysi
for kidnei failur mai purchas contract for their patient thi ensur that the provid
will be paid and the patient ha no outofpocket expens
payment for vendor contract
compani do busi with medic practition will pai a consult fee for refer
busi to them or us their suppli
payment to adjust
in order to get a claim settl quickli an insur or someon oper on hi behalf mai
bribe adjust or other claimshandl personnel to approv or speed up the payment of
a claim
inflat bill
health care bill can be inflat by provid as well as insur the follow ar some
of the most common fraud scheme encount by investig and claim approv
alter claim
ad servic
code manipul
alter claim
alter valid claim can be accomplish us a pen photocopi or scanner comput
and printer common alter ar
amount chang
date of servic chang
name of patient chang
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11225
for exampl a medic bill can be alter by place an addit number in front of the
amount charg the date of servic can be alter so that it becom a cover expens
rather than on that wa incur prior to be elig for coverag the individu
submit a claim can chang the name on the bill from a noncov famili member to
on who is cover under the contract
detect
procedur can help identifi alter claim includ
analyz charg and identifi ani excess claim for prescript or medic
servic abov an accept level
look for ani alter erasur chang of ink or whiteout on the origin bill
prior to pai the claim thi is import in todai environ in which origin
bill check and other document ar destroi as soon as thei ar microfilm to
minim storag space for record keep
train adjust to look for obviou alter when process claim
ad servic
some fraudster add on servic never render to date of actual servic in these case
the verif process is the same as the procedur list under the alter process
code manipul
code manipul is a problem that is face by all health insur each servic is identifi
us the american medic associ uniformli accept code system call the
physician current procedur terminolog cpt medicar and most privat insur have
develop fee schedul that us cpt code and their accompani narr descript
as the basi for pai provid
howev becaus the code system is complic provid and insur often have
difficulti identifi the code that most accur describ the servic provid the
code system is difficult to us becaus it attempt to identifi code for all accept medic
procedur includ code to describ minor procedur that ar compon of more
comprehens procedur payment polici add to the difficulti for exampl the fee for
surgeri often includ the cost of relat servic for the global servic period that is for a
set number of dai befor and after the surgeri to prevent overpay in these case
insur need to identifi when claim for surgeri includ code that repres relat
servic and reduc the payment accordingli
health care fraud financi transact
11226 2011 fraud examin manual
it is difficult for provid and insur to maintain profici in proper code practic
becaus a substanti number of the code ar chang each year these complex can
inadvert lead provid to submit improperli code claim thei also make insur
vulner to abus from provid or bill servic that attempt to maxim
reimburs by intention submit claim contain inappropri combin
of code
unbundl chargesfragment
simpl unbundl occur when a provid charg a comprehens code as well as on or
more compon code for instanc in the exampl illustr below the provid would
be overpaid becaus the fee for the total procedur alreadi includ the valu of it
compon part
procedur
code servic bill correctli bill procedur
58150
58720
49000
44955
58740
total hysterectomi 1300
remov of ovari tube 950
explor of abdomen 671
appendectomi 250
lysi of adhes 550
total charg 3721
total hysterectomi
total payment 1300
29877
29870
knee arthroscopi with debrid
1650
diagnost knee arthroscopi 1625
total charg 3275
knee arthroscopi with debrid
total payment 1650
47610
47600
cholecystectomi with common bile duct
explor 1997
cholecystectomi 705
total charg 2702
cholecystectomi with common bile
duct explor
total payment 1997
unbundl can be detect through the us of a comput program that determin
whether each code submit is a compon of on or more comprehens code
mutual exclus procedur
a variat of unbundl thi scam involv bill for procedur that ar
either imposs to perform togeth or by accept standard should not be
perform togeth
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11227
global servic period violat
some dishonest provid will bill for a major proceduresuch as a surgerya well as
relat procedur when the fee for the major procedur alreadi includ the fee for relat
procedur dure the predefin time period the global servic period thi type of fraud
is possibl becaus most surgeri includ all relat servic for a set number of dai befor
and after the surgeri detect these abus can be difficult becaus the examin must
determin which servic ar relat to the surgeri and which ar not thi difficulti is
compound by the fact that such servic mai be render by more than on provid
upcod
upcod is bill for a higher level of servic than wa render on common form of
upcod involv gener substitutionfil a prescript with a less expens drug
while bill for the more expens form of the drug
misus of new patient code
the cpt code system includ special code for new patient visit which enabl the
physician to be reimburs for the addit work that new patient visit typic requir
consequ physician who want to pad their claim mai bill for visit with establish
patient us new patient code
insur fraud
insur mai attempt to perpetr a fraud by submit fictiti claim form
multipl surgeri
multipl offic visit
foreign claim patient supposedli goe out of the countri and fall ill
noncov depend
doctor shop
excess drug claim for control substanc drug patient shop for control
substanc drug on physician doe not know that the other ha prescrib the drug in
addit the patient mai shop for drug in emerg room complain of soft tissu
injuri sprain and strain
health care fraud financi transact
11228 2011 fraud examin manual
misrepresent on applic
failur by insur to list all prior medic condit or group to list medic condit
of employe
thirdparti fraud
thi categori involv an unauthor us of an insur identif card by anoth
known person or unknown person the insur compani is usual notifi by the insur
onc thei receiv a benefit statement work sheet for servic render
death of insur
the primari insur pass awai howev the beneficiari doe not notifi the insur
carrier and continu to submit fictiti claim on medic expens after the death of the
insur
investig tip
determin how the insur lost hi card if stolen the polic should be contact to
determin if the crime wa report a copi of the polic report should be obtain
obtain an actual descript of the cardhold so that identif can be made of the
impostor who us the card improperli
visit the provid or medic doctor to obtain ani inform to identifi
the perpetr
crimin ring
individu crimin infiltr mailroom and ar abl to obtain copi of legitim bill
submit to provid thei subsequ establish a mail drop point or rent an offic and
begin submit fals claim to insur compani by creat fictiti tax identif
number sinc the claimant ar genuin insur compani will normal pai these bill
collus
collus is the most difficult insur fraud to detect sinc sever peopl ar involv in
commit the fraud usual case of thi natur ar disclos by accid or by a tip
receiv from someon who mai have been involv and ha had a fallingout
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11229
ani time a fraud ar commit by insur there is no question on the part of the
perpetr as to the intent to obtain fund to which thei ar not entitl howev it is
also extrem difficult to detect thi type of fraud
detect
excess bill report mai show that a provid is submit larg amount of
expens in addit the claimant request substanti payment to be made to him
rather than the provid
explan of benefit if submit to the provid will probabl gener some
reaction from the provid if substanti at the time that form 1099 is submit to the
provid there mai also be comment by the provid
period manag should compar the membershipenrol file to the social
secur file to determin if the insur compani is pai claim on deceas
insur the membership file also mai be compar to the file from the vital statist
depart to search for divorc policyhold
divorc
an insur and a cover spous file for divorc but neither parti notifi the insur
compani the exspous who remain at the address of record continu to submit claim
foreign insur
a foreign insur submit phoni inform that the primari insur pass awai for the
last month he wa hospit in a foreign hospit and a sizabl bill wa mail to the
carrier for payment
investig tip
the claim file should be review to determin if the charg ar legitim
determin if the medic languag appear to be proper by compar sampl of bona
fide claim
it mai be necessari to submit a letter to the attend physician to determin if the
charg ar correct
through law enforc contact it mai be necessari to obtain inform regard
the legitimaci of the claim
check the style of the date in mani foreign countri date ar list with the dai first
then the month and year eg 070108 would be 7 januari 2008 if the us style of
date is us monthdayyear it mai indic a fraudul claim
health care fraud financi transact
11230 2011 fraud examin manual
detect of extern fraud
misspel medicaldent terminolog
unusu charg for a given servic
similar handwrit by the claimant and the provid of servic
type not print bill head
bill with irregular column
unassign bill that ar normal assign such as larg hospit or surgic bill
type or handwritten hospit bill
drug receipt from the same pharmaci but on differ color paper
erasur or alter
lack of ani provid signatur on a claim form
absenc of the provid medic degre ie dr john doe instead of john doe
md
an illeg provid signatur on the bill submit or the signatur doe not match the
on on file
surgeri that dont have other relat servic such as hospit charg
physician specialti doe not agre with diagnosi
servic bill do not agre with diagnosi
imposs or unlik servic
photocopi bill
other indic that a claim approv or in vestig should be awar of that could
result in identifi a possibl fraud
pressur by a claimant to pai a claim quickli
individu who hand deliv their claim insist on pick up their claim check
threat of legal action if a claim is not paid quickli
anonym telephon call inquiri regard the statu of a pend claim
ident claim for same patient in differ month or differ year
date of servic just prior to termin of enrol or just after enrol
servic bill that do not appear to agre with the medic record
bill for servic or equip that ar clearli unsuit for the patient need
foreign claim list charg in us dollar when that isnt the currenc of that
countri
foreign claim give document in english when english is not the primari
languag spoken
multipl foreign claim for same subscrib
multipl foreign claim from same physicianhospit
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11231
fraud by medic institut
fraud scheme perpetr by institut and their employe includ those commonli
us by doctor and other provid howev the more common scheme in which
hospit ar primarili involv includ
file of fals cost report
drg creep
bill for experiment procedur
improp contractu and other relationship with physician
revenu recoveri firm to knowingli or unknowingli bill extra charg
fals cost report
cost report sometim includ noncov item such as golf out parti and exot
trip disguis as cover item for exampl an investig disclos that a hospit
recov silver from the process of xrai film sold it gave it to the candi striper onli
to have it donat back to the hospit sinc medicar doesnt consid donat as
revenu the hospit wa abl to claim higher expens thu more monei from medicar
inclus of unallow item
expens for tax penalti late charg and promot advertis
cost incur from a relatedparti transact with a markup over the cost incur
by the relatedparti
expens that ar reimburs under other program eg billabl medic suppli and
therapi
excess expens such as hotel food travel expens for recreat event
luxuri item eg lavish furnish corpor plane swim pool spa
drg creep
diagnost relat group drg is a reimburs methodolog for the payment of
institut claim it is a patient classif scheme that categor patient who ar
medic relat with respect to primari and secondari diagnosi ag and complic
reimburs ar determin by the drg for exampl a heart bypass oper is
worth a certain amount of reimburs and a hernia repair is worth a differ amount
drg creep occur when a hospit is code as a more complex admiss than
occur when it becom a pattern and intent is establish it becom fraud
health care fraud financi transact
11232 2011 fraud examin manual
anoth type of fraud us drg code involv bill for the drg code and then bill
again for servic that were includ in the drg payment
bill for experiment procedur
it is report that on form of medic fraud that is littl known but appar widespread
is the thirdparti bill for experi with new medic devic that have not yet been
approv by the food and drug administr some hospit ar deliber mislead
thirdparti payer by get them to pai for the manufactur research mani of the
doctor involv ar alleg to have stock in the manufactur compani
improp relationship with physician
certain relationship between hospit and physician result in fraud to the insur for
instanc a hospit provid no or token reimburs to pathologist for medicar part a
servic in return for the opportun to perform and bill part b servic at that hospit
the follow transact ar gener regard as suspect
payment of ani sort of incent by the hospit each time a physician refer a patient to
the hospit
provis of free or significantli discount bill nurs or other staff servic
free train for a physician offic staff in area such as manag techniqu cpt
code and laboratori techniqu
guarante that provid that if the physician incom fail to reach a predetermin
level the hospit will supplement the remaind up to a certain amount
lowinterest or interestfre loan or loan that mai be forgiven if a physician refer
patient to the hospit
payment of the cost of a physician travel and expens for confer
payment for a physician continu educ cours
coverag on the hospit group health insur plan at an inappropri or veri
low cost
payment for servic such as consult at the hospit that requir few if ani
substant duti by the physician or payment for servic in excess of the fair market
valu of servic render
revenu recoveri firm
anoth form of health care fraud involv socal revenu recoveri firm pad
medic bill these bill consult review patient bill month or even year after
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11233
treatment look for charg that were miss critic have charg that too often these
firm pad medic bill by ad on fictiti charg the more charg that ar ad
onto the bill the more the revenu recoveri firm get paid in addit their employe mai
be paid bonus for pile on extra charg and pressur to meet monthli quota
chang code
on of the most common method us by revenu recoveri firm is to chang everi
hospit or nurs home bill code for instanc chang each code for an ordinari
fivec bandag so that the provid is charg for a 5 surgic dress
ad item
extra charg ar ad onto hospit bill by assum that hospit us certain item
even though there wa no evid of the procedur or servic for instanc if the hospit
had certain procedur for which thei sometim us a piec of xrai equip the auditor
review the bill would alwai assum that the hospit had us the equip and thei
would put it on the bill
kickback
often hospit ar unawar sometim intention of the extent of the fraud commit
by revenu recoveri firm in other case howev revenu firm report that thei will
contact a hospit or nurs home directli and tell them that if the institut will give them
their bill thei will split the profit produc by the ad charg
bill for expens treatment
numer charg for the us of expens treatment such as laser ar ad to patient
bill charg mai be ad after the patient had alreadi been bill for the us of the laser
alter record
in some instanc firm mai actual alter medic record for exampl in on case a firm
ad more than 1300 to a patient bill for video equip that wa supposedli us
dure surgeri in order to justifi the fraudul bill the firm check a box on the
surgic record to indic that the equip had been us after the origin document
wa obtain it show that the box wa not check on the origin form complet by the
surgic staff
health care fraud financi transact
11234 2011 fraud examin manual
donat organ
on hospit which ha ceas us a particular firm report that the firm regularli
doubl bill for servic and treatment and in anoth instanc outsid auditor found
that the firm had tri to charg for dead patient donat their organ
addit anesthesia time
anoth common scheme is the charg of addit hour of anesthesia patient should
be bill from when thei enter the surgeri room to when thei leav the surgeri room the
revenu firm pad the bill by increas the time bill to includ time spent in a recoveri
room or befor the patient went into the oper room
rentapati scheme
so call rentapati scheme involv pai individu to undergo unnecessari
medic procedur that ar then bill to the patient insur rentapati scheme
typic begin with the leas of a sham medic clinic past investig show that these
clinic tend to be nondescript often within shop center and in destitut section of
town almost alwai the lesse of the clinic is involv in the crimin organ of the
scheme onc a sham clinic is in place recruit aka coyot or capper ar hire to
solicit lowincom individu who speak littl english and offer them monei in exchang
for submit to minor surgic procedur recruit ar often former crimin for it is
not as danger to deal patient as it is to deal drug and can be much more lucr
averag 2000 per will particip
exampl
a surgeri center paid hundr of dollar to patient who endur larg unnecessari
oper and then fals charg the go vernment on of the oper involv
collaps the patient lung to snip a nerv that would supposedli control sweati palm
the surgeri did stop the patient notsosweati palm from perspir it also caus the
patient to lose strength in hi hand and sweat profus on other part of hi bodi
recruit will scour lowincom hous project elderli neighborhood and factori for
victim onc recruit have convinc an individu to becom a will particip thei
will request a copi of the individu benefit ca rd to confirm benefit prior to subject the
patient to an unnecessari treatment
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11235
recruit will drive the patient usual across state line to small out of network sham
clinic along the wai the recruit will advis each patient to describ particular fals and
embellish symptom to the health profession at the clinic such as i sweat too much
my stomach is bother me my nose hurt such descript will later be us by the
scam clinic to creat medic chart justifi a particular surgic procedur follow a
night of fast food and a cheap hotel the patient ar driven to a clinic the patient then
wait in line sign an inform consent form and promis to give the clinic all the check
thereaft receiv follow administr procedur the patient briefli meet with a
doctor and undergo the procedur that have been predetermin for them later that
even or the next dai the recruit will give the patient a few hundr buck and drive
the patient home
after render servic the provid will bill the patient insur compani medicar or
medicaid for the unnecessari procedur beyond the usual and customari cost past
investig evid up to 5000 percent abov averag market price the claim will
like includ fee for surgic suppli and medic equip that were never us or
distribut some insur reimburs patient directli for outofnetwork claim therebi
requir the patient to pai the facil howev becaus the patient target in renta
patient scam ar often indig and believ thei deserv the monei for endur the
unnecessari procedur it is common for them to deposit or cash the check it is a cycl
wherebi the victim ar not onli us to perpetr the fraud but in the end becom
fraudster themselv
insur compani have difficulti determin when rentapati scheme ar be
commit becaus their claim system can onli compar code and cannot determin the
usual and customari cost for a particular procedur to make matter wors some state
have prompt pai law requir claim to be paid within a period of time such as 45dai
rapid claim turnov inevit lead to poor oversight regard fraudrel claim
health care fraud financi transact
11236 2011 fraud examin manual
sourc us gao report health care fraud scheme to defraud medicar medicaid and privat health care
insur juli 2000
what to do
consum educ is the front line to battl rentapati scheme insur
compani must educ their insur on the preval of thi type of fraud and provid
these individu with mean of commun when it is believ fraud is afoot
disadvantag popul must also be inform about the neg impact of
particip in such scheme ie health risk and crimin liabil
insur compani must educ from within investig unit should be establish to
includ skill fraud examin fraud detect softwar program should be purchas to
detect irregular claim pattern an exampl of progress movement toward the fight
against health care fraud is blue cross blue shield establish of the antifraud strike
forc to bring blue plan togeth when face with multijurisdict health care fraud
scheme the program pool resourc insight and intellect from around the countri to
circumv and prosecut rentapati scheme
likewis the feder govern ha implemen ted sever organ and program to
target health care fraud for exampl the health care integr and protect data bank
hipdb is a flag system that alert feder and state govern agenc commenc
with a more thorough review of a practition provid or supplier past deal not
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11237
onli mai feder and state govern review the databas for potenti red flag but also
thei must report the follow inform health carerel civil judgment and crimin
convict in feder or state court injunct administr action particip
exclus and the like failur to report such inform mai subject a health plan to a
civil penalti of up to 25000 for each advers action not report
red flag of rentapati scheme
larg influx of outofst patient to a particular clinic includ cluster of patient
from a particular locat
sever nonrel procedur on a patient in a short period of time eg a colonoscopi
and circumcis on on patient within a few dai or even week
numer claim by a particular clinic for the follow procedur colonoscopi
endoscopi septoplasti circumcis and thoracoscopi with sympathectomi
aka sweati palm surgeri
parallel procedur on famili husband wive and children on the same dai
extrem high staff salari
charg beyond the averag market price for procedur medic equip
and devic
frequent patient with outofnetwork coverag
nurs home
nurs home have becom a multibillion dollar busi in the last few year as such
thei have becom a common target of fraud a wide arrai of provid includ durabl
medic equip supplier laboratori physician optometrist and psychiatrist have
been involv in fraudul or abus bill for servic and suppli furnish to nurs
facil patient most fraudul activ in volv bill for unnecessari or undeliv
servic or misrepres a servic to obtain reimburs
there ar sever featur uniqu to nurs home that make them particularli vulner
to fraud
unscrupul biller of servic can oper their scheme in volum becaus the
patient ar all locat togeth under on roof
in some instanc nurs home make patient record avail to outsid provid
who ar not respons for the direct care of the patient contrari to feder
regul
health care fraud financi transact
11238 2011 fraud examin manual
under the center for medicar and medicaid servic reimburs procedur
provid can bill medicar directli without the nurs facil or attend physician
affirm whether the item were necessari or provid as claim
scrutini of the claim at the processor level is inadequ becaus the autom claim
system us do not accumul data that would time flag indic of improb
high charg or level of servic
even when abus practic ar detect and prosecut repay is rare receiv
from wrongdoer becaus thei usual go out of busi or deplet their resourc so
that thei lack ani resourc to repai the fund
patient person fund ar control by nurs home administr and ar an invit
target for embezzl individu patient gener maintain a rel small
balanc in their person fund account collect howev these fund gener a
consider sourc of incom for an unscrupul nurs home oper or employe
failur of the nurs facil to monitor outsid provid
although nurs home ar requir to perform numer task to monitor patient and
meet their need there ar no requir that nurs home monitor the servic or
suppli provid to their patient these provid ar allow to bill directli without
adequ confirm that the care or item were necessari or were deliv as claim
most nurs facil do not have the inhous capabl to provid all the servic and
suppli their patient need accordingli outsid provid market their servic and
suppli to nurs home to meet the need of their patient typic provid
repres enter the home and offer to handl the entir transactionfrom review
medic record to identifi those patient who need their servic to billingwith no
involv by the nurs facil some home allow provid or their repres to
review patient medic record contrari to feder regul by do so these provid
can obtain all the inform necessari to order bill and be reimburs for servic and
suppli that ar in mani instanc not necessari or even provid
excess reimburs
although carrier do emploi autom control to prevent fraud often question claim
and provid ar not flag befor excess reimburs ar paid in other instanc
provid bill for quantiti of servic or suppli that could not possibl have been
furnish or necessari
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11239
psychiatr hospit fraud
psychiatr hospit ar suscept to fraud becaus of the veri natur of mental health
problem and the manner in which thei ar diagnos and treat unlik the acut care
field it is often difficult to determin whether a person is in need of hospit for
psychiatr treatment
abus in the admiss process
some psychiatr treatment facil have develop program for patient who exhibit
symptom of both psychiatr ill and substanc abus problem fraud occur when a
patient is admit on the basi of a diagnosi that reflect the patient insur coverag
rather than the patient ill psychiatr hospit have been accus of find someth
wrong with patient when it is discov that thei have insur coverag such patient
mai often be admit without examin by a physician
fraud in the treatment process
the follow type of abus can occur with regard to psychiatr treatment
extend the length of treatment program or delai discharg becaus patient have
addit insur benefit remain
the us of illegitim question nonapprov or danger treatment program
and form of therapi such as brain wave synchron magnet therapi memori
retrievalenhanc therapi and deep sleep therapi
engag in excess treatment of psychiatr patient such as thyroid test drug test
or psychiatr evalu test
abus market practic
mani hospit reli on market as a mean of encourag treatment and gener
referr overli aggress market method includ
pai bonus to employe to persuad or pressur prospect patient to undergo a
psychiatr evalu and to admit themselv for treatment
encourag patient to admit themselv by offer financi incent such as
payment of plane fare child care cobra payment and waiver of patient co
payment or deduct
health care fraud financi transact
11240 2011 fraud examin manual
financi reward for referr
mani facil ar depend on outsid sourc of patient referr such as physician or
other clinician thi depend ha led some hospit to develop econom relationship
in order to obtain referr
reward clinician who refer patient by refer patient who need outpati
treatment to those clinician
allow alli health profession who refer patient to provid therapi for their own
patient at the hospit while nonref alli profession ar not allow to us
the hospit
pai medic director or other physician an incent bonu link to the overal
profit of the hospit
pai a physician who is under contract to the hospit but who provid no servic
red flag for psychiatr and substanc abus claim
treatment take place far from patient home
diagnosi becom alcohol when state mandat reimburs alcohol like ani
other ill
patient is on disabl
provid credenti ar question
document of treatment is lack
ancillari servic ar not treatment orient
other fraud in the institut set
writeoff of patient account
when a patient account or other type of receiv ha been determin to be uncollect
the account is writtenoff to bad debt it becom a fraudul transact when the
account ha been writtenoff prematur and the balanc subsequ collect with the
proce go to the employe in thi scheme the employe ha the opportun to collect
the receiv and divert the fund to himself becaus compani typic do not keep track
of old writtenoff account receiv
often old account receiv ar assign to a collect agenc these agenc typic
ar paid on a percentag of the collect amount fraud scheme can be perpetr by
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11241
these agenc if the compani doe not monitor the method by which the agenc receiv
old account and the collect process itself
the assignor compani need to assur itself that the collect agenc is be assign truli
old account onli and not good account that can reason be expect to pai within the
normal cours of busi
addition the compani need to be sure that the collect agenc cannot compromis
the indebted so that collect ar not report thi would allow the collect agenc
to compromis indebted for it own collect and not remit amount ow the
compani
credit balanc
when patient have more than on payer respons for payment of an admiss
institut have been known to collect more than the origin amount bill thi mai
occur when the patient ha more than on health insur compani is in a vehicl accid
where multipl insur carrier ar involv or where worker compens is
applic in addit the facil mai also collect the deduct and copay from the
patient if the hospit ha a credit balanc the amount paid abov the charg should be
refund to the applic parti howev thi doe not alwai occur gener the
refund will be made upon request but onli upon request
theft of pharmaceut and suppli
becaus of the readi market for sell pharmaceut and suppli thei have a propens
for be stolen narcot drug although thei ar usual tightli control still mai be
stolen and sold on the street suppli such as cane sunglass after cataract surgeri and
admiss kit ar popular item for theft or employe abus
manag care
the unit state health care system is move toward more and differ type of
manag care as the countri move to a differ type of health care deliveri system so
mai the type of fraud
tradition health care ha been provid and paid for on a feeforservic basi where
payment were made either directli to the health care provid as payment for servic
health care fraud financi transact
11242 2011 fraud examin manual
render to the insur parti or to the insur as reimburs for medic expens
incur the premis behind manag care is that the medic practition is respons for
manag the total need of the patient the primari purpos of manag care is to reduc
cost by promot the most appropri and effici us of medic servic
the most common manag care arrang ar
modifi tradit coverag
hmo
ppo
modifi tradit coverag
under thi type of coverag the medic practition is reimburs through a feeforservic
arrang the patient is free to choos a provid and a claim is submit for
reimburs by either the insur or the provid it is a manag care model in that cost
cut measur ar in the form of util review prior author second surgic
opinion and hospit preauthor
hmo
hmo or health mainten organ have sever variat the hmo mai
emploi all of the provid as in a staffmodel hmo or the manag care organ mai
contract with individu physician or physician group the insur select a primari care
physician pcp who is the gatekeep gener all medic care is initi through the
pcp payment is made by capit that is the pcp receiv a flat fee per month from the
manag care organ although some fee still mai be paid on a feeperservic basi
usual at a reduc rate care that cannot be perform by the pcp is done by a specialti
care physician who is also a member of the hmo network the patient is sever penal
for go outsid the hmo network
ppo
ppo or prefer provid organ is a manag care arrang in which the
patient choos a provid from a list of particip provid in the ppo network their
care is not manag by on provid as in the hmo and thei mai see ani provid in the
network the patient is penal for go outsid the network although not as sever as
in an hmo network provid usual must bill the thirdparti payer and claim ar
assign
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11243
how manag care alter the potenti for fraud
in a manag care environ fraud is not elimin insur fraud mai be reduc
substanti but provid fraud is still aliv and well in addit to bill fraudul
servic manag care ha an addit incent for fraud becaus the provid share in
the financi risk of a patient there is the potenti to provid less servic to a patient sinc a
fix capit rate allow the patient unlimit visit to a provid
type of manag care fraud
inadequ treatment of patient
refer patient automat to provid outsid the network perhap in exchang
for kickback from outsid provid
establish of inconveni appoint hour servic locat etc to suppress the
number of patient
inflat report of patient traffic and treatment cost to induc payer to increas futur
per patient capit fee
fals claim for servic not cover by fix capit payment
falsif of qualiti of care andor treatmentoutcom data
provid misrepres their credenti or qualif for admiss to a given
payer network of manag care provid
outofnetwork overbil for substandard servic
employe creat claim check dure period when the plan no longer is do
busi with the hmo but treatment of member continu due to exist problem
provid kickback to employe of manag care organ for put patient in
their panel
manag care system also creat the opportun for fraud by the insur some of the
exampl of fraud that mai be found in the manag care environ includ
the follow
patient member loan or sell us of card to nonmemb
enrol nonelig person as member for obtain treatment
fail to disenrol exspous of famili member
outofnetwork falsifi emerg trea tment in collus with provid
red flag
some of the red flag for manag care fraud ar
identifi provid who regularli waiv copay or deduct
health care fraud financi transact
11244 2011 fraud examin manual
unusu referr patternseith too high or too low
unusu high pattern of referr to pharmaci laboratori or specialti
care physician
high number of emerg room referr
patient complaint about the treatment
a pattern of high number of servic that fall outsid of the capit servic
medicaid fraud
in 1965 presid lyndon b johnson sign the social secur act which establish
medicar and medicaid these program provid medic and healthrel servic to
specif group of peopl in the unit state both program ar manag by the center
for medicar and medicaid servic cm a feder agenc within the us depart of
health and human servic
although both medicar and medicaid provid medic and healthrel servic there ar
sever differ between the two program medicar which is fund and govern by
the feder govern is the feder health insur program for peopl ag 65 or older
and most peopl with certain disabl it is financ by social secur contribut
convers medicaid is a feder and statefund program that provid health care
coverag for lowincom famili and children medic and longterm care coverag for
peopl with disabl and assist with health and longterm care expens for low
incom senior although medicaid is a feder program it is oper by the state and
each state decid elig and the scope of coverag medicaid doe not requir recipi
to make contribut and it is financ from gener revenu
accord to the feder govern medicaid fraud involv purpos bill medicaid for
servic that were never provid or receiv
as the number of individu enrol in medi caid increas the amount of fund be
expend by these program leav the industri at a signific risk for fraudul claim
medicaid expenditur compris 216 billion of the 2009 feder budget the propos
fiscal year 2011 budget includ a 17 billion allot to fight fraud and abus in the
medicar and medicaid system
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11245
in respons to the enorm increas in me dicaid fraud the feder govern ha
establish depart program statut and fund for deter investig and
prosecut such type of fraud
an overview of the medicaid system
for a state to establish a medicaid program for it resid it must compli with specif
feder guidelin each state must
establish it own elig standard
determin the type amount durat and scope of servic
set the rate of payment for servic and
administ it own program
health care fraud financi transact
11246 2011 fraud examin manual
agenc respons relat activ
feder
center for medicar and medicaid servic
assist each state in increas the
effect of it medicaid
program integr effort
act as an oversight entiti of
state fraud and abus effort
keep the allianc in work
order
overse state medicaid agenc
facilit commun
and inform share
between the feder
govern and state
establish a nation forum
for medicaid fraud and abus
issu
provid ongo forum and
train for state offici on
fraud control
hh oig
overse state medicaid fraud
control unit
investig feder medicaid
fraud case
sanction fraudul
provid by impos
exclus and civil monetari
penalti
refer investig find
to the doj
doj us attornei
prosecut medicaid fraud case
refer by the fbi and oig
indict negoti
settlement and recov
damag
doj fbi
investig feder fraud case
cant impos sanction
refer investig find
to us attornei
state medicaid agenc
administ state medicaid
program
conduct pre and postpay
claim review
administ provid
enrol process
program
integr unit
review claim data to detect and
investig unusu payment
pattern
conduct variou integr
activ
refer suspect fraud case
to the state medicaid fraud
control unit
refer civil case to the state
medicaid agenc collect
unit
medicaid fraud control unit mfcu
investig and prosecut case
involv medicaid fraud
investig and act on
complaint of abus or neglect of
patient in facil receiv
medicaid fund
refer case that will not be
prosecut to the state
medicaid agenc or other
author for administr
action
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11247
feder legisl
the follow ar some of the most common feder statut us to prosecut
medicaid fraud
the medicar and medicaid antikickback statut
the civil fals claim act
the stark law
health insur portabl and account act hipaa
state level enforc
in 1977 congress devis the medicaid fraud control unit mfcu program to help
state counter medicaid fraud mfcu ar state law enforc agenc that investig
and prosecut case involv medicaid fraud investig and act on complaint of abus or
neglect of patient in facil receiv medica id fund and refer case which will not be
prosecut to the state medicaid agenc or other author for administr action the
onli wai a state can keep from establish an mfcu is by certifi that there is no fraud
in their state
under mfcu program each state is to implement it own mfcu the feder govern
subsid each state program with 90 percent of the moni necessari to get that state
mfcu up and roll three year thereaft the feder govern provid the state
mfcu with 75 percent of it oper cost the onli wai a state can keep from
establish an mfcu is by certifi that there is no fraud in their state
feder initi such as thi have help state effect curb medicaid fraud on state and
local level accord to the unit state govern account offic for fy 2008
state mfcu recov more than 13 billion in legal restitut obtain more than 1314
convict and exclud 971 individu from particip in the medicaid and medicar
program
to identifi and detect medicaid fraud at ani level fraud examin must be appris of
variou medicaid fraud scheme becaus such scheme ar often more stringent regul
at the state level
health care fraud financi transact
11248 2011 fraud examin manual
electron claim fraud
audit electron claim mai us the same techniqu as audit ani other type of health
care if the origin sourc document ar us the differ mai be that the audit mai us
the inform electron transmit rather than the origin inform if relianc
could be place on the inform be submit then there wouldnt be ani differ
howev histori ha prove that electron claim can be a fertil sourc for fraud
electron data interchang edi is the exchang of electron data between comput in
which there is no human interact thi technolog ha advanc compani abil to
conduct busi by lightyear but it ha also provid wouldb fraudster an increas
opportun to commit whitecollar crime
edi origin aris in the 1960 when mani industri group began to develop edi
standard in area such as purchas transport and financi transact the next
major step forward came when the transport data coordin committe and the
nation associ of credit manag credit research foundat develop the
first standard of electron data interchang at thi time thei have develop over 300
differ standard for individu industri concern the transmiss of edi these
standard ar publish by the data interchang standard associ
although these standard have been adopt and us worldwid by a multitud of differ
industri the health care industri ha been notori slow in adopt the new
technolog onli now have a hand of larg health care provid such as blue cross blue
shield announc their endors of the health care industri conduct busi
electron the reason behind the reluct to convert is that the health care system
is so complic that a switch in oper procedur of thi magnitud would caus
consider headach in the earli phase
edi can be us intern within a busi as a wai of commun and data transfer
and it can also be us for the same purpos between differ busi in the case of
the health care industri edi enabl the differ compani to send claim invoic and
other vital data that onc wa ship in a paper format via airmail the fact that edi allow
for an immedi exchang of data make the process of submit and approv health
care claim much more effici for the health care industri
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11249
the health care transact that will be affect by the emerg of edi technolog
includ
claim payment
enrol
claim submiss
elig
claim statu
crossov cob
health care servic review
patient inform record
manag care encount
capit payment
interact claim
hmo report
provid inform
in the current health care system there ar over 1500 insur compani that process
over four billion medic claim everi year becaus the health care system us over 450
differ type of form it is estim that in the past the health care industri spent as
much as 100 billion per year to process it paperwork thu edi ha the potenti to save
the health care industri from 8 billion to 20 billion everi year it is veri simpli a more
effici wai for the health care industri to do busi howev fraud examin fear that
a more effici system also pave the wai for more effici wai to defraud the health
care industri
solid control must be establish to deal with the health care industri convers to edi
or the save that the more effici system will produc mai be gobbl up by bigger fraud
loss the electron convers of inform complet remov paperbas control
edi elimin the abil that fraud examin have to detect fraud in the health care
industri in three wai
the autom of claim ha eras claim profession abil to detect suspici
look claim becaus thei ar us to handl the paperwork of claim edi
hamper the claim profession from get a good pictur of the overal natur of an
account instead reduc each transact to individu claim
becaus of the imperson natur of electron transact edi rais the temptat
health care fraud financi transact
11250 2011 fraud examin manual
of wouldb fraudster to commit whitecollar crime
edi leav no paper trail make the process of fraud detect difficult for the
fraud examin
the reason the health care industri is concern about edi potenti to stimul
fraudul activ includ
the lack of tool to detect edi fraud
the variat of health care servic precipit the potenti from a plethora of
dissimilar fraud
the effici of edi allow for more vendor and thu more claim to account for
the swift in which transact take place allow less time to uncov fraud
in the past the health care industri ha develop sophist method of detect fraud
within the paperbas system now that the convers to edi is take place the health
care industri must find a wai to convert those method to uncov fraud in the electron
format these method will onli be as sophist as the health care industri choos to
make them the less concern that the industri show for creat fraud indic the more
opportun thei will be give fraudster to beat the system
fraud examin should not fear that the convers to edi will elimin ani fraudrel
job opportun in fact that convers will actual open up mani fraud examin
job as the safeguard and red flag system against fraud ha not been effect establish
at thi time therefor fraud examin need to be awar that their job includ not onli
investig fraud but also to creat system that will effect deter fraud
mani new and complic legal issu ar rais as a result of the health care industri
convers to edi some of the difficult question that have been press includ
how doe the insur compani prove that all electron claim ar authent
who is respons for error in electron health care claim
how doe the fraud examin prove that the content of an electron health care claim
ar fals
how doe the health care industri ensur that all electron transmiss ar receiv
exactli as thei ar sent
what term and condit govern electron claim
how will fraud examin determin the actual origin of ani electron submiss
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11251
becaus autom claim ar quit easili alter the health care industri must ensur that
claim ar authent fraud examin must document that claim have been receiv in the
same condit in which thei were process if thei ar to be admiss as evid
some exampl of wai to ensur claim authent includ
data encrypt
digit signatur
messag authent code
prior claim histori checkup
a varieti of field check
the effect of prosecut in an electron environ
edi creat anoth type of legal evid but the basic legal principl regard that
evid should remain intact therefor the burden fall on the compani of the health
care industri to demonstr that it electron system ha proven safeguard that counteract
fraud if the system is proven to be reliabl the compani can then show that it ha creat a
reliabl record of transact
the greatest weak within an edi system is that in the prosecut a defend mai
claim that he did not enter the claim or that the claim wa mishandl by the health care
compani thu a health care compani must maintain the integr of it electron record
the health care compani must have in place sever wai to uncov fraud from automat
red flag to intric fraud analysi program that pick up on familiar pattern that mai
ultim lead to fraud
a health care compani must prove the origin of all electron commun and the
origin content of the transact thei must also reduc the possibl that the origin
claim content can be intention or unintention compromis by do these thing
the health care industri can effect us edi without substanti rais the possibl
of fraudul activ
health care complianc program
recent the govern discov a widespread upcod scheme in which numer
hospit across the countri routin and fraudul code case in their bill system
under a diagnost relat group drg that caus medicar to overcompens the
health care fraud financi transact
11252 2011 fraud examin manual
provid by about 28 percent these optim program cross the line of legitim
bill and subsequ crimin and civil investig follow in deal with such a larg
number of hospit the govern util complianc program also known as corpor
integr agreement to help minim futur instanc of fraud without significantli
damag a commun health care need by sa nction or dismiss medic provid
the us depart of health and human servic offic of the inspector gener
oig is increasingli us corpor complianc program in lieu of sanction to control
medic provid and relat entiti who have defraud feder health care program
the oig ha devis model complianc guidelin for hospit clinic laboratori
durabl medic equip compani and home health compani the entir content of
those model plan can be locat on the unit state depart of health and human
servic websit at wwwhhsgov
complianc program ar simpli a set of effect intern control design to ensur that
compani oper adher to the guidelin regul and law affect the
organ ideal these intern control should complement control that alreadi ar in
place within the account system thi is imper becaus mani problem oig
investig center around the financi oper of the compani such as bill and
collect complianc effort ar meant to encourag a cultur that foster prevent
detect and resolut of conduct that is outsid establish compani polici the
feder sentenc guidelin also encourag complianc program in order to reduc
crimin fine and penalti
the sentenc guidelin and the depart of health and human servic model plan
have some basic characterist to which a complianc program should adher the seven
basic element includ
develop and distribut polici that defin standard and procedur to be follow by
the organ agent and employe specif the organ should establish
standard of conduct that emphas the organ commit to complianc in
area such as center for medicar and medicaid servic cm regul fraud and
abus law feder state and local law and corpor ethic polici mission and
goal annual circul to everi employe a standard of conduct statement that
requir the signatur of all director offic manag employe and contractor
certifi that thei have read understand and agre to compli with it term
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11253
design or hire a highlevel employe who ha ultim respons to oper and
monitor the complianc program and to report directli to the ceo or govern bodi
thi employe would be much like the compani own intern inspector gener
us reason care to identifi sanction provid and remov those individu from
ani activ that would violat a law or regul thi can be done by dismiss the
provid or reassign him to an area of the compani that doe not have direct contact
with patient cover by govern insur or to an area that is neither directli nor
indirectli reimburs by a govern program if a sanction parti work in the
suppli divis and part of the cost of that divis ar alloc on the medicar cost
report then thi could constitut a violat
requir regular train program for all employe and contractor each entiti should
have some polici for educ manag execut and employe about fraud thi
can be conduct dure employe orient andor through ongo train
program and other compani commun method initi and annual train for all
staff especi for those in the market sale and bill depart is essenti
train should focu on bill polici and procedur applic of feder rule and
regul disciplinari action for noncompli person respons of everi
employe to compli cm polici and procedur and fraud and abus law
us variou kind of monitor and proactiv audit system to detect fraud and
unusu trend to ensur complianc there ar mani statist aberr that an
experienc fraud examin can monitor in a proactiv manner to identifi potenti
problem area such as notic variat in bill pattern for instanc if suddenli
there is a 200 percent increas in bill for physician consult the fraud examin
mai wish to review those servic to determin if simpl offic visit ar be
character fraudul as more complex and thu more lucr consult
establish and public a report system in which employe can report crimin
conduct without fear of retribut hotlin or ombudsman program each employe in
the compani should know where to report suspici uneth or illeg behavior
step should includ establish a selfdisclosur polici which outlin procedur for
report law violat to the appropri author and a record retent polici
which set standard on how long record should be store and in what format
electron media origin paper document etc the offic of inspector gener also
ha a provid selfdisclosur program discuss in detail in the feder regist date
oct 30 1998 that offer a cooper effort in report problem
develop a system to respond to alleg investig those alleg and if need
carri out the appropri disciplinari measur be consist and also disciplin
health care fraud financi transact
11254 2011 fraud examin manual
individu who fail to detect the offens due to neglig the complianc program
should outlin specif who will investig suspect irregular and to whom
these irregular will be report ie manag intern investig law
enforc andor legal counsel and
regularli review for system weak in compani oper andor polici and
make chang as need
essenti what a complianc program is design to do is provid insur for the
provid by take everi reason and prudent step possibl a provid will have
demonstr to a prosecutor judg or juri that he ha taken step to prevent fraudul
activ from pervad hi oper consequ the damag to a provid reput
pocketbook and freedom can be control and minim to the fullest extent possibl
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11301
bankruptci fraud
introduct
the bankruptci system and player
bankruptci court
all bankruptci case ar file in the local district of the unit state bankruptci court
although bankruptci court ar feder court thei ar not articl iii court which deriv
their power from articl iii of the constitut articl iii state that judici power of the
unit state rest with the suprem court and in inferior court establish by congress
articl iii court includ the us district court the us circuit court of appeal and the
us suprem court
bankruptci court ar not contempl within thi scheme as inferior court but thei ar
consid as an adjunct to inferior us district court
likewis bankruptci judg ar not articl iii judg which deriv their power from articl
iii of the constitut bankruptci judg hear all case involv debtor and creditor
right approv plan of reorgan award fee to profession and conduct hear
and trial when necessari to resolv disput
offic of the unit state truste
the offic of the unit state truste is a depart of justic agenc that is respons
for administ bankruptci case appoint truste examin and chapter 11
committe overse and monitor truste review employ and fee applic
and appear in court on matter of interest to the estat and creditor
there ar 21 region in the offic of the us truste compris on or more feder
district each region consist of a us truste or an assist truste in sever region
the offic of the ust in each region princip is compris of staff attornei bankruptci
analyst includ account and in some instanc special investig unit
staff attornei review plead eg fee applic and motion to appoint truste and
examin and repres the ust on these matter
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11302 2011 fraud examin manual
bankruptci analyst analyz and review oper report and other relev financi
inform and in gener overse the debtor case to ensur complianc with the
bankruptci code and to protect the asset of the estat
special investig unit investig crimin referr complaint in bankruptci case in some
case thei work with crimin investig agenc such as the feder bureau of
investig and the intern revenu servic crimin investig divis
panel truste
panel truste ar independ profession usual attornei who serv in chapter 7 case
in each feder district in the countri truste also might serv in chapter 11 case where
oper of the debtor busi is consid appropri truste or other might
develop a plan of reorgan to conclud the chapter 11 proceed if the busi
cannot be reorgan the truste might petit the court to convert the case to chapter 7
or develop a plan of liquid under chapter 11 the duti of a truste ar specif
enumer in titl 11 usc section 704 in chapter 7 case and titl 11 usc section
1106 in chapter 11 case the duti of a truste ar as follow administ asset liquid
asset pai creditor litig matter where necessari have the right to sue and be su
conduct hear conduct investig of financi affair of the debtor file report as
requir by the offic of the ust and where a ppropriat file crimin referr with the
unit state attornei offic a truste compens is statutorili defin under the
bankruptci code
examin
an examin is normal appoint in a chapter 11 bankruptci proceed to investig
certain alleg of fraud and misconduct on the part of the debtor or princip of the
debtor in a typic motion for the appoint of a truste or examin alleg of
fraud or misconduct ar rais by creditor the offic of the ust or other interest
parti a bankruptci judg hear evid submit by all parti creditor et al as well
as the debtor respons to the alleg after hear the evid the judg ha the
option either to appoint a truste or an examin or leav the debtor in possess of the
busi if an examin is appoint the sole respons is to investig and report
the result of the investig to the court and other parti in interest as quickli as possibl
examin have the power to subpoena record and depos wit thei do not have the
power to run busi make busi decis or propos plan of reorgan
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11303
gener speak court might expand the examin power to perform certain duti
of truste or debtorsinpossess
debtor
a debtor is defin in titl 11 usc section 10113 as a person or municip who is
the subject of a file under titl 11 person is defin as an individu partnership or
corpor municip is defin as a polit subdivis public agenc or
instrument of a state an individu debtor object in a chapter 7 case is to be
reliev of all discharg debt and to obtain a fresh start thi is accomplish by the
court grant the individu debtor a discharg the debtor primari object in a chapter
11 should be to have a plan of reorgan confirm by the court and preserv the
busi oper
creditor
a creditor is defin by the code as on who hold a claim creditor can be either secur or
unsecur
secur creditor
a secur creditor hold a claim for which there is a properli perfect secur interest it will
be consid a secur claim to the extent of the valu of the properti when the debt is
undersecur amount of note is greater than the valu of the secur interest the debt will
be consid both unsecur and secur for exampl if a note for 500 is secur by
properti have a valu of 400 there will be a secur claim for 400 and an unsecur
claim for 100 if the debtor and the credit or cannot agre on the valu of the collater
there will be a hear under section 506 of the bankruptci code and the court will
determin the valu of the collater the bankruptci court will reli on state law where the
properti is locat to determin if a secur claim exist a secur interest gener is
obtain in person properti by a ucc file and in real properti by file a lien with the
counti clerk in the counti where the properti is locat
at the time of the file of the bankruptci petit an automat stai preclud the creditor
from take ani action to repossess the properti unless relief from the stai is grant in a
chapter 11 case the court gener will grant relief onli if it can be shown that there is no
equiti in the properti and that the properti is not need for reorgan the busi the
stai also might be remov if the properti is declin in valu and the debtor fail to
compens the creditor for thi declin refer to as adequ protect payment if
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11304 2011 fraud examin manual
the stai is remov the creditor then can proce under state law to obtain possess of
the properti often through a foreclosur to satisfi the claim
holder of secur claim have prioriti over unsecur creditor and normal get paid first
in the distribut to creditor made by the truste or debtorinpossess in the
develop of a chapter 11 plan the right of holder of secur claim normal ar
provid for befor the unsecur claim holder will receiv materi consider
unsecur creditor
unsecur creditor ar those that have a claim against the debtor that aros befor the
bankruptci petit wa file and do not have a perfect secur interest titl 11 usc
section 507 give some of the holder of unsecur claim prioriti over other unsecur
claim holder among those claim that have prioriti ar administr expens cost
associ with the oper of the busi and profession fee while the busi or
individu is in bankruptci select prepetit unpaid wage prepetit contribut
requir but not made to employe benefit plan prepetit unpaid alimoni and support
payment and select prepetit tax claim
adjust
adjust or oper agent as thei ar frequent call ar the right hand to truste
and debtor an adjust or oper agent is an individu who handl the peripher
duti of a truste such duti includ secur the busi locat chang lock
locat asset of the estat locat busi record open new bank account
investig theft of asset in conjunct with the truste store asset of the estat and
arrang sale of asset adjust also can assist debtor and truste in oper the
debtor busi and in help to prepar bankruptci schedul as well as interim
statement and oper report
the bankruptci code titl 11 unit state code
the bankruptci code is broken down into eight chapter 1 3 5 7 9 11 12 and 13 under
titl 11 of the unit state code in addit there ar two other sourc of inform
deal with bankruptci issu that ar found in the unit state code thei can be found
at titl 18 usc chapter 9 which deal with crime and crimin procedur and titl 28
which deal with the judiciari and judici procedur some of the provis of the
bankruptci code as amend by the bankruptci reform act of 1994 ar outlin below
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11305
chapter 1 gener provis
chapter 1 contain definit rule of construct power of the court who can be a
debtor and other miscellan inform chapter 1 ha been amend to reflect issu
deal with person who neglig or fraudul prepar bankruptci petit section
101 of thi chapter is particularli import as it deal with definit of term us in
bankruptci proceed section 110 deal with the penalti for person who neglig or
fraudul prepar bankruptci petit see later section on crimin conduct
chapter 3 case administr
part 1 of chapter 3 deal with the commenc of case file requir and court
appear part 2 deal with offic the qualif of the truste the role of the
truste and the compens of truste and other offic part 3 deal with
administr involv meet of creditor notic requir properti of the
estat and other administr requir part 4 deal with administr power
includ the power of the truste to protect properti of the estat us leas or sell the
properti and obtain credit on behalf of the estat
chapter 5 creditor debtor and the estat
part 1 of chapter 5 deal with creditor clai ms their prioriti and their allow thi
section contain the priorit of claim and the distribut of estat asset part 2 deal
with specif duti of the debtor the exempt debtor can claim and discharg of
debt part 3 deal with properti of the estat recoveri of voidabl transfer and contractu
right of the estat
chapter 7 liquid of debtor asset
part 1 of chapter 7 deal with offic and the administr of chapter 7 case and spell
out duti of the truste part 2 deal with the collect liquid and distribut of the
estat asset part 3 deal with stockbrok liquid part 4 deal with commod
broker liquid
chapter 7 is the most common type of bankruptci it involv liquid of the debtor
asset by a truste to pai the creditor claim thi allow the debtor to get a court order
under which some or all of hi debt mai be elimin it involv the liquid of asset
that ar not exempt by state law person bankruptci doe not elimin tax fine
alimoni child support and certain student loan
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11306 2011 fraud examin manual
a petit for liquid under chapter 7 mai be file by ani entiti eg ani individu
corpor partnership busi trust etc but a chapter 7 case file by an individu
debtor mai be dismiss or convert to a case under chapter 11 or 13 with the debtor
consent if grant relief under chapter 7 would constitut an abus the mean test is us
to determin whether the chapter 7 file is presumpt abus under thi test the
truste or ani creditor can bring a motion to dismiss a chapter 7 file if the debtor incom
is greater than the state median incom
also a chapter 7 debtor cannot receiv a discharg if a prior discharg wa receiv within 8
year of the new file
chapter 11 reorgan
often debtor want to avoid liquid and chapter 11 provid a type of bankruptci that
is design to help the debtor by reorgan the busi the code allow for debtor to
restructur their debt pai their creditor and emerg from bankruptci part 1 of the chapter
deal with offic and administr part 2 deal with the plan of reorgan part 3
deal with postconfirm matter part 4 deal with railroad reorgan
the purpos of the chapter 11 file is to allow the debtor breath room from the
creditor so that the debtor can reorgan it financi affair and continu as a go
concern if the court is provid with suffici probabl caus regard the financi affair
of the debtor a truste or examin can be appoint by the court
chapter 13 adjust of debt
chapter 13 provid anoth type of bankruptci that allow a debtor pai off hi debt over
time in accord with a court approv plan under thi type of case the debtor mai keep
certain properti that he would not be allow to retain in a chapter 7 bankruptci becaus
of chang to the bankruptci law in 2005 mani peopl ar no longer elig to file for
bankruptci under chapter 7 some have their chapter 7 case convert to a chapter 13 case
but chapter 13 is not grant if the debtor receiv a discharg under chapter 7 11 or 12
within the previou 4 year or a discharg under chapter 13 in the previou 2 year
also the court mani not grant a chapter 13 discharg unless the debtor ha complet an
educ cours in person financi manag
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11307
the bankruptci case
a bankruptci case begin with the file of a bankruptci petit but to be elig to file a
bankruptci petit an individu debtor must have receiv credit counsel from an
approv counsel agenc within 180 dai befor file
when a petit is file the debtor must file the follow document
a list of creditor
a schedul of asset and liabil
a schedul of current incom and current expenditur
a statement of the debtor financi affair
evid of payment from employ if ani receiv 60 dai befor the file date
an item statement of monthli net incom
a statement disclos ani reason anticip increas in incom or expenditur for
the 12 month after the file
a record of ani interest in an qualifi state tuition program or an educ individu
retir account
a certif of credit counsel from the approv counsel agenc if the petition
is an individu
a statement of the debtor intent with respect to hi properti that secur debt if
the petition is an individu
a copi of the debtor tax return for the most recent tax year
gener if an individu debtor in a chapter 7 case fail to file the document within 45
dai of the origin file date the case is automat dismiss
onc the bankruptci case ha been commenc the debtor is protect by an automat
stai which prevent creditor from continu attempt to collect debt from the petition
there ar howev except where the automat stai doe not appli eg prosecut of
crimin case patern case domest support oblig case child custodi case etc
also if the bankruptci petit wa file as part of a scheme to delai hinder or defraud
creditor a creditor whose claim is securt by a real properti interest is entitl to relief
from the stai
addition after file the debtor will be appoint a truste who will overse the case in
a chapter 7 case the truste is respons for collect sell and reduc the estat
asset to cash temporarili continu to oper the debtor busi make a final report
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11308 2011 fraud examin manual
and file a final account in a chapter 11 case howev the debtor remain in possess of
hi asset and gener retain the same author as the truste except for the duti to
investig the debtor and the right to compens a truste is appoint in a chapter 13
case but the truste duti gener involv in vestig the debtor financi affair
provis affect individu
nondischarg debt
although a bankruptci proceed mai result in the discharg of a debtor debt certain
debt ar not discharg in chapter 7 case
tax in gener tax claim ar not discharg
debt incur by fraud embezzl and larceni gener liabil aris from fraud
embezzl and larceni ar not discharg
luxuri good debt ow to a singl creditor total more than 500 for luxuri good
incur within 90 dai of file ar preseum nondischarg
cash advanc cash advanc of 750 that ar made within 70 dai of file ar presum
nondischarg
unschedul debt in gener debt that ar not list or ar not schedul ar not
discharg
domest support oblig debt for domest support oblig ar not discharg
properti settlement aris from divorc or separ debt for properti settlement aris
from divorc or separ ar not discharg
certain liabil liabil aris from will and malici injuri and liabil for death
or person injuri incur when oper a vehicl ar not discharg
fine and penalti oblig to pai a fine penalti or forfeitur ow to the
govern ar not discharg
student loan student loan ar not discharg unless it would impos an undu
hardship for the debt surviv
homestead exempt
to prevent individu who ar like to file for bankruptci from move their asset to
state with more favor law the debtor must satisfi certain hold period requir
to qualifi for a state homestead exempt whic h allow filer to exempt the valu of their
home from creditor for properti worth more than 125000 the debtor must own that
properti for 1215 dai befor file also befor qualifi for a state homestead
exempt the debtor must have live in that state for 730 dai prior to file
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11309
retir plan exempt
debtor can exempt retiremet fund from the bankruptci estat if thei ar in a fund or
account that is exempt from tax under the intern revenu code
educ account exempt
debtor can exempt educ account under section 529 and 530 from the bankruptci
estat if the beneficiari of the account is a child stepchild grandchild or stepgrandchild of
the debtor for the taxabl year dure which fund were place in the account
privaci provis
under the bankruptci abus prevent and consum protect act the bankruptci
court is permit to honor the privaci polici of busi debtor the act creat a
consum privaci ombudsman to protect person privaci in bankruptci proceed
measur mai be implement to prevent ident theft and to guid what inform is
readili access to the public debtor ar permit to request that court protect sensit
inform befor it is place in public record
the role of the truste in bankruptci fraud matter
the truste in bankruptci matter is often confront with alleg of fraud and
misconduct on the part of the debtor and it princip in chapter 11 case it is often the
primari reason the court appoint a truste creditor repres of the creditor
committe or privat investig might be interact with a bankruptci truste for thi
reason it is import to know how the truste oper what the role of the truste is and
how to make the most of the opportun to work with the truste the truste author to
investig fraud is found in the bankruptci code the follow is a brief outlin of the
chapter 7 and chapter 11 truste author to investig fraud
statutori author
in chapter 7 case section 704 of the code spell out all duti of the truste which includ
investig claim file by creditor and the code provid that the truste shall
investig the financi affair of the debtor
although gener truste in chapter 11 case do not oper the debtor busi
chapter 11 truste ha the duti to investig the debtor financi affair
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11310 2011 fraud examin manual
investig by the truste
the truste power enabl him to gather financi inform from variou sourc
includ the debtor attornei and account a truste step into the shoe of the
debtor which allow him the opportun to break the attorneycli privileg attornei
might attempt to rais the attorneycli privileg as a defens to provid inform but
thei ar usual unsuccess in thi regard sinc the truste is now the client he must be
abl to understand what legal action need to be taken therefor it is imper that the
debtor attornei cooper with the truste the truste also should have access to the
account work paper tax return and client document in their possess which might
provid the truste and creditor with the opportun to locat and recov hidden asset
anoth us tool in the truste arsen is the power to have access to debtor record
that ar in the possess of the crimin author sinc the truste step into the shoe of
the debtor he ha the right to inspect and us these record to conduct the busi affair
of the debtor
if the investig uncov suffici evid of fraud the truste should file a report
detail the result of the investig with the unit state attornei thi duti is spell
out in titl 18 unit state code section 3057
sourc of inform
the truste should obtain the variou document or inform list below in the cours
of an investig if ani of thi inform is unavail the truste can subpoena these
document the subpoena document could either be the origin document certifi
copi of these document or other inform that could be us to reconstruct the
miss document
type of inform locat
debtor petit schedul statement of
financi affair
bankruptci court offic and ust
interim and oper statement bankruptci court and ust
adversari proceed claim regist
transcript of hear 2004 examin
bankruptci court
fee applic bankruptci court and ust
real properti record counti clerk counti assessor
person properti record counti clerk
ucc file secretari of state
financi statement lend institut debtor counsel
account chapter 7 or chapter 11 file
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11311
forward address post offic
dba counti record secretari of state
partnership secretari of state
offic of corpor secretari of state
address of individu vote record
insur polici insur compani provid coverag
current or prior busi activ interview conduct of creditor former
employe former spous former busi
activ
crimin histori current or prior litig polic record local court record
tape and transcript of sworn testimoni
341a and 2004 examin
ust 341a exam
bankruptci court 2004 exam
investig procedur
to fulfil their fiduciari investig respons truste need to gather financi
inform if debtor book and record ar miss incomplet or unreli thei should
be obtain from third parti such as bank custom relat parti and so on if the
thirdparti resist the truste request the truste can subpoena record or testimoni under
bankruptci rule 2004 after receiv thirdparti record and testimoni the truste might
then
reconstruct cash receipt and cash disburs journal and gener ledger
identifi new bank account relatedparti transact and hidden or conceal asset
take 2004 exam deposit of uncoop wit
take 2004 exam of thirdparti wit and other who can authent document
record etc
obtain declar testimoni from cooper wit
interview wit determin direct versu indirect knowledg of fact bookkeep
ar good sourc of inform who can provid inform regard cash receipt
and disburs relatedparti transact and evid regard destruct of
record
after documentari and other evid ha been gather and analyz the truste
should prepar an investig report
if alleg of fraud ar present file a separ report pursuant to titl 18 section 3057
file with unit state attornei offic
creditor right and remedi
normal when busi or individu ar not paid thei attempt to collect amount ow
to them when normal collect effort fail thei resort to legal action but if after a
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11312 2011 fraud examin manual
creditor file a legal action the debtor file a petit for bankruptci the creditor can take
the follow step
investig the reason why payment ha not been made
check with other creditor to see if thei have not been paid
check with credit bureau for credit histori
file a motion for the appoint of a truste other creditor and the offic of the ust
might join in with the petit creditor
to succe the move parti must demonstr that fraud is suspect and therefor a
truste should be appoint to overse the oper of the debtor
the creditor should have suffici documentari and other evid of fraudul
conduct includ declar provid by knowledg wit
a hear is held where the judg hear evid support and refut the fraud
alleg thereaft the judg issu a rule regard the appoint of a truste
in some case the judg might appoint an examin instead of a truste becaus it is less
intrus an examin role is onli to investig and report back to the judg whether
the alleg of fraud ar support by the independ examin own evid
if the debtor doe not file bankruptci the creditor might join other creditor and file an
involuntari petit against the debtor
creditor committe
after file a chapter 11 bankruptci petit the ust normal appoint a committe of
creditor hold unsecur claim thi committe is refer to as a creditor committe
titl 11 usc section 1102 provid guidanc in the format of creditor committe
titl 11 usc section 1103 detail the power of creditor committe thei can emploi
attornei account or other agent to assist them in the perform of their duti
under the code in carri out their duti creditor committe ar author to consult
with the truste or debtorinpossess concern the administr of the case to
investig the act conduct asset liabil and financi condit of the debtor and the
oper of the debtor busi to particip in the format of a plan of
reorgan to request the appoint of a truste or examin and to perform such
other servic as ar in the interest of those repres
involuntari petit titl 11 usc section 303
most bankruptci case ar voluntari ie voluntarili file by the debtor as we have
describ abov debtor have specif reason for file bankruptci individu
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11313
partnership and corpor have the statutori right to file bankruptci as a protect
from their creditor in exchang for exercis their privileg of file bankruptci debtor
give up their right to financi privaci and must do other thing requir under the code
most creditor howev do not want their de btor to file for bankruptci becaus it might
make recov a claim more difficult and it might diminish the amount thei receiv on
their claim
to collect amount ow to them or to obtain a judgment against the debtor some creditor
might sue the debtor in state court befor ani bankruptci petit is file numer
collect action can be brought against the debtor which might lead to an increas in
competit for the debtor remain asset when thi occur the debtor normal file
bankruptci to prevent these creditor from seiz it asset in some rare instanc
howev the creditor might involuntari petit the debtor into bankruptci although
do so run contrari to their normal inclin to do everyth thei can to keep debtor
out of bankruptci
that be said involuntari petit serv veri import purpos thei can be us to
stop the financi hemorrhag that usual take place in fraudul oper busi
and thei allow the creditor to control the debtor and protect the valu of the busi while
investig the financi affair of the debtor
an involuntari petit can onli be file under chapter 7 and 11 creditor who have not
been paid by the debtor can file a petit forc the compani into bankruptci gener
the creditor must be abl to demonstr in court that the debtor is not pai debt as thei
matur
to commenc the file of an involuntari proceed creditor must satisfi the follow
criteria
the debt must not be subject to a bona fide disput and must be nonconting
the creditor must be ow at least 14425 more than the valu of the lien or
collater
if there ar 12 or more creditor then three creditor ar need to file
if there ar fewer than 12 creditor onli on creditor is need to file
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11314 2011 fraud examin manual
after the involuntari petit is file a court hear is held the court might dismiss the
petit or enter an order for relief but if the court deem it necessari an interim truste
might be appoint to preserv the properti of the estat at the hear on the involuntari
petit the creditor ar requir to demonstr through direct testimoni that the alleg
debtor is not pai debt as thei come due
creditor must be care when file an involuntari petit if the creditor ar not
success in court and the judg dismiss the petit thei might be su by the debtor
damag for lost profit and goodwil could be assess against the creditor who file the
involuntari petit occasion in egregi circumst court have award punit
damag against creditor who file an involuntari petit
investig by creditor
individu creditor might conduct their own investig and assist chapter 7 and chapter
11 truste in perform their investig truste ar normal veri appreci of
creditor who can provid inform regard the financi affair of the debtor creditor
also can attend the 341a examin of the debtor and ask pertin question creditor
who bring copi of document such as prior loan applic or pictur of particular
asset to the 341a examin ar of great interest to truste creditor can ask the
debtor what happen to the variou asset list on the loan applic or asset shown in
photograph
bankruptci crime statut
bankruptci crime that ar commit dure the cours of a bankruptci proceed or in
contempl of a bankruptci proceed ar contain in feder statut thei ar carri
out through the file of a bankruptci petit either to accomplish the purpos of the crime
or to cover up anoth crime that ha alreadi been perpetr
although the bankruptci code is contain within titl 11 us code bankruptci crime
appear within titl 18 us code section 151 through 155 section 152 is the most
comprehens of the individu bankruptci crime statut to constitut and be prove as a
feder crime bankruptci crime must have been commit dure the pendenc of a bankruptci
proceed with the defend knowledg and with a fraudul intent to defeat the bankruptci law
the fbi investig bankruptci crime and the us attornei offic prosecut them
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11315
it is no defens to these crime that the creditor have actual knowledg of conceal asset
or that the conceal wa not from all creditor and it is no defens that the defend
return the estat asset though such fact might mitig damag
gener the penalti for each bankruptci offens is a fine of up to 500000 in the case of
bankruptci fraud commit by an organ or imprison for not more than five
year or both the statut of limit doe not run until the fraud is detect or the
debtor receiv a discharg or is deni a discharg pursuant to the bankruptci code
the follow section set out the bankruptci crime statut as well as relat crimin
statut that frequent aris in bankruptci case
titl 18 us code section 151
thi section contain the definit of the term debtor a parti who ha file a petit under
titl 11 of the us code
titl 18 us code section 152
thi is the most comprehens crimin bankruptci fraud statut it serv as the primari
bankruptci crime statut for prosecut bankruptci fraud under section 158 the fbi and
the us attornei ar charg with enforc of section 152 there ar nine paragraph in
section 152 that defin variou offens against the bankruptci law the follow is a brief
overview of each of the nine offens
paragraph 1 conceal of properti
a person who knowingli and fraudul conceal from a custodian truste marshal or other
offic of the court charg with the control or custodi of properti or in connect with a case
under titl 11 from creditor or the unit state truste ani properti belong to the estat
of a debtor
for purpos of thi paragraph estat properti consist of asset record and anyth
of valu
paragraph 2 fals oath or account
fals oath appli to oral testimoni that might be given in 341a examin 2004
examin deposit and testimoni provid at hear and trial
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11316 2011 fraud examin manual
a person who knowingli and fraudul make a fals oath or account in or in relat to
ani case under titl 11
paragraph 3 fals declar
a person who knowingli and fraudul make a fals declar certif verif or
statement under penalti of perjuri as permit under section 1746 of titl 28 in or in relat
to ani case under titl 11
written document file with the court under penalti of perjuri consist of the debtor
petit schedul and statement of financi affair interim statement and oper
report as well as declar file with the court declar ar made in petit
schedul and in other court file motion thi section give the same weight to
unsworn declar as to those sworn under penalti of perjuri
paragraph 4 fals claim
a person who knowingli and fraudul present ani fals claim for proof against the estat of
a debtor or us ani such claim in ani case under titl 11 in a person capac or as or
through an agent proxi or attornei
thi paragraph is design to prevent fictiti or inflat claim from be file by
creditor or other in a bankruptci case
paragraph 5 fraudul receipt of properti
a person who knowingli and fraudul receiv es ani materi amount of properti from a
debtor after the file of a case under titl 11 with intent to defeat the provis of titl 11
thi paragraph relat back to paragraph 1 abov and it implic those who work in
concert with the debtor thi could be a creditor or ani other interest parti
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11317
paragraph 6 extort and briberi
a person who knowingli and fraudul give offer receiv or attempt to obtain ani
monei or properti remuner compens reward advantag or promis thereof for
act or forbear to act in ani case under titl 11
thi paragraph cover briberi which also is spell out in titl 18 princip section 210
and 1503 both section discuss the attempt to bribe judici offic and to unlawfulli
corrupt or influenc ani offic of the court section 1503 also cover threat intend to
influenc intimid or imped an offic in the perform of hi duti
paragraph 7 fraudul transfer or conceal
a person who in a person capac or as agent or offic of ani person or corpor in
contempl of a case under titl 11 by or against him or ani other person or corpor
or with intent to defeat the provis of titl 11 knowingli and fraudul transfer or
conceal ani of hi properti or the properti of such other person or corpor
thi paragraph is the onli paragraph under section 152 that deal with prebankruptci
conduct the section address situat where a bankruptci petit file is immin it
is intend to cover action by individu who transfer properti rightfulli belong to the
creditor of the prospect bankruptci estat
paragraph 8 fraudul destruct or alter of document
a person who after the file of a case under titl 11 or in contempl thereof knowingli
and fraudul conceal destroi mutil falsifi or make a fals entri in ani record
inform includ book document record and paper relat to the properti or
financi affair of a debtor
paragraph 9 fraudul withhold of document
a person who after the file of a case under titl 11 knowingli and fraudul withhold
from a custodian truste marshal or other offic of the court or a unit state truste
entitl to it possess ani record inform includ book document record and
paper relat to the properti or financi affair of a debtor
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11318 2011 fraud examin manual
thi section is particularli us in case where the debtor doe not turn over estat record
after be compel to do so by the court and the record ar later discov by feder
author dure the execut of search warrant
embezzl against the estat titl 18 us code section 153
a offens a person describ in subsect b who knowingli and fraudul appropri to the
person own us embezzl spend or transfer ani properti or secret or destroi ani document
belong to the estat of a debtor
b person to whom section appli a person describ in thi subsect is on who ha access to
properti or document belong to an estat by virtu of the person particip in the administr
of the estat as a truste custodian marshal attornei or other offic of the court or as an agent
employe or other person engag by such an offic to perform a servic with respect to the estat
thi statut deal with all properti and the record or document that the court offic
receiv dure the tenur of the truste or offic
advers interest and conduct of offic titl 18 us code section 154
a person who be a custodian truste marshal or other offic of the court
1 knowingli purc hase directli or indirectli ani properti of the estat of which the person is such
an offic in a case under titl 11
2 knowingli refus to permit a reason opportun for the inspect by parti in interest of
the document and account relat to the affair of estat in the person charg by parti
when direct by the court to do so or
3 knowingli refus to permit a reason opport uniti for the inspect by the unit state
truste of the document and account relat to the affair of ani estat in the person
charg
bankruptci truste ar in a posit of trust and therefor should be held to a higher
standard of conduct than other interest parti but on critic aspect is the sale of estat
properti truste can influenc the sale of properti and can make signific profit if thei
directli or indirectli purchas asset of the estat it would be similar to insid trade by
individu in the secur industri thi statut is unlik the other list abov in that a
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11319
violat of thi statut is onli a misdemeanor wherea all of the abov ar feloni
convict under thi section carri a fine as well as forfeitur of the person offic
know disregard of bankruptci law or rule titl 18 us code section 156
a definit in thi section
1 the term bankruptci petit prepar mean a person other than the debtor attornei or an
employe of such an attornei who prepar for compens a document for file and
2 the term document for file mean a petit or ani other document prepar for file by a
debtor in a unit state bankruptci court or a unit state district court in connect with a case
under titl 11
b offens if a bankruptci case or relat proceed is dismiss becaus of a know attempt by a
bankruptci petit prepar in ani manner to disregard the requir of titl 11 unit state
code or the feder rule of bankruptci procedur
thi section is the crimin version of the titl 11 usc section 110 which deal with
petit mill and petit prepar who de liber disregard the bankruptci code or
ani of it rule and procedur petit mill and prepar who fall under thi section might
file fals document for debtor with deliber wrong social secur number or other
incorrect inform in some case debtor might not even be awar thei ar file
bankruptci or the effect of a bankruptci on their credit rate
bankruptci fraud titl 18 us code section 157
a perso n who have devis or in tend to devis a scheme or artific to defraud and for the purpos
of execut or conceal such a scheme or artific or attempt to do so
1 file a petit under titl 11 includ a fraudul involuntari bankruptci petit under
section 303 of such titl
2 file a document in a proceed under titl 11 includ a fraudul involuntari bankruptci
petit under section 303 of such titl or
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11320 2011 fraud examin manual
3 make a fals or fraudul re present claim or promis concern or in relat to a
proceed under titl 11 includ a fraudul in voluntari bankruptci petit under section 303 of
such titl at ani time befor or after the file of the petit or in relat to a proceed fals
assert to be pend under such titl
thi section is veri similar to mail and wire fraud statut both in word and in concept
thi section appli to insid who perpetr bustout scheme as well as those who
attempt to obtain credit immedi prior to file bankruptci under section 158 the fbi
and the us attornei ar charg with enforc of section 157
falsifi alter or destroi document titl 18 us code section 1519
whoever knowingli alter destroi mutil conceal cover up falsifi or make a fals entri in
ani record document or tangibl object with the intent to imped obstruct or influenc the
investig or proper administr of ani matter within the jurisdict of ani depart or agenc
of the unit state or ani case file under titl 11 or in relat to or contempl of ani such
matter or case shall be fine under thi titl imprison not more than 20 year or both
thi section wa ad as part of the sarbanesoxlei act in 2002 it specif provid
that alter falsifi or destroi document file under titl 11 the bankruptci code
is a crimin violat subject to imprison of up to 20 year
bankruptcyrel violat
although bankruptci crime ar the focu of thi section there ar other crime that ar
usual perpetr prior to the file of a bankruptci petit in some case the bankruptci
process is the culmin of a pattern of prior crimin activ there ar mani other crime
frequent associ with bankruptci includ mail fraud wire fraud bank fraud interst
transport of stolen good or properti aid or abet fals statement conspiraci tax
evas and monei launder bankruptci fraud is also a predic offens under rico for
more inform on these offens see the law relat to fraud chapter in the law
section of the fraud examin manual
although the crimin aspect of bankruptci crime ar heard in district court the
underli fact deal with a debtor misc onduct also ar heard in the form of civil
proceed befor the unit state bankruptci court parallel proceed occur in case
where bankruptci fraud alleg have been made sever exampl of civil proceed
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11321
that ensu as a result of fraud alleg against the debtor ar motion for the appoint
of truste and examin lawsuit for recoveri of fraudul transfer properti and
object to the debtor discharg
bankruptci scheme
conceal asset
the most common crime is the conceal of asset rightfulli belong to the debtor
estat asset might consist of cash consum properti hous and interest in partnership
and corpor as well as lawsuit in which the debtor is a plaintiff asset also includ
book and record of the debtor conceal vari from littl or no monetari valu to ten
of million of dollar the variou conceal offens ar describ in more detail under
the bankruptci crime statut
the plan bustout
a bustout is a plan bankruptci it can take mani differ form the basic approach is
for an appar legitim busi to order larg quantiti of good on credit then
dispos of those good through legitim or illegitim channel the perpetr then
close shop abscond with the proce and leav the supplier unpaid
bustout scheme ar plan and perpetr by individu both prior to and subsequ to
the format of the new busi entiti other characterist of bustout scheme follow
thei ar plan from the begin
sometim organ crime is involv
credit is establish with numer vendor prompt payment ar made to all vendor
vendor feel comfort in deal therebi extend exist credit line
perpetr build inventori by order everyth thei can from vendor thei promis
to pai soon and order more merchandis
sell out inventori at deep discount or move it befor vendor can take possess of it
busi fail or close up file bankruptci or creditor beat them to it with involuntari
bankruptci
detect
some red flag that signal that a bustout scheme might be in process includ
a busi relationship base princip on trust creditor ar will to offer extend
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11322 2011 fraud examin manual
term for payment hold check or take postdat check thi make them vulner
buyer with a histori of purchas good for an unreason discount
a larg number of bank account indic a possibl kite scheme the perpetr
occasion pai some of hi creditor with fund gener by float check between
bank account
prevent
lender and supplier should evalu potenti custom carefulli prior to extend credit
by perform due dilig and obtain detail background inform lender
and supplier should at time visit their custom locat to verifi the legitimaci of
the busi
multipl file
thi scheme involv repeat bankruptci file by the same debtor in order to obtain the
benefit of the automat stai usual each petit is dismiss for failur to file the requir
statement or to appear for examin fals statement on petit ar common
includ a denial that the debtor ha file ani previou petit
credit card bustout
the debtor intention run up a number of credit card to their limit and file bankruptci
with no intent to repai credit card debt might includ purchas for jewelri luxuri item
or other person properti that ar not disclos on the schedul credit card debt also
might includ larg cash advanc taken prior to file bankruptci
forg file
bankruptci petit ar sometim file in anoth uninvolv person name usual as
part of a larger scheme us an assum ident it can take year to correct the credit
record of the person whose ident ha been stolen sometim the debtor name is
obtain from obituari notic
type servic or petit mill
thi scheme involv compani that file bankruptci petit typic on behalf of low
incom and often unsuspect client the petit often contain numer fals
statement the debtor usual ha no idea a bankruptci ha been file as the servic ha
held itself out to be a renter right group and ha not told the client how it will accomplish
what it ha promis
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11401
tax fraud
introduct
the most import distinct in determin whether an individu or compani ha
commit tax fraud is whether the taxfil parti intention file an improp tax return
with the feder govern the intent of the parti to wrongli file a return will determin
the differ between tax avoid and tax evas the us court have determin evas
to be unlaw while avoid ha been deem law
the definit of tax fraud is
the actual intent wrongdo and the intent requir to evad a tax believ to
be ow fraud impli bad faith intent wrongdo and a sinist motiv it is
never imput or presum and the court will not sustain find of fraud upon
circumst which at most creat onli suspicion
thi definit tell us that a fals tax return is consid fraudul if the respons parti
ha knowingli attempt to defraud the govern of ow tax dollar in us v
pomponio the court further refin the scope of tax fraud by state that will is a
voluntari intent violat of a known legal duti that doe not requir proof of an evil
motiv it can thu be accept that accident fals tax return do not qualifi as fraudul
return
fraudul intent
an exampl of fraudul intent is the file of a tax return in the wrong district when the
taxpay a cpa knew or had reason to know the proper district spencer d lorton v
commission tc memo 1954872
object reason good faith misunderstand of the law
good faith or a legitim misunderstand of the requir of the law negat
will us v cheek 931 f2d 1206 7th cir 1991 affd 111 us 604 1991 the case
held howev that the belief that tax ar in violat of the constitut wa not
object reason so as to negat will
114 merten law of feder incom taxat sec 5521 page 64 1991 rev ross glove co v commission 60 tc 569 1973
2 us v pomponio 429 us 10 1976 762 ustc 9695
tax fraud financi transact
11402 2011 fraud examin manual
will can be infer from conduct such as
keep a doubl set of book not to be confus with gaap and tax record
make fals entri or alter or creat fals invoic or document
destruct of book or record
conceal of asset illicit incom
cover up sourc of incom
avoid make record usual in transact of the kind
conduct that mislead or conceal spi v us 317 us 492 1943
hallmark badg of fraud
the court recogn certain hallmark or badg of tax fraud some of these ar
misrepresent of fact
artific
devic to hide incom or asset
doubl set of book
secret bank account under fals name
overstat of deduct
fictiti transact
fraud is more than a mistak in judgment
the failur to know and understand the rule of first in first out fifo is not suffici
to sustain a fraud charg smith v commission 40 bta 387 supplement opinion 42 bta
505 there wa no indic in thi case that the taxpay misrepres ani fact withheld
ani inform or resist or prevent the discoveri by the commission of ani
pertin data
fals versu fraudul
definit of fals
when fals appear by itself and not coupl with a penalti or the creation of an
offens then fals mean incorrect eliot nation bank v gill 218 f 600 1st cir 1914
fals mean it is incorrect but made in good faith nation bank of commerc in st loui
v allen 223 f 472 8th cir 1915
statement of opinion as distinguish from those of materi fact ar not fraud ohio brass
co v commission 17 bta 1199 1929
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11403
corpor fraud
corpor fraud depend on the intent of the corpor offic auerbach shoe co v
commission 21 tc 191 1st cir 1953
exampl
charg airlin ticket to air freight a fals representat ion coupl with the failur to
credit refund for redeem ticket to the corp orat wa suffici to render the corpor
return fraudul krep v commission 42 tc 660 1964 affd 351 f2d 1
2nd cir 1965
exampl
a 40 percent shareholderoffic of a corpor embezzl corpor fund for her
person us then falsifi corpor record the corpor incorrectli claim deduct
base on the fals record the fraud claim wa not sustain against the corpor
botwinik bro of mass inc v commission 39 tc 988 1963
burden of proof
in juli of 1998 presid clinton sign in to law the ir restructur and reform act
thi act made sweep chang in the structur and procedur of the ir on of the
most import chang involv the shift of the burden of proof in civil case the gener
rule prior to the act wa that the taxpay bear the burden of proof at trial in civil
proceed the statutori notic of defici 90dai letter enjoi the presumpt of
correct the presumpt of correct in favor of the ir requir the taxpay to go
forward with prima faci evid to disprov the irss determin after successfulli
rebut the presumpt of correct taxpay had the burden of prove their case by
at least a preponder of the evid
howev the rule establish under the reform act is that ir ha the burden of proof in
civil court proceed on incom gift estat or generationskip tax liabil with
respect to factual issu that ar relev to determin the taxpay tax liabil provid
the taxpay 1 provid credibl evid on the factual issu 2 keep record and back
up item as present requir under the code and regul and 3 cooper with ir
in regard to reason request for meet interview wit inform and
document corpor trust and partnership with a net worth in excess of 7 million
continu to bear the burden of proof the senat financ committe report state that if
tax fraud financi transact
11404 2011 fraud examin manual
the taxpay evid and the irss evid ar equal balanc the court should find
that the ir ha not sustain it burden of proof
fraud
even under the old ir code there wa no presumpt of correct afford the ir
when fraud wa involv therefor the ir had the burden of prove fraud armstrong v
us 354 f2d 274 173 ctcl 944 1965 if the fraud claim is for more than on year the
ir must show that some part of the underpay wa due to fraud for each year that the
penalti is ad profession servic v commission 79 tc 888 1982 first there must be a
defici and second the defici must be substanti us v mors 491 f2d 149 1st cir
1974 substanti is a question of fact us v mark 282 f supp 546 d or 1966 affd
391 f2d 210 9th cir 1968 cert deni 39 3 us 839 1968 there is controversi about
whether substanti appli to the unpaid tax or to unreport incom fraud penalti
surviv the death of the taxpay
civil versu crimin
although the burden of prove fraud is on the ir the primari determin of whether the
ir pursu a civil rather than a crimin fraud charg is what it believ it can prove there
also might be budgetari and staf constraint that might dictat whether a suit is pursu
civilli or crimin
the differ between civil and crimin in the view of the ir is that a civil case never
ripen into a crime and crimin offens involv behavior too insidi to be dispos of
on a civil basi failur to cooper might rais a civil case to a crime becaus it might
demonstr will intent
taxpay penalti
taxpay with a tax defici mai be subject to civil or crimin penalti the primari
determin of whether the ir pursu a civil rather than a crimin fraud charg is what it
believ it can prove
from the irss perspect a civil case never ripen into a crime but a crimin offens
involv behavior too insidi to be dispos of on a civil basi
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11405
civil taxpay penalti
neglig titl 26 usc 6662
if a taxpay underpay is attribut to neglig or on of the other reason
specifi in thi section the govern mai impos an accuracyrel penalti neglig
is strongli indic where inform is omit on tax return or deduct ar too
good to be true
if guilti under thi law the govern will impos a penalti base on a percentag of the
underpay in the case of neglig or disregard of rule and regul substanti
understat of incom tax substanti valuat misstat substanti overstat
of pension liabil or substanti understat of estat or gift tax valuat
frivol return titl 26 usc 6702
if a taxpay file a frivol return on that is incorrect on it face or on that doe not
contain enough inform to determin the tax liabil the govern mai impos a
separ 5000 civil penalti an exampl of a frivol return is on written in roman
numer rather than arab number
fraud titl 26 usc 6663
if a taxpay underpay is attribut to fraud the govern mai impos a penalti
of 75 percent of the portion of the underpay that is attribut to fraud if howev
the taxpay is success in prove that a portion of the underpay is not the result of
fraud that portion might still be subject to the neglig penalti
crimin taxpay penalti
tax evas titl 26 usc 7201
if a taxpay is found guilti of tax evas which is the intent evas of tax
oblig the govern shall impos a penalti of not more than 100000 500000 in
the case of a corpor andor imprison for not more than five year
there ar three element to the crime of tax evas
will
a will and posit attempt to evad or defeat the tax in ani manner lift a misdemeanor to
a feloni spi v unit state 317 us 492 1943 a consist pattern of not report or
tax fraud financi transact
11406 2011 fraud examin manual
underreport incom is suffici to infer will unit state v stone 770 f2d 842 9th
cir 1985
exist of a substanti defici
there must be a defici and that defici must be substanti lawn v unit state 355
us 339 mors supra therefor there must also be a tax liabil 7202 but see mark
supra
affirm act
there must be an affirm act constitut an evas or attempt evas of tax
oblig but to be found guilti of thi feloni on need onli to attempt to evad the tax
make a fals return tax perjuri titl 26 usc 72061
thi crime occur when a taxpay us fals or mislead inform on hi tax return
the element of thi crime includ all of the follow
the defend made and subscrib a return statement or other document that wa
fals with regard to a materi matter
the return statement or other document contain a written declar that it wa
made under the penalti of perjuri
the defend did not believ the return statement or other document wa true and
correct as to everi materi matter
the defend fals subscrib to the return statement or other document willfulli
with the specif intent to violat the law
failur to file and pai titl 26 usc 7203
thi statut make it a crime to willfulli do ani of the follow
fail to pai ani tax or estim tax
fail to file a return
fail to keep requir record
fail to suppli ani requir inform
a person convict under thi statut can be fine up to 25000 100000 in the case of a
corpor or sentenc to up to on year in prison in addit to ani other penalti
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11407
conspiraci to defraud the unit state titl 18 usc 371
the crimin tax statut of the intern revenu code do not includ a statut for the crime
of conspiraci but tax conspiraci can be prosecut under the gener conspiraci statut
under section 371 of titl 18 us code section 371 make it illeg for two or more
person to agre to commit an offens against the unit state or to defraud ani feder
agenc conspiraci in tax case usual involv a conspiraci to commit tax evas or to file
fals tax return
tax prepar penalti
aid and abet understat of taxpay liabil titl 26 usc 6701
the code impos a civil penalti on ani person who aid or assist or procur or advis
in the prepar or present of ani taxrel document if the person know or ha
reason to believ that the document will be us in connect with a materi tax matter
and will result in the understat of a taxpay liabil the penalti mai also be
impos if the person act through an employe or agent by order or caus hi
subordin to act or by fail to prevent hi subordin from act
the amount of the penalti is 1000 for each un derstat taxpay 10000 in the case of a
corpor client return per period
understat of taxpay liabil titl 26 usc 6694
section 6694 provid a penalti against a return prepar for underst a taxpay
liabil due to an unreason posit understat mean ani understat of the
net amount payabl or ani overstat of the net amount refund
section 6694 provid that unless there is a reason caus for an understat and the
prepar act in good faith a penalti of the greater of 1 000 or 50 percent of the incom
deriv or to be deriv by the tax return prepar will be assess against ani prepar
who knew or reason should have known that a posit taken on a return wa
not realist possibl of be sustain on it merit
not disclos under usc 6662d2bii
a frivol posit
tax fraud financi transact
11408 2011 fraud examin manual
addition the penalti increas to the greater of 5000 or 50 percent of the incom
deriv or to be deriv if the understat is will or reckless
crimin fraud titl 26 usc 72062
aid or assist in the prepar of a fals return
section 72062 make it a crime to aid or assist in the prepar of a fals return under
thi section a person is guilti of a feloni and mai be subject to a fine of up to 100000 or
500000 in the case of a corpor andor imprison of up to three year
thi feloni is without regard to the knowledg or consent of the person author or
requir to present the return affidavit claim or other document
exampl
rudolf desouza presid and owner of de fens contractor rd intern wa
indict on 86 count of conspiraci convers of govern properti monei launder
file fals incom tax return and submit fals claim and fals statement the
indict is the result of a threeandhalfyear investig by the naval investig
servic and the crimin investig divis of the ir
accord to the indict desouza conspir to inflat the expens of rdi and hi
own incom in an effort to imped the ir as part of the conspiraci he allegedli file
fals corpor incom tax return for rdi that claim deduct for salari that were
never paid the indict sai that rdi us an accrual method of account and
deduct as a busi expens salari that accru to desouza dure a fiveyear period
the contractor claim 490000 in such deduct the accru salari not paid were
enter on rdi book as loan from an offic
in addit the indict alleg that rdi employe purchas comput equip from
a vendor and then leas it at desouza dire ction to bk trade at an inflat price
consequ rdi bill the govern for the cost of the fictiti leas and did not give
the comput to the govern even though it had been reimburs for them moreov
the indict accus desouza of claim thousand of dollar worth of person expens
as busi expens specif he is alleg to have charg the govern for trip to
disneyland disnei world and canada
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11409
the monei launder charg involv alleg that desouza us sever bank account
to conduct approxim 900000 in financi transact design to hide corpor
asset from the bankruptci court specif desouza is accus of have caus
numer transfer of monei from rdi acco unt to those of gm technolog these
transfer had the effect of reduc the balanc of fund in rdi account further desouza
did not disclos to the bankruptci court the exist of gm technolog hi famili
control interest or the monei transfer fr om rdi the indict also alleg that
desouza transfer monei from rdi to anoth familyown compani while the
bankruptci petit wa pend
whistleblow program
as part of the tax relief and health care act of 2006 congress amend section 7623 of
the intern revenu code to greatli enhanc the irss whistleblow program under thi
amend taxpay have a statutori right to reward of 1530 percent of the collect
proce tax penalti and interest for inform that lead directli to an
administr or judici action by the treasuri depart it also provid for up to 10
percent of the collect proce for less substanti inform congress also
elimin ani cap on the potenti amount of recoveri by the inform
to manag thi revis reward program congress establish the ir whistleblow offic
wbo thi wa done in respons to complaint that the previou reward program had
not been effect manag
on import note befor you pick up the phone to call the ir these 1530 percent
recoveri do not appli to smaller individu case these larger percentag reward do not
appli to report against individu who make less than 200000 and whose tax liabil is
less than 2 million the rule do appli to all other individu and entiti
defens for tax fraud
no defici
to prove innoc of tax fraud matter the defend can establish that there is no
defici if there is no defici there is no tax liabil
tax fraud financi transact
11410 2011 fraud examin manual
lack of will
a lack of will reduc the defend culpabl for fraud
avoid not evas
in contrast to tax fraud which refer to illeg method of tax reduct tax avoid refer
to a legal mean of lower on tax bill through legitim deduct credit and
shelter thu establish that the taxpay wa engag in tax avoid and not evas
provid a defens to tax fraud
object reason posit
a defend might also claim that he took an object reason posit with respect
to the tax return
claim of right doctrin
in the unit state a taxpay must recogn incom if he receiv the incom even if he
doe not have a fix right to the incom thu a taxpay mai seek to evad pai their
incom tax by claim that he doe not have an unrestrict right to the monei at issu
other defens
mental ill
thi defens is applic in regard to the time the return wa prepar
incompet bookkeep
josei v commission tc memo 1956153 in on case a bookkeep file the tax return
by put it in a file cabinet rather than send it to the intern revenu servic
ignor of the law
rutana v commission tc memo 1986336 a court ha held that consider must be
given to the intellig and expertis of the taxpay
innoc spous
innoc spous relief permit a spous to avoid tax liabil under thi doctrin a spous
mai be excus from tax liabil for tax or tax penalti if a joint tax return wa file and the
spous can establish the follow element
the underpay of tax is due to unreport incom or disallow deduct that ar
attribut to the other spous
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11411
the spous did not know and did not have reason to know of the fact surround
the underpay of tax
addition innoc spous mai obtain relief for erron incom item
relianc on an attornei or account
on can assert a defens of relianc on an attornei or account if all of the follow
condit ar met
the relianc is specif
the expert is qualifi which is determin by a fact and circumst test
full disclosur to the expert is requir
inappropri defens
some defens ar inappropri thei includ those discuss below
amend or delinqu return
a taxpay will receiv no mitig of penalti for file an amend or delinqu return
badaracco v commission 464 us 386 1984
statut of limit
the threeyear statut of limit doe not appli to tax fraud usc 6501c
death of taxpay
fraud penalti surviv the death of the taxpay helver v mitchel 303 us 391 1938
rev rule 73 293 19732 cb 413
bankruptci
tax ow as a result of file fraudul feder incom tax return ar not discharg in
bankruptci 11 usc sec 523a1c in re harri 59 br 545 bcdc va 1986 rev
rule 8799 19872 cb 291
evid of tax fraud
evid of tax fraud mai be direct or circumstanti direct evid includ testimoni that
tend to prove or disprov a fact in issu directli such as eyewit testimoni or a
tax fraud financi transact
11412 2011 fraud examin manual
confess circumstanti evid is evid that tend to prove or disprov fact in issu
indirectli by infer
direct evid
certain circumst constitut direct evid of tax fraud includ
unexplain bank deposit eg us bank account in anoth person name or a
fictiti name
submiss of fals document eg if a taxpay claim medic deduct but cannot
provid ani evid that he had seen or paid the bill
fals explan for prior conduct eg the taxpay destroi hi compani cash
regist tape which were the onli record for the compani sale
particip in an illeg busi eg over sever year a taxpay who ran an illeg
lotteri substanti underreport hi incom
fals claim of extra withhold exempt eg a taxpay claim 50 withhold
exempt but could not substanti that he wa entitl to claim them
circumstanti evid
certain circumst constitut circumstanti evid of tax fraud includ
illicit incom which can be prove by show that the subject asset or expenditur
for a given period exce that which can be account for from admit sourc of
incom
incom in excess of deposit eg audit of servic industri peopl in texa led to
assess of sever thousand dollar in back taxa and penalti
other legal element of tax fraud
embezzl monei is immedi incom to the embezzl even though he is under a duti
to repai it but upon repay the embezzl get a deduct for the repay for
exampl in stephen v commission 905 f2d 667 7th cir 1990 a taxpay embezzl about
530000 from hi employ raytheon and record it on hi tax return as consult
incom the taxpay wa order to pai restitut to raytheon plu interest he wa
allow deduct under ir code section 165 c2 relat to ordinari and necessari
busi expens for the restitut amount in the year paid but the court did not allow a
deduct for the interest
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11501
secur fraud
introduct
in order to effect conduct investig or examin of fraudul secur
transact fraud examin and investig need a gener understand of both feder
and state law and the philosophi behind regul mani financi product and
opportun can be deem to be secur but that is often far from obviou to an
untrain observ thi section help provid fraud examin with the tool necessari to
recogn secur fraud and conduct a success investig
the primari purpos of secur regul is to balanc the legitim need of busi to
rais capit against the need to protect investor the worth of a secur come from the
valu of the interest it representsit ha no inher valu secur ar not a commod
to be consum but more resembl a currenc be trade
although there is some common between feder and state law regard the regul
of the secur industri there exist a complex web of law from 50 state in addit to
feder regul each state ha it own secur law and even where the law is similar
interpret and rule mai differ markedli regul of secur transact cover not
onli their sale but also the offer of secur to the public
feder regul
secur act of 1933
concern over the 1929 stock market crash and over the manipul of the secur
market precipit the need for feder intervent in 1933 the secur act wa
enact to regul the public offer of secur and protect investor the 1933 act
sometim known as the truth in secur es act defin secur to includ
ani note stock treasuri stock bond debentur invest contract fraction
undivid interest in ani oil ga or other miner right ani put call straddl option
ani interest or instrument commonli known as a secur titl 15 usc
77ba1
secur fraud financi transact
11502 2011 fraud examin manual
of cours both feder and state law provid for exempt exempt basic fall
under two categori exempt secur and exempt transact for exampl certain oblig
issu or guarante by the unit state govern or by state or local govern ar
exempt secur
thi act also requir that investor be given full and fair disclosur of materi inform
concern their invest or prospect invest in thi wai the sale of secur
differ from mani other commerci transact where caveat emptor is the rule here the
investor is entitl to all inform necessari for an inform invest decis to
be made
secur exchang act of 1934
unlik the 1933 act the secur exchang act of 1934 mainli deal with postissu
trade thi act which gave birth to the secur and exchang commiss sec
requir the registr of secur broker and dealer simpli put the 1933 act can be
thought of as regul the issuanc of the secur themselv while the 1934 act cover
subsequ trade thi secondari market trade repres by far the greatest volum of
secur transact trade gener take place on market with actual trade floor
call exchang or on socal overthecount market such as nasdaq
the 1934 act contain section 10b a comprehens antifraud provis which permit
the sec to set forth rule and regul that prohibit manipul or decept devic or
contriv via the mail or other mean of interst commerc for exampl under
section 10b the sec promulg rule 10b5 which prohibit fals statement and other
fraudul activ in connect with secur transact specif rule 10b5 state
that
it shall be unlaw for ani person directli or indirectli by the us of ani mean or
instrument of interst commerc or of the mail or of ani facil of ani nation
secur exchang
1 to emploi ani devic scheme or artific to defraud
2 to make ani untru statement of a materi fact or to omit to state a materi fact
necessari in order to make the statement made in the light of the circumst under
which thei were made not mislead or
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11503
3 to engag in ani act practic or cours of busi which oper or would oper as
a fraud or deceit upon ani person in connect with the purchas or sale of ani
secur
invest advisor act of 1940
regist secur dealer ar requir to adher to the rule of fair practic issu by the
nation associ of secur dealer and the invest advis act of 1940 thi
act mandat registr and regul of invest advis it appli to anyon who
advis other as part of a regular busi and for compens on the invest
purchas or sale of secur thi doe not appli to those who do not receiv
compens or who publish financi advic in a newspap or magazin
invest compani act of 1940
under the invest compani act of 1940 invest compani ar requir to regist
with the sec which also regul their activ thi act dictat qualif for offic
and director requir that certain matter ar submit for stockhold approv and
mandat sec permiss for certain transact such as those between insid and
affili it divid invest compani into three categori
faceamount certif compani ani comp ani engag in issu fix incom
debentur type secur
unit invest trustscompani organ under a trust indentur contract of
agenc or those similar in natur which do not have a board of director and issu onli
redeem secur
manag compani firm that do not fit the criteria of the first two categori fall
into thi on thi includ open and closedend compani whether list on secur
exchang or not openend compani ar commonli refer to as mutual fund
and the net asset valu of a share is calcul base on the market valu of the fund
portfolio divid by the number of share outstand the share of closedend
compani trade in a similar manner to regular stock ie the valu is determin by the
market forc of suppli and demand
although there ar crimin penalti attach to violat of the feder secur law the
secur and exchang commiss doe not have the power to take crimin action sec
investig that disclos potenti crimin violat ar usual refer to the feder
bureau of investig
secur fraud financi transact
11504 2011 fraud examin manual
less seriou violat mai be address us the commiss administr power the
sec ha the power to issu ceas and desist order levi fine and order disgorg
of profit
the sarbanesoxlei act
the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002 is on of the most signific chang in the secur field
sinc the 1934 act wa pass it wa design to restor investor confid in capit
market and help elimin financi statement fraud in publicli trade compani while at
the same time significantli increas the penalti for corpor account fraud
the most signific chang brought on by the act includ
the creation of the public compani account oversight board
requir for senior financi offic to certifi sec file
standard for audit committe independ
standard for auditor independ
enhanc financi disclosur requir
protect for corpor whistleblow
enhanc penalti for whitecollar crime
the act is discuss in detail in the law relat to fraud chapter in the law section of
the fraud examin manual howev some of the more import provis as thei relat
to corpor govern ar reproduc here
certif oblig for ceo and cfo
on of the most signific chang effect by the sarbanesoxlei act is the requir
that the chief execut offic and the chief financi offic of public compani
person certifi annual and quarterli sec file these certif essenti requir
ceo and cfo to take respons for their compani financi statement and prevent
them from deleg thi respons to their subordin and then claim ignor
when fraud is uncov in the financi statement
there ar two type of offic certif mandat by sarbanesoxlei crimin
certif which ar set forth in section 906 of the act and codifi at 18 usc 1350
and civil certif which ar set forth in section 302
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11505
crimin certif 906
period file with the sec must now be accompani by a statement sign by the ceo
and cfo which certifi that the report fulli compli with the sec period report
requir and that the inform in the report fairli present in all materi respect
the financi condit and result of oper of the compani
these certif ar known as crimin certif becaus the act impos crimin
penalti on offic who violat the certif requir
corpor offic who knowingli violat the certif requir ar subject to
fine of up to 1000000 and up to 10 year imprison or both
corpor offic who willfulli violat the certif requir ar subject to fine
of up to 5000000 and up to 20 year imprison or both
civil certif 302
section 302 of the act requir the ceo and cfo to person certifi the follow in
their report
thei have person review the report
base on their knowledg the report doe not contain ani materi misstat that
would render the financi mislead
base on their knowledg the financi inform in the report fairli present in all
materi respect the financi condit result of oper and cash flow of the
compani
thei ar respons for design maintain and evalu the compani intern
control thei have evalu the control within 90 dai prior to the report and thei
have present their conclus about the effect of those control in the report
thei have disclos to the auditor and the audit committe ani materi weak in
the control and ani fraud whether materi or not that involv manag or other
employe who have a signific role in the compani intern control and
thei have indic in their report whether there have been signific chang in the
compani intern control sinc the file of the last report
note that in item 2 and 3 the ceo and cfo ar not requir to certifi that the financi
ar accur or that there is no misstat thei ar simpli requir to certifi that to their
knowledg the financi ar accur and not mislead howev thi doe not mean that
senior financi offic can simpli plead ignor about their compani sec file in
order to avoid liabil the term fairli present in item 3 is a broader standard than what
is requir by gaap in certifi that their sec file meet thi standard the ceo and
secur fraud financi transact
11506 2011 fraud examin manual
cfo essenti must certifi that the comp ani 1 ha select appropri account
polici to ensur the materi accuraci of the report 2 ha properli appli those
account standard and 3 ha disclos financi inform that reflect the underli
transact and event of the compani furthermor the other certif rule see 1
and 46 abov mandat that ceo and cfo take an activ role in their compani public
report and in the design and mainten of intern control
it is signific that in item 4 the ceo and cfo not onli have to certifi that thei ar
respons for their compani intern control but also that thei have evalu the
control within 90 dai prior to their quarterli or annual report essenti thi certif
requir mandat that compani activ and continu reevalu their control
structur to prevent fraud
in conjunct with the 302 certif requir on the respons of the ceo
and cfo for intern control 404 of the act requir all annual report to contain an
intern control report that 1 state manag respons for establish and
maintain an adequ intern control structur and procedur for financi report
and 2 contain an assess of the effect of the intern control structur and
procedur of the compani for financi report
item 5 requir the ceo and cfo to certifi that thei have disclos to their auditor and
their audit committe ani materi weak in the compani intern control and also
ani fraud whether materi or not that involv manag or other kei employe
obvious thi is a veri broad report standard that goe beyond the materi standard
gener us in financi statement audit the ceo and cfo now must report to their
auditor and audit committe ani fraud commit by a manag thi place a greater burden
on the ceo and cfo to take part in antifraud effort and to be awar of fraudul activ
within their compani in order to meet thi certif requir
item 6 is signific becaus period sec file must now includ statement detail
signific chang to the intern control of publicli trade compani
standard for audit committe independ
audit committe respons
section 301 of the act requir that the audit committe for each publicli trade compani
shall be directli respons for appoint compens and overse the work of the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11507
compani outsid auditor the act also mandat that the auditor must report directli to
the audit committe not manag and make it the respons of the audit
committe to resolv disput between manag and the auditor section 301 also
requir that the audit committe must have the author and fund to hire independ
counsel and ani other advisor it deem necessari to carri out it duti
composit of the audit committe
the sarbanesoxlei act mandat that each member of a compani audit committe must
be a member of it board of director and must otherwis be independ the term
independ mean that the audit committe member can onli receiv compens from
the compani for hi servic on the board of director the audit committe or anoth
committe of the board of director thei cannot be paid by the compani for ani other
consult or advisori work
financi expert
section 407 of the act requir everi public compani to disclos in it period report to
the sec whether or not the audit committe ha at least on member who is a financi
expert and if not to explain the reason why the act defin a financi expert as a
person who through educ and experi as a public account or auditor or a cfo
comptrol chief financi offic or a similar posit 1 ha an understand of gener
accept account principl and financi statement 2 ha experi in prepar or
audit financi statement of compar compani and the applic of such principl
in account for estim accrual and reserv 3 ha experi with intern control
and 4 ha an understand of audit committe function
establish a whistleblow structur
the act make it the respons of the audit committe to establish procedur eg a
hotlin for receiv and deal with complaint and anonym employe tip regard
irregular in the compani account met hod intern control or audit matter
enhanc financi disclosur requir
offbal sheet transact
the sarbanesoxlei act direct the sec to issu rule that requir the disclosur of all
materi offbal sheet transact by publicli trade compani the rule requir
disclosur of all materi offbal sheet transact arrang oblig
includ conting oblig and other relationship the compani mai have with
secur fraud financi transact
11508 2011 fraud examin manual
unconsolid entiti or person that mai have a materi current or futur effect on the
compani financi condit chang in financi condit liquid capit expenditur
capit resourc or signific compon of revenu or expens these disclosur ar
requir in all annual and quarterli sec report
pro forma financi inform
section 401 also direct the sec to issu rule on pro forma financi statement these
rule requir that pro forma financi must not contain ani untru statement or omiss
that would make them mislead and requir that the pro forma financi be reconcil to
gaap these rule appli to all pro forma financi statement that ar file with the sec or
that ar includ in ani public disclosur or press releas
prohibit on person loan to execut
section 402 make it illeg for public compani to make person loan or otherwis extend
credit either directli or indirectli to or for ani director or execut offic there is an
except that appli to consum lender if the loan ar consum loan of the type the
compani normal make to the public and on the same term
restrict on insid trade
section 403 establish disclosur requir for stock transact by director and
offic of public compani or by person who own more than 10 percent of a publicli
trade compani stock report of chang in benefici ownership by these person must
now be file with the sec by the end of the second busi dai follow the transact
under 306 director and offic ar also prohibit from trade in the compani
secur dure ani pension fund blackout period thi restrict onli appli to
secur that were acquir as a result of their employ or servic to the compani a
blackout period is defin as ani period of more than three consecut busi dai in
which at least 50 percent of the particip in the compani retir plan ar restrict
from trade in the compani secur if director or offic violat thi provis thei
can be forc to disgorg to the compani all profit receiv from the sale of secur
dure the blackout period
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11509
code of ethic for senior financi offic
pursuant to 406 of the act the sec must establish rule that requir public compani to
disclos whether thei have adopt a code of ethic for their senior financi offic and if
not to explain the reason why the rule requir immedi public disclosur ani
time there is a chang of the code of ethic or a waiver of the code of ethic for a senior
financi offic
enhanc review of period file
section 408 of the act now requir the sec to make regular and systemat review of
disclosur made by public compani in their period report to the sec review of a
compani disclosur includ it financi statement must be made at least onc everi
three year prior to thi enact review were typic minim and tend to coincid
with regist offer
real time disclosur
under 409 public compani must publicli disclos inform concern materi
chang in their financi condit or oper these disclosur must be in plain
english and must be made on a rapid and current basi
protect for corpor whistleblow under sarbanesoxlei
the sarbanesoxlei act establish broad protect for corpor whistleblow there
ar two section of the act that address whistleblow protect section 806 deal with
civil protect and section 1107 establish crimin liabil for those who retali against
whistleblow
civil liabil whistleblow protect
section 806 of the act which is codifi at titl 18 usc 1514a creat civil liabil for
compani that retali against whistleblow it should be note that thi provis doe
not provid univers whistleblow protect it onli protect employe of publicli trade
compani section 806 make it unlaw to fire demot suspend threaten harass or in
ani other manner discrimin against an employe for provid inform or aid in an
investig of secur fraud in order to trigger 806 protect the employe must
report the suspect misconduct to a feder regulatori or law enforc agenc a
member of congress or a committe of congress or a supervisor employe ar also
protect against retali for file testifi in particip in or otherwis assist in a
secur fraud financi transact
11510 2011 fraud examin manual
proceed file or about to be file relat to an alleg violat of secur law or
sec rule
the whistleblow protect appli even if the compani is ultim found not to have
commit secur fraud as long as the employe reason believ he is report
conduct that constitut a violat of variou feder secur law then he is protect
the protect cover retaliatori act not onli by the compani but also by ani offic
employe contractor subcontractor or agent of the compani
if a public compani is found to have violat 806 the act provid for an award of
compensatori damag suffici to make the employe whole penalti includ
reinstat back pai with interest and compens for special damag includ
litig cost expert wit fee and attornei fee
crimin sanction whistleblow protect
section 1107 of sarbanesoxlei codifi at titl 18 usc 1513 make it a crime to
knowingli with the intent to retali take ani harm action against a person for provid
truth inform relat to the commiss or possibl commiss of ani feder
offens thi protect is onli trigger when inform is provid to a law enforc
offic it doe not appli to report made to supervisor or to member of congress as is
the case under 806
addition the act codifi three crimin offens to titl 18 of the code first it is a
crimin offens to alter destroi mutil conceal coverup or falsifi ani record or
document with the intent to imped obstruct or influenc a feder investig or
bankruptci proceed carri a maximum sentenc of 20 year imprison 18 usc
1519 secondli all audit account of secur issuer must maintain all audit or
review workpap for a period of 5 year where there is a know and will violat of
thi offens a sentenc of up to 10 year mai be impos 18 usc 1520 final the
act made codifi an addit secur fraud offenc that can carri a maximum sentenc
of 25 year imprison 18 usc 1348
in gener the coverag of 1107 is much broader than the civil liabil whistleblow
protect of 806 while the 806 protect appli onli to employe of publicli trade
compani 1107 crimin whistleblow protect cover all individu and
organ regardless of where thei work also 806 onli appli to violat of
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11511
secur law or sec rule and regul section 1107 on the other hand protect
individu who provid truth inform about the commiss or possibl commiss
of ani feder offens
violat of 1107 can be punish by fine of up to 250000 and up to 10 year in prison
for individu corpor that violat the act can be fine up to 500000
other crimin penalti
secur fraud
section 807 of the act make secur fraud a crime under 18 usc 1348 provid for
fine up to 250000 and up to 25 year in prison
secur fraud titl 18 us code 1348
whoever knowingli execut or attempt to execut a scheme or artific
1 to defraud ani person in connect with ani secur of an issuer with a class of
secur regist under section 12 of the secur exchang act of 1934 15 usc
78l or that is requir to file report under section 15d of the secur exchang act
of 1934 15 usc 78od or
2 to obtain by mean of fals or fraudul pretens representat ion or promis ani
monei or properti in connect with the purchas or sale of ani secur of an issuer with a
class of secur regist under section 12 of the secur exchang act of 1934 15
usc 78l or that is requir to file report under section 15d of the secur
exchang act of 1934 15 usc 78od
shall be fine under thi titl or imprison not more than 25 year or both
document destruct
section 802 of the act make destroi evid to obstruct an investig or ani other
matter within the jurisdict of ani us depart illeg and punish by a fine of up to
250000 and up to 20 year in prison
the final rule adopt by the sec under section 802 specif requir that account
who perform audit on publicli trade compani must maintain all audit or review work
paper for a period of seven year although the origin provis of section 802 onli
secur fraud financi transact
11512 2011 fraud examin manual
requir a retent period of five year the sec extend the requir to be consist
with the sevenyear retent period requir under the audit standard promulg by
the public compani account oversight board pcaob per section 103 of the act
violat of the final sec rule mai be punish by fine up to 250000 and up to 10
year in jail for individu or fine up to 500000 for corpor
section 1102 of the act amend 1512 of the us code to make it a crimin offens to
corruptli alter destroi mutil or conceal a record or document with the intent to impair
it integr or us in an offici proceed or to otherwis obstruct influenc or imped
ani offici proceed or attempt to do so violat of thi section ar punish by fine
up to 250000 and imprison for up to 20 year
freez of asset
dure an investig of possibl secur violat by a publicli trade compani or ani
of it offic director partner agent control person or employe the sec can
petit a feder court to issu a 45dai freez on extraordinari payment to ani of the
forego person if grant the payment will be place in an interestbear escrow
account while the investig commenc thi provis wa enact to prevent
corpor asset from be improperli distribut while an investig is underwai
bankruptci loophol
section 803 amend the bankruptci code so that judgment settlement damag fine
penalti restitut payment disgorg payment etc result from violat of
feder secur law ar nondischarg thi wa intend to prevent corpor
wrongdoer from shelter their asset under bankruptci protect
disgorg of bonus
on of the most uniqu aspect of the sarbanesoxlei act is 304 which state that if a
publicli trade compani is requir to prepar an account restat due to the
compani materi noncompli as a result of misconduct with ani financi report
requir under secur law then the ceo and cfo must reimburs the compani for
ani bonu or other incentivebas or equitybas compens receiv dure the
12 month after the initi file of the report that requir restat and
ani profit realiz from the sale of the compani secur dure the same 12
month period
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11513
while the act requir the ceo and cfo to disgorg their bonus if the compani
financi statement have to be restat becaus of misconduct it make no mention of
whose misconduct trigger thi provis there is certainli noth in the text of 304 that
limit the disgorg provis to instanc of misconduct by the ceo and cfo
presum then the ceo and cfo could be requir to disgorg their bonus and
profit from the sale of compani stock even if thei had no knowledg of and took no part in
the misconduct that made the restat necessari
selfregulatori organ
sec deleg signific regulatori author to selfregulatori organ sro
sro overse the market thei oper and polic the member firm particip in those
market sro creat and enforc rule deal with such area as secur list
exchang and settlement procedur and member qualif
the malonei act of 1938 amend the secur exchang act of 1934 to allow the
nation associ of secur dealer nasd to regul the busi of member
subject to secur and exchang commiss oversight
in 2007 the financi industri regulatori author finra wa creat through the
consolid of nasd and the member regul enforc and arbitr function
of the new york stock exchang finra is dedic to investor protect and market
integr through effect and effici regul and complementari complianc and
technologybas servic
finra touch virtual everi aspect of the secur businessfrom regist and
educ industri particip to examin secur firm write rule enforc those
rule and the feder secur law inform and educ the invest public provid
trade report and other industri util and administ the largest disput resolut
forum for investor and regist firm it also perform market regul under contract
for the nasdaq stock market the american stock exchang the intern secur
exchang and the chicago climat exchang all told finra overse more than 5000
brokerag firm about 172000 branch offic and more than 676000 regist secur
repres
secur fraud financi transact
11514 2011 fraud examin manual
secur brokerdeal must regist with the sec and in those state where thei plan to
do busi if thei plan to do busi with the public thei must also becom finra
member typic registr requir includ busi financi disciplinari
inform and disclosur of crimin convict
state regul
the first state secur law of ani substanc were enact in kansa around 1911 state
secur law ar often refer to as blue sky law the term blue sky came into us in
1917 after a judg issu an opinion describ the purpos of these law as prevent
specul scheme which have no more basi than so mani feet of blue sky
the initi step taken in kansa to regul the secur industri and protect consum
were quickli imit by other state in 1956 the nation confer of commission
on uniform state law and the american bar associ promulg the uniform
secur act more than 30 state have adop ted most or all of the uniform secur act
which wa revis in 1985 and amend in 1988
the revis uniform act ha four part
regul of brokerdeal most state requir brokerdeal to regist with the
state secur regul brokerdeal mean a person engag in the busi of
effect transact in secur for the account of other or for the person own
account and doe not includ an issuer sell hi own secur
registr of securitiesmost state requir that an issuer propos to offer secur
for sale file some type of registr applic
antifraud provis fraud is usual defin in languag similar to rule 10b of the
secur and exchang act of 1934 crimin civil and administr penalti ar
usual attach to violat of state antifraud provis
definit exempt administr provis the definit of secur is
basic the same as that under the secur act of 1933 provid power for state
regul to examin book and record and take disciplinari action
to simplifi to a gener rule of thumb unless certain exempt appli befor a secur is
sold or offer for sale
there must be a registr in place to cover the secur
the brokerdeal must be regist
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11515
there must be full and fair disclosur of all materi inform
as long as there is no conflict with feder law each state can supplement or duplic
feder requir howev in 1996 congress pass the nation secur market
improv act preempt state regul in sever signific area
nation secur market improv act of 1996
the most signific feder legisl develop in secur regul in recent year is
the nation secur market improv act of 1996 often refer to as nsmia
pronounc nismia it is an attempt to standard secur regul in the unit
state and us feder law to preempt some of the state requir essenti the
author of a state to requir registr of certain secur or control certain transact
ha been remov
three main chang that ar of particular import
so call cover secur ar no longer regul by the state a state cannot
requir registr of secur that ar deem cover essenti these ar secur
list on the major exchang mutual fund and certain privat placement
previous all individu and compani offer invest advic came under state
jurisdict now onli those with asset of less than 25 million fall under state
regul
although nsmia significantli reduc the enforc power of state in sever area
a state can still take action in case involv fraud
what constitut a secur
the definit of secur in both state and feder law includ instrument that can easili
be identifi as secur these more tradit secur ar usual easi to spot
tradit secur
type of invest most commonli recogn as secur includ
stock
a stock is an equiti that repres a right of ownership in a corpor there ar mani
differ class includ common prefer nonvot and restrict
secur fraud financi transact
11516 2011 fraud examin manual
bond
a bond is a debt instrument exampl includ treasuri bill corpor bond municip
bond and junk bond although the term junk bond ha a veri neg connot thei
ar simpli highrisk belowinvestmentgrad commerci bond
certif of deposit
a certif of deposit cd is acknowledg by a bank of the receipt of monei with a
promis to repai it with interest
less obviou but still clearli secur ar
futur
a futur is a contract agre to bui or sell a specifi quantiti of someth such as foreign
currenc or commod at some futur time at a price agre upon now in futur
contract the deliveri or sale of the product is assum and the investor ha an oblig
to fulfil the contract note that in realiti few futur contract actual result in deliveri
usual the investor will enter into offset futur contract prior to the deliveri date as
futur contract ar freeli transfer the two transact can offset each other
option
an investor can purchas an option to bui known as a call or sell known as a put an
asset such as stock bond commod or real estat on or befor a futur date at a price
agre upon now with an option the investor bui the right but not the oblig to
perform the contract the price paid for the option is known as the option premium the
price at which the option mai be exercis is known as the strike price of cours onc an
option ha expir it ceas to have ani valu whatsoev
futur and option ar essenti method of manag price risk often call hedg
thei can be us for exampl by farmer or intern manufactur compani as a
form of insur against advers price or currenc exchang rate chang thei ar
exampl of deriv mani esoter type of invest vehicl have been creat often
us complex mathemat model these deriv product allow trade to take place in
variou indic for exampl the dow jone industri index or the standard and poor 500
and also in secur known as strip collater mortgag oblig and leap
futur and option ar discuss in more detail below
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11517
invest contract
other transact ar less obvious secur but fall under the catchal categori of an
invest contract unfortun the term invest contract is not usual defin
by statut and it is therefor necessari to look to case law to determin whether a particular
transact mai constitut an invest contract mani fraudul scheme involv
exot invest can be argu to constitut the offer or sale of invest contract
the howei test
in the case sec v howei co 328 us 293 299 1946 a compani wa sell subdivid
section of a florida orang orchard that were to be manag by a subsidiari compani in it
opinion in the case the us suprem court outlin a fourel test to determin if an
invest contract wa present in essenc the suprem court state that there must be
an invest of monei or other asset
a common enterpris in veri gener term the common enterpris requir mean the
success of the investor is depend on the effort and success of those seek the
invest of third parti typic the promot the third parti who provid the
entrepreneuri skill share in the profit or loss with the investor usual the
common enterpris requir will be met where the fortun of the investor ar
interwoven with and depend upon the effort and success of those seek the
invest or a thirdparti see sec v glenn w turn er enterpris inc 474 f2nd 476
482 n7 9th circuit 1973
an expect of profit profit is gener defin to be either monei receiv for the us
of capit or capit appreci in unit hous foundat inc v forman 421 us 837
1975 stock sold to potenti apart renter which would be appli to their
secur deposit wa not held to be an invest contract becaus the individu were
attract sole by the prospect of somewher to live not financi return on their
monei
profit must be gener sole from the effort of other the essenti manageri effort which
affect the success or failur of the enterpris come from the third parti the promot
not the investor in howei the subsidiari compani wa to plant cultiv and harvest
the orang as a gener rule the more activ involv an investor is in the enterpris
the less like it is that an invest contract will be held to exist subsequ case law
ha dilut sole to primarili or substanti from the effort of other
nevertheless if the investor effort ar signific in the success of the enterpris an
invest contract will not be found to exist for exampl in the forman case
mention abov the court state an in vestment contract is the presenc of an
secur fraud financi transact
11518 2011 fraud examin manual
invest in a common ventur premis on a reason expect of profit to be
deriv from the entrepreneuri or manageri effort of other
risk capit test
as an altern to the howei test mani state and feder court ar us the socal
risk capit test thi test allow the invest or to plai a more activ role if the fund he
contribut ar part of the risk capit of the busi a person entrust monei or other
capit to anoth with the expect of deriv a profit the failur or success of the
ventur is depend upon the manageri effort of the other person sever state have
formal adopt thi test sometim known as the hawaii market test as an altern
definit of invest contract howev the suprem court ha expressli declin to
decid if thi test should be us
exampl of invest contract
follow ar type of invest that frequent qualifi as invest contract and ar
therefor consid secur sever type of relat fraud ar also list to demonstr
the broad and expans natur of invest contract scheme more inform about
these scheme can also be found in the consum fraud section
ponzi scheme
a ponzi scheme is name after charl ponzi who in the earli 1920 persuad ten of
thousand of bostonian to invest over 10 million he creat an entiti aptli name the
secur and exchang compani and issu investor a promissori note guarante a 50
percent return in 90 dai on everi 1000 invest
the scheme involv the alleg bui of intern postal repli coupon in europ
us foreign currenc which had depreci substanti against the dollar in the year
after world war i ponzi claim that these coupon bought at a discount could then be
redeem at full face valu yield a substanti profit
there were two main problem first although ponzi claim to be trade over 10 million
worth of postal repli coupon onli a few hundr thousand dollar worth actual exist
a more fatal flaw wa the fact that the scheme reli on new investor fund to pai return to
earlier investor in august 1920 after the inevit collaps of hi scheme ponzi wa
arrest for mail fraud and larceni ponzi serv jail time and wa later deport to hi
nativ itali
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11519
of cours the most infam and costli ponzi scheme wa that of bernard madoff in
2009 madoff plead guilti to eleven feloni includ on count of secur fraud on
count of wire fraud on count of mail fraud and three count of monei launder he wa
sentenc to 150 year in prison he ha also been order to forfeit 170 billion dollar the
amount prosecutor sai flow through hi busi
madoff told hi client that he gener such high return by emploi a splitstrik
convers invest strategi which is a fairli common approach that involv a
combin of stock and option under thi strategi an investor attempt to gener
predic return and reduc volatil by hold a portfolio of stock close correl to
an index while concurr sell option on a stock index and bui put option on the
same index
in realiti howev madoff did not invest ani of hi client monei accord to irv
picard the truste overse the liquid of madoff asset there wa no evid to
indic secur were purchas for custom account instead madoff simpli deposit
hi client monei into hi busi account which he then us to pai client who
request withdraw in other word madoff wa run a ponzi scheme
unfortun for madoff hi scheme began to unravel in decemb 2008 when the
financi crisi caus an increas demand of cash withdraw from hi client the
increas in redempt caus hi scheme to collaps when there were not enough fund
from new invest to pai them off and so like all ponzi scheme it collaps the
consum fraud chapter contain more detail about the madoff case
pyramid scheme
these typic involv a scheme wherebi fee or due paid by a member to join an
organ ar to be paid to anoth member and there is a provis for increas
membership through a chain process of new member bring in other new member the
member make monei not by commiss on the bona fide retail sale of a legitim
product but by sign up new peopl an organiz structur that like the ponzi
scheme reli on bring in new peopl must eventu collaps although all pyramid
scheme ar fraudul and in mani state specif deem illeg not all pyramid
scheme necessarili meet the howei test
secur fraud financi transact
11520 2011 fraud examin manual
worm rabbit and ostrich farm
although sometim amus when view object by the investig mani investor
have been defraud by be persuad to invest in exactli these type of opportun
fraud examin can practic appli the howei test to these type of case in an attempt
to determin whether an invest contract exist what if anyth doe the investor
need to do in order to get the promis return if for exampl the investor involv is
pure passiv then an invest contract will be held to exist howev where the
investor is involv in feed the ostrich and market the meat then the last element of
the howei test fail
prime bank fraud
these scheme involv the issuanc and purport trade of socal prime bank note
or other highyield invest opportun investor ar often told that thei can obtain
return exceed sever hundr percent per year when their fund ar place in an off
shore trade program excess complex and secreci gener character these
fraudul program investor ar usual told that thi opportun is onli avail to a
select few and the sign of nondisclosur agreement is mandatori typic the
explan of how the program actual work is full of obscur terminolog and make
refer to legitim bank or organ such as the intern monetari fund
imf to lend credibl often investor ar told that there is littl or no risk of lose their
princip despit warn publish by the state regul the sec the imf the
intern chamber of commerc and the world bank thi type of fraud continu to
fleec million of dollar from investor worldwid
preciou metal scheme
typic these involv the purchas of interest in gold or silver coin bullion diamond
and other preciou or semipreci stone
viatic
a viatic settlement involv the sale by a termin ill person at a discount of the right to
death benefit from the proce of their life insur polici in and of itself thi doe not
constitut the offer or sale of a secur howev an industri ha evolv to bui these
right and then sell fraction interest in them to investor frequent these polici right
ar pool and the investor ar sold an interest in the pool investor return increas
accord to how deepli the polici is discount and ar invers relat to how long the
beneficiari surviv whether such invest constitut secur is a matter of
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11521
consider debat in juli 1996 the circuit court of appeal for the district of columbia
held that viatic settlement sold by life pa rtner were not secur becaus the profit do
not predominantli deriv from the effort of a parti other than the investor see sec v life
partner inc 87 f 3d 536 dc cir 1996 the appel court rule in essenc that the
ministeri function perform by life partner did not have an impact on the profit of the
investor and therefor that the last part of the howei test wa not met
partnership
interest in limit partnership ar gener held to be secur becaus thi type of
structur conform close to howei gener partnership will not usual be held to be
secur thi is normal becaus in a true gener partnership the partner take an activ
role in the oper of the busi howev be warn that some promot will try to
disguis an invest contract as a gener partnership it is import to look beyond the
surfac wrap and determin if the partner realli take an activ role in oper the
entiti some invest opportun involv wireless cabl and pai telephon leas ar
good exampl of thi tactic
joint ventur
interest in a joint ventur will often be found to be secur the howei test should be
appli and as with partnership interest care attent should be paid to the extent to
which the investor activ particip in the manag or oper of the busi
oil ga and miner interest
usual the sale of fraction ownership of oil and ga well or miner right constitut the
sale of a secur the misrepresent and omiss found in oil and ga scam ar often
repeat in other miner mine scheme such as gold or coal investor have a right to be
advis of the risk inher in a secur invest and oilga opportun ar
tradition veri high risk if investor have been assur or guarante of success in
strike oil fraud examin should consid that a red flag natur as in all case of
secur fraud on should look for discrep in promot credenti busi
histori and commiss the follow type of misrepresent and omiss ar often
encount
drill and complet cost cost ar often huge inflat to bilk the investor
leas promot frequent do not have a valid miner right leas
secur fraud financi transact
11522 2011 fraud examin manual
discoveri and product potenti the investor mai be misl regard the
likelihood of strike oil and the amount produc thi inform is usual contain
in the geologist report
well the promot mai exagger the number and depth of well thu inflat the
oper cost paid by investor
selfdeal the promot mai declar a good well dry in order to reap the benefit of
a product well later when the investor have given up
dry hole often these ar complet by the promot sole to improv hi
complet record and collect complet fund from investor
royalti insid mai be assign the major of royalti while investor receiv onli
a small portion
number of partner promot ar like to oversel the well ie 9964th
occasion the invest mai be a complet fabric thi is even more like in
oversea miner invest geologist re port mai be falsifi or promot mai
reli on investor reluct to travel to remot spot in order to see their well or mine
for themselv
exampl
a good exampl of thi is the brex gold scandal that occur in the spring of 1997 the
canadian mine compani claim to have found the largest gold deposit discov in the
twentieth centuri in busang on the island of borneo share pric es of the befor unheard of
pennystock compani skyrocket as rumor of the tremend discoveri circul
optimist investor larg ignor the red flag that began to emerg the initi concern
that most had wa that the mine wa locat in indonesia creat potenti difficulti due
to poor us relat with that countri
not to be deter by proxim or diplomat difficulti investor continu to avidli
acquir stock in the former junior mine compani brex geolog report of as mani as
568 gram of gold per ton continu the trend then howev a multitud of problem
seem to aris
the accuraci of the sampl began to come into question instead of preserv part of the
core sampl for verif brex allow them to be crush and soon after a fire
destroi the geologist record further cast the verac of the discoveri into doubt
insid began surreptiti sell off larg amount of their share new that the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11523
indonesian govern had withheld kei permit wa conceal from investor after the
explor manag mysteri death he supposedli commit suicid by jump out of
a helicopt share price plung from approxim c100 to around c2 brex
market valu declin by 90 percent the ontario municip employe retir
system lost c45 million and canada caiss de dpt et placement du qubec record
a loss of c70 million the core sampl it wa later reveal had been salt
the most disturb aspect of thi case is the sever handicap investig face caus by
jurisdict question thi could be a monument scam that will be nearli imposs
to prosecut said a privat investig wo rking on the case he explain some of the
difficulti no on realli ha jurisdict the salt of the gold sampl took place in
indonesia but what law were realli broken in that countri the law against salt
there is none the law against deceiv sharehold that happen in canada and the
us most of the main suspect probabl disappear in the philippin but what law did
thei break in the philippin ar thei fugit no can a prosecutor in canada get a
warrant for those gui in the philippin for what thei did in indonesia veri tricki
in indonesia no extradit or lawenforc cooper agreement exist with canada
or the us which mean the crimin investig is be handl by the indonesian
themselv likewis though the us embassi in jakarta ha been ask by
washington to look into the busang fraud the us and indonesia have a poor track
record of cooper in crimin matter
investor in such ventur can easili find themselv with no legal recours if thing go
wrong obvious differ countri have vari law regard investor right natur
thi make investig a case such as thi quit difficult the princip of brex claim
not to have known about sampl salt thei portrai themselv as victim and blame
the geologist for the fraudul sampl the geologist howev were philippin nation
and retreat to their homeland further complic the investig the philippin
govern suspect foul plai in the death of the head geologist michael de guzman and is
more concern with the indonesian inquiri into the matter than with turn over their
countrymen for question
when examin the case from a follow the monei standpoint the trail seem to lead to
brex insid even as thei conceal new of permit be withheld by the indonesian
govern insid secretli sold off huge amount of stock at great profit accord to
secur fraud financi transact
11524 2011 fraud examin manual
the wall street journal brex chairman david walsh vice chairman and chief geologist
john felderhof and two other execut sold nearli c38 million of stock
hedg fund
although there is no statutori or regulatori definit of hedg fund the term typic
refer to privat pool invest vehicl manag by advis who gener have a veri
larg financi interest in the fund base on a manag fee that includ a percentag of
the fund perform hedg fund emploi variou specul and aggress strategi
that ar not commonli avail to mutual fund thei often combin tradit
invest with short sale leverag and arbitrag strategi to maxim return
in the past few year the us secur market ha seen a signific growth in the number
and size of hedg fund accord to the sec asset under manag by hedg fund
have grown dramat and ar now estim to exce 2 trillion thi is a massiv jump
from the 38 billion hedg fund industri in 1990 consequ hedg fund fraud ha grown
substanti enough for the sec to take extraordinari measur to regul it between 2000
and 2004 the sec brought 51 case against hedg fund advis for defraud hedg fund
investor or us the fund to defraud other in 2005 the sec brought 11 hedg fund
fraud case and had sever investig underwai in 2007 the sec creat a hedg fund
work group within the divis of enforc work with other feder law
enforc agenc and selfregulatori organ the group lead agenc effort to
combat hedg fund insid trade in the most signific insid trade case in 20 year
the sec file charg in 2007 against 14 defend in a scheme involv hedg fund that
net more than 15 million in illeg profit on thousand of trade us inform
stolen from ub secur llc and morgan stanlei
with the enorm growth in the hedg fund industri advis ar becom more
aggress and less meticul in their transact typic hedg fund fraud by investor
includ
theft of investor asset
late trade
insid trade
overvalu of portfolio
enter into inappropri time arrang
exploit of mutual fund investor for privat gain
enter into inappropri arrang with mutual fund advis in which the mutual
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11525
fund advis waiv restrict on market time in exchang for placement of other
asset by the hedg fund advis in fund manag by a mutual fund advis and
conspir with intermediari to identifi hedg fund from mutual fund personnel
promissori note
a note is defin as a secur but in practic the law is more complic than that under
certain circumst promissori note ar not held to be secur a note is presum to
be a secur unless it bear a strong resembl to a categori of instrument that ar not
secur gener longerterm commerci paper is similar in mani respect to a bond and
mai be held to be a secur unless it relat to such transact as consum financ or
residenti mortgag for exampl in the case of a residenti mortgag the note you sign is
simpli a promis to repai not a method to rais capit for some busi ventur
with note and other potenti secur it is often help to appli the famili resembl
test and look at three thing
motiv and expect
what is the issuer primari motiv if it is to rais monei for the gener us of a busi
enterpris then a secur mai be held to exist what is the buyer primari motiv is it
realli a loan or an investmenttyp transact what is a reason investor think what
ar hi expect
plan of distribut
is there some form of common trade if so a secur probabl exist
regul
is there some other regulatori system that significantli reduc the risk of the transact
therebi render the applic of the secur law unnecessari if the transact is
deem appropri regul in wai other than through the applic of the secur
law then it is less like that secur law will be brought to bear
commod futur exchangetrad option and otc option
there have been numer fraud involv commod futur exchangetrad option
and otc option in decemb 1994 orang counti california becam the largest
municip ever to file for bankruptci thi wa larg caus by riski invest
secur fraud financi transact
11526 2011 fraud examin manual
strategi util otc option that result in trade loss of about 10 billion in more
recent new the catastroph failur of enron wa partial caus by a fraudul hedg
transact util an otc option through a compani he control andrew s fastow
sold worthless option to enron make it appear that the valu of enron invest in
avici system inc wa hedg fastow pocket the premium for the bogu option while
enron appear to have establish a hedg posit protect the valu of their
invest other notabl failur relat to exchangetrad deriv includ bare
plc the 223yearold london merchant bank that help financ the louisiana purchas
and the canadian pacif railwai which collaps as a result of hidden deriv loss
deriv trade is riski busi but a lack of adequ intern control led to mani of
the loss mention abov intern control must be airtight in a firm that engag in
hedg or trade activ us exchangetrad or otc deriv insuffici market
and product knowledg wa also a major factor in these financi debacl
commod futur primer
as mention previous commod futur contract ar agreement between buyer and
seller to make or take deliveri of a commod at a futur date at an agre upon price
commod futur contract ar standard contract specif such as the contract
size deliveri month commod grade locat of deliveri and other detail for each
futur contract ar preset in the contract term price and quantiti ar the onli thing
negoti by the counterparti to a trade in the unit state agricultur industri and
financi futur ar trade on organ exchang known as contract market
the possibl of deliveri keep futur contract in line with their underli cash market
if a contract rise too high in price rel to the cash market trader might sell futur with
the intent of make deliveri thi forc the futur price down and is the reason futur
market reflect the price of their underli cash market some futur contract ar cash
settl the valu of these contract is deriv from an underli index valu when a
futur contract is cash settl trader will often us a calcul fair valu to determin if
the futur ar high or low compar to the underli index if fair valu indic that
futur ar too high a trader might sell futur expect the differ to narrow
futur contract do not have ani intrins valu in and of themselv their valu is deriv
from the underli commod index or secur becaus futur contract deriv their
price from their underli cash market thei ar call deriv there ar other
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11527
deriv market such as exchangetrad option on futur option on secur and
overthecount otc option which will be discuss later in thi section the contract
trade on these market also deriv their valu from an underli commod secur
or index
the principl of offset
on of the featur of commod futur market that make them so liquid and cost
effect is the principl of offset the oblig of the buyer to accept futur deliveri and
the oblig of the seller to make futur deliveri is not with each other but with the
central clear function of the exchang exchang mai have a separ clear
corpor or clear mai be a part of the exchang itself clear match futur
transact and becom counterparti to both side of the trade elimin counterparti
credit risk by guaranti both side of the transact as a result trader can liquid their
posit oblig by mere execut an equal and opposit offset transact
sell out a long posit or bui back a short clear also transfer fund between
firm when futur trade ar mark to market at the end of each dai
trade on margin
commod futur ar trade on margin onli a small percentag usual about 5 percent
of the contract notion valu is requir to establish a posit long or short in a futur
market notion valu is the contract size in unit multipli by the price per unit margin
ar set by the exchang for each commod and ar rais or lower from time to time to
reflect chang market volatil and notion contract valu brokerag firm mai requir
greater margin of their custom but mai not requir less than what the exchang ha set
each exchang will have a margin committe made up of exchang member and support
personnel that monitor and evalu the market and make margin chang
as appropri
there ar two type of margin initi margin the amount of monei per contract that must
be present in the account when the posit is initi and mainten variat margin
the minimum amount of monei per contract that must be maintain in the account while
the posit is open for exampl a decemb corn contract had a close price of 284
14 per bushel the notion valu of thi contract is 14212 5000 bushel x 284 14
the initi margin requir set by the chicago board of trade cbot is 810 per
contract which is 569 percent of the notion contract valu while mainten margin is
secur fraud financi transact
11528 2011 fraud examin manual
set at 625 per contract which is 439 percent of the notion contract valu posit can
be liquid without custom author in account that violat margin requir
trade basic
a trader who bui futur contract assum thi is not an offset transact is long
the market and will profit if price rise for exampl if you bought a decemb corn
contract at 270 per bushel and the price rose to 280 per bushel you would have an
unreal profit of 500 10 cent x 5000 bushel becaus open commod posit
transact that ar not offset ar mark to market at the end of the trade dai thi
500 profit will be credit to your trade a ccount and is avail as margin for addit
contract purchas thi transfer of fund occur through the clear corpor of
the exchang
the transact counterpart of the long buyer is the short seller us the abov exampl if
you sold a decemb corn contract at 270 per bushel and the price rose to 280 per
bushel you would have an unreal loss of 500 10 cent x 5000 bushel again open
commod posit ar mark to market at the end of the trade dai mean that thi
500 loss will be debit from your trade account
option primer
like commod futur contract option contract ar agreement between counterparti
the main differ between these market is that commod futur impos oblig on
both the buyer and the seller to either make or take physic deliveri of the commod or to
agre to cash settlement at contract expir option contract confer right not
oblig to the option buyer and impos oblig on the option seller importantli if
an option is not exercis it just expir over 90 percent of exchangetrad option expir
worthless in contrast if a commod contract is held to expir the long get deliveri
and the short must make deliveri option can be exchangetrad overthecount otc
between individu busi entiti or between individu person busi and
individu commonli us option in real estat person properti and interest rate
transact
standard exchangetrad option contract ar known as plain vanilla option that is
there ar no embed featur that would affect the basic option contract
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11529
offexchang or otc option often have embed featur that can make them complex
or exot standard equiti option ar trade at sever exchang in the unit state
the most success is the chicago board option exchang cboe
exchangetrad option
like commod futur exchangetrad option ar contract market with central
clear that elimin individu counterparti credit risk and allow offset transact
option contract ar standard expir at a futur date ar mark to market call for
physic deliveri and ar deriv thi is where the similar to commod futur
market end
the buyer of an option contract purchas the right not the oblig to bui or sell
someth at a specifi price exercis or strike price by the expir date of the option
contract the object of the option contract what the option is written on is call the
underli the valu of the underli is the main but not onli factor from which the
option contract deriv it valu
there ar two kind of option call and put a call option is the right but not the
oblig to purchas the underli secur at the strike exercis price by the option
expir date a put option is the right but not the oblig to sell the underli secur
at the strike exercis price by the option expir date in option transact the seller
of a call option is the call writer while the seller of put option is the put writer option
buyer pai a premium to option writer for the option thei bui option writer seller
collect thi premium for the option thei write and ar oblig to deliv the underli
secur if the option is exercis
exchangetrad equiti option ar standard plain vanilla american style option
american style option can be exercis at ani time by the buyer european style option
can onli be exercis on the expir dai for exampl ibm call option trade at the
cboe ar for 100 share of ibm common stock the option writer is oblig to deliv
100 share of ibm common stock at the strike price if the option buyer choos to exercis
the option
relationship of the underli secur to an option
the valu of option is primarili deriv from the valu of the underli secur for
exampl xyz common stock close todai at 8829 per share and the strike price of the
secur fraud financi transact
11530 2011 fraud examin manual
octob 2008 xyz call rang from 65 per share to 135 per share the more that the
share price of xyz is abov a particular strike price the greater the valu of that option the
stock price of 88 per share is about 23 over the strike price of the xyz 65 call the
current premium for xyz 65 call is 2290 per share a trader who had previous bought
thi call option could sell it back into the market for about 2290 2290 x 100 share or
could exercis the option and bui the stock at 65 with the market at 88
option can be in the monei out of the monei or at the monei a call option is in the
monei when the price of the underli secur exce it strike price likewis a put
option is in the monei when the price of the underli secur is less than it strike price
option ar at the monei when the price of the underli secur is about the same as the
strike price all other option ar out of the monei
option valu and premium
there ar two valu that make up option premium intrins valu and time valu
to have ani intrins valu an option must be in the monei out of the monei option have
onli time valu from the abov exampl the xyz 85 call close todai at a premium of
570 per share thi call option is 3 in the monei becaus the underli xyz stock
close abov the strike price at 88 per share the premium ha 3 intrins valu while the
remain 270 is time valu
while the concept of intrins valu is rather straightforward the concept of time valu is
complex and beyond the scope of thi write it is worth note howev that the
mathemat formula for price option time valu wa first introduc by fischer black
and myron s schole in 1973 the formula take six factor into account underli price
strike price time to expir volatil of the underli dividend and interest rate for
further inform on thi and other topic on option visit the learn center on the
cboe web page wwwcboecom
overthecount otc option
otc option ar agreement made between privat parti bank larg brokerag firm
insur compani and mani other busi ar activ in the otc option market
trillion of dollar in notion valu ar at stake in the otc market on a daili basi
otc option ar not central clear or standard these option ar usual custom
by the option writer to fit the need of the option buyer becaus otc option ar not
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11531
central clear counterparti credit risk can be a major concern and risk factor the option
is worthless if the option writer cannot perform
otc option can be plain vanilla complex or exot the complex and exot form can be
particularli problemat for market particip account and auditor and ar beyond
the scope of thi write
secur fraud scheme
secur fraud by regist person and entiti
frequent alleg of misconduct by regist individu or firm fall into on or more of
the follow area
churn
churn is the excess trade of a custom account for the purpos of gener
commiss for secur and option there is a commiss charg when the trade is
enter into and when the trade is liquid commod futur have a roundturn
commiss scheme mean that the commiss cover both the purchas and sale
commiss on commod futur ar not charg until the trade is close out
definit of excess trade activ
the commod futur trade commiss cftc state that to establish churn a
complain must prove that 1 the broker control the trade in an account 2 the
volum of trade wa excess in light of the complain trade object and 3 the
broker act with intent to defraud or with reckless disregard for the custom interest
hinch v commonwealth financi group inc 19961998 transfer binder comm fut l rep
27056 at 45020 cftc mai 13 1997 johnson v don charl compani 19901992
transfer binder comm fut l rep cch 24986 cftc jan 16 1991
two question aris in churn case who had trade author over the account and
when did the account activ and commiss becom excess if custom ar make
their own trade thei cannot possibl accus the broker of churn their account but
broker or some other peopl have trade author discret over the account and
particip in the commiss a conflict of interest exist and there mai be predic for a
charg of churn
secur fraud financi transact
11532 2011 fraud examin manual
mani of the regulatori definit of churn ar inher vagu and offer littl practic
guidanc custom trade object ar simpl make profit and avoid loss the best
test to detect churn is to calcul the amount of monthli gross commiss gener
from the account as a percentag of the averag account balanc for exampl an activ
trade account with an averag daili balanc of 10000 might reason gener on the
high side about 500 dollar 5 percent in gross commiss in an averag month gross
commiss would probabl increas in month when the market ar experienc
greater price volatil and trade ha been success the cfe should look for the
follow indic
did the broker have trade author discret over the account
have gross commiss increas dure period of decreas market volatil
ar the gross commiss for the month in question substanti higher than the
averag monthli gross commiss for thi account
ar gross commiss greater than 5 percent of the averag account balanc
did commiss consum realiz profit andor aggrav loss
were numer trade enter into and exit over short time period for small gain or
loss
wa the trade unit number of contract per trade too larg for thi account
overtrad
were the trade made for thi account recommend by the research depart of the
brokerag and dissemin to other custom
did unauthor trade take place
if the broker had discretionari author to trade the account and ani of the abov factor
ar true further investig for churn is warrant final brokerag supervisor ar
requir to perform due dilig to ensur that churn and other trade abus do
not occur
unsuit recommend
secur repres ar requir to know their custom thei must take into
account the financi profil and level of sophist of the individu investor place
client into unsuit secur for exampl recommend highrisk option to a senior
citizen with limit asset is prohibit
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11533
exampl
unit state secur and exchang commiss
litig releas no 20438 januari 24 2008
peopl of the state of california v daniel william heath deni timothi obrien john
william heath and larr jay schlarmann superior court of california counti
of riversid case no rif117775
the secur and exchang commiss announc that on januari 10 and 11 2008
a juri in riversid counti california convict three men on feloni charg involv a
fraudul scheme that wa the subject of a prior enforc action brought by the
commiss which rais more than 187 mill ion from over 1800 victim mostli senior
citizen and the elderli convict for their role in the scheme were daniel william heath
51 formerli of chino hill california deni timothi obrien 53 formerli of yorba
linda california and heath father john william heath 81 formerli of covina
california daniel heath wa found guilti on 400 feloni count obrien on 70 feloni
count and john heath on 52 feloni count in 2004 the riversid counti district
attornei offic arrest and charg them with commit secur fraud elder abus
grand theft monei launder tax fraud and conspiraci all under california law larr
jay schlarmann 52 formerli of carlsbad california wa also arrest plead guilti to
secur fraud elder abus monei launder and tax fraud and wa sentenc to serv
15 year in state prison daniel heath face a maximum of 117 year in state prison
obrien 37 year and john heath 28 year
in april 2004 the commiss file a compla int against daniel heath and hi entiti
and obrien alleg thei fraudul in duce elderli investor through free lunch
seminar to invest in secur note that paid a guarante return the court appoint
a perman receiv over the heath entiti final judgment of perman injunct and
other relief were enter against heath and obrien enjoin them from violat the antifraud
secur registr and brokerdeal registr provis of the feder
secur law for their role in the scheme the judgment order heath and obrien to
disgorg to the receiv their illgotten gain plu prejudg interest the commiss then
institut administr proceed against heath and obrien bar them from
associ with a broker or dealer heath and obrien consent to the entri of the final
judgment and administr order with out admit or deni the commiss
alleg and find in septemb 2007 the commiss institut administr
secur fraud financi transact
11534 2011 fraud examin manual
proceed against martin s duffield 52 of west covina california and raul a
jordan 52 of pasadena california for viol at the antifraud secur registr
and brokerdeal registr provis for their role in the scheme duffield wa bar
associ with ani broker or dealer and jordan wa bar from associ with ani
broker or dealer with the right to reappli for associ after five 5 year to the
appropri selfregulatori organ or if there is none to the commiss duffield
and jordan were order to disgorg illgotten gain to the receiv plu prejudg interest
duffield and jordan consent to the entri of the order with out admit or deni the
commiss find
administr of the courtord receivership over the heath entiti will continu
failur to supervis
brokerdeal firm ar respons for oversight of their repres to ensur adher
to rule of fair practic and state and feder law
failur to report client complaint
invest and advisori firm ar requir to report client complaint to the sec yet mai
neglect to do so fear an investig
park
park is the practic of sell a secur to on parti with the understand that the seller
will repurchas the secur later at an agreedupon price thi scheme allow circumvent
of ownership report requir and net capit rule
front run dual trade
front run an order is a type of insid trade although it usual will not caus a direct
loss to the custom it could and is a violat of exchang rule front run involv
the us for profit of the privileg knowledg of a custom order to bui or sell a larg
amount of a commod option or secur that becaus of it size is like to move the
market back offic personnel could have knowledg of such an order and bui or sell for
their own account ahead of the custom becaus order filler on the exchang floor ar
allow to trade for their own account and fill order for custom dual trade thei also
have an opportun
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11535
consid the follow scenario an order is receiv from a hedger to sell 500 decemb
cattl futur contract at the market if the order filler know that current market condit
ar such that thi order will move the market significantli lower it would be veri tempt
to sell a few contract for himself and profit from the market declin when he execut the
custom order order filler ar requir to op rate in the best interest of the custom and
work the order to get the best price howev er onc the trader ha establish hi short
posit it is realli in hi own interest to drive the market as far down as possibl when
execut the 500 contract sell order in thi situat the order filler mai not give hi best
effort and could hurt the custom
the vast major of exchang member would never put themselv ahead of a custom
but it ha happen in the past in todai market with sophist surveil exchang
investig personnel activ guard against thi type of activ the time stamp on the
custom order time and sale report from the exchang and the account activ of the
trader would have to be obtain and examin to substanti ani front run alleg
thi inform is easili obtain brokerag complianc personnel should easili detect
front run by back offic personnel by period check their account activ or not
allow them to open trade account at all
bucket shop
bucket shop ar fraudul enterpris that masquerad as licens brokerag oper a
true retail futur brokerag would be requir to be regist and meet certain financi
threshold salespeopl would be requir to pass the seri three nation commod
futur examin and all other personnel would need to be regist as associ
person there mai also be other registr or licens requir depend on the
type of busi that the brokerag engag in see
wwwnfafuturesorgregistrationwhohastor egisterasp bucket shop bypass all these
requir and oper like legitim busi
the solut to find whether or not an individu or firm is legitim is easi go to
wwwnfafuturesorgbasicnet for commod futur broker and firm
wwwfinraorginvestorstoolscalculatorsbrokercheckindexhtm for stock option and
futur broker and firm
wwwsecgovinvestorbrokershtm for secur broker and firm
secur fraud financi transact
11536 2011 fraud examin manual
you will be abl to search file for ani firm or individu author to do secur option
or futur busi their licens statu and ani complaint brought against them if a firm or
profession doe not appear on on of these page thei ar not legitim
excess markup
excess markup involv sell at a markedup price or bui at a markeddown price
not reason relat to the prevail market price
misus or misappropri of custom secur
thi scheme mai involv outright theft or us the secur in improp wai for
exampl as collater for loan or to conduct other secur transact eg margin
trade
unauthor trade
unless otherwis agre to in write onli the custom name on the trade account can
author trade ani loss accru to the custom account becaus of an unauthor
trade whether made by mistak or intention ar the respons of the brokerag firm
and must be reimburs to the custom gain from unauthor trade also belong to the
custom thi prevent broker from execut unauthor trade claim error and
take ani profit that mai occur the onli entri to the brokerag compani error account
should be loss profit in an error account should be investig custom must report
unauthor trade to the manag of the brokerag firm as soon as detect silenc
would impli ratif of the transact
systemat trade account against each other
systemat trade account against each other usual occur between invest pool
the scheme involv someon with trade author simultan establish opposit
market posit in two separ invest pool that he control a person who ha
trade author and other control over the pool mai receiv a monthli manag fee of
about 15 percent of the pool balanc a percentag of ani of the pool gain perhap 10
percent per quarter and a portion or all of the commiss on trade the conflict of
interest in such a busi arrang ar obviou it is in the interest of the pool oper
to maintain account balanc a high as possibl trade the account for commiss and to
have at least some profit
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11537
assum that a pool oper establish two limit partnership for trade commod
that he wa gener partner of both partnership and that he wa to be compens as
previous describ the gener partner who ha trade author then bui 100
contract of decemb corn for pool a establish a long market posit and at the
same time sell 100 contract of decemb corn for pool b establish a short market
posit if these transact occur in the same account thei would offset each other
over time on of the pool will suffer a loss while the other will enjoi a gain for the gener
partner thing havent chang much the amount of equiti in the two pool combin will
be about the same with the loss in on pool be offset by the gain in the other pool thi
preserv the basi for the gener partner manag fee while the profit pool will
ow him a percentag of the gain
in the long run on of the invest pool will dissolv becaus of trade loss while the
other will enjoi handsom profit thi then take on some of the characterist of a ponzi
scheme when the pool oper creat a new limit partnership advertis hi success
from the result of the profit pool and particip in the success pool tell their
friend the trick here is to ensur that particip in the origin two pool dont know
each other
supervisor and complianc manag of brokerag should be on the lookout for thi type
of activ thei can do littl howev if the gener partner maintain the trade account
at two separ brokerag the cfe will need to acquir the trade record of all pool run
by a pool oper in order to establish if such a trade scheme ha occur the
comparison of market posit over time is simpl and the inform is easili obtain
from the brokerag onc it is discov who thei ar
the gener partner would have commit a materi breach of contract in that he fail in
hi fiduciari duti to the limit partner there ar also numer violat of feder
regulatori and sro rule that prohibit thi type of trade scheme
block order scheme
when sever differ account ar combin on the same order it is call a block order
for exampl a broker mai wish to execut the same bui order for 10 of hi custom to
accomplish thi he mai write an order ticket such as for account 12345 and other bui
100 contract of decemb cattl at the market the justif for thi type of order is
secur fraud financi transact
11538 2011 fraud examin manual
that time is of the essenc if the market is volatil custom will need their order execut
as quickli as possibl write 10 separ order ticket for each account and call the
order to the trade floor separ would take too much time by combin all the order
on on ticket and provid on account number time is save and the other account
number and quantiti can be ad to the order ticket when the execut order fill is
report back to the broker
the potenti for abus is obviou price move rapidli in volatil market and the account
the order ha been execut for have not all been made known the time from when the
block order is place and when the fill is report back to the broker can take mani minut
on some busi dai it can take an hour or more dure thi time the market is move and
the execut order will either be in a loss or gain posit by the time it is report back
thi is where fraud can occur
for exampl assum that 100 contract of decemb cattl were bought at 8000 cent per
pound and that when the fill is report thirti minut later the market is at 8100 thi
favor chang in market price 100 point is equival to 400 profit per contract or
40000 profit for the entir order the broker then give out the other account number
to the floor clerk to complet the order with 55 contract go to a favor account and 5
contract go to the other nine account the broker then immedi sell 55 decemb
cattl contract for the favor account realiz a 22000 profit of cours if the market
had move lower by the time the fill wa report the favor account would not have been
ad to the order or the loss taken would have been minim
prove such a scheme is easi the cfe will need to obtain 1 the monthli brokerag recap
of the salesman 2 copi of all order ticket written by the salesman for the time period in
question brokerag must keep the hard copi for sever year 3 a copi of the telephon
audio record of the placement of the order and report fill from the trade floor all
call to the trade floor ar record and archiv and 4 copi of the daili equiti
statement provid to the salesman by the brokerag firm detail account number
account name open posit and the cash valu of all account repres by the
salesman a block order scheme will easili be detect by analyz thi inform
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11539
market manipul
market manipul consist of a seri of transact design to artifici rais or lower
price or to give the appear of trade activ for the purpos of induc other to bui
or sell thi is especi common with penni stock or microcap stock penni stock ar
lowpric usual less than 5 specul secur that ar regist but do not meet the
list requir of an exchang microcap just mean the stock of compani with veri
small market capit onc the price ha been artifici inflat the stock is sold to
unsuspect victim
insid trade
under the legal theori of misappropri the us of nonpubl inform to profit from
purchas or sale of secur mai violat the insid fiduciari duti to their compani or
sharehold although not all court accept thi argument crimin charg ar not unusu
in case of thi natur ivan boeski and michael milken indict for insid trade in the
late 1980 both serv time in prison
exampl
a california psychotherapist plead guilti to secur fraud after feder offici accus
him of make a nice profit after trade on some insid inform he learn dure a
counsel session with a client
accord to feder offici the psychotherapist bought common stock in lockhe corp
hour after hi client a compani execut undergo marriag counsel mention
the secret and ultim success merger talk between lockhe and martin marietta
corp
under a legal doctrin known as the misappropri theori he wa deem to have
violat secur law becaus he stole inform from a person who had assum hi
trust and discret and then us the in format to trade on the stock market
public disclosur requir
in 2000 the sec adopt rule concern public disclosur of inform regul fd
fair disclosur wa promulg to elimin select disclosur by compani to
certain group such as broker and analyst befor such inform wa made avail to
the public
secur fraud financi transact
11540 2011 fraud examin manual
the regul state that if a compani or someon on it behalf disclos materi non
public inform to a particular group primarili market secur profession it must
make a public disclosur of the inform the time of the disclosur depend on
whether the disclosur wa intent or inadvert if the disclosur wa intent then
compani must make the disclosur simultan if the disclosur wa inadvert then
the compani must make the disclosur promptli
the sec provid three option for proper dissemin
1 file the inform with the sec on a form 8k
2 dissemin the inform through a press releas
3 dissemin the inform through ani other method or combin of method that
ar reason design to provid broad public distribut of the inform such as
an announc at a press confer open to the public
regul fd onli appli to materi commun between compani execut or
author spokesperson to analyst institut investor and holder of the compani
stock regul fd also appli onli to senior execut and exclud commun
with the media with rate agenc and with custom conduct in the normal cours of
busi inform is consid materi if there is a substanti likelihood that a
reason sharehold would consid it import in make an invest decis or if
it would have significantli alter the total mix of inform avail
insid trade rule
rule 10b5 promulg under section 10b of the secur exchang act of 1934
prohibit ani fals statement or other fraudul activ in connect with the purchas or
sale of ani secur includ insid trade it provid the main basi for the sec to
investig possibl secur fraud claim rule 10b5 contain civil and administr
remedi such as the power to initi action to enjoin further violat enforc by the
sec as well as crimin sanction enforc by the depart of justic specif rule
10b5 make it unlaw for anybodi to directli or indirectli conduct oper of busi
that would deceiv anoth person concern transact involv secur although
the text of the secur exchang act doe not provid for a privat caus of action for
rule 10b5 violat the suprem court found an impli right which typic requir the
plaintiff to prove 1 a materi misstat or omiss 2 intent fraud or deceit by
the parti charg with the violat 3 relia nce on the misrepresent or omiss in the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11541
purchas or sale of a secur and 4 econom ic loss caus by the purchas or sale of
the secur
howev 10b5 claim do have certain limit for exampl there is no privat caus of
action against those who mere aid and abet the primari violat and in stoneridg
invest partner llc v scientificatlanta inc the court held that there is no privat caus
of action against third parti who neither make alleg misstat nor engag in
decept conduct on which investor reli
in stoneridg a group of investor in charter commun inc accus two charter
supplier of enter in a busi scheme with charter which allow charter to issu
fraudul financi statement in the alleg scheme charter gave it equip vendor
abovenorm payment for tv settop box and the supplier then gave back the extra
payment as advertis fee charter then fraudul account the return payment as
revenu the court rule that the rule 10b5 doe not extend to third parti aider or
abettor who do not make alleg misstat and do not engag in decept conduct
on which investor reli there wa no basi for find that the group of investor did not
reli on anyth the supplier said or did the investor could not have reli upon the
supplier decept act for two reason 1 charter supplier did not take part in
prepar or distribut the fraudul statement and 2 the supplier did not make ani
misstat reli upon by the public or violat ani duti to disclos as a result the court
held that the group of investor could not show relianc on ani of the supplier action
the interest thing about the stoneridg decis is that it cannot be broadli read to sai that
secondari actor lawyer account and banker ar free from liabil under rule 10b5
the court held that decept conduct can provid the basi for secur fraud liabil if
plaintiff can establish that thei reli on that conduct unlik the relationship between the
investor and supplier in stoneridg lawyer and account often serv as advis which
could be consid as take part in activ that investor could reli upon
the sec also recent issu rule 10b51 and rule 10b52 to supplement section 10b of
the secur exchang act of 1934 and rule 10b5 rule 10b51 and rule 10b52 deal with
unsettl issu that have arisen under rule 10b5
secur fraud financi transact
11542 2011 fraud examin manual
rule 10b51 address the issu of when insid trade liabil aris in connect with a
trader us or know possess of mater ial nonpubl inform specif rule
10b51 prohibit the purchas or sale of a secur on the basi of materi nonpubl
inform howev the rule also set forth an affirm defens for trader if thei can
show that such trade were made pursuant to a preexist written 10b51 trade plan
recent the sec indic that it intend to scrutin plan contempl by rule 10b51
more critic thi increas scrutini like result from the public of a 2006 studi by
alan jagol an assist professor at the stanford univers graduat school of
busi which suggest that on averag sale under rule 10b51 plan were gener
abnorm trade return and that such plan seem to outperform the market
rule 10b52 address the issu of when a breach of a famili or other nonbusi
relationship mai give rise to liabil under the misappropri theori of insid trade
under the misappropri theori as defin by the suprem court case in unit state v
ohagan 521 us 642 1997 a person is liabl for secur fraud if he
misappropri confidenti inform
for the purpos of secur trade
in breach of a duti ow to the sourc and
trade base on the misappropri inform
rule 10b52 seek to provid further guidanc regard what type of relationship creat a
duti not to us the inform receiv for exampl if a person agre to keep the
inform in confid a duti of trust or confid will exist similarli if two person
have a histori pattern or practic of share confid such that the recipi
reason should know that the other expect that the insid inform will remain
confidenti a duti of trust or confid will exist
subsect b3 also creat a presumpt that ani person who receiv insid inform
from hi spous parent child or sibl will ow that other person a duti of trust or
confid
disclosur misrepresent and omiss
secur law requir that the investor receiv full and fair disclosur of all materi
inform give the investor or prospect investor fals or mislead inform is
clearli a misrepresent an omiss occur when the issuer in connect with the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11543
offer or sale of secur omit a materi fact necessari in order to make the statement
made not mislead make misrepresent to the investor or fail to inform the
investor of certain fact omiss is a violat of both state and feder law onli if the
misrepresent or omiss is materi
it is import to show the materi of misrepresent or omiss even if
represent made for exampl in a prospectu ar clearli fals it is still necessari to
show materi in a 1988 decis the suprem court state that a fact is materi if it
disclosur would chang the total mix of fact avail and there is a substanti likelihood
that a reason sharehold would consid the fact import to her invest
decis see basic inc v levinson 485 us 224 1988
as a gener rule the examin or investig need to determin the answer to the
follow question would a reason investor wish to know thi inform in order to
make an inform decis if the answer is ye then thi inform or the lack thereof
ha a high likelihood of be deem materi if an actual investor act base on the
misrepresent that clearli strengthen the case but it is not essenti that the fals or
mislead statement influenc an investor mere that a reason investor could have
been so influenc
the issuer of a biotechnolog stock fals claim that the food and drug administr
ha approv their new cancer drug would be an exampl of a misrepresent that is
clearli materi to ani prospect investor similarli if the chairman of the compani had
recent been releas from prison after serv time for secur fraud thi fact should
featur promin in ani offer document failur to disclos thi fact would obvious
constitut the omiss of a materi fact
the sec ha adopt a socal safe harbor provis wherebi certain forwardlook
statement and project will not be held to be fraudul issuer will not be held liabl if
these type of statement were believ true at the time and were accompani by appropri
cautionari languag
note also that feder and state law usual prohibit the promot from state that the
offer ha govern approv of some kind for exampl even if the offer is
regist the promot cannot state that it is sec approv
secur fraud financi transact
11544 2011 fraud examin manual
secur fraud by unregist person
in conduct investig or examin relat to alleg violat of the secur
law the fraud examin should alwai begin by seek the answer to these crucial
question
is the secur regist if not doe it meet an exempt
is the person offer or sell the secur regist if not is the transact exempt
ar there indic of fraud present
exempt
exampl of exempt under the 1933 act includ secur issu by the us
govern and those issu by state or local govern registr is also not requir
for limit offer of secur issu pursuant to regul d of the act
issuanc of secur undertaken pursuant to rule 501 through 508 of reg d is fairli
complex but for these purpos the essenti element ar as follow
rule 501 defin accredit investor to includ bank insur compani certain
chariti and individu with a net worth exceed 1 million or annual incom of
more than 200000 300000 includ spous
rule 504 allow an issuer to sell up to 1 million in secur in a 12month period to
ani number of purchas rule 504 also allow gener solicit and advertis
rule 505 increas the limit to 5 million reduc the maximum number of non
accredit investor to 35 and doe not allow gener solicit or advertis
rule 506 allow the issuanc of ani amount of secur to ani number of accredit
and up to 35 nonaccredit but sophist investor again no gener solicit or
advertis is allow
the most reli upon exempt from registr where we ar like to see fraud is the socal
privat placement exempt in most state thi exempt is avail where the
secur is sold to a small number of peopl and there is no gener solicit in florida
for exampl there must be no more than 35 nonaccredit investor in a 12month period
thei must receiv full and fair disclosur of materi inform and there is a prohibit
on gener solicit or advertis it is common to find that on or more of the
condit necessari for the claim exempt ar not present andor that the offer
is fraudul
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11545
backdat stock option
as a supplement to salari compani frequent offer employe stock option which grant
the recipi the privileg to purchas a share of the compani stock at a futur date for a
specif price call the strike price a strike price is the valu of a share at a particular date
gener the strike price is set at the price of the underli stock on the dai the option is
grant therefor the option becom valuabl onli with futur increas in the stock price
in thi wai compani grant stock option as an incent for employe to boost compani
perform and thu rais the stock price howev the practic of backdat stock
option give the employe a chanc to profit by purchas stock at past low price
provid an immedi payoff backdat stock option occur when a compani alter the
date of the grant to a time when the stock wa trade at a lower price in the interest of
make the option instantli valuabl and further increas the employe gain if the stock
price continu to rise
for exampl on june 1 2008 compani xyz grant it ceo a stock option that provid
the execut the right to purchas 100 share of xyz stock on januari 1 2009 for the
strike price per it usual polici the strike price is set at the price of the compani stock on
the date of the option grant on june 1 2008 the grant date xyz stock wa trade at 40
per share therefor if the stock price increas to 45 per share by januari 1 2009 the
ceo could exercis the option and purchas the share for 40 per share then sell them
immedi on the market for 45 per share result in a gain of 5 per share howev
the compani ha recent experienc a dramat increas in it share price on mai 24
2008 the stock wa trade for 15 per share to provid the ceo with an opportun to
exploit the increas in share price even though it ha alreadi occur the compani choos
to backdat the stock option to make it appear as if thei were grant on mai 24 2008
becaus the strike price is set at the price of the stock on the option grant date the strike
price is effect chang to 15 per share as a result the ceo now ha the option to bui
100 share of xyz stock on januari 1 2009 for 15 per share thu the ceo ha
immedi gain 25 per share the differ between the stock price on the actual grant
date of june 1 and the state grant date of mai 24 base sole on the manipul of the
grant date us
backdat stock option came to the attent of the us secur and exchang
commiss sec when academ research reveal a pattern of stock price descend
just prior to mani report date of option grant then ascend immedi afterward
secur fraud financi transact
11546 2011 fraud examin manual
backdat is not necessarili illeg but can be if not handl appropri in order to be
legal the practic must be explicitli report to sharehold and the govern failur to
do so mai constitut secur fraud
in august of 2002 certain provis laid out under the sarbanesoxlei act took effect
requir compani to report stock option grant within two dai these rule greatli
reduc the time compani had to choos a favor grant date compani were
previous allow week or month befor thei were requir to report stock option
grant consequ the appar pattern of backdat nearli disappear around thi
time howev report of actual practic in stock option and the record data remain
inconsist in mani case becaus not all compani adher to sarbanesoxlei
addition the revel of the preval of backdat ha caus concern that
compani mai not have record and disclos the option grant on the financi
statement in an accur manner in respons to the issu the public compani account
oversight board pcaob issu a practic alert to prepar auditor for the possibl of
financi misstat due to backdat stock option to keep a tight rope on the
possibl of thi type of illeg activ auditor should assess the inform obtain
from the audit to determin the need for further procedur
investig tip
promot materi
usual but by no mean on everi occas the fraud examin will discov that variou
written inform ha been provid to investor and potenti investor thi disclosur is
often in the form of document entitl prospectu offer memorandum or privat
placement offer memorandum these document can sometim provid the smoke
gun and should therefor be examin in detail do not overlook the inform util
in variou advertis media to persuad the public to invest how did the investor hear of
thi opportun cold call direct mail newspap magazin televis or the internet
a properli prepar prospectu which usual indic that the issuer claim the secur is
regist or a privat placement memorandum the issuer claim the secur is exempt
would normal be expect to contain detail inform concern the issuer and the
secur be offer
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11547
such inform should describ the type of secur the initi price and the amount be
offer for sale the issu compani it busi product background and the
qualif of it offic and director should be describ ani legal problem involv
the compani or it offic should be disclos the financi condit of the issuer should
be discuss with audit financi statement where applic frequent there will be
project or forecast of expect futur growth and develop see safe harbor
provis discuss earlier usual there will be risk disclosur of variou kind in bold
font state that for exampl these secur es have not been regist or purchas of
these secur involv a high degre of risk
these document should be examin thoroughli for misrepresent omiss and
downright li look close at the background of princip if in doubt conduct a detail
background investig of the princip offic of the corpor look especi for ani
previou crimin or regulatori action relat to secur fraud or offens involv
dishonesti also check for lawsuit bankruptci or other civil or administr action
against the entiti or it princip whether allegedli resolv or not look not onli for the
disposit of the action but also for potenti evid gather dure the cours of the
suit for exampl deposit do not forget to verifi ani claim experi in the relev
industri or academ qualif close compar the inform if ani disclos in
advertis and the offer document with the result of the background investig
a few other pertin question ar
what promis ar made regard the viabil of the product or servic is a patent
claim doe it exist
is there a function busi you can check out or is it in the development stage
ascertain when and where the corpor wa legal incorpor or in the case of a
partnership where it wa legal file
ar investor promis guarante return
can financi statement concern asset liabil and incom be verifi
how will investor fund be us follow the monei trail were the proce invest as
repres or us for other purpos is the issu potenti oversubscrib
ar sale commiss paid to unregist person usual thi is illeg also check to
see if commiss paid ar unusu high or conceal from investor
ar the insid retain a major of the stock while the investor fund the compani
ar there ani other undisclos benefit to insid
is there adequ risk disclosur investor mai not have been made fulli awar of a
secur fraud financi transact
11548 2011 fraud examin manual
high percentag of failur the degre of competit or inexperi on the part of
the princip
is it a secur or an invest
some state includ an invest fraud provis in their secur law the advantag of
thi provis if avail is that usual invest is much more broadli defin than
secur for exampl in florida invest mean the commit of monei or
properti princip induc by a represent that an econom benefit mai be deriv in
mani case it is much easier to prove that there is an invest than to show there wa a
secur sold the violat of cours would be the fraud in relat to the sale of the
invest and would constitut a third degre feloni in the state of florida
investig resourc
central registr depositori crd run by finra is a nation databas of inform
on regist and some unregist individu and compani now avail via the
internet to author user it includ qualif employ and disciplinari
action in addit to basic biograph data
north american state secur administr associ nasaa the organ of state
secur regul wwwnasaaorg
feder trade commiss ha bulletin regard a number of invest and other
secur wwwftcgov
secur and exchang commiss the sec home page is an excel sourc of
inform and link in addit to gener inform and detail of enforc
action the public can also access the electron data gather analysi and retriev
system edgar edgar contain mani of the document that public compani ar
requir to file with the commiss includ the annual report known as a 10k
wwwsecgov
selfregulatori organ sro mention previous ar all a good sourc of inform
and a us resourc for the investig
financi industri regulatori author wwwfinraorg
commod futur trade commiss wwwcftcgov
nation futur associ wwwnfafuturesorg
new york stock exchang wwwnysecom
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11549
secur fraud and the internet
of cours the veri technolog that give us access to almost limitless inform also give
the crimin greater opportun to commit crime anoth factor that work in favor of the
onlin scam artist is that there ha tradition been a cultur of trust and benevol on
the internet
us the internet to promot fraudul invest scheme is rel easi and cheap
there is the potenti to reach hundr of thousand of peopl us equip and
softwar that ar veri inexpens there is enough competit between provid of
internet access that the cost of maintain a home page on the web is veri low
the internet is alreadi be us to solicit investor mani illeg pyramid scheme have
professionallook websit for exampl us of email and the internet also make it
easier for crook to conceal their ident and oper anonym from other countri
secur law ar base on geograph boundari on the internet there ar no boundari
with the prolifer of cyber cash and va riou wai of exchang payment for good
and servic over the internet the fraud examin can expect to see a huge rise in financi
fraud commit onlin particularli preval onlin ar the so call pumpanddump
scheme in which promot us internet newslett and bulletin board to hype stock thei
bought for littl or no monei so thei can sell on a rise market
same old fraud new medium
mani of the fraudul scheme prolifer in cyberspac ar not new rather thei ar
recycl and repackag to appeal to a new gener of gullibl consum
newslett
in thi context a newslett is not an independ object public discuss the
merit of a particular secur offer such object analysi doe exist but more often
than not the slick market document is a far cry from the independ analysi that it
purport to be in realiti the compani publish the newslett is often paid to hype a
particular stock by the promot consequ there is a seriou danger of
misrepresent to the investor usual the cozi relationship between the stock promot
and the newslett publish is not disclos to the prospect investor neither is the fact
that the promot pai to have hi offer receiv promin and flatter treatment
secur fraud financi transact
11550 2011 fraud examin manual
the newslett mai take the form of an actual document mail out to subscrib who mai
or mai not pai for the privileg often the inform is impart via a profession
websit design to motiv investor to act on the great opportun be offer
usual inform will be gather on those who subscrib to such public or view
the websit thi data is rich with free lead to secur repres or other who
promot the secur be hype in the newslett the ident of investor who have
shown some type of interest in a particular offer cover in the public is a valuabl
sourc of new busi
onlin trade
a recent legal opinion ha allow a bulletin board to be us to bui and sell secur
without registr thi bypass of feder registr requir mai make the
rais of ventur capit easier but it will reduc consum protect and potenti creat
a regulatori nightmar
greater util of the internet to promot both legitim and fraudul secur
offer will increasingli challeng the investig or examin the fraud examin will
continu to face jurisdict as well as technic issu as the internet becom the medium
of choic for the financi crimin
editor note the associ would like to thank chri hancock cfe for hi assist in prepar
thi chapter mr hancock is the investig manag for the state of florida depart of bank and
financ northwest florida region and special in the investig of financi crime with an emphasi
on secur fraud
we would also like to thank richard j bobel cfe mba cpa who author the materi on
commod option and deriv mr bobel is a former commod broker and collegeunivers faculti
member who special in derivati ve market and work for mani year as a research economist for the
chicago board of trade where he design commod futur and option contract richard wa a
contribut author to the cbot commod trade manual and the cbot specul
workbook he can contact at 8478287417 or at rjbrjbcpacom
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11601
monei launder
introduct
monei launder is the disguis of the exist natur sourc ownership locat and
disposit of properti deriv from crimin activ although it is not current possibl
to quantifi the total volum of monei launder global or in the us it is clearli an
enorm problem exist within everi financi system nevertheless the continu
demand to know how much monei is launder annual ha led mani organ to
calcul and offer their own estim for exampl the intern monetari fund
estim that monei launder caus a total monetari loss of 590 billion to 15 trillion
global in 1996 the unit nation estim a loss of 500 billion to 1 trillion global in
2005 and a 2007 kpmg survei found that moneylaund flow exce 1 trillion per
year
the wash of monei includ all form of illeg activ in most instanc the goal is
to conduct transact in cash currenc in such a wai as to conceal the true natur of
transact problem occur regard larg volum of cash transport it convert
small denomin bill to larger denomin bill and convert cash into asset that
can be invest or spent monei launder is gener accomplish in three stage 1
placement 2 layer and 3 integr
the monei launder process
placement
placement of fund into a financi institut is the initi step in the process it is at thi
step that legisl ha been develop to prevent launder from deposit or convert
larg amount of cash at financi institut or take cash out of the countri monei
launder scheme ar most often detect at thi stage
placement can take ani number of form if the monei launder ha a larg amount of
cash he can move the monei out of the countri in a suitcas and deposit it in an offshor
bank anoth choic is to break up the monei into smaller amount and deposit it into
bank account or purchas cashier check travel check or monei order the process
of break transact up into smaller amount to evad the report requir is
monei launder financi transact
11602 2011 fraud examin manual
known as smurf a sophist smurf oper might involv hundr of bank
account in dozen of citi
layer
if the placement of the initi fund goe undetect financi transact can be design
in complex pattern in order to prevent detect thi stage of the process is refer to as
layer and repres the most difficult area of detect onc the fund have been
deposit into a financi institut a launder can move the fund around by us layer
of financi transact design to confus the audit trail the monei can even be
transport out of the countri through wire transfer
integr
the final stage in the launder process is the integr of the monei back into the
economi in such a wai as to make it appear to be a legitim busi transact thi
stage of the process is also difficult to detect howev if the integr process creat a
paper trail such as deed for real estat invoic loan document currenc transact
report ctr or checksand if there is cooper from inform or foreign entiti
then the chanc of detect ar improv
a monei launder scheme cannot be success until the paper trail is elimin or made
so complex that the flow of illeg incom cannot be easili trace the number of step us
to launder fund depend on how much distanc the monei launder wish to put between
the illeg earn cash and the launder asset into which it is convert a greater number
of step increas the complex of trace the fund but it also increas the length of the
paper trail and the chanc that the transact will be report
the object of monei launder is not onli to disguis the sourc of illeg fund but also to
convert larg store of currenc into other asset in some case illeg fund ar spent on
person asset such as home car jewelri and furnitur but the typic monei launder
will not dispos of all hi illeg currenc in thi manner he will want to have a certain
amount of liquid reserv for spend keep larg bundl of cash is ineffici becaus
thei ar difficult to hide and transport therefor monei launder will often convert
substanti portion of their currenc into negoti instrument such as cashier check
and monei order which ar routin issu by financi institut crimin prefer these
negoti instrument for two reason first cashier check and monei order ar bearer
instrument and the holder can us them or deposit them without have to prove the
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11603
sourc of the fund second thei ar liquid asset becaus the holder can us
them immedi
the follow is an exampl of how a monei launder scheme oper
exampl
alberto barrera dub papa smurf by the feder agent investig him ran a rather
sophist smurf oper out of miami involv bank account in citi all over the
countri barrera and hi accomplic would fly to phoenix denver omaha portland and
other citi when thei arriv thei would immedi travel to variou bank the scheme
would begin with the purchas of cashier check and monei order in amount less than
10000 to avoid feder report ing requir thi would be repeat sever time at
differ bank the smurf would then travel to anoth citi where some of the
previous purchas check and monei order would be deposit in account control by
barrera then more purchas of cashier check and monei order would be made befor
the group travel on to the next citi onc the monei wa convert or deposit much of
it wa transfer to offshor bank
us a legitim busi to launder fund
on of the most comm on method of launder fund is to filter the monei through a
legitim busi otherwis known as a front busi a front busi can be a veri
effect wai to launder monei becaus it provid a safe place for organ and manag
crimin activ where the come and go of larg number of peopl will not arous
undu suspicion in addit a front that doe legitim busi provid cover for
deliveri and transport relat to illeg activ the expens from illeg activ can be
attribut to the legitim enterpris and illeg revenu can be easili place into the
enterpris
the three method most commonli us to hide asset or launder monei through a front
busi ar overstat of report revenu overstat of report expens and
balanc sheet launder
overstat of report revenu
overst revenu also known as incom statement launder occur when the monei
launder record more incom on the book of a busi than is actual gener by that
monei launder financi transact
11604 2011 fraud examin manual
busi the fictiti revenu account for the illeg fund that ar secretli insert into
the compani
exampl
abc us car encourag custom to pai with cash if the custom pai in cash
he receiv a discount that might be as high as 25 percent the invoic howev make
no mention of thi cash discount the compani report the full sale amount as incom
depend on the number of car sold the compani can launder thousand of dollar
in illeg incom
overstat of report expens
the disadvantag of overst revenu is that tax will be due on the report incom
therefor if a compani overst it revenu it will also want to overst it expens to
offset it tax liabil the fictiti expens also enabl the perpetr to siphon monei
out of the busi in order to make payoff bui illeg good or invest in other
crimin ventur
overst expens can be accomplish veri easili by report payment for suppli
never receiv profession servic never render or wage for fictiti employe
exampl
abc us car report wage for three mechan and an assist manag who do
not exist the compani also report payment of over 200000 a year to sever
lawyer account and other consult who do littl if ani actual work
incom statement launder which includ both overst revenu and expens can be
difficult to detect when artifici price inflat is appli in moder percentag to good
and servic whose market valu is difficult to establish eg artwork us car consult
fee advertis expens detect is exceedingli difficult without insid inform
complet fabric of transact on the other hand or creation of ghost employe is
somewhat easier to spot
deposit cash and write check in excess of report revenu and expens balanc sheet launder
rather than attempt to disguis monei as normal busi revenu excess fund can
simpli be deposit into the bank account of the busi thi techniqu is known as
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11605
balanc sheet launder becaus it is independ of the monei that flow in and out of
the busi
exampl
abc us car deposit an addit 30000 per month in it account although
there ar no record sale for thi amount at the end of the year the compani ha an
extra 360000 in cash in it account
thi type of scheme can be detect by examin the revenu record of the busi
everi legitim asset in a compani possess had to have come from somewher if not
from revenu then from a limit number of other credibl altern the basic
altern sourc ar loan sale of properti or equip and capit invest from
sharehold all of these transact requir signific documentari evid which the
examin should seek out to explain ani suspici infus of cash into a suspect busi
favorit busi for hide or launder monei
in gener term the busi chosen for monei launder possess on or more of the
follow characterist
revenu a revenu base that is difficult to measur becaus most revenu come from
cash transact with a highli variabl amount per custom thi allow extra monei
to be brought into the busi and disguis as revenu
expens expens that ar variabl and difficult to measur can enabl the launder
to extract monei from the front busi without give rise to undu suspicion
histori histor ti either with the ethnic base of a particular crimin group or with
industri that have tradition serv as a base for crimin activ
bar restaur and night club
busi that ar commonli us to front monei launder oper includ bar
restaur and nightclub these busi charg rel high price and custom
vari wide in their purchas sale ar gener in cash and it is notori difficult to
match the cost of provid food liquor and entertain with the revenu thei produc
fast food restaur ar also frequent us to front for monei launder oper
although thei tend to charg lower price than other type of restaur most of their sale
ar made in cash and expens can be easili inflat
monei launder financi transact
11606 2011 fraud examin manual
vend machin
vend machin oper also possess mani characterist favor to a monei
launder oper thei have a highli variabl and difficult to measur volum of cash
receipt and in larg oper there is a fair amount of flexibl with variou
transport instal and promot expens provid cover for the withdraw of
launder fund
wholesal distribut
wholesal distribut busi have histor been a promin part of monei
launder the revenu in a wholes busi ar not typic as flexibl as in food
servic and vend machin oper but with a divers product line and falsifi
invoic it is still possibl to inject a good deal of illeg cash into the busi more
importantli the industri is ideal for monei launder from the standpoint of expens the
activ requir to run thi kind of busi ar so divers and difficult to measur that
expens ar easi to inflat furthermor a wholesal businesss build warehous
transport fleet and it contact with retail establish ar all attract factor mani
of the classic crimin activ such as drug fenc and contraband ar themselv
noth more than distribut oper and can hide behind thi type of busi cover
the real estat industri
monei launder often us the real estat industri to launder illicitli obtain monei
gener the real estat industri is attract to monei launder for variou reason for
exampl the vast arrai of financi transact link to real estat provid monei
launder an except rang of option for abus these procedur to launder and us
illeg obtain fund in addit real estat transact often involv multipl parti
such as broker agent and apprais which can obscur the sourc of invest fund
and the ident of the true owner final monei launder mai earn addit profit
from introduc illicit fund into the real estat industri especi in vibrant real
estat market
although there is a vast number of method to launder monei in the real estat industri
there ar a few common scheme that warrant identif and discuss includ
loanback scheme
backtoback loan scheme
shell compani
apprais fraud
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11607
monetari instrument
mortgag scheme
indirect invest in the real estat industri
loanback scheme
monei launder often us loanback scheme to financ the purchas of properti directli
or indirectli through purchas share in properti invest fund in a typic loanback
scheme monei launder will deposit illicit fund in an oversea entiti that thei own and
then the entiti loan the fund back to the launder the purpos of the loan is to make
the monei sourc appear legitim and to conceal the parti ident or the natur of the
financi transact associ with the loan
backtoback loan scheme
as with loanback scheme monei launder often us backtoback loan scheme to
purchas properti in a backtoback loan scheme a monei launder obtain a loan by
present collater which origin from illicit fund to a financi institut like the
loanback scheme thi techniqu give the loan monei the appear of a genuin loan
shell compani
monei launder often us shell compani which ar discuss in more detail below to
purchas real estat gener defin shell compani ar busi entiti includ
limit liabil compani trust busi trust and corpor without activ busi
or signific asset becaus there is a lack of transpar in the format of shell
compani monei launder often us them to hide the ident of the true owner the
sourc of the monei or the destin of the monei
apprais fraud
apprais fraud is often associ with monei launder scheme monei launder mai
purchas properti to launder monei or mai us illicit fund to servic the interest on the
debt such scheme can conceal the true ident of the properti owner and the true origin
of the fund us in the transact
apprais fraud occur where apprais fail to accur evalu the properti or when the
apprais deliber becom parti to a scheme to defraud the lender the borrow or
both a common techniqu is the over or undervalu of properti which consist of
buyingsel properti at a price abovebelow it market valu in addit to manipul
monei launder financi transact
11608 2011 fraud examin manual
apprais monei launder also overvalu properti through a seri of subsequ sale
each time at a higher price which tend to conceal the true purpos of the transact
monetari instrument
in mani instanc monei launder purchas build or renov properti with cash wire
transfer or other payablethrough account thi allow the integr of larg sum of
illicit monei into legal financi system later if sold it is difficult to relat the transact
to ani crimin activ and therefor successfulli conceal the true origin of the illicit fund
and their ownership
mortgag scheme
often monei launder will us illicit fund to pai the interest or repai the princip on
mortgag loan and in so do the illicit incom is convert into seemingli legitim
profit when the properti is sold mortgag scheme also involv under and overvalu
of properti for exampl in a common undervalu scheme a monei launder will
undervalu the purchas price of properti obtain a mortgag loan for the undervalu
amount us the loan to pai for the undervalu price and pai the excess amount under the
tabl with illicit fund
indirect invest in the real estat industri
indirect invest which ar those in which the investor ha no direct control over the
asset or invest vehicl in the real estat industri offer opportun to conceal an
investor identif and monetari sourc primarili becaus multipl parti ar involv
with the process
atm
law enforc offici ar also report an increas us of automat teller machin
atm to launder monei atm can be purchas for as littl as 3000 monei launder
purchas the machin and place them either in establish thei control or in legitim
busi the machin work the same as ani other atm machin and all transact
ar legitim the monei launder simpli fill the machin with cash from illeg activ
the custom us the machin and never realiz the sourc of the cash
the atm bank system debit the cardhold account and credit the atm owner bank
account at the end of the month the launder receiv a bank statement show fund
be deposit from a legitim financi institut
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11609
thi option is attract for monei launder becaus there ar current no regul
govern the us and oper of privatelyown atm there is no requir to
check the background of purchas of the machin and there ar no mandatori report
procedur and no rule for maintain atm sale record
gift card
although gift card ar a conveni wai to show someon you care the eas with which
thei can be purchas and us make them attract for monei launder it is estim
that american consum purchas more than 100 billion each year in storedvalu card
closedsystem card ar those that can be us at onli on retail or group of retail
opensystem card such as those issu by visa mastercard and american express can
be us at ani merchant who accept those credit card
although closedcard can onli be us at certain locat there is no oversight as to their
purchas as long as the purchas doe not involv a cash transact greater than 10000
there is no oblig on the part of the retail to perform ani type of due dilig or even
obtain the ident of the purchas
even for opensystem card purchas at financi institut there is no requir that
purchas have an account at the bank or provid identif if the transact is under
10000 bank ar not requir to perform due dilig on individu purchas
monei launder can anonym purchas storedvalu card at a number of differ
locat and then easili transport them out of the countri a small box contain just 200
card could store almost 2000000 without the necess of currenc report
bank and other depositori financi institut
bank and other depositori institut ar suscept to individu attempt to launder
illicit fund becaus thei ar the primari gatewai to the us financi system onc place in
a depositori institut illeg proce can be transfer instantli by wire or disguis by
commingl with legitim fund a challeng current face by depositori institut
includ monei launder conceal their ident and sourc of incom to open
account and launder illeg proce addition the increas us of the internet to
open or access account make it difficult for depositori institut to verifi custom
identif
monei launder financi transact
11610 2011 fraud examin manual
monei servic busi
monei servic busi msb refer to nondepositori financi servic provid
oper in on or more of the follow capac
currenc exchang
check casher
issuer seller or redeem of travel check monei order or store valu
the unit state postal servic and
monei transmitt
msb offer an altern to depositori institut for both financi servic and monei
launder for thi reason an individu unabl to transfer illeg fund into the us
bank system mai turn to msb in a ddition most msb oper without feder
regulatori supervis
insur compani
due to the recent growth in the financi product offer by insur agent and broker
includ save product invest product and tax plan servic the insur
industri ha becom increasingli attract to monei launder accord to the 2007
nation monei launder strategi thi de velop is occur primarili becaus
insur agent and broker now offer a rang of invest servic featur financi
product that can be purchas and subsequ transfer redeem or sold creat
new opportun for monei launder gener the independ broker and agent
who often sell insur product do not work directli for the insur compani as a
result these intermediari mai lack the knowledg or incent to screen client or to
question payment method and it is thi factor that monei launder often exploit
casino
casino oper in a highvolum cashintens industri and provid a broad rang of
financi servic such as deposit and credit account fund transfer check cash and
currenc exchang servic outsid the tradit financi servic system as a result
casino ar suscept to monei launder
accord to the 2005 us monei launder threat assess crimin typic
launder monei through casino by exchang illicit cash for casino chip and then either
hold the chip for a period of time and later cash them in for a casino check or
have the casino wire the monei elsewher
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11611
us the chip as currenc to purchas narcot with the drug dealer later cash in
the chip or
us the chip to gambl in hope of gener certifi win
shell compani
shell compani refer to nonpublicli trade corpor limit liabil compani
llc and trust which gener do not have ani physic presenc other than a mail
address and gener littl to no independ econom valu in most situat individu
and busi form shell compani for legitim reason such as hold the stock or
intellectu properti right of anoth busi entiti facilit domest and crossbord
currenc and asset transfer or foster domest and crossbord currenc corpor
merger howev shell compani have becom common tool for monei launder
primarili becaus thei have the abil to hide ownership and mask financi detail and
becaus monei launder can creat them with minim public disclosur of person
inform regard control interest and ownership thi lack of transpar
prevent the discoveri of suspici transact and imped investig and
prosecut
other common method of monei launder
in the 2005 us monei launder threat assess the us govern identifi
other common method that crimin us to integr illicit monei into the financi system
1 onlin payment system 2 bulk cash smuggl and 3 tradebas monei launder
onlin payment system
in respons to market demand onlin payment servic which accept fund in a varieti of
wai to transfer payment either to an individu or a merchant ar emerg in addit the
increas demand for new payment method ha led a grow number of onlin market
to embrac onlin payment system which set their own clear and settlement term and
offer no consum protect or financi regul sinc most transact through these
servic provid ar consid final and provid no recours to individu who believ
thei have been defraud feder law enforc agenc suggest that thei have becom a
popular payment system for individu perpetr onlin fraud
onlin payment system ar often vulner to monei launder becaus mani of them
function as intern persontoperson payment system which cross jurisdict
boundari creat difficulti for author pursu enforc or legal action
monei launder financi transact
11612 2011 fraud examin manual
furthermor mani servic provid do not have effect custom identif or
recordkeep practic while other promot anonym payment
bulk cash smuggl
bulk cash smuggl which is the smuggl cash out of the us for deposit in foreign
jurisdict with lax financi institut or to fund crimin enterpris is also on the rise
the rise is bulk cash smuggl is due to the increasingli effect antimonei launder
polici and procedur at us financi institut in typic bulk cash smuggl
oper smuggler hide cash in vehicl luggag express packag commerci
shipment privat aircraft or privat boat
tradebas monei launder
tradebas monei launder is gener the most complex of the monei launder
method thi method encompass a varieti of scheme which util intern trade to
disguis the transfer of illicit fund the most common method of tradebas monei
launder is the black market peso exchang bmpe a scheme where broker purchas
narcot proce in the us from the cartel and exchang them for clean peso in
columbia other common tradebas monei launder method includ manipul
trade document to over and underpai for import and export and us crimin
proce to bui gem or preciou metal
call in a specialist
convert illgotten gain into cashier check or monei order is not particularli difficult
for even the most unsophist crimin howev becaus mani launder fear
detect thei turn to more sophist specialist courier arrang for the transport
of monei to a site where it is convert into anoth form of currenc for instanc drug
traffick will physic transport monei to a foreign jurisdict where it is deposit into
a bank account or convert directli to check or monei order sinc the courier ha no
appar connect with the true owner of the fund the monei launder retain
hi anonym
whitecollar profession such as attornei account and broker might also serv to
launder illeg fund through invest trust account fund transfer and tax avoid
scheme these profession can manipul the financi commerci and legal system to
conceal the origin and ownership of asset
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11613
hawala exchang
although the theoret work of hawala have been around for at least a centuri onli
recent ha the unit state publicli recogn it as a threat to homeland secur
hawala often refer to as hundi is an inform remitt system primarili exploit in
asia and the middl east becaus the system is unregul and leav virtual no paper
trail it is ripe for monei launder
how it work
hawala network oper with the nonphys transfer of monei typic on who want
to send monei abroad will call on a hawala dealer known as a hawaladar hawala
transact ar often disguis by legitim busi eg travel agenc cell phone
compani movi store conveni store and car wash the hawaladar will contact
anoth hawaladar in the countri where the monei is to be distribut and with whom he
ha a famili relat or is a trustworthi connect the hawaladar will discuss the
transact and arrang for deliveri of the monei to the recipi sometim the hawaladar
will give the giver a receipt but with veri littl inform inform typic contain
therein includ a code that the giver is to pass along to the recipi onc hawaladar have
exchang the basic inform of the transact the hawaladar for the recipi will
locat and deliv the monei to the recipi the recipi will then us the code to verifi
hi identif with the hawaladar who is distribut the monei the onli record kept of
the transact ar the amount ow on hawaladar to anoth becaus most hawala
transact ar disguis by legitim busi record of such transact ar gener
disguis as well
exampl
1 ana in new york contact and give 5000 in cash to hawaladar a in new
york to get 4800 to andi in dubai
2 hawaladar a contact hawaladar b in dubai and arrang the transfer a code is
exchang
3 hawaladar a give ana a code to be commun to andi
4 ana commun the code to andi
5 hawaladar b and andi make contact in dubai
6 andi relat code to hawaladar b and is then given the monei
7 hawaladar a ow hawaladar b 4800 worth of the big appl tshirt
hawaladar a send the merchandis from new york to hawaladar b in dubai
8 transact is complet
monei launder financi transact
11614 2011 fraud examin manual
often hawaladar ar busi partner who do legitim busi with each other on a
regular basi becaus it can be difficult to transfer larg amount of monei between
countri a debt might be paid with merchandis or a favor eg hawaladar b ow
hawaladar a monei from a past transact and in a new transact pai the recipi
therebi relinquish hi debt to hawaladar a from the former transact
the hawala exchang is a tempt opportun for mani becaus it
doesnt requir formal identif
take hour rather than dai to transfer the monei oversea
is cheaper than pai bank and ship fee becaus hawaladar gener take a veri
small commiss
no currenc convers is necessari and
lack a coher paper trail
the hawala exchang and monei launder
the veri essenc of hawala exchang bypass regul such that monei can be
transfer independ of govern and financi institut oversight while mani
hawala exchang ar remitt free of malint and therefor legitim in some
countri known as white hawala the system lend itself to abus the us of a hawala
exchang for illeg purpos such as monei launder drug traffick or terror is
refer to as a black hawala
monei launder specif is the disguis of the exist natur sourc ownership
locat and disposit of properti deriv from crimin activ for hawaladar who
oper storefront retail or servic busi in addit to their side hawala exchang
bank deposit will rare trigger investig by a financi institut unless deposit ar
exceedingli high for the particular busi as alwai such monei can go undetect by
us it toward person and busi expens it is import to note that in the us all
cash transact over 10000 must be report to the feder govern hawala monei
can easili be layer becaus paper trail ar meager at most furthermor becaus most
hawala exchang ar hidden behind busi veil monei receiv from such transact
can unnotic be recoup into busi account and thu integr into bank account
unfortun due to the hidden natur of the hawala busi much of thi monei is
us to fund danger activ such as the import of heroin and the purchas of
unauthor weapon
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11615
sign of a hawala exchang
red flag of monei launder could also indic a hawala exchang the follow
transact could indic monei launder via a hawala exchang the list should be us
to identifi those transact and custom which might requir further investig
us of cash as payment for a transact which is typic handl by check or other
form of payment
sever check deposit from variou ethnic commun
lump sum payment made by wire transfer or with foreign currenc
reluct to provid normal inform when set up a polici account or
provid minim inform
purchas of invest in amount consid beyond the custom appar mean
us of a letter of credit or other method of trade financ to move monei between
countri where such trade is inconsist with custom usual pattern
establish of a larg invest polici and within a short time period custom
request cancel of the polici and cash valu paid to thirdparti
us of wire transfer to move larg amount of monei to or from a financi haven
countri such as the cayman island colombia hong kong liechtenstein
luxembourg monaco panama or switzerland
servic provid internation but paid for local
feder and state law
patriot act of 2001
on octob 26 2001 pre sident georg w bush sign into law the unit and strengthen
america by provid appropri tool requir to intercept and obstruct terror act the
patriot act the patriot act wa a respons to the tragedi of septemb 11 2001
and reflect congression concern with the monei launder activ of the terrorist
who commit those attack
titl iii of the act is entitl the intern monei launder abat and anti
terrorist financ act of 2001 titl iii creat signific requir for financi
institut aim at curtail monei launder the most signific antimonei
launder provis of the law includ the follow
financi institut ar requir to establish antimonei launder program
financi institut ar requir to establish program for identifi custom
monei launder financi transact
11616 2011 fraud examin manual
us bank ar prohibit from maintain correspond account with foreign shell
bank
secur brokerdeal ar requir to file suspici activ report
financi institut ar requir to adopt special due dilig procedur for foreign
correspond account and privat bank account
nonfinanci busi ar requir to file currenc transact report
financi institut have increas author to share custom inform relat to
monei launder
the govern ha greater power to obtain inform from financi institut
antimonei launder program
section 352 of the patriot act requir all financi institut to establish antimonei
launder program which must includ at a minimum
the develop of intern polici procedur and control to prevent monei
launder
the design of a monei launder complianc offic
an ongo train program for awar of monei launder
an independ audit function to test the program
the act defin the term financi institut broadli to includ not onli insur and
commerci bank but also secur broker and dealer invest compani currenc
exchang issuer of cashier check and monei order credit card compani insur
compani travel agenc and a host of other busi the complet list can be found at
31 usc 312 a2
identif and verif of accounthold
section 326 of the act expand the bank secreci act discuss below by requir
financi institut to implement custom identif program cip these cip ar
to be incorpor into financi institut monei launder program and at a
minimum thei must includ reason procedur for
verifi the ident of ani person seek to open an account to the extent reason
and practic
maintain record of the inform us to verifi a person ident includ
name address and other identifi inform and
consult list of known or suspect terrorist or terrorist organ to determin
if the person seek to open the account appear on ani such list
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11617
prohibit against foreign shell bank account
pursuant to section 313 and 319 of the patriot act the treasuri depart issu a
farreach final regul that appli to over 9000 foreign financi institut that have
correspond account in the unit state the rule prohibit foreign shell bank those
without a physic presenc in ani countri from maintain correspond account at ani
us financi institut it also requir us financi intuit to maintain the name and
contact inform of the owner of the foreign bank for whom thei maintain
correspond account the rule strongli encourag us intuit to obtain
certif from their foreign bank custom s the certif can be us by the us
institut to help ensur that the custom is not a shell bank although not requir
obtain the certif and verifi the inform can creat a safe harbor from civil
liabil
us institut ar also requir to take reason step to ensur that correspond
account provid to foreign bank ar not us to provid servic indirectli to foreign
shell bank foreign bank that have account in the us ar requir to appoint someon in
the us to accept servic of legal process the rule also give the secretari of the treasuri
and the attornei gener the author to issu a summon or subpoena to ani foreign bank
that maintain a correspond account here and to request record relat to that account
suspici activ report by brokerdeal
pursuant to section 356 of the act the financi crime enforc network fincen
adopt rule requir broker and dealer in secur to report suspici activ 31
cfr 10319a2 thi report requir will be discuss in more detail later in thi
section see secur brokerdeal un der suspici activ report below
special due dilig for foreign account
section 312 of the patriot act requir financ ial institut to establish due dilig
polici procedur and control that ar reason design to detect and report instanc
of monei launder through certain account held by nonu citizen or their
repres thi provis appli to two type of foreign account
privat bank account
correspond account
a privat bank account is defin by the act as an account or combin of account that
1 requir a minimum aggreg deposit of fund or other asset of at least 1 million 2 is
monei launder financi transact
11618 2011 fraud examin manual
establish on behalf of on or more individu who have a direct or benefici ownership
in the account and 3 is assign to or admini stere by an offic employe or agent of the
financi institut act as a liaison between the financi institut and the owner of the
account
for privat bank account held by nonu person the act requir at a minimum that
financi institut take reason step to
ascertain the ident of the nomin and benefici owner of the account and the
sourc of fund deposit into the account as need to guard against monei launder
and report ani suspici transact and
conduct enhanc scrutini of ani such account that is request or maintain by or
on behalf of a senior foreign polit figur or an immedi famili member or close
associ of such that is reason design to detect and report transact that mai
involv the proce of foreign corrupt
a correspond account is defin as an account establish to receiv deposit from or make
payment on behalf of a foreign financi institut or handl other financi transact
relat to such an institut enhanc due dilig is requir for correspond account
maintain by or on behalf of foreign bank that oper under offshor bank licens or
for bank that ar licens by foreign countri that have either been design as
noncoop with intern antimonei launder principl or that have been
design by the secretari of the treasuri as warrant special measur due to monei
launder concern enhanc due dilig for these correspond account consist of
at a minimum
ascertain the ident of the owner of ani foreign bank whose share ar not
publicli trade
determin the natur and extent of each owner interest
conduct enhanc scrutini of the account to guard against monei launder and
report suspici transact and
ascertain whether the foreign bank provid correspond account to other
foreign bank and if so the ident of those foreign bank and relat due
dilig inform
currenc report by nonfinanci busi
section 365 of the patriot act requir person engag in ani trade or busi to file a
report with fincen when in the cours of their busi thei receiv more than 10000 in
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11619
coin or currenc thi report requir is discuss in more detail later in thi section
under the report and recordkeep provis of the bank secreci act
share inform between financi institut
pursuant to section 314b of the patriot act the treasuri depart issu a rule
allow financi institut to share custom inform with on anoth the term
financi institut includ ani entiti that is requir to have an antimonei launder
program under the bank secreci act see abov in order to share inform with anoth
financi institut the share institut must follow these step
file a prescrib notic form with fincen state that it intend to share custom
inform with other financi institut the notic remain effect for on year
the institut mai then share the inform with anoth institut provid that it
ha verifi that the other institut ha also file a notic with fincen fincen will
period releas a list of institut who have submit notic if an institut is
on the list then the share institut will be consid to have fulfil it
verif duti
the institut must ensur that the share inform is secur and not us for ani
purpos other than to identifi and where appropri report on monei launder or
terrorist activ determin whether to establish or maintain an account or conduct a
transact or assist the other share institut with it complianc of bsa regul
the institut must also file a suspici activ report if base on the share
inform the institut suspect that the individu or entiti mai be involv in
monei launder or terrorist activ
section 355 of the act also permit insur depositori institut to share inform in
written employ refer about known or suspect unlaw activ of their current or
former director offic employe agent or other person affili with the institut
thi provis which is codifi at 12 usc 1828w doe not make it mandatori for
bank to disclos thi inform but it doe protect them from liabil if thei voluntarili
make such disclosur as long as the disclosur ar not made with malici intent
govern access to financi inform
on septemb 18 2002 the treasuri depart issu regul that provid feder law
enforc agenc with greater power to obtain financi inform the twopart
regul is an amend to the bank secreci act regul and wa mandat by
section 314 of the patriot act
monei launder financi transact
11620 2011 fraud examin manual
if a feder agenc provid fincen with a written certif that a person entiti or
organ about whom inform is sought is reason suspect base on credibl
inform to be engag in terrorist acti viti or monei launder fincen mai then
requir ani financi institut to search it record to determin if it maintain or ha
maintain account for or ha engag in transact with the subject
the inform report is limit to the name or account number of each cite person
entiti or organ the number of the match account or transact and the social
secur number taxpay id passport number date of birth or other identifi
inform the subject gave when open the account or conduct the transact
the institut mai not disclos the inform to anyon other than fincen or the
request agenc the institut also cannot disclos that the inform ha been
request or provid it mai howev us the inform in the request to determin
whether an account will be open or a transact conduct and to compli with
bsa regul
the term financi institut is defin as it is under the bsa and includ bank brokerdeal
insur compani monei servic busi as well as car and airplan dealer
travel agent and pawnbrok
offic of foreign asset control ofac
the offic of foreign asset control ofac is an offic within the depar tment of the
treasuri charg with administ and enforc us sanction polici against target
foreign organ and individu that sponsor terror and intern narcot
traffick ofac maintain a list of individu al government entiti compani and
merchant vessel around the world that ar known or suspect to engag in illeg activ
person or entiti on the list known as special design nation and block person
sdn includ foreign agent front organ terrorist and terrorist organ
and drug traffick the list contain over 5000 variat on name of individu
government entiti compani and merchant vessel and is updat on a regular basi
on septemb 24 2001 presid georg w bush issu an execut order impos
enhanc trade sanction on 27 individu and entiti includ osama bin laden and al
qaeda the immedi effect of the order is to block all asset of these individu and
entiti under us control and ban all deal with the list parti
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11621
on juli 26 2001 ofac issu a bulletin specif to the insur industri includ
underwrit broker agent primari insur and reinsur the bulletin affirm that us
insur mai not insur sdn or individu or entiti locat in certain prohibit
countri or make payment to beneficiari who ar design as prohibit person or
entiti exampl of prohibit transact includ 1 issu an insur polici or
annuiti contract to an sdn 2 issu a life insur polici name an sdn as a
beneficiari and 3 receiv premium payment for ani such transact
the bank secreci act
the bank secreci act bsa which went into effect in 1970 wa the first major piec of
legisl aim at detect and prevent monei launder the purpos of the law as
state in section 5311 is to requir certain re port or record where thei have a high degre
of us in crimin tax or regulatori investig or proceed the bsa set
forth a system of report and recordkeep requir design to help track larg or
unusu financi transact
the bsa consist of two titl titl i contain provis requir that financi institut
and secur broker and dealer keep extens record of the transact and account of
their custom it is codifi in titl 12 of the unit state code usc section 1829b
and 19511959 titl ii of the bsa origin entitl currenc and foreign transact
report act requir bank financi institut which includ casino secur
broker and dealer currenc exchang and other and in some case individu to
report to the govern certain transact titl ii is codifi at 31 usc 5311
5330
for more inform on the examin process and the complianc procedur financi
institut ar requir to follow pleas review the bank secreci actantimonei
launder examin manual publish by the feder financi institut
examin council it is avail for view on their websit wwwffiecgov
titl i recordkeep
the regul govern recordkeep ar set forth in chapter 31 of the code of feder
regul at part 103 subpart c recordkeep requir ar set forth for bank
nonbank financi institut secur broker casino and currenc dealer and
exchang all institut ar requir to keep a record of ani financi transact of more
than 10000
monei launder financi transact
11622 2011 fraud examin manual
these regul provid in part that bank must keep for five year an origin microfilm
or other copi of certain document relat to demand deposit and check and save
account the record that must be retain includ
signatur card
statement ledger card or other record disclos all transact that is deposit and
withdraw
copi of both side of custom check bank draft monei order and cashier
check of more than 100 drawn on the bank or issu and payabl by it
ident of each purchas of a certif of deposit
each deposit slip or credit ticket reflect a transact in excess of 100
in addit to these requir financi institut ar requir to captur verifi and
retain inform on the ident of purchas of monetari instrument such as cashier
check in amount of 3000 or more or ani transmitt or transfer of fund involv
3000 or more these record ar also requir to be kept for five year
bank also must retain for two year all record necessari to reconstruct a custom
check account these record must includ copi of custom deposit ticket thei
must also retain record necessari to trace and suppli a descript of a check deposit to a
custom check account
although some of these requir appli onli to check written or deposit made in
excess of 100 most bank find it cheaper to microfilm all such item rather than sort out
those less than 100 the bank secreci act also requir financi institut to retain a
record of ani extens of credit more than 1 0000 as well as each transfer of 10000 or
more outsid the unit state
the penalti for failur to compli with these recordkeep requir ar sever ani
insur depositori institut and ani director offic or employe who willfulli or through
gross neglig violat ani regul can be subject to a 10000 civil penalti the statut
further provid that a separ violat occur for each dai the violat continu and at
each offic branch or place of busi at which the violat occur if a violat is
commit in further of a feloni crime crimin penalti can be impos of up to five
year in prison andor a fine of not more than 10000
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11623
titl ii report and recordkeep
titl ii of the bank secreci act is codifi as 31 usc 53115330 the purpos of
these section is to requir certain report or record to be file or kept by financi
institut section 5312a2 defin financi institut veri broadli to includ not
onli bank but also secur broker currenc exchang hous insur compani loan
compani travel agenc telegraph compani issuer or cashier of check or monei
order auto boat and airplan dealer casino and person involv in real estat close
and settlement onli recent ha the treasuri depart begun to reign in much of the
nonfinanci institut transact busi in the us by requir registr of these
divers enterpris see the monei servic busi excerpt below
the regul promulg by the us treasuri depart ar contain primarili in
chapter 31 of the code of feder regul at part 103 subpart b and requir the
follow report
currenc transact report ctr fincen form 104
all bank and certain other financi institut ar requir to fill out currenc transact
report ctr whenev there is a currenc transact deposit withdraw exchang or
cash of check of 10000 or more the easiest wai to summar the file requir is
to rememb if currenc in excess of 10000 is brought into a financi institut to conduct
a transact or if as the result of a transact 10000 in currenc leav the financi
institut a ctr must be file
fincen form 104 formerli name ir form 4789 is prepar by the financi institut
and contain the name of the individu conduct the transact or the name of
the person or organ on whose behalf the transact is be conduct as well as
all identifi data of these individu or entiti it also requir the detail of the transact
and identifi data of the financi institut prepar the form for purpos of report
multipl transact must be treat as a singl transact if the financi institut ha
knowledg that the transact ar by or on behalf of the same person and the amount total
more than 10000 dure ani on busi dai
under titl 31 usc section 5313 the treasuri depart publish a mandatori
exempt list that specif identifi entiti whose transact with a financi
institut ar exempt from these report requir the exempt entiti includ
bank depart or agenc of state or feder govern and other busi whose
monei launder financi transact
11624 2011 fraud examin manual
report have littl or no valu for law enforc purpos the exempt list must be
publish period in the feder regist
the treasuri depart can also provid discretionari exempt for qualifi busi
custom which ar defin as busi that 1 maintain transact account as defin
by the feder reserv act at the particular institut 2 frequent engag in transact
with the institut that ar subject to the report requir and 3 meet the guidelin
and criteria establish by the treasuri depart to ensur that the failur to file report on
these entiti will not interfer with the purpos of the act
a copi of form 104 is includ at the end of thi chapter
currenc report by casino fincen form 102
form 102 formerli name ir form 8362 is requir to be file by casino licens by
state or local govern and have an annual gross revenu in excess of 1000000
nevada casino ar exempt from file these form becaus of a strict state law that requir
report for currenc transact the file requir and transact detail for thi
form ar almost ident to form 104
currenc report by nonfinanci busi ir form 8300
the patriot act creat titl 31 section 5331 of the us code which requir person
engag in ani trade or busi to file a report with fincen when in the cours of their
busi thei receiv more than 10000 in coin or currenc either in on transact or in
two or more relat transact for purpos of comput the amount of multipl relat
transact the recipi must aggreg all payment made within on year of the first
payment transact cover by thi section must be report within 15 dai of receipt of
payment in excess of 10000 the rule govern ing these report ar codifi at 31 cfr
10330
thi section doe not appli to financi institut which ar alreadi cover by 31 usc
5313 as describ abov it also doe not appli to transact occur entir outsid
the unit state in addit the rule exempt certain loan instal sale and down
payment plan
the inform requir to be report under section 5331 is veri similar to the
inform that wa alreadi requir by the ir under section 6050i of the intern
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11625
revenu code becaus of the similar between the two statut the report ar to be
made on the same form 8300 which is file jointli with fincen and the ir essenti
the rule impos no new recordkeep burden sinc form 8300 alreadi had to be file
with the ir
under the intern revenu code there ar both civil and crimin penalti for failur to
file form 8300 or file a fals form crimin sanction includ imprison of up to five
year for a will failur to file and fine of up to 500000 for organ knowingli
file a fals return
report of intern transport of currenc or monetari instrument custom cmir fincen form 105
pursuant to titl 31 usc 5316 a person shall file a report if he transport or is about to
transport monetari instrument of more than 10000 into or out of the unit state at on
time or if he receiv by transport mail or shipment monetari instrument in excess of
10000 at on time transport into the unit sate from a place outsid the unit state
fincen form 105 formerli name custom form 4790 is to be file at the time of
transport or within 15 dai of receipt
for the purpos of thi statut the term monetari instrument mean unit state and
foreign coin and currenc bearer instrument such as busi bank or person check
monei order promissori note bearer stock and bond
there ar exempt from the cmir filin g requir that extend to bank for
transfer of fund through normal bank procedur the feder reserv and certain
common carrier
a copi of thi form is includ at the end of thi chapter
report of foreign bank and financi account fbartreasuri form 90221
treasuri depart regul requir citizen of the unit state and resid alien to
file a report when thei maintain a financi interest or signatur author over a foreign bank
account with a balanc of more than 10000 dure the calendar year account in differ
foreign countri have to be aggreg
monei launder financi transact
11626 2011 fraud examin manual
penalti
section 5321 of the bsa set forth the civil penalti for noncompli with the act a
cover entiti includ it partner director offic or employe that willfulli violat
the report requir can be hit with a penalti of up to the amount of the transact
not to exce 100000 or 25000 whichev is greater a separ penalti can be impos
for each dai the violat continu and at each branch or offic civil penalti of up to
500 ar also author for a neglig violati on if there is a pattern of neglig activ
the penalti limit increas to 50000 thi section also set forth other penalti applic
to structur transact and foreign financi agenc transact
crimin penalti ar set forth in section 5322 which provid that a person willfulli
violat the statut or regul can be fine up to 250000 andor imprison for up to
five year if the violat occur while violat anoth feder law or as a pattern of illeg
activ involv more than 100000 the maximum fine increas to 500000 and the
maximum prison time increas to 10 year as with the civil penalti a separ violat
occur each dai the conduct continu and at each locat
forfeitur
section 5317c provid crimin and civil forfeitur penalti for violat of the currenc
report requir in 5313 report on domest transact 5316 report on
export and import monetari instrument and 5324 structur transact to
evad report requir a person convict of an offens under ani of these statut
or of a conspiraci to violat ani of these statut can be order to forfeit all properti that
wa involv in the offens and ani properti traceabl thereto
suspici activ report sar
financi institut
the bsa also requir financi institut to monitor suspici activ and file suspici
activ report sar to disclos known or suspect crimin offens or transact that
involv monei launder or violat the act for year suspici transact were
report on the currenc transact report ctr howev such activ is now report
us the suspici activ report sar
the offic of the comptrol of the currenc occ which charter regul and
supervis more than 2500 nation bank adopt a requir mandat that nation
bank file sar with the appropri feder law enforc agenc and the treasuri
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11627
depart in accord with the form instruct by send the report to the
financi crime enforc network fincen these report requir ar found
in titl 12 part 353 of the code of feder regul thi is an enorm improv
on the old report system becaus it establish a central report system that is
share throughout govern agenc simultan the dea for instanc can now
access the same inform as the ir when work on a suspici report the report
procedur ha also been simplifi for bank make the inform much easier for the
depart of the treasuri to obtain
financi institut ar also requir to us sar form to report incid of comput
intrus the term comput intrus is defin as gain access to the comput
system to remov steal or procur custom fund or other account inform or to
access the institut comput system with the intent of damag or disabl ani
critic comput system
sar ar us to report a known or suspect crimin offens or a transact that involv
monei launder or violat the bsa more specif a sar must be file with fincen
in each of the follow instanc
ani known or suspect crimin violat involv the financi institut when the
institut ha a substanti basi for identifi on of it director offic employe
agent or affili parti as have commit the act or aid in it commiss
ani known or suspect crimin violat involv the financi institut and
aggreg 5000 or more when the institut ha a substanti basi for identifi a
possibl suspect or group of suspect
ani known or suspect crimin violat involv the financi institut and
aggreg 25000 or more regardless of whether the institut ha a substanti basi
for identifi possibl suspect
ani transact conduct or attempt to be conduct through the financi
institut when the institut ha reason to suspect that 1 the fund were deriv
from illeg activ 2 the transact is design to evad ani regul under the
bank secreci act or 3 the transact appear to have no busi purpos or appear
unusu in normal bank practic
when a financi institut report a suspici transact to a govern agenc the act
18 usc 5318g2 make it illeg for the financi institut to notifi ani person
involv in the suspici transact that such a report ha been made
monei launder financi transact
11628 2011 fraud examin manual
section 5318g3 of the bsa also contain a safe harbor provis for financi institut
that report suspici transact or that make voluntari disclosur to a govern
agenc of ani other possibl violat of a law or regul the act provid that these
financi institut shall not be liabl under ani law regul or contract to ani person
for make the report note that thi safe harbor provis onli appli to report made to
govern agenc not to selfregulatori organ
a copi of the sar report form is includ at the end of thi chapter
monei servic busi
even befor the passag of the patriot act the treasuri depart wa in the process
of expand it report guidelin to includ busi that did not fall under the
tradit definit of financi institut but nevertheless perform a myriad of financi
servic on of these categori includ monei servic busi msb which compris
variou type of monei transmitt issuer of monei order and travel check and
check cash busi msb have long been requir to file ctr but otherwis veri
littl govern regul ha been requir
in august 1999 mani of the report and registr oblig contain in the bank
secreci act were extend to ms bs these busi ar now requir to regist with
fincen under chapter 31 cfr part 103 subchapt d those that fail to regist can
incur substanti penalti
under the rule 1 monei transmitt 2 issuer seller and redeem of monei order
3 issuer seller and redeem of travel check and 4 the us postal servic except
with regard to the sale of postag or philatel product ar requir to report certain class
of transact that meet certain dollar threshold to the depart of the treasuri after
januari 1 2002
the report transact includ
transact involv fund deriv from illeg activ or intend or conduct in
order to hide or disguis fund or asset deriv from illeg activ
transact design whether through structur or other mean to evad the
requir of the bsa
transact that appear to serv no busi or appar law purpos and
transact that involv the us of a mutual fund to facilit crimin activ
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11629
the rule includ two differ dollar threshold depend on the stage and type of
transact involv
for transact conduct or attempt by at or through a monei servic busi or
it agent a threshold of 2000 appli
for transact identifi by issuer of monei order or travel check from a review
of clearanc record or other similar record of instrument that have been sold or
process a threshold of 5000 appli
msb ar given 30 dai after becom awar of a suspici transact to complet a
suspici activ report by monei servic busi sarmsb form 109 and file it
with fincen in situat involv violat that requir immedi attent such as
ongo monei launder scheme the msb or msb ar to notifi the appropri law
enforc author immedi by telephon in addit to file the requir form
support document relat to each sarmsb is to be collect and maintain by
the report msb for review as need by law enforc and regulatori agenc
although the sarmsb form is not format for joint file msb mai be includ as
joint filer with other report financi institut
currenc exchang
in a rule issu februari 10 2003 us currenc exchang ar requir to file suspici
activ report under the same rule that appli to monei servic busi
mutual fund
as part of the patriot act mutual fund ar also requir to establish antimonei
launder program in mai 2003 the depart of treasuri and the secur and
exchang commiss sec issu a regul requir mutual fund to implement
reason measur to establish custom identif procedur and to verifi whether
custom appear on list of ani known or suspect terrorist
in mai 2006 the treasuri depart issu fi nal approv to regul that requir
mutual fund to report suspici activ to fincen under these regul mutual
fund ar requir to report suspici currenc and noncurr transact or
attempt transact of 5000 or more the report would be file on the sarsf
suspici activ for secur and futur industri form 101
monei launder financi transact
11630 2011 fraud examin manual
the rule state that four categori of transact will requir report these ar the same
four categori that trigger report requir for monei servic busi and
currenc exchang
transact involv fund deriv from crimin activ or intend or conduct to
hide or disguis fund from crimin activ
transact design to evad bank secreci act bsa requir
transact appear to serv no busi or appar law purpos or
transact involv the us of the mutual fund to facilit crimin activ
secur brokerdeal
in 2002 fincen announc a rule requir broker and dealer in secur to report
suspici activ via a suspici activ report by secur and futur industri
sarsf fincen form 101 these firm ar oblig to report suspici transact
conduct or attempt by at or through a brokerdeal and involv or aggreg at least
5000 in fund or asset thi requir took effect decemb 31 2002
broker and dealer in secur ar requir to report to fincen transact that fall into
on of the four categori below again these categori ar substanti similar to those
that trigger report by monei servic busi and mutual fund see abov
transact involv fund deriv from illeg activ or intend or conduct in
order to hide or disguis fund deriv from illeg activ
transact design whether through structur or other mean to evad the
requir of the bank secreci act
transact that appear to serv no busi or appar law purpos or ar not the
sort of transact in which the particular custom would be expect to engag and
for which the brokerdeal know of no reason explan after examin the
avail fact or
transact that involv the us of the brokerdeal to facilit crimin activ
brokerdeal ar also requir to establish antimonei launder program that among
other thing ar design to detect suspici transact under recent promulg selfregulatori
organ sro rule the sec ha the author to examin brokerdeal
for complianc with the rule and it is expect that the sro will also be review
complianc as part of the enforc of their rule
a copi of sarsf is includ at the end of the chapter
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11631
casino and card club
effect march 25 2003 casino and card club with gross revenu over 1000000 must
file suspici activ report on form sarc under the rule casino and card club must
report suspici activ if a transact involv or aggreg at least 5000 in fund and if
it meet on of the four categori that gener trigger sar see previou section on
financi institut monei servic busi mutual fund etc
some possibl exampl of suspici activ accord to fincen includ
us wire transfer and cashier check to deposit fund into casino account and us
the monei for littl or no game activ befor cash out and
transfer chip to other individu to cash out or redeem chip for casino check
that total significantli more than the amount deposit with no appar win to
account for the excess amount
casino ar also requir to file currenc transact report via fincen form 102 or the
nevada state form see abov
insur compani
although insur compani have alwai fallen under the definit of a financi
institut under the bsa the treasuri depart had never issu ani rule pertain
to the industri the patriot act howev requir that all financi institut
establish antimonei launder program and it give the secretari of the treasuri the
discret to determin which institut would be requir to file sar
in novemb 2005 fincen publish rule pertain to insur compani that sell
certain type of insur product the rule appli onli to compani that sell cover
product that fincen deem to be more at risk for monei launder activ than
other type of insur product compani that sell these cover product ar requir
to file sar and to implement antimonei launder program the rule defin cover
product as ani of the follow
a perman life insur polici other than a group polici
an annuiti contract other than a group annuiti contract or
ani other insur product with cash valu or invest featur
group insur product term life properti casualti health and titl insur polici
ar not consid cover product
monei launder financi transact
11632 2011 fraud examin manual
also insur compani must report suspici activ to fincen fincen form
108suspici activ report by insur companiesha been propos howev
until the form is approv insur compani should us the suspici activ
report form us by the secur and futur industri fincen form 101 to report
suspici activ
dealer in preciou metal stone or jewel
person who deal in jewel preciou metal and preciou stone ar requir to establish
antimonei launder program dealer ar defin as person who have purchas at
least 50000 and sold more than 50000 worth of jewel stone or metal dure the
preced year addition the person must also be in the busi of sell signific
amount of such item therefor the rule wo uld not appli to occasion seller or hobbyist
dealer howev ar not requir to file sar fincen is develop a set of final rule to
address in more detail who is cover under the rule and what procedur will be requir
other feder law relat to monei launder
the fraud examin should be awar of the feder law that ar typic involv when
prosecut a monei launder transact most such scheme will involv on or more of
the follow
structur transact to evad report requir titl 31 usc 5324
if a person caus or attempt to caus a cover institut to fail to file a requir report
with the purpos of evad the report requir such person can be fine under the
provis of 18 usc 3571 andor imprison up to five year if the violat occur
in the cours of violat anoth feder law or as part of a pattern of illeg conduct
involv more than 100000 in a 12month period then the amount of the fine under
3571 can be doubl and the prison time increas to up to 10 year
section 3571 of titl 18 provid for fine for individu convict of a feloni of up to
250000 and fine for organ of up to 500000 altern a fine can be impos
up to twice the amount of the illgotten gain to the crimin or twice the amount of the loss
to the victim
bulk cash smuggl into or out of the unit state titl 31 usc 5332
section 5332 which wa creat by section 371 of the patriot act make it illeg for
anyon to knowingli conceal more than 10000 in currenc or other monetari instrument
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11633
and transport or attempt to transport such currenc into or out of the unit state with the
intent to evad a currenc report requir under 18 usc 1956 see below
violat of these section mai be imprison up to five year and mai be requir to forfeit
ani properti involv in the offens or ani properti traceabl thereto
monei launder statut titl 18 usc 1956 and 1957
transact monei launder
section 1956a1 provid that anyon who know that properti involv in a
financi transact repres the proce of some form of unlaw activ and conduct a
financi transact in ani of the follow wai
with the intent to promot the carri on of specifi unlaw activ
with the intent to violat section 7201 tax evas or 7206 file fals return of the
intern revenu code
know that the transact is design to conceal or disguis the natur locat
sourc ownership or control of the illeg proce
know that the transact is design to avoid a report requir
such individu shall be fine up to 500000 or twice the valu of the monetari instrument
or fund whichev is greater andor imprison for not more than 20 year specifi
unlaw activ is defin in 1956c7 and includ a long list of feder crime
includ rico fraud embezzl theft and fals statement also fund that ar
illeg transmit in violat of thi statut or ani properti traceabl to those fund ar
subject to civil forfeitur under 18 usc 981a1a
intern transport and launder of fund
section 1956a2 prohibit the transport transmiss or transfer of fund either into
or out of the unit state if the person know the fund ar the proce of unlaw
activ and the transport transmiss or transfer is done with the intent to promot
the carri on of specifi unlaw conduct is done to conceal the natur locat
sourc ownership or control of the fund or is done to avoid report requir the
penalti ar the same as those set forth in subsect a1
sting oper
section 1956a3 prohibit a person from engag in financi transact involv
properti the person believ to be the proce of illeg activ thi is intend to cover
sting oper in which a suspect engag in monei launder activ with fund he
monei launder financi transact
11634 2011 fraud examin manual
believ to be illeg deriv even though the fund ar actual suppli by govern
agent the person can be imprison for up to 20 year andor fine in accord with 18 usc 3571
engag in monetari transact with monei deriv from specifi unlaw activ
an offens occur under section 1957 if a person knowingli engag or attempt to engag
in a monetari transact with crimin deriv properti that is greater than 10000 and
that is deriv from specifi unlaw activ section 1957 appli in situat where
the offens take place in the unit state or within it special maritim or territori
jurisdict or the offens take place outsid the us but the defend is a us citizen or
legal alien
violat of thi statut ar punish by a fine under 18 usc 3571 andor 10 year in
prison in addit the illeg transmit fund can be forfeit under 18 usc
981a1a
civil penalti
section 1956b set forth civil penalti for violat of section 1956 and 1957 under thi
section those who violat either monei launder statut ar liabl to the unit state for
the valu of the properti fund or monetari instrument involv in the illeg transact
or 10000 whichev is greater
longarm jurisdict over foreign monei launder
section 1956b also give us district court jurisdict over foreign person or financi
institut when 1 the foreign person commit a monei launder offens under section
1956a that occur in whole or in part in the unit state 2 the foreign person convert
to hi own us properti in which the unit state ha an ownership interest or 3 the
foreign financi institut maintain a bank account in the unit state
under section 1956b3 a us court can issu restrain order to freez the asset of
foreign monei launder describ abov prior to trial to ensur that the defend asset
ar avail to satisfi a judgment the court can also appoint a feder receiv to collect
marshal and take control of the defend asset to satisfi a civil or crimin judgment for
monei launder or a civil or crimin forfeitur judgment
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11635
prohibit of illeg monei transmit businessestitl 18 usc 1960
thi section prohibit the oper of a busi that transfer fund by ani mean
whether by wire check or courier if the busi doe not have the appropri state
licens or fail to compli with the registr requir establish under titl 31 of the
us code section 5330 the offend can be fine under section 3571 of titl 18 andor
imprison not more than five year illeg transmit fund can also be seiz by the
unit state under 18 usc 981a1a
racket influenc and corrupt organ ricotitl 18 usc 1961
1968
violat of the monei launder crime statut 18 usc 1956 and 1957 and
certain violat of the bank secreci act ar predic offens constitut racket
activ these act can be prosecut under the rico statut which includ crimin
penalti of up to 20 year in prison andor fine under section 3571 of titl 18 the statut
also provid for a civil caus of action by ani person injur in hi busi or properti
as a result of a violat of rico remedi includ trebl damag and attornei fee
seizur and forfeiturestitl 18 usc 981 et seq
section 981 provid for the civil seizur and forfeitur of properti involv in certain
crime includ monei launder section 982 deal with crimin forfeitur forfeitur mai
be defin as the take by the govern of properti that is illeg us or acquir
without compens the owner these remedi ar onli avail to the govern and
typic ar us in connect with a crimin investig and prosecut
when a piec of properti is forfeit all right titl and interest in the properti vest in the
govern consequ all the defend ownership right ar extinguish the
transfer of right date back to the moment when the properti becam forfeit ie when
the crime wa commit ani subsequ transfer by the defend is of no effect thi is
known as the relat back doctrin in the ey of the law the subsequ judici proceed
mere confirm that a forfeitur ha in theori alreadi taken place although the govern
cannot claim ani right in the properti until it receiv a forfeitur judgment becaus the
govern right to the properti and relat proce date back to when the crime wa
commit the govern is legal entitl to ani gain accru from the proce of the
illeg activ
monei launder financi transact
11636 2011 fraud examin manual
crimin forfeitur ar conduct in conjunct with a crimin trial the proof necessari
to perfect the forfeitur is the same as requir to convict the individu of the crimin
charg that is proof beyond a reason doubt the crimin forfeitur is an action in
personam against the person in such a proceed the govern ha the same burden of
proof as it doe in a crimin case if the govern sustain a convict the judg will
forfeit the properti at time of sentenc at which time the properti can be seiz
civil forfeitur ar conduct independ from a crimin proceed a civil forfeitur is
an action in rem against the properti in respons to perceiv abus on the part of the
govern congress pass the civil asset forfeitur reform act of 2000 which
drastic amend the law concern civil forfeitur
below ar some of the highlight of the act
set forth notif requir with respect to seiz properti and civil forfeitur
proceed includ a requir that the govern notifi interest parti as
soon as practic but within 60 dai after the date of the seizur
set forth procedur for file claim for seiz properti after a claim is file the
govern ha 90 dai in which to file a complaint for forfeitur if the govern
fail to do thi then it must return the properti in lieu of or in addit to file a
civil forfeitur complaint the govern mai includ a forfeitur alleg in a
crimin indict
provid that the court appoint counsel to repres anyon with an interest in the
properti if the person is financi unabl to afford counsel
place the burden of proof on the govern to establish by a preponder of the
evid that the properti is subject to forfeitur
provid that if the forfeitur action is be prosecut becaus the properti wa us
to commit or facilit the commiss of a crimin offens or wa involv in such
commiss the govern must establish that there wa a substanti connect
between the properti and the offens
provid an innoc owner defens to the forfeitur action the owner must prove
hi innoc by a preponder of the evid
author a claimant to petit the court to determin whether a forfeitur wa
constitution excess direct the court to compar the forfeitur to the graviti of
the offens place upon the claimant the burden of establish by a preponder of
the evid at a hear conduct by the court without a juri that the forfeitur is
grossli disproport to the offens upon the claimant
amend the feder tort claim act to allow claimant to sue the govern for ani
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11637
damag or loss of properti while in possess of the govern
author the us of forfeit properti to pai restitut to ani victim of the offens
give rise to the forfeitur includ in the case of a monei launder offens ani
offens constitut the underli specifi activ
direct that all civil forfeitur of real properti and interest in real properti proce as
judici forfeitur prohibit with except 1 real properti that is the subject of a
civil forfeitur from be seiz befor entri of a forfeitur order and 2 the owner or
occup of the real properti from be evict from or otherwis depriv of the us
and enjoy of real properti that is the subject of a pend forfeitur action
provid for the forfeitur of the proce of specifi unlaw activ under the
monei launder statut
forfeitur of fund in interbank account
section 319 of the patriot act amend 18 usc 981 expand the unit state
abil to seiz the proce of monei launder activ by provid for forfeitur of fund
held in unit state interbank account an interbank account is an account on financi
institut hold at anoth financi institut
if fund involv in a monei launder transact or the proce of ani specifi
unlaw activ as defin by the monei launder statut ar deposit in a foreign bank
and if that foreign bank ha an interbank account in the unit state then the taint fund
will be deem to have been deposit into the us account in other word the fund in
the foreign bank us interbank account can be seiz even if the launder monei wa
not deposit in that account the govern doe not have to trace the monei in the us
interbank account to the monei that wa deposit in the foreign account it is enough that
the us interbank account is held by the same financi institut in which the launder
monei wa deposit oversea
fals statementstitl 18 usc 1001
person who violat the bank secreci act and other report law might also be guilti of
violat of 18 usc 1001 which is the prin cipal feder fals statement statut becaus
most of the oblig impos by the bsa involv recordkeep and report mani
bsa violat might also constitut fals statement section 1001 prohibit knowingli
falsifi conceal cover up or make a fals fictiti or fraudul statement or
represent in ani matter within the jurisdict of ani us depart or agenc
violat of thi section ar often charg when an individu is stop at the border with
monei launder financi transact
11638 2011 fraud examin manual
a larg amount of unreport cash and respond fals to the question of custom offic
or inspector it ha been us to prosecut individu for structur a transact so that it
deceiv a financi institut into file a fals report
conspiraci to defraud the unit state titl 18 usc 371
although numer feder statut make conspiraci a crime the most commonli us
feder conspiraci statut is the gener conspiraci statut under section 371 of titl 18 us
code
section 371 can be divid into two part 1 conspiraci to commit a crime against the
unit state and 2 conspiraci to defraud the unit state or it agenc sever
court have upheld convict base on the second prong of the statut sole for failur to
file ctr such prosecut ar base on the theori that the person depriv the ir of
accur ctr in the case of unit state v richter 610 fsupp 480 nd ill 1985 the
court held that the divis of larg amount of cash into smaller nonreport transact
by sever individu work as a team wa a conspiraci to obstruct the govern
function of receiv ctr howev other court have reject thi theori on the ground
that there is no duti on the part of the custom to inform the govern or the bank of
the natur of the transact whether report or not
travel act titl 18 usc 1952
the travel act is applic if the offens involv the proce of illeg activ and
interst travel the act provid that it is an offens to travel in interst or foreign
commerc or us the mail with the intent to distribut the proce of ani unlaw activ
commit ani crime of violenc to further unlaw activ or otherwis establish promot
or manag an establish for the purpos of carri on ani unlaw activ unlaw
activ is defin to includ the report requir under 31 usc chapter 53 as well
as the monei launder statut 18 us c 1956 and 1957 the fine establish
under 3571 can be impos andor up to five year imprison if a crime of violenc is
involv the term of imprison increas to a maximum of 20 year or life if someon
wa kill
state law
approxim 30 state have enact statut that crimin monei launder most of
which appli to businesspeopl and profession some of the state statut ar broader than
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11639
the feder statut and thei ar often enforc more aggress than their feder
counterpart
mani state have crimin attempt monei launder with the same penalti as the
complet crime some state contain a sting provis which enabl the prosecut of
activ even though the launder monei is not actual deriv from crimin activ but
rather suppli by govern agent as part of a sting oper sever state have also
enact legisl requir financi institut and busi to file currenc transact
report that mirror the feder report some requir duplic file with the state other
ar satisfi with the feder file
intern antimonei launder effort
in the 1980 the mount global drug crisi led to the birth of intern antimonei
launder aml effort as a result intern organ began take on initi
to fight monei launder while other were creat for that same purpos the princip
organ includ the unit nation un the financi action task forc on monei
launder fatf and the egmont group fo llow the event of septemb 11 2001
howev the intern commun aml focu shift from antidrug to antiterror
and mani intern organ revis the aml framework to not onli examin
fund from illeg sourc but to also examin fund whose purpos were illegitim
the unit nation
in 1988 the un adopt the un convent against illicit traffic in narcot drug and
psychotrop substanc a mandat to bring an end to monei launder in respons the
un establish the global programm against moneylaund gpml which provid
member state with assist in compli with intern aml standard in addit
the gpml in particip with other intern organ maintain the
intern monei launder inform ne twork imolin a websit that provid
the intern commun with inform and tool concern aml
the financi action task forc on monei launder fatf
in 1989 the group of seven g7 lead industri nation establish the financi
action task forc fatf a multilater policymak and standardset bodi design
to combat monei launder the fatf develop a set of forti recommend
regard the proper approach to combat monei launder through law enforc
monei launder financi transact
11640 2011 fraud examin manual
effort financi regul and intern cooper in addit to observ the
current fatf member carri out these recommend the fatf also lobbi for
other nation and territori to adopt them the fatf also issu financi advisori that
warn financi institut against do busi in countri that seem to invit
monei launder
the egmont group
the egmont group is an inform intern network of financi intellig unit
fiu nation center that collect inform on suspici or unusu financi activ
design to fight monei launder by encourag global cooper and mutual exchang
of inform
enforc and prevent strategi
financi institut broker and insur compani should be awar and should make
their employe awar of situat that could indic monei launder activ
bank secreci act complianc program
most financi institut ar now requir to have a bank secreci act complianc program
in place howev everi busi that ha the potenti for transact deal with
signific amount of cash should institut a complianc program and a monei launder
awar program all employe should be made awar of the monei launder statut
and the seriou implic of such law on the institut and the employe employe
should be educ to be awar of transact that might suggest possibl launder
activ procedur should be set out detail what an employe should do if a custom or
transact appear suspici
minimum standard
treasuri regul provid that at a minimum a written complianc program should be
adopt that
establish a system of intern control to ensur ongo bsa complianc
provid for independ test of complianc by intern auditor andor outsid
examin
design a complianc offic to ensur daytodai complianc with bsa
provid train on an ongo basi for all personnel
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11641
complianc offic
a busi should select a person or team respons for the daytodai monitor of the
complianc program the complianc offic should be given broad author to monitor all
aspect of the institut complianc includ the develop and refin of the
program and the monitor of employe train program such individu should also
have the author to conduct regular and ad hoc audit to ensur that the program is
function effect and to hire outsid consult as necessari to investig problem
polici statement
all entiti cover under the report and recordkeep law and regul should have
a written polici against handl the proce of drug traffick or other crimin activ
the statement should provid that the institut requir it employe to oper with the
highest moral and ethic principl it should includ a statement that the compani refus
to do busi with crimin and monei launder a commit to conduct busi onli
with legitim busi organ a statem ent against do busi with organ
that fail to provid proper document of their ident and purpos clear direct for
refer all suspici transact to the appropri depart and a commit to
compli with the provis of the bank secreci act
know your custom program
most financi institut have know your custom program as part of their bsa
complianc program such program should provid for effect custom identif
account monitor and appropri action in suspici circumst both the ctr
report requir and the recordkeep requir of the bank secreci act
mandat the identif of custom us the institut servic
new deposit account
for individu deposit account minimum identif standard should be establish
the inform to be obtain should includ
name
address
date of birth
social secur number or for nonu citizen a passport visa or alien registr
number
current employ
busi and resid telephon number
monei launder financi transact
11642 2011 fraud examin manual
the custom should be requir to submit some form of identif that includ a
photo such as a driver licens or passport and a copi should be made and kept in the
custom file if there ar ani doubt or inconsist about the inform provid
the employe should be instruct to notifi the appropri depart
minimum standard for new busi account should includ
busi name and address
telephon number
taxpay identif number
document establish the format of the busi entiti articl of incorpor
partnership agreement etc
copi of all assum name file or dba do busi as
a full descript of the oper of the busi
credit and bank refer
the ident of the offic director or other princip
the account repres should also consid make a person visit to the custom
place of busi besid promot good custom relat a person visit will help
identifi whether the busi is legitim or simpli a front the repres can also us
thi opportun to get to know the princip of the busi
new loan account
an institut should perform due dilig in establish a new loan account becaus if the
custom is engag in monei launder there is a risk of forfeitur of collater pledg on
the loan real or person properti that is traceabl to drug sale or that is purchas with
launder fund is subject to seizur by the govern if the properti seiz is pledg as
collater the financi institut must prove that it wa an innoc lienhold of the
properti and had no knowledg of the illeg activ
minimum standard regard the inform to be gather should includ
reliabl identifi inform similar to that requir for new deposit account
reliabl financi inform such as financi statement w2 and copi of tax
return
the purpos of the loan
credit histori and prior bank refer
verifi legitim mean of repay
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11643
assur that the loan amount is consist with the purpos of the loan and the natur
of the busi
servic for nonaccounthold
bank often issu cashier check monei order and travel check and perform
currenc exchang wire transfer or check cash servic strict identif
requir should be establish for transact with person who ar not regular bank
custom in fact regul requir that in some instanc bank keep a record of the
ident of person who ar not establish custom such regul usual requir at a
minimum the person name and address driver licens number or other number of
identifi document produc and social secur number or employ identif
number
monitor account
while identif of custom is import it is equal import to monitor the activ
of account the institut should identifi unusu transact that might not be consist
with the normal busi of the custom unusu and dramat chang in wire transfer
monetari instrument and check transact ar import to identifi if unusu
transact or activ ar note the institut should take some action to protect itself
the appropri action in some case might be to discuss the chang with the custom to
find out the reason for said inconsist increas transact might be the result of an
increas in sale or the result of a promot activ howev if the discuss lead to a
reason suspicion that the transact ar illegitim the institut might be requir to
notifi the appropri govern agenc andor file a suspici activ report
special problem for insur compani
although financi institut such as bank ar primarili associ with monei launder
activ insur compani have becom major target of monei launder oper
becaus of the varieti of servic and invest vehicl thei offer that can be us to
conceal the sourc of fund
the most common form of monei launder that insur compani face involv singl
premium contract or polici exampl includ purchas of annuiti lump sum topup
to an exist life insur contract and lump sum contribut to person pension
contract
monei launder financi transact
11644 2011 fraud examin manual
insur compani like other financi institut should educ their employe to look
out for transact that appear to be inconsist with a custom known legitim
busi or person activ or the normal transact for that type of account to that
end insur compani should institut know your custom program such as those
describ abov
red flag
the follow transact might indic monei launder is take place the list should be
us to identifi those transact and custom that might requir further investig
larg purchas of a lump sum contract when the custom typic purchas small
regular payment contract
us of a thirdparti check to make a purchas or invest
lack of concern for the perform of an invest but great concern for the earli
cancel of the contract
us of cash as payment for a transact that is typic handl with check or other
form of payment
lump sum payment made by wire transfer or with foreign currenc
reluct to provid normal inform when set up a polici or account or
provid minim inform
purchas of invest in amount consid beyond the custom appar mean
us of a letter of credit or other method of trade financ to move monei between
countri where such trade is inconsist with the custom usual pattern
establish of a larg invest polici and within a short time period the custom
request cancel of the polici and cash valu paid to a thirdparti
us of wire transfer to move larg amount of monei to or from a financi haven
countri such as the cayman island colombia hong kong liechtenstein
luxembourg monaco panama or switzerland
request to borrow the maximum cash valu of a singl premium polici soon after
pai for the polici
detect
insur compani must file all appropri report and follow all the requir of the
bank secreci act includ the implement of an effect bsa complianc program
certain other report can help compani identifi suspici transact incom and
outgo wire transfer log can help compani identifi possibl pattern suggest of monei
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11645
launder account activ report gener show weekli andor monthli balanc deposit
and withdraw review of these statement can identifi those account with larg increas
in averag balanc and number of transact polici cancel report should identifi
polici cancel within a specif time period report detail should includ the amount of
the cash surrend valu the ident of the sale agent and the actual term of the polici
the trace illicit transact chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin
manual provid more inform about techniqu for detect illicit incom and
payment includ in that chapter ar detail on analyz financi record financi and
behavior profil and net worth analysi
currenc transact report
omb no 15060004
fincen form 104
formerli form 4789
eff decemb 2003
complet all part that applyse instruct
1 check all box that appli
section aperson on whose behalf transact is conduct
5 do busi as dba
4 middl initial3 first name2 individu last name or entiti name
6 ssn or ein
7 address number street and apt or suit no
depart of the treasuri
fincen
9 citi 10 state 11 zip code 12 countri code
if not us
13 occup profess or busi
25 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
section b individu conduct transact if other than abov
if section b is left blank or incomplet check the box below to indic the reason
14 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
44 titl of approv offici
47 type or print prepar name
45 signatur of approv offici
48 type or print name of person to contact 49 telephon number
18 address number street and apt or suit no
17 middl initial16 first name15 individu last name
19 ssn
20 citi 21 state 22 zip code 23 countri code
if not us
40 citi
38 address number street and apt or suit no
enter regul or bsa
examin code number
see instruct
37 name of financi institut
42 zip code 43 rout micr number41 state
26 total cash in 00
cat no 37683n fincen form 104 formerli form 4789 rev 803
previou edit will not be accept after august 31 2004
pleas type or print
person involv in transactionspart i
b mail deposit or shipment c night deposit or autom teller machin d multipl transactionsa armor car servic
8 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
24 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
b passport c alien registr
d other f number
part ii amount and type of transact check all box that appli
28 date of transact
mm dd yyyi
26a foreign cash in 00
27 total cash out 00
27a foreign cash out 00
30 wire transfer 31 negoti instrument purchas
34 depositswithdraw
35 account number affect if ani 36 other specifi
part iii financi institut where transact take place
39 ein or ssn
for paperwork reduct act notic see page 4
sign
here
mm dd yyyi
46 date of signatur
a amend prior report b multipl person c multipl transact
e issu by
33 currenc exchang
d other
b passport c alien registrationa driver licensest id
f number issu by
e conduct on own behalf
a driver licensest id
see instruct page 3
32 negoti instrument cash
29 foreign countri
see instruct page 3
section aperson on whose behalf transact is conduct
5 do busi as dba
4 middl initial3 first name2 individu last name or entiti name
6 ssn or ein
7 address number street and apt or suit no
9 citi 10 state 11 zip code 12 countri code
if not us
25 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
section bindividu conduct transact if other than abov
14 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
f number issu by
18 address number street and apt or suit no
17 middl initial16 first name15 individu last name
19 ssn
20 citi 21 state 22 zip code 23 countri code
if not us
person involv in transactionspart i
8 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
24 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr
d other e issu by f number
multipl person
complet applic part below if box 1b on page 1 is check
fincen form 104 formerli form 4789 rev 803 page 2
section aperson on whose behalf transact is conduct
5 do busi as dba
4 middl initial3 first name2 individu last name or entiti name
6 ssn or ein
7 address number street and apt or suit no
9 citi 10 state 11 zip code 12 countri code
if not us
25 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
section bindividu conduct transact if other than abov
14 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
f number
18 address number street and apt or suit no
17 middl initial16 first name15 individu last name
19 ssn
20 citi 21 state 22 zip code 23 countri code
if not us
person involv in transactionspart i
8 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
24 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr
d other
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr
e issu by
d other
f number issu byd other
13 occup profess or busi
13 occup profess or busi
fincen form 104 formerli form 4789 rev 803 page 3
suspici transact
thi currenc transact report ctr should not be
file for suspici transact involv 10000 or less
in currenc or to note that a transact of more than
10000 is suspici ani suspici or unusu activ
should be report by a financi institut in the
manner prescrib by it appropri feder regul
or bsa examin see the instruct for item 37 if a
transact is suspici and in excess of 10000 in
currenc then both a ctr and the appropri
suspici activ report form must be file
should the suspici activ requir immedi
attent financi institut should telephon
1800800ctr an intern revenu servic ir
employe will direct the call to the local offic of the
ir crimin investig divis ci thi tollfre
number is oper mondai through fridai from
approxim 900 am to 600 pm eastern standard
time if an emerg consult directori assist for
the local ir cid offic
gener instruct
who must file each financi institut other than a
casino which instead must file fincen form 103 and
the us postal servic for which there ar separ rule
must file fincen form 104 formerli 4789 ctr for
each deposit withdraw exchang of currenc or other
payment or transfer by through or to the financi
institut which involv a transact in currenc of
more than 10000 multipl transact must be
treat as a singl transact if the financi institut
ha knowledg that 1 thei ar by or on behalf of the
same person and 2 thei result in either currenc
receiv cash in or currenc disburs cash out by
the financi institut total more than 10000
dure ani on busi dai for a bank a busi dai
is the dai on which transact ar routin post to
custom account as normal commun to
depositori custom for all other financi institut
a busi dai is a calendar dai
gener financi institut ar defin as bank
other type of depositori institut broker or dealer
in secur monei transmitt currenc exchang
check casher and issuer and seller of monei order
and travel check should you have question see
the definit in 31 cfr part 103
when and where to file file thi ctr by the 15th
calendar dai after the dai of the transact with the
ir detroit comput center
attn ctr
po box 33604
detroit mi 482325604
keep a copi of each ctr for five year from the date
file
a financi institut mai appli to file the ctr
magnet to obtain an applic to file magnet
write to the
ir detroit comput center
attn ctr magnet media coordin
po box 33604
detroit mi 482325604
identif requir all individu except
employe of armor car servic conduct a
report transact for themselv or for anoth
person must be identifi by mean of an offici
document accept form of identif includ
a driver licens militari and militarydepend
identif card passport state issu identif
card cedular card foreign nonresid alien
identif card or ani other identif document
or document which contain name and prefer
address and a photograph and ar normal accept
by financi institut as a mean of identif when
cash check for person other than establish
custom
accept identif inform obtain
previous and maintain in the financi institut
record mai be us for exampl if document
verifi an individu ident were examin and
record on a signatur card when an account wa
open the financi institut mai reli on that
inform in complet the ctr the financi
institut must indic on the form the method type
and number of the identif statement such as
known custom or signatur card on file ar not
suffici for form complet
penalti civil and crimin penalti ar provid for
failur to file a ctr or to suppli inform or for file
a fals or fraudul ctr see 31 usc 5321 5322
and 5324
for purpos of thi ctr the term below have the
follow mean
currenc the coin and paper monei of the unit
state or ani other countri which is circul and
customarili us and accept as monei
person an individu corpor partnership trust
or estat joint stock compani associ syndic
joint ventur or other unincorpor organ or
group
organ entiti other than an individu
transact in currenc the physic transfer of
currenc from on person to anoth thi doe not
includ a transfer of fund by mean of bank check bank
draft wire transfer or other written order that doe not
involv the physic transfer of currenc
negoti instrument all check and draft includ
busi person bank cashier and thirdparti
monei order and promissori note for purpos of
thi ctr all travel check shall also be consid
negoti instrument whether or not thei ar in bearer
form
foreign exchang rate if complet item 26a27a
us the exchang rate in effect for the busi dai of
the transact the sourc of the exchang rate that is
us will be determin by the report institut
specif instruct
becaus of the limit space on the front and back of
the ctr it mai be necessari to submit addit
inform on attach sheet submit thi addit
inform on plain paper attach to the ctr be sure
to put the individu or entiti name and identifi
number item 2 3 4 and 6 of the ctr on ani
addit sheet so that if it becom separ it mai
be associ with the ctr
item 1a amend prior report if thi ctr is be
file becaus it amend a report file previous check
item 1a stapl a copi of the origin ctr to the
amend on complet part iii fulli and onli those other
entri which ar be amend
item 1b multipl person if thi transact is be
conduct by more than on person or on behalf of
more than on person check item 1b enter inform
in part i for on of the person and provid inform
on ani other person on the back of the ctr
item 1c multipl transact if the financi
institut ha knowledg that there ar multipl
transact check item 1c
part i person involv in transact
section a must be complet if an individu conduct
a transact on hi own behalf complet section a and
leav section b blank if an individu conduct a
transact on hi own behalf and on behalf of anoth
person complet section a for each person and leav
section b blank if an individu conduct a
transact on behalf of anoth person complet
section b for the individu conduct the transact
and complet section a for each person on whose
behalf the transact is conduct of whom the financi
institut ha knowledg
section a person on whose behalf transact
is conduct see instruct abov
item 2 3 and 4 individualorgan name if
the person on whose behalf the transact is
conduct is an individu put hisher last name in item
2 first name in item 3 and middl initi in item 4 if
there is no middl initi leav item 4 blank if the
transact is conduct on behalf of an entiti put it
name in item 2 and leav item 3 and 4 blank
item 5 do busi as dba if the financi
institut ha knowledg of a separ do busi
as name enter it in item 5 for exampl smith
enterpris dba mj pizza
item 6 ssnitin or ein enter the social secur
number ssn or individu taxpay identif
number itin or employ identif number ein
of the person or entiti identifi in item 2 if none
write none
item 7 9 10 11 and 12 address enter the
perman address includ zip code of the person
identifi in item 2 us the us postal servic two
letter state abbrevi code a p o box should not
be us by itself and mai onli be us if there is no
street address if a p o box is us the name of the
apart or suit number road or rout number where
the person resid must also be provid if the address
is outsid the us provid the street address citi
provinc or state postal code if known and the two
letter countri code for countri code list go to
wwwfincengovregbsaformshtml or telephon
18009492732 and select option number 5 if us
leav item 12 blank
item 8 date of birth enter the date of birth eight
numer must be insert for each date the first two
will reflect the month the second two the dai and the
last four the year a zero 0 should preced ani singl
digit number for exampl if an individu birth date
is april 3 1948 item 8 should read 04 03 1948
item 13 occup profess or busi identifi
the occup profess or busi of the person on
whose behalf the transact wa conduct for
exampl secretari shoe salesman carpent attornei
housewif restaur liquor storeetc do not us non
specif term such as merchant selfemploi
businessman etc
item 14 if an individu describ method us to
verifi ident if an individu conduct the
transact on hisher own behalf hisher ident must
be verifi by examin of an accept document
see gener instruct for exampl check box a if
a driver licens is us to verifi an individu ident
and enter the state that issu the licens and the number
in item e and f if the transact is conduct by an
individu on behalf of anoth individu not present
or on behalf of an entiti enter na in item 14
section b individu conduct transact
if other than abov financi institut should enter
as much inform as is avail
fincen form 104 formerli 4789 rev 803 page 4
howev there mai be instanc in which item 1525
mai be left blank or incomplet if item 1525 ar
left blank or incomplet check on or more of the
box provid to indic the reason
exampl if there ar multipl transact that if onli
when aggreg the financi institut ha knowledg
the transact exce the report threshold and
therefor did not identifi the transactor check box d
for multipl transact
item 15 16 and 17 individu name complet
these item if an individu conduct a transact on
behalf of anoth person for exampl if john doe an
employe of xyz groceri store make a deposit to the
store account xyz groceri store should be identifi
in section a and john doe should be identifi in section
b
item 18 20 21 22 and 23 address enter the
perman street address includ zip code of the
individu see the instruct for item 7 and 9 through
12 enter countri code if not us refer item 12
item 19 ssnitin if the individu ha a social secur
number or individu taxpay indentifc number
enter it in item 19 if the individu doe not have an
ssnitin enter none
item 24 date of birth enter the individu date of
birth see the instruct for item 8
item 25 if an individu describ method us to
verifi ident enter the method us to identifi the
individu ident see gener instruct and the
instruct for item 14
part ii amount and type of transact
complet part ii to identifi the type of transact
and the amount involv
item 26 and 27 total cash intot cash out in the
space provid enter the total amount of currenc
receiv total cash in or total currenc disburs total
cash out by the financi institut if foreign currenc
is exchang us the us dollar equival on the dai
of the transact see foreign exchang rate and
complet item 26a or 27a whichev is appropri
if less than a full dollar amount is involv increas
that figur to the next highest dollar for exampl if the
currenc total 2000005 show the total as
2000100
item 26a and 27a foreign cash inforeign cash out
if foreign currenc is exchang enter the amount of
foreign currenc in item 26a and 27a report countri
of origin in item 29
item 28 date of transact insert eight numer for
each date see instruct for item 8
item 29 foreign countri if item 26a andor 27a ar
complet indic that foreign currenc is involv
check item 29 and identifi the countri if multipl
foreign currenc ar involv check box 36 and
identifi the addit countri andor currenc
involv
determin whether transact meet the
report threshold
onli cash transact that if alon or when
aggreg exce 10000 should be report on the
ctr transact shall not be offset against on anoth
if there ar both cash in and cash out transact
that ar report the amount should be consid
separ and not aggreg howev thei mai be
report on a singl ctr
if there is a currenc exchang it should be aggreg
separ with each of the cash in and cash out total
exampl 1 a person deposit 11000 in currenc to
hi save account and withdraw 3000 in currenc
from hi check account the ctr should be
complet as follow
cash in 11000 and no entri for cash out thi is
becaus the 3000 transact doe not meet the
report threshold
exampl 2 a person deposit 11000 in currenc to
hi save account and withdraw 12000 in currenc
from hi check account the ctr should be
complet as follow
cash in 11000 cash out 12000 thi is becaus
there ar two report transact howev on
ctr mai be file to reflect both
exampl 3 a person deposit 6000 in currenc to hi
save account and withdraw 4000 in currenc from
hi check account further he present 5000 in
currenc to be exchang for the equival in french
franc the ctr should be complet as follow
cash in 11000 and no entri for cash out thi is
becaus in determin whether the transact ar
report the currenc exchang is aggreg with
each of the cash in and cash out amount the result is
a report 11000 cash in transact the total cash
out amount is 9000 which doe not meet the
report threshold therefor it is not enter on the
ctr
exampl 4 a person deposit 6000 in currenc to hi
save account and withdraw 7000 in currenc from
hi check account further he present 5000 in
currenc to be exchang for the equival in french
franc the ctr should be complet as follow
cash in 11000 cash out 12000 thi is becaus
in determin whether the transact ar report
the currenc exchang is aggreg with each of the
cash in and cash out amount in thi exampl each
of the cash in and cash out total exce 10000 and
must be reflect on the ctr
item 3033 check the appropri item to identifi
the follow type of transact
30 wire transfer
31 negoti instrument purchas
32 negoti instrument cash
33 currenc exchang
item 34 depositswithdraw check thi item to
identifi deposit to or withdraw from account eg
demand deposit account save account time
deposit mutual fund account or ani other account
held at the financi institut enter the account
number in item 35
item 35 account number affect if ani enter
the account number of ani account affect by the
transact that ar maintain at the financi
institut conduct the transact if necessari
us addit sheet of paper to indic all of the
affect account
exampl 1 if a person cash a check drawn on an
account held at the financi institut the ctr should
be complet as follow
indic negoti instrument cash and provid
the account number of the check
if the transact doe not affect an account make no
entri
exampl 2 a person cash a check drawn on anoth
financi institut in thi instanc negoti
instrument cash would be indic but no account
at the financi institut ha been affect therefor
item 35 should be left blank
item 36 other specifi if a transact is not identifi
in item 3034 check item 36 and provid an addit
descript for exampl a person present a check to
purchas foreign currenc also list multipl foreign
currenc from item 29
part iii financi institut where transact take
place
item 37 name of financi institut and ident of
regul or bsa examin enter the financi institut
full legal name and identifi the regul or bsa examin
us the follow code
regul or bsa examin code
comptrol of the currenc occ1
feder deposit insur corpor fdic2
feder reserv system frs3
offic of thrift supervis ots4
nation credit union administr ncua5
secur and exchang commiss sec6
intern revenu servic irs7
us postal servic usps8
commod futur trade commiss cftc9
state regulator10
item 38 40 41 and 42 address enter the street address
citi state and zip code of the financi institut where
the transact occur if there ar multipl transact
provid inform of the offic or branch where ani on
of the transact ha occur
item 39 ein or ssn enter the financi institut ein
if the financi institut doe not have an ein enter the
ssn of the financi institut princip owner
item 43 rout micr number if a depositori
institut enter the rout magnet ink charact
recognit micr number
signatur
item 44 and 45 titl and signatur of approv
offici the offici who review and approv the ctr
must indic hisher titl and sign the ctr
item 46 date of signatur the approv offici must
enter the date the ctr is sign see the instruct for
item 8
item 47 prepar name type or print the full name of
the individu prepar the ctr the prepar and the
approv offici mai not necessarili be the same
individu
item 48 and 49 contact persontelephon number
type or print the name and telephon number of an
individu to contact concern question about the ctr
paperwork reduct act notic the request
inform is us in crimin tax and regulatori
investig and proceed financi institut ar
requir to provid the inform under 31 usc
5313 and 31 cfr part 103 commonli refer to as the
bank secreci act bsa the bsa is administ by the
us depart of the treasuri financi crime
enforc network fincen you ar not requir
to provid the request inform unless a form
displai a valid omb control number
the time need to complet thi form will vari
depend on individu circumst the estim
averag time is 19 minut if you have comment
concern the accuraci of thi time estim or
suggest for make thi form simpler you mai write
to the financi crime enforc network p o
box 39 vienna va 22183 do not send thi form to
thi offic instead see when and where to file in the
instruct
report of cash payment over 10000
receiv in a trade or busi
ir
form
8300
omb no 15450892
rev march 2008
see instruct for definit of cash
depart of the treasuri
intern revenu servic
for privaci act and paperwork reduct act notic see page 5
suspici transact
b
amend prior report
a
check appropri box if
1
ident of individu from whom the cash wa receiv
if more than on individu is involv check here and see instruct
2
taxpay identif number
6
mi
5
first name
4
last name
3
occup profess or busi
13
address number street and apt or suit no
7
date of birth
8
countri if not us
12
zip code
11
state
10
citi
9
describ id
a
identifi
document id
14
c
person on whose behalf thi transact wa conduct
if thi transact wa conduct on behalf of more than on person check here and see instruct
15
19
mi
18
first name
17
individu last name or organ name
16
employ identif number
occup profess or busi
22
address number street and apt or suit no
21
countri if not us
26
zip code
25
state
24
citi
23
descript of transact and method of payment
busi servic provid
d
person properti purchas
a
intang properti purchas
e
real properti purchas
b
person servic provid
c
32
date cash receiv
28
00
busi that receiv cash
employ identif number
36
name of busi that receiv cash
35
social secur number
address number street and apt or suit no
37
natur of your busi
41
zip code
40
state
39
citi
38
under penalti of perjuri i declar that to the best of my knowledg the inform i have furnish abov is true correct
and complet
42
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
cat no 62133
part iv
part i
part ii
part iii
us currenc
b
foreign currenc
20
do busi as dba name see instruct
total cash receiv
29
00
if cash wa receiv in
more than on payment
check here
30
total price if differ from
item 29
31
00
amount of cash receiv in us dollar equival must equal item 29 see instruct
a
00
00
00
00
00
c
cashier check
d
monei order
e
bank draft
f
travel check
amount in 100 bill or higher
countri
00
type of transact
33
exchang of cash
g
escrow or trust fund
h
other specifi in item 34
j
debt oblig paid
f
specif descript of properti or servic shown in
33 give serial or registr number address docket
number etc
34
issuer name and serial number of the monetari instrument
see instruct
taxpay identif number
bail receiv by court clerk
signatur
titl
date of
signatur
type or print name of contact person
contact telephon number
us thi form for transact occur after march 31 2008 do not us prior version after thi date
fincen
form
8300
omb no 15060018
rev march 2008
depart of the treasuri
financi crime
enforc network
author offici
ir form 8300 rev 32008
b
issu by
number
describ id
alien
identif id
issu by
number
continu complet if box 2 on page 1 is check
continu complet if box 15 on page 1 is check
part i
part ii
ir form 8300 rev 32008
page 2
multipl parti
complet applic part below if box 2 or 15 on page 1 is check
taxpay identif number
mi
first name
last name
occup profess or busi
address number street and apt or suit no
date of birth
countri if not us
zip code
state
citi
taxpay identif number
mi
first name
last name
occup profess or busi
address number street and apt or suit no
date of birth
countri if not us
zip code
state
citi
first name
individu last name or organ name
employ identif number
occup profess or busi
address number street and apt or suit no
countri if not us
zip code
state
citi
do busi as dba name see instruct
taxpay identif number
mi
first name
individu last name or organ name
employ identif number
occup profess or busi
address number street and apt or suit no
countri if not us
zip code
state
citi
do busi as dba name see instruct
taxpay identif number
ir form 8300 rev 32008
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
describ id
identifi
document id
issu by
number
describ id
alien
identif id
issu by
number
describ id
identifi
document id
issu by
number
describ id
alien
identif id
issu by
number
comment pleas us the line provid below to comment on or clarifi ani inform you enter on ani line in part i ii iii and iv
page 3 ir form 8300 rev 32008
import remind
clerk of feder or state court must
file form 8300 if more than 10000 in
cash is receiv as bail for an
individu charg with certain crimin
offens for these purpos a clerk
includ the clerk offic or ani other
offic depart divis branch or
unit of the court that is author to
receiv bail if a person receiv bail on
behalf of a clerk the clerk is treat as
receiv the bail see the instruct
for item 33 on page 5
gener instruct
who must file each person engag in
a trade or busi who in the cours
of that trade or busi receiv more
than 10000 in cash in on transact
or in two or more relat transact
must file form 8300 ani transact
conduct between a payer or it
agent and the recipi in a 24hour
period ar relat transact
transact ar consid relat
even if thei occur over a period of more
than 24 hour if the recipi know or
ha reason to know that each
transact is on of a seri of
connect transact
except cash is not requir to be
report if it is receiv
when to file file form 8300 by the
15th dai after the date the cash wa
receiv if that date fall on a saturdai
sundai or legal holidai file the form on
the next busi dai
statement to be provid you must
give a written or electron statement to
each person name on a requir form
8300 on or befor januari 31 of the
year follow the calendar year in which
the cash is receiv the statement
must show the name telephon number
and address of the inform contact
for the busi the aggreg amount
of report cash receiv and that the
inform wa furnish to the ir
keep a copi of the statement for your
record
multipl payment if you receiv more
than on cash payment for a singl
transact or for relat transact
you must report the multipl payment
ani time you receiv a total amount that
exce 10000 within ani 12month
period submit the report within 15 dai
of the date you receiv the payment that
taxpay identif number tin
you must furnish the correct tin of the
person or person from whom you
receiv the cash and if applic the
person or person on whose behalf the
transact is be conduct you mai
be subject to penalti for an incorrect
or miss tin
penalti you mai be subject to
penalti if you fail to file a correct and
complet form 8300 on time and you
cannot show that the failur wa due to
reason caus you mai also be
subject to penalti if you fail to furnish
time a correct and complet statement
to each person name in a requir
report a minimum penalti of 25000
mai be impos if the failur is due to
an intent or will disregard of the
cash report requir
c by a financi institut requir to file
form 104 currenc transact report
c by a casino requir to file or exempt
from file form 103 currenc
transact report by casino if the
cash is receiv as part of it game
busi
c by an agent who receiv the cash
from a princip if the agent us all of
the cash within 15 dai in a second
transact that is report on form
8300 or on form 104 and disclos all
the inform necessari to complet
part ii of form 8300 or form 104 to the
recipi of the cash in the second
transact
c in a transact occur entir
outsid the unit state see
public 1544 report cash
payment of over 10000 receiv in
a trade or busi regard
transact occur in puerto rico
and territori and possess of the
unit state
c in a transact that is not in the
cours of a person trade or busi
if multipl payment ar made in cash
to satisfi bail and the initi payment
doe not exce 10000 the initi
payment and subsequ payment
must be aggreg and the inform
return must be file by the 15th dai
after receipt of the payment that caus
the aggreg amount to exce
10000 in cash in such case the
report requir can be satisfi
either by send a singl written
statement with an aggreg amount
list or by furnish a copi of each
form 8300 relat to that payer
payment made to satisfi separ bail
requir ar not requir to be
aggreg see treasuri regul
section 16050i2
voluntari us of form 8300 form
8300 mai be file voluntarili for ani
suspici transact see definit
on page 4 for us by fincen and the
ir even if the total amount doe not
exce 10000
if you have request but ar not abl
to get a tin for on or more of the
parti to a transact within 15 dai
follow the transact file the report
and attach a statement explain why
the tin is not includ
except you ar not requir to
provid the tin of a person who is a
nonresid alien individu or a foreign
organ if that person or foreign
organ
keep a copi of each form 8300 for 5
year from the date you file it
where to file file the form with the
intern revenu servic detroit
comput center po box 32621
detroit ml 48232
the tin for an individu includ a
sole proprietorship is the individu
social secur number ssn for certain
resid alien who ar not elig to
get an ssn and nonresid alien who
ar requir to file tax return it is an
ir individu taxpay identif
number itin for other person
includ corpor partnership and
estat it is the employ identif
number ein
casino must file form 8300 for
nongam activ restaur shop
etc
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
section refer ar to the intern
revenu code unless otherwis note
c section 6050i 26 unit state code
usc 6050i and 31 usc 5331
requir that certain inform be
report to the ir and the financi
crime enforc network fincen
thi inform must be report on
irsfincen form 8300
c item 33 box i is to be check onli by
clerk of the court box d is to be
check by bail bondsmen see the
instruct on page 5
c the mean of the word currenc
for purpos of 31 usc 5331 is the
same as for the word cash see cash
on page 4
penalti mai also be impos for
caus or attempt to caus a trade
or busi to fail to file a requir
caus the total amount to exce
10000 if more than on report is
requir within 15 dai you mai file a
combin report file the combin
report no later than the date the earliest
report if file separ would have to
be file
c doe not have incom effect
connect with the conduct of a us
trade or busi
c doe not have an offic or place of
busi or a fiscal or pai agent in
the unit state
c doe not furnish a withhold
certif describ in 114411e2 or
3 or 114415c2iv or 3iii to the
extent requir under 114411e4vii
or
c doe not have to furnish a tin on ani
return statement or other document as
requir by the incom tax regul
under section 897 or 1445
page 4 ir form 8300 rev 32008
part i
item 2 if two or more individu
conduct the transact you ar
report check the box and complet
part i for ani on of the individu
provid the same inform for the
other individu on the back of the
form if more than three individu ar
involv provid the same inform
on addit sheet of paper and attach
them to thi form
item 6 enter the taxpay identif
number tin of the individu name
see taxpay identif number tin
on page 3 for more inform
item 8 enter eight numer for the date
of birth of the individu name for
exampl if the individu birth date is
juli 6 1960 enter 07 06 1960
item 13 fulli describ the natur of the
occup profess or busi for
exampl plumber attornei or
automobil dealer do not us gener
or nondescript term such as
businessman or selfemploi
item 14 you must verifi the name and
address of the name individu
verif must be made by
examin of a document normal
accept as a mean of identif
when cash check for exampl a
driver licens passport alien
registr card or other offici
document in item 14a enter the type of
document examin in item 14b
identifi the issuer of the document in
item 14c enter the document number
for exampl if the individu ha a utah
driver licens enter driver licens
in item 14a utah in item 14b and the
number appear on the licens in item
14c
part ii
item 15 if the transact is be
conduct on behalf of more than on
person includ husband and wife or
parent and child check the box and
complet part ii for ani on of the
person provid the same inform
for the other person on the back of
the form if more than three person ar
involv provid the same inform
on addit sheet of paper and attach
them to thi form
specif instruct
you must complet all part howev
you mai skip part ii if the individu
name in part i is conduct the
transact on hi or her behalf onli for
voluntari report of suspici
transact see item 1 below
item 1 if you ar amend a prior
report check box 1a complet the
appropri item with the correct or
amend inform onli complet all
of part iv stapl a copi of the origin
report to the amend report
to voluntarili report a suspici
transact see suspici transact
abov check box 1b you mai also
telephon your local ir crimin
investig divis or call
18665563974
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
note you must complet all three item
a b and c in thi line to make sure
that form 8300 will be process
correctli
definit
cash the term cash mean the
follow
c us and foreign coin and currenc
receiv in ani transact
c a cashier check monei order bank
draft or travel check have a face
amount of 10000 or less that is
receiv in a design report
transact defin below or that is
receiv in ani transact in which the
recipi know that the instrument is
be us in an attempt to avoid the
report of the transact under either
section 6050i or 31 usc 5331
design report transact a
retail sale or the receipt of fund by a
broker or other intermediari in
connect with a retail sale of a
consum durabl a collect or a
travel or entertain activ
retail sale ani sale whether or not
the sale is for resal or for ani other
purpos made in the cours of a trade
or busi if that trade or busi
princip consist of make sale to
ultim consum
consum durabl an item of tangibl
person properti of a type that under
ordinari usag can reason be
expect to remain us for at least 1
year and that ha a sale price of more
than 10000
collect ani work of art rug
antiqu metal gem stamp coin etc
travel or entertain activ an
item of travel or entertain that
pertain to a singl trip or event if the
combin sale price of the item and all
other item relat to the same trip or
event that ar sold in the same
transact or relat transact
exce 10000
except a cashier check monei
order bank draft or travel check is
not consid receiv in a design
report transact if it constitut the
proce of a bank loan or if it is
receiv as a payment on certain
promissori note instal sale
contract or down payment plan see
public 1544 for more inform
note cash doe not includ a check
drawn on the payer own account such
as a person check regardless of the
amount
person an individu corpor
partnership trust estat associ or
compani
recipi the person receiv the
cash each branch or other unit of a
person trade or busi is consid
a separ recipi unless the branch
receiv the cash or a central offic
link the branch know or ha
reason to know the ident of payer
make cash payment to other
branch
transact includ the purchas of
properti or servic the payment of
debt the exchang of a negoti
instrument for cash and the receipt of
cash to be held in escrow or trust a
singl transact mai not be broken
into multipl transact to avoid
report
suspici transact a suspici
transact is a transact in which it
appear that a person is attempt to
caus form 8300 not to be file or to
file a fals or incomplet form
report for caus or attempt to
caus a trade or busi to file a
requir report contain a materi
omiss or misstat of fact or for
structur or attempt to structur
transact to avoid the report
requir these violat mai also
be subject to crimin prosecut which
upon convict mai result in
imprison of up to 5 year or fine of
up to 250000 for individu and
500000 for corpor or both
item 16 through 19 if the person on
whose behalf the transact is be
conduct is an individu complet
item 16 17 and 18 enter hi or her
tin in item 19 if the individu is a sole
proprietor and ha an employ
identif number ein you must
enter both the ssn and ein in item 19
if the person is an organ put it
name as shown on requir tax file in
item 16 and it ein in item 19
item 20 if a sole proprietor or
organ name in item 16 through
18 is do busi under a name other
than that enter in item 16 for
exampl a trade or do busi
as dba name enter it here
item 27 if the person is not requir to
furnish a tin complet thi item see
taxpay identif number tin on
page 3 enter a descript of the type
of offici document issu to that
person in item 27a for exampl a
passport the countri that issu the
document in item 27b and the
document number in item 27c
page 5 ir form 8300 rev 32008 fincen form 8300 rev 32008
item 31 enter the total price of the
properti servic amount of cash
exchang etc for exampl the total
cost of a vehicl purchas cost of
cater servic exchang of currenc if
differ from the amount shown in item
29
item 32 enter the dollar amount of each
form of cash receiv show foreign
currenc amount in us dollar
equival at a fair market rate of
exchang avail to the public the
sum of the amount must equal item 29
for cashier check monei order bank
draft or travel check provid the
name of the issuer and the serial number
of each instrument name of all issuer
and all serial number involv must be
provid if necessari provid thi
inform on addit sheet of paper
and attach them to thi form
item 33 check the appropri box
that describ the transact if the
transact is not specifi in box ai
check box j and briefli describ the
transact for exampl car leas
boat leas hous leas or aircraft
rental if the transact relat to the
receipt of bail by a court clerk check
box i bail receiv by court clerk
thi box is onli for us by court clerk
if the transact relat to cash
receiv by a bail bondsman check box
d busi servic provid
part iv
item 36 if you ar a sole proprietorship
you must enter your ssn if your
busi also ha an ein you must
provid the ein as well all other
busi entiti must enter an ein
item 41 fulli describ the natur of
your busi for exampl attornei or
jewelri dealer do not us gener or
nondescript term such as busi
or store
privaci act and paperwork reduct
act notic except as otherwis note
the inform solicit on thi form is
requir by the intern revenu servic
ir and the financi crime
enforc network fincen in order
to carri out the law and regul of
the unit state depart of the
treasuri trade or busi except
for clerk of crimin court ar requir
to provid the inform to the ir and
fincen under both section 6050i and 31
usc 5331 clerk of crimin court
ar requir to provid the inform
to the ir under section 6050i section
6109 and 31 usc 5331 requir that
you provid your social secur number
in order to adequ identifi you and
process your return and other paper
the princip purpos for collect the
inform on thi form is to maintain
report or record which have a high
degre of us in crimin tax or
regulatori investig or proceed
or in the conduct of intellig or
counterintellig activ by direct
the feder govern attent to
unusu or question transact
gener tax return and return
inform ar confidenti as state in
section 6103 howev section 6103
allow or requir the ir to disclos or
give the inform request on thi
form to other as describ in the code
for exampl we mai disclos your tax
inform to the depart of justic
to enforc the tax law both civil and
crimin and to citi state the district
of columbia to carri out their tax law
we mai disclos thi inform to
other person as necessari to obtain
inform which we cannot get in ani
other wai we mai disclos thi
inform to feder state and local
child support agenc and to other
feder agenc for the purpos of
determin entitl for benefit or
the elig for and the repay of
loan we mai also provid the record
to appropri state local and foreign
crimin law enforc and regulatori
personnel in the perform of their
offici duti we mai also disclos thi
inform to other countri under a
tax treati or to feder and state
agenc to enforc feder nontax
crimin law and to combat terror in
addit fincen mai provid the
inform to those offici if thei ar
conduct intellig or
counterintellig activ to protect
against intern terror
you ar not requir to provid
inform as to whether the report
transact is deem suspici
failur to provid all other request
inform or provid fraudul
inform mai result in crimin
prosecut and other penalti under
titl 26 and titl 31 of the unit state
code
item 42 thi form must be sign by an
individu who ha been author to
do so for the busi that receiv the
cash
you ar not requir to provid the
inform request on a form that is
subject to the paperwork reduct act
unless the form displai a valid omb
control number book or record
relat to a form or it instruct must
be retain as long as their content
mai becom materi in the
administr of ani law under titl 26
or titl 31
the time need to complet thi
form will vari depend on individu
circumst the estim averag
time is 21 minut if you have
comment concern the accuraci of
thi time estim or suggest for
make thi form simpler you can write
to the intern revenu servic tax
product coordin committe
sewcarmpttsp 1111 constitut
av nw ir6526 washington dc
20224 do not send form 8300 to thi
address instead see where to file on
page 3
comment
us thi section to comment on or
clarifi anyth you mai have enter
on ani line in part i ii iii and iv for
exampl if you check box b
suspici transact in line 1 abov
part i you mai want to explain why you
think that the cash transact you ar
report on form 8300 mai be
suspici
part iii
item 28 enter the date you receiv the
cash if you receiv the cash in more
than on payment enter the date you
receiv the payment that caus the
combin amount to exce 10000
see multipl payment on page 3 for
more inform
item 30 check thi box if the amount
shown in item 29 wa receiv in more
than on payment for exampl as
instal payment or payment on
relat transact
note you must complet all three item
a b and c in thi line to make sure
that form 8300 will be process
correctli
report of intern
transport of currenc
or monetari instrument
omb no 15060014
to be file with the bureau of
custom and border protect
airlineflightvessel inspector name and badg number licens plate
depart of the treasuri
financi crime enforc network
for paperwork reduct act
notic and privaci act notic
see back of form
2 identif no see instruct 3 date of birth modayyr
4 perman address in unit state or abroad 5 your countri or countri of
citizenship
10 immigr alien no
fincen form 105
7 passport no countri
9 place unit state visa wa issu
31 usc 5316 31 cfr 10323 and 10327
formerli custom form 4790
custom and border protect us onli
1 name last or famili first and middl
8 us visa date modayyr
6 address while in the unit state
depart from us portciti in us arriv at citi in us
11 if currenc or monetari instrument is accompani by a person complet 11a or 11b
b import into the unit state
currenc and monetari instrument inform see instruct on reverseto be complet by everyon
a export from the unit state
12a date ship modayyr
12e ship to name and address
15 type of busi activ occup or profess
12f receiv from name and address
17 if other than us currenc
is involv pleas complet
block a and b
signatur of person complet thi report
under penalti of perjuri i declar that i have examin thi report and to the best of my knowledg and belief it is true correct and complet
18 name and titl print 20 date of report modayyr
part iv
part i
16 type and amount of currencymonetari instrument
total
other monetari instrument
specifi type issu entiti and date and serial or other identifi number
currenc and coin
for a person depart or enter the unit state or a person ship mail or receiv currenc or
monetari instrument if act for anyon els also complet part ii below
19 signatur
statecountri number
date
count verifi voluntari
report
ye no ye no
a currenc name
b countri
part iii
part ii
ye no
15a is the busi a bank
inform about person or busi on whose behalf import or export wa conduct
13 name last or famili first and middl or busi name
14 perman address in unit state or abroad
fincen form 105
formerli custom form 4790
rev juli 2003
depart of the treasuri
fincen
depart from foreign citycountryarriv at foreign citycountri
12 if currenc or monetari instrument wa mail or otherwis ship complet 12a through 12f
12d name of carrier12b date receiv modayyr 12c method of shipment eg us mail public carrier etc
pleas type or print
gener instruct
thi report is requir by 31 usc 5316 and treasuri depart regul 31 cfr
103
who must file
1 each person who physic transport mail or ship or caus to be physic
transport mail or ship currenc or other monetari instrument in an aggreg
amount exceed 10000 at on time from the unit state to ani place outsid the
unit state or into the unit state from ani place outsid the unit state and
2 each person who receiv in the unit state currenc or other monetari
instrument in an aggreg amount exceed 10000 at on time which have been
transport mail or ship to the person from ani place outsid the unit state
a transfer of fund through normal bank procedur which
doe not involv the physic transport of currenc or
monetari instrument is not requir to be report
except report ar not requir to be file by
1 a feder reserv bank
2 a bank a foreign bank or a broker or dealer in secur in respect to currenc
or other monetari instrument mail or ship through the postal servic or by common
carrier
3 a commerci bank or trust compani organ under the law of ani state or of
the unit state with respect to overland shipment of currenc or monetari instrument
ship to or receiv from an establish custom maintain a deposit relationship
with the bank in amount which the bank mai reason conclud do not exce
amount commensur with the customari conduct of the busi industri or profess
of the custom concern
4 a person who is not a citizen or resid of the unit state in respect to
currenc or other monetari instrument mail or ship from abroad to a bank or
broker or dealer in secur through the postal servic or by common carrier
5 a common carrier of passeng in respect to currenc or other monetari
instrument in the possess of it passeng
6 a common carrier of good in respect to shipment of currenc or monetari
instrument not declar to be such by the shipper
7 a travel check issuer or it agent in respect to the transport of travel
check prior to their deliveri to sell agent for eventu sale to the public
8 a person with a restrict endors travel check that is in the collect
and reconcili process after the travel check ha been negoti nor by
9 a person engag as a busi in the transport of currenc monetari
instrument and other commerci paper with respect to the transport of currenc
or other monetari instrument overland between establish offic of bank or broker
or dealer in secur and foreign person
when and where to file
a recipi each person who receiv currenc or other monetari instrument in the
unit state shall file fincen form 105 within 15 dai after receipt of the currenc or
monetari instrument with the custom offic in charg at ani port of entri or departur
or by mail with the commission of custom attent currenc transport
report washington dc 20229
b shipper or mailer if the currenc or other monetari instrument doe not accompani
the person enter or depart the unit state fincen form 105 mai be file by
mail on or befor the date of entri departur mail or ship with the commission
of custom attent currenc transport report washington dc 20229
c travel travel carri currenc or other monetari instrument with them shall
file fincen form 105 at the time of entri into the unit state or at the time of departur
from the unit state with the custom offic in charg at ani custom port of entri or
departur
an addit report of a particular transport mail or ship of currenc or
the monetari instrument is not requir if a complet and truth report ha alreadi
been file howev no person otherwis requir to file a report shall be excus from
liabil for failur to do so if in fact a complet and truth report ha not been file
form mai be obtain from ani bureau of custom and border protect offic
penalti civil and crimin penalti includ under certain circumst a
fine of not more than 500000 and imprison of not more than ten year ar
provid for failur to file a report file a report contain a materi omiss or
misstat or file a fals or fraudul report in addit the currenc or
monetari instrument mai be subject to seizur and forfeitur see 31 usc5321
and 31 cfr 10357 31 usc 5322 and 31 cfr 10359 31 usc 5317 and 31 cfr
10358 and usc 5332
definit
bank each agent agenc branch or offic within the unit state of ani person do
busi in on or more of the capac list 1 a commerci bank or trust compani
organ under the law of ani state or of the unit state 2 a privat bank 3
asav associ save and loan associ and build and loan associ
organ under the law of ani state or of the unit state 4 an insur institut as
defin in section 401 of the nation hous act 5 a save bank industri bank or
other thrift institut 6 a credit union organ under the law of ani state or of the
unit state 7 ani other organ charter under the bank law of ani state
and subject to the supervis of the bank supervisori author of a state other than a
monei servic busi 8 a bank organ under foreign law and 9 ani nation
bank associ or corpor act under the provis of section 25a of the
feder reserv act 12 usc section 611632
foreign bank a bank organ under foreign law or an agenc branch or offic locat
outsid the unit state of a bank the term doe not includ an agent agenc branch
or offic within the unit state of a bank organ under foreign law
broker or dealer in securitiesa broker or dealer in secur regist or requir
to be regist with the secur and exchang commiss under the secur
exchang act of 1934
identif number individu must enter their social secur number if ani
howev alien who do not have a social secur number should enter passport or alien
registr number all other should enter their employ identif number
monetari instrument 1 coin or currenc of the unit state or of ani other countri
2 travel check in ani form 3 negoti instrument includ check promissori
note and monei order in bearer form endors without restrict made out to a
fictiti paye or otherwis in such form that titl thereto pass upon deliveri 4
incomplet instrument includ check promissori note and monei order that ar
sign but on which the name of the paye ha been omit and 5 secur or stock
in bearer form or otherwis in such form that titl thereto pass upon deliveri monetari
instrument do not includ i check or monei order made payabl to the order of a
name person which have not been endors or which bear restrict endors
ii warehous receipt or iii bill of lade
person an individu a corpor a partnership a trust or estat a joint stock
compani an associ a syndic joint ventur or other unincorpor organ
or group an indian tribe as that term is defin in the indian game regulatori act
and all entiti cogniz as legal person
special instruct
you should complet each line that appli to you part ii block 13 provid the
complet name of the shipper or recipi on whose behalf the export or import
wa conduct part iii specifi type of instrument issu entiti and date serial or
other identifi number and paye if ani part iv block 22a and 22b enter the
exact date you ship or receiv currenc or monetari instrument block 21 if
currenc or monetari instrument of more than on countri is involv attach a list
show each type countri or origin and amount
privaci act and paperwork reduct act notic
pursuant to the requir of public law 93579 privaci act of 1974 notic is herebi
given that the author to collect inform on form 4790 in accord with 5 usc
552ae3 is public law 91508 31 usc 5316 5 usc 301 reorgan plan
no1 of 1950 treasuri depart order no 165 revis as amend 31 cfr 103
and 44 usc 3501
the princip purpos for collect the inform is to assur mainten of report
or record have a high degre of us in crimin tax or regulatori investig
or proceed the inform collect mai be provid to those offic and
employe of the bureau of custom and border protect and ani other constitu
unit of the depart of the treasuri who have a need for the record in the perform
of their duti the record mai be refer to ani other depart or agenc of the
feder govern upon the request of the head of such depart or agenc the
inform collect mai also be provid to appropri state local and foreign crimin
law enforc and regulatori personnel in the perform of their offici duti
disclosur of thi inform is mandatori pursuant to 31 usc 5316 and 31 cfr part
103 see penal
disclosur of the social secur number is mandatori the author to collect thi number
is 31 usc 5316b and 31 cfr 10327d the social secur number will be us as a
mean to identifi the individu who file the record
an agenc mai not conduct or sponsor and a person is not requir to respond to a
collect of inform unless it displai a current valid omb control number the
collect of thi inform is mandatori pursuant to 31 usc 5316
statement requir by 5 cfr 13208b3iii the estim averag burden associ
with thi collect of inform is 11 minut per respond or record keeper
depend on individu circumst comment concern the accuraci of thi burden
estim and suggest for reduc thi burden should be direct to the depart
of the treasuri financi crime enforc network po box 39 vienna virginia
22183 do not send complet form to thi officese when and where to file
abov
fincen form 105
formerli custom form 4790
1 check box below onli if correct a prior report
correct prior report see instruct 3 under how to make a report
d
31 is the relationship an insid relationship a ye b no
close
ye no
ye no
a
b
1suspici
activ report
juli 2003
previou edit will not be accept after decemb 31 2003
alwai complet entir report
see instruct
frb fr 2230 omb no 71000212
fdic 671006 omb no 30640077
occ 8010980101 omb no 15570180
ot 1601 omb no 15500003
ncua 2362 omb no 31330094
treasuri td f 902247 omb no 15060001
part i report financi institut inform
2 name of financi institut
4 address of financi institut
6 citi
11 state 12 zip code10 citi
9 address of branch offic where activ occur multipl branch includ inform in narr part v
14 account number affect if ani
part ii suspect inform
15 last name or name of entiti 16 first name 17 middl
18 address 19 ssn ein or tin
7 state 8 zip code
20 citi 21 state 22 zip code 23 countri
27 date of birth
24 phone number resid includ area code
25 phone number work includ area code
26 occupationtyp of busi
29 form of identif for suspect
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr d other
number issu author
mm dd yyyi
c still emploi at financi institut e termin
d suspend f resign
32 date of suspens termin resign
mm dd yyyi
c
suspect inform unavail
close
ye no
ye no
mm dd yyyi
3 ein
5 primari feder regul
a feder reserv d occ
b fdic e ot
c ncua
if ye specifi
13 if institut close date close
28 admissionconfess
a ye b no
30 relationship to financi institut
a account d attornei g custom j offic
b agent e borrow h director k sharehold
c apprais f broker i employe l other
37 dollar amount of recoveri if applic
00
f comput intrus
g consum loan fraud
h counterfeit check
i counterfeit creditdebit card
j counterfeit instrument other
k credit card fraud
34 total dollar amount involv in known or suspici activ
00
40 ha ani law enforc agenc alreadi been advis by telephon written commun or otherwis
a dea d postal inspect g other feder
b fbi e secret servic h state
c ir f us custom i local
j agenc name for g h or i
2
35 summari character of suspici activ
a bank secreci actstructur
monei launder
b briberygratu
c check fraud
d check kite
e commerci loan fraud
s other
part iii suspici activ inform
33 date or date rang of suspici activ
from to
36 amount of loss prior to recoveri
00
38 ha the suspici activ had a
materi impact on or otherwis
affect the financi sound
of the institut
a ye b no
51 agenc if not file by financi institut
mm dd yyyi mm dd yyyi
39 ha the institut bond compani been notifi
a ye b no
part iv contact for assist
45 last name 46 first name
50 date prepar
48 titleoccup
mm dd yyyi
49 phone number includ area code
47 middl
type of activ
if applic
41 name of person contact at law enforc agenc 42 phone number includ area code
44 phone number includ area code
43 name of person contact at law enforc agenc
l debit card fraud
m defalcationembezzl
n fals statement
o misus of posit or self deal
p mortgag loan fraud
q mysteri disappear
r wire transfer fraud
t terrorist financ
u ident theft
3part v suspici activ inform explanationdescript
explanationdescript of known or suspect violat
of law or suspici activ
thi section of the report is critic the care with which it is
written mai make the differ in whether or not the describ
conduct and it possibl crimin natur ar clearli understood
provid below a chronolog and complet account of the
possibl violat of law includ what is unusu irregular or
suspici about the transact us the follow checklist as
you prepar your account if necessari continu the
narr on a duplic of thi page
a describ support document and retain for 5 year
b explain who benefit financi or otherwis from the
transact how much and how
c retain ani confess admiss or explan of the
transact provid by the suspect and indic to
whom and when it wa given
d retain ani confess admiss or explan of the
transact provid by ani other person and indic
to whom and when it wa given
e retain ani evid of coverup or evid of an attempt
to deceiv feder or state examin or other
f indic where the possibl violat took place
eg main offic branch other
g indic whether the possibl violat is an isol
incid or relat to other transact
h indic whether there is ani relat litig if so
specifi
i recommend ani further investig that might assist law
enforc author
j indic whether ani inform ha been exclud from
thi report if so why
k if you ar correct a previous file report describ the
chang that ar be made
for bank secreci actstructuringmonei launder report
includ the follow addit inform
l indic whether currenc andor monetari instrument
were involv if so provid the amount andor descript
of the instrument for exampl bank draft letter of
credit domest or intern monei order stock
bond travel check wire transfer sent or receiv
cash etc
m indic ani account number that mai be involv
or affect
paperwork reduct act notic the purpos of thi form is to provid an effect and consist mean for financi institut to notifi appropri law enforc agenc of known
or suspect crimin conduct or suspici activ that take place at or were perpetr against financi institut thi report is requir by law pursuant to author contain in
the follow statut board of governor of the feder reserv system 12 usc 324 334 611a 1844b and c 3105c 2 and 3106a feder deposit insur corpor
12 usc 93a 1818 188184 340122 offic of the comptrol of the currenc 12 usc 93a 1818 188184 340122 offic of thrift supervis 12 usc 1463 and 1464
nation credit union administr 12 usc 1766a 1786q financi crime enforc network 31 usc 5318g inform collect on thi report is confidenti 5
usc 552b7 and 552ak2 and 31 usc 5318g the feder financi institut regulatori agenc and the us depart of justic and treasuri mai us and share the inform
public report and recordkeep burden for thi inform collect is estim to averag 30 minut per respons and includ time to gather and maintain data in the requir report review
the instruct and complet the inform collect send comment regard thi burden estim includ suggest for reduc the burden to the offic of manag and budget
paperwork reduct project washington dc 20503 and depend on your primari feder regulatori agenc to secretari board of governor of the feder reserv system washington dc 20551
or assist execut secretari feder deposit insur corpor washington dc 20429 or legisl and regulatori analysi divis offic of the comptrol of the currenc washington
dc 20219 or offic of thrift supervis enforc offic washington dc 20552 or nation credit union administr 1775 duke street alexandria va 22314 or offic of the director financi
crime enforc network depart of the treasuri 2070 chain bridg road vienna va 22182 the agenc mai not conduct or sponsor and an organ or a person is not requir
to respond to a collect of inform unless it displai a current valid omb control number
tip on sar form prepar and file ar avail in the sar activ review at wwwfincengovpubreportshtml
suspici activ report
instruct
safe harbor feder law 31 usc 5318g3 provid complet protect from civil liabil for all report of suspici
transact made to appropri author includ support document regardless of whether such report ar
file pursuant to thi report instruct or ar file on a voluntari basi specif the law provid that a financi
institut and it director offic employe and agent that make a disclosur of ani possibl violat of law or
regul includ in connect with the prepar of suspici activ report shall not be liabl to ani person
under ani law or regul of the unit state ani constitut law or regul of ani state or polit subdivis of
ani state or under ani contract or other legal enforc agreement includ ani arbitr agreement for such
disclosur or for ani failur to provid notic of such disclosur to the person who is the subject of such disclosur or ani
other person identifi in the disclosur
notif prohibit feder law 31 usc 5318g2 requir that a financi institut and it director offic
employe and agent who voluntarili or by mean of a suspici activ report report suspect or known crimin
violat or suspici activ mai not notifi ani person involv in the transact that the transact ha been report
in situat involv violat requir immedi attent such as when a report violat is ongo the
financi institut shall immedi notifi by telephon appropri law enforc and financi institut
supervisori author in addit to file a time suspici activ report
when to make a report
1 all financi institut oper in the unit state includ insur bank save associ save
associ servic corpor credit union bank hold compani nonbank subsidiari of bank hold
compani edg and agreement corpor and us branch and agenc of foreign bank ar re
quir to make thi report follow the discoveri of
a insid abus involv ani amount whenev the financi institut detect ani known or suspect
feder crimin violat or pattern of crimin violat commit or attempt against the financi
institut or involv a transact or transact conduct through the financi institut where the
financi institut believ that it wa either an actual or potenti victim of a crimin violat or seri of
crimin violat or that the financi institut wa us to facilit a crimin transact and the
financi institut ha a substanti basi for identifi on of it director offic employe agent or
other institutionaffili parti as have commit or aid in the commiss of a crimin act regardless
of the amount involv in the violat
b violat aggreg 5000 or more where a suspect can be identifi whenev the financi
institut detect ani known or suspect feder crimin violat or pattern of crimin violat com
mit or attempt against the financi institut or involv a transact or transact conduct
through the financi institut and involv or aggreg 5000 or more in fund or other asset where
the financi institut believ that it wa either an actual or potenti victim of a crimin violat or seri
of crimin violat or that the financi institut wa us to facilit a crimin transact and the
financi institut ha a substanti basi for identifi a possibl suspect or group of suspect if it is
determin prior to file thi report that the identifi suspect or group of suspect ha us an alia then
inform regard the true ident of the suspect or group of suspect as well as alia identifi such
as driver licens or social secur number address and telephon number must be report
c violat aggreg 25000 or more regardless of a potenti suspect whenev the financi
institut detect ani known or suspect feder crimin violat or pattern of crimin violat com
mit or attempt against the financi institut or involv a transact or transact conduct
through the financi institut and involv or aggreg 25000 or more in fund or other asset where
the financi institut believ that it wa either an actual or potenti victim of a crimin violat or seri
of crimin violat or that the financi institut wa us to facilit a crimin transact even though
there is no substanti basi for identifi a possibl suspect or group of suspect
d transact aggreg 5000 or more that involv potenti monei launder or violat of the
bank secreci act ani transact which for purpos of thi subsect mean a deposit withdraw
transfer between account exchang of currenc loan extens of credit purchas or sale of ani stock
bond certif of deposit or other monetari instrument or invest secur or ani other payment transfer
or deliveri by through or to a financi institut by whatev mean effect conduct or attempt by at
or through the financi institut and involv or aggreg 5000 or more in fund or other asset if the financi
institut know suspect or ha reason to suspect that
i the transact involv fund deriv from illeg activ or is intend or conduct in order to hide or
disguis fund or asset deriv from illeg activ includ without limit the ownership natur
sourc locat or control of such fund or asset as part of a plan to violat or evad ani law or regul or
to avoid ani transact report requir under feder law
ii the transact is design to evad ani regul promulg under the bank secreci act or
iii the transact ha no busi or appar law purpos or is not the sort in which the particular custom
would normal be expect to engag and the financi institut know of no reason explan for the
transact after examin the avail fact includ the background and possibl purpos of the transact
the bank secreci act requir all financi institut to file currenc transact report ctr in accord with
the depart of the treasuri implement regul 31 cfr part 103 these regul requir a financi
institut to file a ctr whenev a currenc transact exce 10000 if a currenc transact exce 10000
and is suspici the institut must file both a ctr report the currenc transact and a suspici activ
report report the suspici or crimin aspect of the transact if a currenc transact equal or is below
10000 and is suspici the institut should onli file a suspici activ report
2 comput intrus for purpos of thi report comput intrus is defin as gain access to a
comput system of a financi institut to
a remov steal procur or otherwis affect fund of the institut or the institut custom
b remov steal procur or otherwis affect critic inform of the institut includ custom account
inform or
c damag disabl or otherwis affect critic system of the institut
for purpos of thi report requir comput intrus doe not mean attempt intrus of websit or
other noncrit inform system of the institut that provid no access to institut or custom financi or
other critic inform
3 a financi institut is requir to file a suspici activ report no later than 30 calendar dai after the date of
initi detect of fact that mai constitut a basi for file a suspici activ report if no suspect wa identifi
on the date of detect of the incid requir the file a financi institut mai delai file a suspici activ
report for an addit 30 calendar dai to identifi a suspect in no case shall report be delai more than 60
calendar dai after the date of initi detect of a report transact
4 thi suspici activ report doe not need to be file for those robberi and burglari that ar report to local
author or except for save associ and servic corpor for lost miss counterfeit or stolen
secur that ar report pursuant to the requir of 17 cfr 24017f1
how to make a report
1 send each complet suspici activ report to
detroit comput center po box 33980 detroit ml 482320980
2 for item that do not appli or for which inform is not avail leav blank
3 if you ar correct a previous file report check the box at the top of the report line 1 complet the report in it
entireti and includ the correct inform in the applic box then describ the chang that ar be made
in part v descript of suspici activ line k
4 do not includ ani support document with the suspici activ report identifi and retain a copi
of the suspici activ report and all origin support document or busi record equival for five 5
year from the date of the suspici activ report all support document must be made avail to
appropri author upon request
5 if more space is need to report addit suspect attach copi of page 1 to provid the addit inform if
more space is need to report addit branch address includ thi inform in the narr part v
6 financi institut ar encourag to provid copi of suspici activ report to state and local author
where appropri
17 govern issu identif if avail
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr d corporatepartnership resolut
e other
f id number g issu state or countri 2 digit code
fincen
form 101
effect mai 2004
suspici activ report by the
secur and futur industri
pleas type or print alwai complet entir report item
mark with an asterisk ar consid critic see instruct omb no 1506 0019
subject inform 2 check box a if multipl subject box b subject inform unavailablepart i
4 first name 5 middl initi
6 also known as aka individu do busi as dba entiti
3 individu last name or entiti full name
7 occup or type of busi
16 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
12
14 ssnitin individu or ein entiti
8 address
15 account number affect if ani indic if close
part iiipart iii
21 date or date rang of suspici activ
18 phone number work
23 instrument type check all that appli
suspici activ inform
from
mm dd yyyi
to
mm dd yyyi
part ii
20 is individualbusi associatedaffili
with the report institut see instruct
a ye b no
13 email address if avail
9 citi
11 zip code
30 type of suspici activ
o signific wire or other transact
without econom purpos
p suspici document or id present
q terrorist financ
r wash or other fictiti trade
s wire fraud
t other describ in part vi
24 cusip number
27 cusip number
25 cusip number
28 cusip number
26 cusip number
29 cusip number
catalog no 35349u
acct
ye acct
ye
acct ye acct ye
countri code if not us
see instruct
a bondsnot
b cash or equiv
c commerci paper
d commod futur contract
e monei market mutual fund
f mutual fund
g otc deriv
h other deriv
q commod type
pleas identifi
r instrument descript
s market where trade
enter approprit three or fourlett code
t other explain in part iv
i commod option
j secur futur product
k stock
l warrant
m other secur
n other nonsecur
o foreign currenc futuresopt
p foreign currenc
a briberygratu
b check fraud
c comput intrus
d creditdebit card fraud
e embezzlementtheft
f commod futuresopt fraud
g forgeri
h ident theft
i insid trade
j mail fraud
k market manipul
l monei launderingstructur
m prearrang or other noncompetit trade
n secur fraud
1 check the box if thi report correct a prior report see instruct
22 total dollar amount involv in suspici activ
rev 052204
19 phone number home
00
10 state
part vipart iv
55 titleposit
54 middl initial52 last name of individu to be contact regard thi report 53 first name
mm dd yyyi
57 date report prepared56 work phone number
contact for assist
report financi institut informationpart iv
part v
2
31 if a law enforc or regulatori author ha been contact exclud submiss of a sar check the appropri box
a dea f secret servic k nyse p state secur regul
d fbi i nasd n other stateloc
e ic j nfa o other srosecurit phlx pcx cboe amex etc
b us attornei 32 g cftc l other rfa q foreign
law enforc or regulatori contact informationpart iii
c ir h sec m other refutur cme cbot nymex nybot r other explain in part vi
mm dd yyyi
32 other author contact for item 31 l through r list us attornei offic here 33 name of individu contact for all of item 31
35 date contact
36 name of financi institut or sole proprietorship
39 citi 41 zip code
37 ein ssn itin
42 addit branch address locat handl account activ or custom 43 multipl locat see instruct
40 state
38 address
j i a
k invest compani mutual fund
l market maker
m municip secur dealer
n nfa
o refutur
p other rfa
q secur broker clear
r secur broker introduc
51 type of institut or individu check box for function that appli to thi report
s secur dealer
t secur floor broker
u secur option brokerdeal
v srosecur
w specialist
x subsidiari of bank
y us govern brokerdeal
z us govern interdeal broker
aa other describ in part vi
a agricultur trade option merchant
b affili of bank hold compani
c cpo
d cta
e direct particip program
f fcm
g futur floor broker
h futur floor trader
i ibc
44 citi
49 nfa id number
47 central registr depositori number
46 zip code45 state
50 ha thi report individualent coordin thi report with anoth report individualent ye provid detail in part vi no
48 sec id number
34 telephon number of individu contact item 33
send complet report to
detroit comput center
attn sarsf
po box 33980
detroit mi 48232
suspici activ inform narr part vi 3
explanationdescript of suspici activityi thi section of the report is critic the care with which it is complet mai determin whether
or not the describ activ and it possibl crimin natur ar clearli understood by investig provid a clear complet and chronolog
descript not exceed thi page and the next page of the activ includ what is unusu irregular or suspici about the transact us
the checklist below as a guid as you prepar your account
a describ conduct that rais suspicion
b explain whether the transact wa complet or onli attempt
c describ support document eg transact record new
account inform tape record email messag correspon
denc etc and retain such document in your file for five year
d explain who benefit financi or otherwis from the
transact how much and how if known
e describ and retain ani admiss or explan of the transact
provid by the subject or other person indic to whom and
when it wa given
f describ and retain ani evid of coverup or evid of an
attempt to deceiv feder or state examin sro or other
g indic where the possibl violat of law took place eg main
offic branch other
h indic whether the suspici activ is an isol incid or
relat to anoth transact
i indic whether there is ani relat litig if so specifi the
name of the litig and the court where the action is pend
j recommend ani further investig that might assist law
enforc author
k indic whether ani inform ha been exclud from thi report
if so state reason
l indic whether us or foreign currenc andor us or foreign
negoti instrument were involv if foreign provid the
amount name of currenc and countri of origin
m indic market where trade and wire transfer identifi
inform when appropri
n indic whether fund or asset were recov and if so enter the
dollar valu of the recoveri in whole dollar onli
o indic ani addit account number and ani foreign bank
account number which mai be involv
p indic for a foreign nation ani avail inform on subject
passport visa andor identif card includ date countri
citi of issu issu author and nation
q describ ani suspici activ that involv transfer of fund to or
from a foreign countri or transact in a foreign currenc identifi
the countri sourc and destin of fund
r describ subject posit if emploi by the financi institut
s indic whether secur futur or option were involv if so
list the type cusip number or isid number and amount
t indic the type of institut file thi report if thi is not clear
from part iv for exampl an ia that is manag partner of a limit
partnership that is act as a hedg fund that detect suspici activ
ti in part to it hedg fund activ should note that it is oper as
a hedg fund
u indic in instanc when the subject or entiti ha a crd or nfa
number what that number is
v if correct a prior report box in item 1 check complet the form
in it entireti and note the correct item here in part vi
inform alreadi provid in earlier part of thi form need not necessarili be repeat if the mean is clear
support document should not be file with thi report maintain the inform for your file
tip on sar form prepar and file ar avail in the sar activ review at wwwfincengovpubreportshtml
enter explanationdescript in the space below continu on the next page if necessari
suspici activ report narr continu 4
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11701
consum fraud
complaint of consum fraud can be found as far back as the first centuri when plini the
elder told of the adulter honei be sold in rome and the mix of wine with gypsum
lime pitch rosin wood ash salt sulphur and other artifici addit
scheme against consum rang from home repair fraud to more sophist scam in
a nationwid solicit l00000 peopl purchas light bulb becaus thei were persuad
that the profit were go to the disabl thei were but the disabl certifi by doctor
includ such crippl disord as acn hai fever nervous and obes those
donat paid about three time the go price for similar light bulb
sometim fraud occur when the immedi victim cannot fight back a tennesse funer
director wa charg with buri peopl without casket and throw trash in on top of
the corps
scandal involv the ministri especi televis evangel also have captur
headlin in l988 us evangelist jim bakker wa indict on mail fraud charg stem
from the televis sale of lifetim partnership in a vacat hotel at the heritag usa
theme park prosecutor were abl to document that bakker and hi wife tammi fai
receiv about 35 million in bonus from the scheme bakker receiv a 45year prison
sentenc which later wa reduc he is now out of prison
fraud is notabl common in the repair and servic industri home repair fraud frequent
perpetr against the elderli rang from the sale or us of substandard materi such as
roof to secur payment without do ani work at all automobil repair often
involv fraudul act on studi maintain that 53 cent of everi repair dollar wa
wast becaus of unnecessari work overcharg servic never perform or
incompet a us govern survei conclud that american motorist ar
overcharg an averag of l50 a car each year
in australia john braithwait found that us car dealer roll back odomet on a third
of the car thei offer for sale interview with the dealer in australia illustr the kind of
reason that can buttress such illeg activ on salesman said peopl pai too much
attent to the mileag read on a car there might be a car with a low mileag read
but all sort of fault and anoth perfect car with a high mileag read it doesnt matter
consum fraud financi transact
11702 2011 fraud examin manual
what the mileag read is but how good the car is so if you turn the mileag read back
on a car in perfect order your encourag peopl to bui a good car there wa no
evid howev that it wa onli on good car that the odomet wa made to provid a
lower read
anoth australian dealer said thei think becaus you ar a us car dealer you ar a liar
so thei treat you like on and lie to you can you blame the dealer for ly back 1
con scheme
confid game involv a rang of fraudul conduct usual commit by profession
con artist against unsuspect victim the victim can be organ but more
commonli ar individu con men usual act alon but thei mai group togeth for a
particular complex endeavor
these ar some of the mani kind of confid scheme telemarket scheme and
pyramid scheme ar discuss in more detail at the end of the chapter
advanc fee swindl and debt consolid scheme
advanc fee swindl ar structur to obtain an illeg gain by fals promis the deliveri
of a product or a servic in some scheme the product is market to a larg number of
custom and then the oper is shut down prior to the deliveri stage
peopl who find themselv in debt sometim turn to consolid agenc for help
these agenc do not advanc loan but rather act as an intermediari between debtor and
creditor some agenc ar legitim mani ar not
in a typic scenario the debtor contact the agenc which compil a list of the creditor
and the amount of monthli payment the agenc usual write letter to the creditor
request a workout plan at lower monthli payment spread over a longer period of time
the creditor will often offer such an arrang if thei feel that the debt will therebi be
paid or if the workout plan will forestal bankruptci or default by the creditor
1john braithwait an exploratori studi of us car fr aud in paul r wilson and john braithwait ed
two face of devianc brisban univers of queensland press 1978 pp 101122
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11703
unscrupul debt consolid scheme often involv the agenc collect the monei
from the debtor but not forward it to the creditor in some instanc consider time
can pass befor the debtor find out that hi monei ha been misappropri
anoth variat of the debt consolid scheme occur when a custom is guarante
that he will receiv a loan or a credit card regardless of hi credit rate typic the victim
have been reject by legitim financi institut becaus their credit rate ar poor
the victim must pai a process fee for the applic to be accept after the victim
pai the fee the con artist disappear
directori advertis scheme
the essenc of directori advertis scheme is the sale of advertis in a nonexist
magazin or directori a fake or in some case a real directori is shown to the potenti
victim the victim contract and pai for displai or classifi advertis that is to appear
some month in the futur by that time the fraudster ha disappear
merchandis scheme
merchandis scheme run a wide gamut if you have ever paid for an item and receiv
less than what wa advertis you have been the victim of a merchandis scheme
person improv fraud
these fraud prei upon the desir of peopl to improv their educ or job skill in some
instanc thei appeal to a person appear
diploma mill
for what is often a hefti fee a diploma can be purchas by those who appli the fraudster
usual claim that the fee is for process the applic or for verifi the experi
necessari for the degre to be award the hallmark of the diploma mill is the eas with
which the degre is obtain though the degre becaus the school is not accredit is
essenti worthless
correspond school mai also oper with the same modu operandi as diploma mill
investig have at time submit the scribbl of their infant children to school that
advertis that thei will provid art lesson to person who demonstr talent usual the
infant draw ar judg to show consider abil and the submitt is ask to
send a fee to begin receiv the lesson
consum fraud financi transact
11704 2011 fraud examin manual
model school
model school appeal to the vaniti of some peopl in the typic scheme the model
school repres tell the prospect student that he will prepar a portfolio of portrait
to be sent to potenti custom who mai emploi the victim as a model the victim is then
charg an inflat price for the pictur con game model school often claim
inaccur connect to famou peopl and maintain that thei have been instrument
in start the career of success model the school sometim target parent and
grandpar with lure of the monei that can be earn by their exception pretti
infant children or grandchildren
direct debit from check account
when a custom decid to purchas an item from a catalog or over the phone he is told
he can purchas it rapidli and simpli by give hi bank name and hi check account
number for a direct debit from hi account thi result in unauthor withdraw from
the account
equityskim scheme
fall for thi scam can cost consum their home con men try to talk the mark out of
the equiti on their home and mai try to persuad them to borrow against their equiti
fundrais nonprofit and religi scheme
some group us cancer or aid in their titl to convinc the consum thei ar
legitim charit organ other o ffer a prize or award for the consum as a
reward for their contribut
homebas busi
a popular fad todai mani compani market homebas busi requir a person to
bui materi for assemblyathom product the consum is promis that the compani
will purchas the complet product and when it doe not the consum is left with a bad
invest and a stock of cheap worthless good
home improv
a common scam involv phoni repair peopl sell their servic doortodoor after
pai them to fix a roof window or other item the consum is left with unfinish repair
work and no workmen
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11705
monei manag or financi planner
these scam involv convinc mark to invest in lowrisk highreturn opportun of
cours consum who invest in these opportun see no return at all
phone card scheme
the con artist call claim to be with the consum long distanc compani and ask to
confirm their card number if the number is reveal the consum next long distanc bill
will contain some expens call he did not make
scaveng or reveng scheme
thi involv the compani that initi con the consum us a differ compani
name the outfit contact the consum again and ask if he would like to help put the
uneth compani out of busi and get hi monei back natur an upfront fee is
requir to financ the investig
sweepstak giveawai and prize
mani of these socal free gift requir the consum to pai a fee usual label a
ship fee befor collect thi fee actual cover the cost of the merchandis
deem free
colleg scholarship servic
thi bogu servic usual charg an upfront fee or advanc payment fee for find a
scholarship suitabl for the applic
credit repair
some of these firm mai charg unnecessari fee to fix credit problem know that the
consum could easili call the credit bureau and request a copi of hi credit report himself
other con scheme
block hustl
socal becaus purveyor of cheap stereo equip jewelri and watch usual hawk
their good on street corner or at traffic light the item for sale ar gener either stolen
or imit of brand name
consum fraud financi transact
11706 2011 fraud examin manual
pigeon drop
thi is often us on middleag or elderli women who ar like to have a save
account pretend to find a wallet full of monei the con men convinc their mark that
thei should divid the discov monei as a show of good faith each should withdraw
a sum of monei from their bank and turn it over to a lawyer or anoth thirdparti for
safekeep thei agre to place an ad in a newspap for the lost wallet if it is not claim
within a certain amount of time thei will split the monei of cours when the design
time expir the victim will find that the lawyer wa part of the scam and that her monei ha
vanish
bank examin swindl
bank examin swindl ar also perpetr on older women especi widow with access
to their husband life insur polici the con man imperson a bank examin
investig her bank he ask her to withdraw a certain amount of cash from her account
place it in an envelop and allow him to inspect the bill for counterfeit mani con men us
fals id and dress to take on thi role
jamaican handkerchief or envelop switch
in thi con the crimin put hi monei into an envelop with the mark monei and then
unobtrus trade thi parcel for anoth that look like the same thing but is instead
bulk up with worthless paper
the obituari hustl
capit on a bereav person grief the con man cull inform from an obituari
pose as a deliveri person collect monei for a packag or other order the deceas
supposedli made
threecard mont
an old card game that involv two peopl who fleec an unsuspect onlook into a
rig game
poker bunco
thi scam can involv poker dice pool and other game the con man is of cours an
expert and hustl the mark
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11707
missingheir scheme
in the modern version of thi scam the con man pose as a probat investig or other
genealogist charg fee to distribut an inherit
gold mine swindl
here the con man claim to own a product mine but requir monei to start oper
the scheme involv sell share to the mine
spanish prison game
thi con can be trace back to the spanish armada of the sixteenth centuri a businessman
receiv a letter purportedli from a hostag held prison in some foreign land he need
monei to bribe hi captor or pai a ransom as collater a treasur map or other valuabl
paper ar often enclos
murphi game
also known as miss murphi paddi hustl or carpet game the tradit con is
plai in place where prostitut occur the con artist plai a pimp but never deliv the
prostitut
badger game
a refin version of miss murphi but in thi con the con woman or prostitut is in on the
scam the con artist rob the mark of hi wallet through simpl theft or pretens of
blackmail
goat pastur scam
the mark receiv a call from a person who sai he from an oil and ga servic that is
sponsor a lotteri on miner right if the consum invest a certain tax deduct sum
thei can receiv a percentag of the incom in royalti payment
other common hustl occur in the privaci of on own home or through telephon
solicit ie boiler room
consum fraud financi transact
11708 2011 fraud examin manual
telemarkt fraud
victim of telemarket fraud ar swindl out of more than 40 billion a year accord
to on survei 92 percent of us adult sai thei have receiv postcard or letter promis
thei had definit been award a guarante prize of those respond 69 percent
never receiv the promis prize telemarket select victim deliber target the
elderli and the unemploi over 55 million american said thei had bought item by
telephon in the past two year and were exploit in the process
while the telephon newspap and postal servic us to be the kei tool of telemarket
the internet ha afford fraudster a more fast pace and anonym method of carri
out their scheme the number on scam to be current found on the internet sai the
nation consum leagu fraud watch ncl is the fake check scam in which
consum ar paid with a phoni check for work or item sold and ar instruct to wire
monei back thi ha been the number on rank telemarket fraud for two year
run advanc fee scam and phish also rank in the top 10 scheme on the world
wide web a discuss of some of the specif internet scheme can be found in the
comput and internet fraud chapter in the financi transact section of the fraud
examin manual
telemarket offens ar classifi as consum fraud yet mani busi ar affect by
offic suppli and market servic scam the hitandrun natur of phone room the
geograph distanc between the crook and their victim and the resourc and prioriti
of law enforc agenc all make enforc effort difficult onli about on in 100
victim ever file a complaint
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11709
ncl top 10 telemarket fraud
2008 top 10 fraud
2009 top 10 fraud
fake check scam 61 fake check scam 52
prizessweepstak 12 prizessweepstak 21
phish 105 phish 13
advanc fee loanscredit arrang 2 internet gener merchandis 3
lotterieslotteri ticket club 2 scholarshipseduc grant 1
internet gener merchandis 15 advanc fee loanscredit arrang 1
magazin 15 magazin sale 1
scholarshipseduc grant 1 lotterieslotteri ticket club 1
offic ad spacedirectori list ing 1 telephon cram 5
credit card issu 5 busi opportunitiesfranchis 5
telemarket terminolog
term in the scammer vocabulari includ bang or nail the custom in other word
close the deal a salesperson most effect skill is puf the abil to sound convinc
while exagger the valu of a busi opportun or gift to make the puf more
persuas market hire singer or crier to tell potenti victim what a great deal thei ar
get call from angri custom who realiz thei have been swindl ar known as heat
call these ar handl by someon claim to be the compani manag or vicepresid
boiler room staff
work in a boiler room is share by fronter closer and verifi
fronter
the fronter call victim and make the initi pitch thi lowlevel worker is usual
break into the busi and read from a script to the prospect custom fronter
seldom see the merchandis or know the full extent of the oper keep fronter in
the dark at least in theori limit what thei can tell investig and protect them in the
event of prosecut
closer
the closer is a veteran fronter pass an interest caller to their closer identifi as the
firm manag who convinc the person to bui
consum fraud financi transact
11710 2011 fraud examin manual
verifi
next the caller is pass to a verifi who read some vagu word about the deal and
record the person agreement these record ar intention vagu leav out the
pitch and kei detail essenti record onli the custom consent verifi also stall
custom who call back to complain heat call find reason why a littl more patienc
will solv the problem and in some case convinc the person to send a littl more monei
to help the process along
staff exploit
the custom of fraudul telemarket oper ar not the onli victim fronter ar
often poorli educ and easili taken advantag of by the career crimin who run the
oper salespeopl mai face hidden cost in a work agreement similar to the on
involv in the item thei push on unsuspect custom for exampl boiler room
oper hold back part of their phone list and sell them to crew member as hot lead
telescam veteran know how to oper a gift sting that bilk both the custom and the
salesperson oper overst the retail valu of the gift so the custom get less than
thei paid for then by give agent an inflat wholesal cost the oper can pai these
worker less commiss which is figur on the profit margin between wholesal
and retail
the salespeopl in boiler room ar sometim as desper as their victim most ar
unemploi with littl educ or market skill telemarket promis easi work
and big pai without ani experi mani pe opl who start out as fronter howev ar
serv an apprenticeship in their crimin career thei ar woo with car cellular
phone and other perk former worker have report that supervisor sprinkl line of
cocain along the phone bank tabl and threw hand of monei into the air promis the
proce to whoever made the next sale
natur there ar no social secur or payrol tax deduct from paycheck so
employe can ow big tax bill at the end of the year fronter commiss payment ar
often short or withheld paycheck frequent fail to clear the bank owner promis big
profit share for a month or two then shut down the busi thei tell the worker that
their asset have been frozen by creditor or regul worker lose their job and usual
their last week commiss for the last few month howev the owner have been
take in 25000 to 30000 a week
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11711
telemarket supplier
the telemarket industri reli on a number of sourc to suppli it phone script mail
list merchandis phone bank and autodial mail list and phone list ar sold for a
few cent per name list of peopl who have been stung befor or who have bad credit
record fetch between 10 and fifteen cent per name by suppli telemarket with the
tool of their trade these compani make telescam possibl mani of the supplier ar
awar of telemarket crimin intent and choos to ignor them
turnkei
turnkei compris an industri of their own by provid the collater a telemarket scam
need turnkei launder credit card receipt and check sell autodial and phone list and
provid the merchandis portrai as valuabl prize
legitim busi howev ar routin implic in thi scurril industri the us
postal servic for instanc carri ton of telemarket ad in the earli dai of the
industri telemarket us the postal servic to deliv merchandis cod but when the
postal servic mount an aggress campaign against fraud compani turn to credit
card bill to avoid the scrutini thei also us parcel deliveri servic or overnight
which ar not subject to feder mail fraud law by keep the valu of the merchandis
just below 300 telemarket avoid the minimum amount at which postal inspector ar
requir to investig fraud
independ servic organ
telemarket often have difficulti secur credit card servic from reput institut
mani bank will not open creditprocess a ccount for busi who do a substanti
amount of their busi in phone sale becaus these account typic incur a high rate of
chargeback feder law give consum 60 dai to protest charg to their card and if
success the issuer ha to absorb the loss mastercard and visa estim their loss from
phone fraud at 300 million a year
telemarket oper have learn the difficulti thei face when deal directli with
bank to circumv thi obstacl phone sale compani hire independ servic
organ which approach bank on the telemarket behalf the servic compani
agre with the bank to cover ani chargeback from the oper the telemarket is
requir to post a larg bond to cover potenti loss so the servic organ is also
protect from loss howev even with a halfmillion dollar bond the reserv fund can be
consum fraud financi transact
11712 2011 fraud examin manual
quickli deplet when custom start to realiz thei have been swindl leav the servic
compani andor the bank with enorm loss
factor compani
telemarket oper also commonli engag factor compani these group bui
credit card receipt from telemarket concern at a discount then us their merchant bank
account to convert the receipt into cash some factor charg as much as 30 percent of the
receipt gross valu to launder the slip factor is illeg in some state though crook
find wai to slip through loophol or disguis their allianc
intern factor compani
factor through asian and european merchant is becom increasingli common
factor compani in these countri tend to charg a lower price for their servic than
some other countriesbetween nine and 10 percent of the gross regardless of their local
factor have the opportun to make a great profit thei also howev face the risk that
bank will freez their account or sue them for excess chargeback in respons to the
loss suffer at the hand of dishonest telemarket bank and credit card compani
have start review their account to locat those busi with inordin number of
chargeback the financi institut close these account and mai file suit if the account
holder can be locat
checkcash establish
anoth conveni tool at the telemarket dispos is the checkcash store if a boiler
room oper wish to avoid the risk of set up a bank account that might be trace
or seiz custom person check ar taken to a compani that cash them for a small
fee these establish rare requir ani identif to cash the check custom mai
complain and try to stop payment on their check but thei ar ordinarili too late
common telemarket scam
senior scam
older peopl ar the favorit prei of telescamm in the us thei make up 11 percent of
the popul but constitut 32 percent of the victim of consum fraud and 50 percent of
all phone scam victim fortyf percent of senior citizen have been offer invest
by a person unknown to them senior own more than half of all financi asset in the us
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11713
fred schult author of fleec relat the pitch deliv to an elderli woman in
philadelphia by tim oneil the woman told detect about the more than 10000 for
which oneil and hi lieuten swindl her oneil call to mollifi the woman protest
wa record by the fbi on the line he insist the collect the woman bought
includ actual bullet excav from the civil war ar genuin and valuabl
do you wear pendant thi is a beauti is a diamond im not gonna ask you to
spend a penni
how old ar you god bless you 89
were gonna get that out to you look for it in the middl of next week and then give
us a call and then let us know how you like it
well i hope i put a littl sunshin in your dai okai honei and god bless you oh dont
cry now were here to take care of you well be here and if you need to talk to anybodi
at ani time you give us a call okai bye bye and god bless you
telemarket usual call in the even nighttim call find peopl of everi ag in more
impuls mood senior mai be more vulner to pitch promis them extra monei
and luxuri good becaus mani live on fix incom these lotterystyl gambit can seem
like an easi wai for the elderli to improv their financi statu
target the unemploi
the unemploi ar anoth favorit target for sweepstak pitch and job search servic
wherea the system ha left the jobless without hope the telemarket offer a wai
around offici channel peopl with bad credit pai telemarket to repair their credit
record or get a major card instead thei get a list of bank that offer credit card commonli
publish in newspap or an applic for a card that requir a secur deposit for
activ usual sever hundr or a thousand dollar these peopl ar also target by
advancefe loan scam which promis loan in exchang for a fee
affin fraud
affin fraud target group of peopl who have some social connect neighborhood
chiefli popul by racial minor especi immigr group ar often the site of
affin fraud religi and profession ti ar often exploit market technolog ha
consum fraud financi transact
11714 2011 fraud examin manual
made it possibl for a compani to bui target list not just by locat but accord to
bui habit leisur time activ and club membership the most expens list carri
the name of peopl who have alreadi fallen for a telemarket scam thi is call reload
chief among telescamm trick is obfusc salespeopl read off list of prize
emphas bigticket item like jewelri and car not mention that the odd of actual
win anyth besid a trinket ar astronom schult relat an incid in which
victim were told thei had won a winnebago victim were ask to pai a handl fee of
2900 a fraction of the cost of a new travel home about two month later victim found a
deliveri driver at their door with a winnebago tent
some oper actual encourag their mark to call and check with the better busi
bureau bbb and with former custom give out the number for the person to call
these number ring at phoni line set up by the scammer who give out a glow
recommend phone room have been known to set up refer arm with titl like
the better busi bureau of america or intern better busi bureau to
recommend their ventur if a potenti victim doe reach the better busi bureau
chanc ar the report will contain littl or noth of us the inform in these file is
usual ambigu and out of date
consol
when irat custom call telemarket back to complain their call ar rout to
profession who placat the caller with more promis and obfusc some boiler
room have a prearrang commun rout for lead complaint through four or five
differ depart thi tactic caus mani caller to eventu hang up without
have spoken to anyon in some instanc telemarket confront with furiou caller
threaten legal action do award someth of valu to the custom though the item is
usual worth far less than the person ha paid
if obfusc and consol prize fail to appeas the caller the con turn to threat and
intimid thi is a favorit method for deal with senior citizen especi elderli
women threat ar us not just to keep custom from file complaint but to cajol
more monei out of them some telemarket have actual threaten caller person
safeti if thei refus to pai
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11715
the odd in favor of catch a boiler room oper in progress ar usual poor
oper can select a town set up a room make their haul and leav again in a matter of
week or month when author raid a boiler room the oper ha typic alreadi
move on if the compani owner regist with state regul thei probabl did so
under an alia by the time polic arriv the perpetr have move on and the chanc of
find them ar slim
800 number
tollfre 800 number or other tollfre prefix such as 866 877 or 888 offer by
phone servic compani ar us by some oper the scam is a tollfre line
advertis in mailer flier and newspap ad to lure victim into make the call
themselv the tollfre number usual carri a record that direct custom to a 900
number that charg the caller between 3 and 10 a minut to hear record messag a
favorit devic of seller is to insist that the offer be made is good for less than 48 hour
to secur the opportun the custom hand over a cashier check to an overnightdeliveri
servic even if the victim doe have second thought he will be unabl to stop
payment on a cashier check
automat debit
the person check account is on of the most conveni tool for defraud
telemarket custom thank to advanc in electron bank technolog us
computer transfer busi can set up an automat debit to the buyer account
telemarket oper us thi devic to obtain payment befor victim can chang their
mind about their purchas wors telemarket can simpli us the inform to drain
the victim account thi inform is usua lly obtain by tell the victim that the
account number ar need to verifi elig for a giveawai or busi opportun
bank ar not respons for ani loss custom suffer in thi wai so there ar no
chargeback and littl recours for the swindl custom besid file a complaint even if
an investig of the complaint bring the scammer to court the chanc that the victim
will receiv restitut ar poor
busi opportun biz op
mani telemarket fraud ar aim at peopl start their own busi regul put
loss in fraudul busi opportun at over 100 million a year and most observ
think the number is far higher
consum fraud financi transact
11716 2011 fraud examin manual
workathom scheme
besid franchis offer and other miscellan busi scam the most preval fraud
involv workathom scheme and fccrelat invest victim of these phoni
offer do not see themselv as part of the telemarket prei thei believ thei ar
make a legitim busi invest
biz op promot often us a team approach in their enterpris the victim usual see an
ad and call a fronter who make the introductori pitch and then pass the victim to a
higherup next the caller is put through to a crier who endors the opportun and tell
the victim of the profit he made final a closer seal the deal and get the payment secur
as quickli as possibl
telemarket us businessrel term such as exclus territori annual gross revenu and
emerg market in these call thi help convinc the mark that the biz op is legitim a
loui harri poll found that 1 in 33 cold call for invest were success
some businesspitch oper ar complet fabric thei offer envelop stuf or
bookreview enterpris that do not realli exist scammer mail out postcard or bui cheap
ad in magazin and newspap some mai not even take ani phone call the ad
convinc the victim to send monei to a mailbox unlik the us postal servic which
requir identif from renter and divulg thi inform to anyon who inquir
privat compani will rent maildrop to anyon for a few dollar a month and can refus to
sai who paid for the box
fly and bui
some scam involv ventur such as vend machin pai phone and merchandis
displai rack thei often gain credibl by set up a front oper and invit
investor for tour thi part of the ruse is known as the fly and bui for exampl the
secur divis of the state of washington prosecut a case on behalf of a woman who
travel to colorado and met with a promot the promot offer to let her in on a deal
for video pool and video bowl game thrill with the demonstr and her tour
guid promis of quick profit she paid 13000 for machin that broke down in less
than three month when the woman complain to the promot about the shoddi of
the machin she wa sent two new on along with a bill
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11717
shoddi merchandis is a familiar element of the biz op scam the scam ar tailor for the
target audienc a maryland ring ran advertis in incom plu magazin and other
investorori public for a solarpow car batteri recharg in second your
off and run the ad claim the offer state that distributor were make over
200000 a year with the revolutionari devic but the machin were worthless on
investor took the recharg to an electrician and wa told it could recharg a batteri but that
it would take a few week
vend machin and pai phone scam
buyer ar promis exclus territori but find the same area ha been sold to mani
peopl often the machin do not work or thei simpli do not make ani monei sooner or
later the ruse is expos but in the short term the oper can make substanti proce
entrepreneuri enterpris
telemarket deal not onli in machineryori scam like those abov the rais of
exot anim like ostrich and emu for luxuri item and for slaughter ha been a popular
scam for a while includ weekend retreat to a model farm for wouldb rancher in the
last 10 year the 900 telephon number servic ha been us to swindl those who set out
to be swindler themselv peopl ar convinc thei can make a fortun charg between
3 and 10 a minut for record messag provid entertain psychic read or
inform avail for free from other sourc
scam involv comput technolog ar usual success due to the layman lack of
knowledg in that field although around 80 percent of american household own some
type of comput few actual understand the intric detail of how comput function
whatev the natur of the opportun there ar sign that indic that it is not legitim
among the most common
classifi ad urg the prospect to call an 800 number
wild unsubstanti claim about potenti earn
promis about exclus territori assur about good locat or the assist
of a profession locat
refer specifi by the compani
consum fraud financi transact
11718 2011 fraud examin manual
the lack of a complet disclosur document contain inform about the
promot experi lawsuit histori audit financi statement and substanti
for earn assert
invent scheme
in order to crack down on oper that offer fraudul invent promot the ftc
recent launch project mousetrap us ad these oper solicit inventor to
submit their product idea to the promot firm which supposedli special in bring
new product to the market invent ar supposedli evalu and apprais and nearli
alwai endors the firm offer to submit the product to manufactur for a fee
the us feder trade commiss charg the american institut for research and
develop inc aird and it predecessor american inventor corpor aic
with run a decept inventionspromot scheme that bilk consum nationwid
out of thousand of dollar each over a 20year time span promot us print ad in
person and telephon sale present to offer two basic servic 1 a feasibl
report price from 250 to 495 to evalu the patent and market of the
inventor product and 2 a represent ag reement that promis to prepar file and
prosecut a patent applic and to promot the product to industri repres the
represent agreement cost from 5490 to 11990 the complaint alleg that the firm
obtain design patent which have littl or no commerci valu instead of the util
patent thei promis furthermor peopl were told that onli a select few invent were
accept when virtual everi person who appli wa brought into the program aird and
aic also encourag their custom to expect huge financi gain when the trade
commiss charg in 20 year of busi perhap no more than 13 custom have
realiz ani financi gain at all as a result of the compani servic
victim receiv a useless recommend for their product and a code from the us
bureau of standard industri code sic the code gener a list of manufactur who
make product similar to the inventor but regul sai the list of manufactur that
come from classifi your idea with the sic usual ar of limit valu some victim
thought thei were secur a patent in their promot deal but instead receiv onli a
disclosur document from the us patent offic avail to the gener public for 10
the document is not a patent but a statement of evid of the date of concept of the
invent and doe not guarante right to ani futur product
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11719
employ servic
the phoni employ servic is similar in natur to the biz op prei on the
unemploi these scam promis good job mani of them oversea with the ad
entic of taxfre wage victim pai bet ween 250 and 1000 for the servic some
get list of govern job which ar usual avail for free or list from classifi
ad most get noth
credit servic
the simplest credit scam promis that the compani will secur a loan for the applic
regardless of credit histori and refer if the person pai an upfront fee usual between
35 and 75 check account debit ar a favorit payment method as ar 900 number
which charg by the minut up to 40 or 50 per call to hear inform wide avail
that provid no help in swai a loan for the listen usual there ar few or no loan
made occasion loan inform and applic mai be mail out to the victim but
usual after the fee ha been paid the oper ar not heard from again
credit repair scam
similar to loan scam ar those that promis to repair credit pitch men like to sai thei can
wipe awai or doctor or cosmetic blotch on credit insinu thei have wai of
chang or disguis a person credit histori despit the fact that there is realli no wai to
eras bad credit mani peopl fall for thi scam pai hundr of dollar to expung
their record
primer credit card
in thi scam telemarket compani assur custom thei can get major card for a small
fee even if their credit report is poor victim receiv an applic for a mastercard which
thei could obtain in ani depart store telemarket also push secur card which
requir a cash deposit usual a 250300 minimum to the issuer bank to activ
the card
gold card
a rel new credit card sting on the internet tout gold card statu for custom
regardless of credit histori the advertis claim applic will be process for a
major credit card in actual applic ar mere assist in file an applic for a
major credit card a worthless servic sinc applic ar quit simpl to complet and
submit for a larg upfront fee particip receiv a catalog card which is onli
consum fraud financi transact
11720 2011 fraud examin manual
redeem if the holder bui the compani overpr lowqual merchandis list in
the catalog as discount for cardhold even then an actual purchas mai requir pai
addit fee or cash deposit befor the custom is allow to charg the remaind
sinc the issuer do not report payment activ to ani of the credit report bureau us
the card doe not improv the custom credit rate
lotterieslotteri club
consum receiv a fals claim that thei have won or can get help to win a lotteri often in
a foreign countri most lotteri scam ar perpetr by con artist in other countri
sometim us us address to disguis their real locat sometim the lotteri
actual exist but invit to plai dont come from govern that oper legitim
lotteri or anyon connect to them the consum ha no wai of assur that thei will
receiv the ticket that thei pai for or in the unlik event that thei do win will ever be
abl to collect their monei potenti victim need to rememb that it is illeg to us the
mail or telephon to plai lotteri across border us law prohibit it not onli across
nation border but state line as well the consum could be accus of illeg activ
just by particip differ in legal system difficulti of conduct investig in
other countri and expens and other complic involv in pursu crossbord
fraud make the chanc of a consum get hi monei back veri veri slim
buyer club
thi scheme involv membership in discount bui club that consum never agre to
join or were sign up for through freetrial offer consum should bewar of
advertis for product at incred cheap price or free if the consum pai for
ship these offer mai be design to lure the consum into a buyer club membership
anoth wai to avoid be a victim of a buyer club scheme is to understand how a trial
offer work in mani case the consum will automat be charg for a membership
when the freetrial expir unless thei contact the club to cancel the consum should
ask for the detail of all membership offer in write befor thei agre to join if
unauthor charg or debit ar notic on monthli statement the consum should
contact their credit card issuer or bank and ask for their account to be credit for these
unauthor charg
travelvac scheme
offer of free or discount travel that never materi consum need to be skeptic of
offer for free trip airlin and other wellknown compani sometim oper contest
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11721
for travel prize howev there ar also compani that offer free trip to try to lure
peopl into bui their product or servic consum also need to know what is includ
with the trip a free or incred cheap trip mai have hidden cost for instanc the
cruis mai be free but the consum ha to pai to fly to the departur point and stai in a
hotel at their own expens or thei mai have to endur a long highpressur sale pitch for
a timeshar or travel club membership as part of the trip often the best travel deal ar onli
avail for offpeak time not dure school vacat holidai or other popular
travel date
to avoid be victim of travelvac scheme consum should confirm all travel
arrang if transport and hotel ar includ in the travel packag ask how to
contact those compani and confirm with them directli that the reserv have been
made consum should do their own travel research it easi to get inform from a
local travel agent or other sourc such as newspap book and the internet when
make travel arrang it is advis to pai with a credit card fraudul travel
oper can take a consum monei and run and even legitim compani can go out
of busi pai with a credit card allow the consum to disput the charg if the
promis that ar made ar not kept
slam
slam occur when a consum telephon or electr servic is switch from their
current compani to anoth on without their permiss long distanc is the most
common target of telephon slam but it can also happen with local or localtol servic
consum should read the fine print on all contest entri form coupon and other
promot materi as these might includ an agreement to switch phone servic feder
law requir that written agreement to chang phone servic must be separ document
not part of a prize packag or other materi if the compani offer a check for the
consum to switch the check must clearli state on the front and on the back in the
signatur area that the consum is agre to chang their servic
consum should alwai check their phone bill carefulli if the consum notic a new
compani name he should call the number that list on that portion of the bill and ask for
an explan if he ha been slam he should inform the compani that he did not agre
to us it servic he should then contact hi origin phone compani and ask to be
reinstat to hi old call plan under feder law the consum can switch back for free
and thei dont have to pai for the first 30 dai of servic from the slammer
consum fraud financi transact
11722 2011 fraud examin manual
real estat
real estat scam ar easili recogn there is almost alwai an element of time pressur
with the victim be convinc thei ar particip in a onceinalifetim nowor
never deal the investor ar led to believ there is no time to investig the ventur and
that if thei hesit thei will miss the opportun to make a fortun promis of big profit
for littl or no involv ar the norm in real estat scam the investor is also misl into
assum thei ar be let in on a special offer or an exclus deal by the promot
sinc the 1920 when thousand of american bought swampland in florida real estat ha
serv as a conduit for fraud a moderndai variat ha dispens with the actual land
entir and simpli sell inform compani tout the rich avail in real estat
through seminar and book that claim to offer secret wai to cash in the custom pai
for the secret info and get worthless tip in return
timeshar
anoth scam sell timeshar in condominium for vacation telemarket pass
themselv off as broker to condominium owner and purport to special in sell
timeshar
option
ad in the real estat section of newspap coax investor into bui option on
properti supposedli the option lock in a presentdai price on behalf of the purchas
who can exercis the option later if he wish to bui the land or to sell it at a profit
sometim the investor ha bought noth but a piec of paper the agent ha no
author to make deal on the properti occasion the option is onli valid for a few
month or is too vagu word to be enforc usual there is an actual plot of land
but in most instanc it is undevelop due to locat or zone restrict and is
therefor worthless
develop properti
the gener develop corpor of florida ran a legendari land fraud scam in which
potenti investor were shown lot and hous guarante to make them rich in thi
render of the buyandfli sham victim were shepherd and their contract restrict
until thei sign a deal for a lot the scam continu for approxim six year and cost
victim million
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11723
artrar item
land deal prei on the public rever for real estat the con who deal in art object
prei on a similar impuls the rever for the rare paint worth littl more than their
canva and oil ar tag as masterpiec sure to grow in valu the victim who fall for
these scam ar art novic who seem to unquestioningli believ the dealer apprais of
the objet dart
thi sort of will victim will bui lithograph print massproduc by the thousand
think thei ar purchas a limit edit ani anxieti the victim mai develop ar
calm by a promis 30dai no oblig trial and with certif of authent
accord to the ftc the most popular artist to counterfeit ar salvador dali pablo
picasso marc chagal and joan miro
collect and memorabilia
collect and household decor item such as vase bricabrac and figurin ar also
commonli hawk by telemarket again these supposedli valuabl object ar noth
more than cheap shoddi merchandis war memorabilia is especi popular particularli
item relat to the world war ii document and keepsak from ani bygon era ar on
the fraudul telemarket bestsel list stamp ar sold as rare when thei ar in
fact worthless
coin ar anoth prime moneymak for telemarket certif of authent and
apprais ar includ with the merchandis to reassur custom but needless to
sai these document ar usual produc by the sale compani or doctor from a
legitim origin
preciou stone
gem ar gener regard as item that will not lose their valu telescamm exploit thi
mindset by offer highqual gem for wholesal price custom ar told thei ar
be offer a special deal due to fluctuat in the market or becaus their name ar on
an industri list
the risk is minim victim ar told by acquir the stone wholesal the individu
minim the invest exposur the compani even offer it own brokerag servic
which can liquid the stone at a moment notic should the investor need the cash back
quickli the stone not onli have a grade certif and apprais document but ar also
consum fraud financi transact
11724 2011 fraud examin manual
seal in a plastic wrapper to guarante that their condit remain flawless the real
purpos of the seal which victim ar told must not be broken if the gem ar ever to be
offer for sale is to keep buyer from make a genuin inspect of the articl
onc a victim make a bui a compani spokesperson call a second time sai that if the
person bui more stone hi gemston portfo lio will be more attract to prospect
buyer and at auction advertis in compani literatur if the victim bui addit item a
compani broker will inevit call with good new the brokerag will have found a
buyer for the victim hold but befor the transact can go through the custom
must pai some minor fee these mai be pass off as finder fee broker
commiss examin fee intern duti or tax there mai be a provis
requir the victim to bui more stone befor make the sale
a variat on the scheme target those who have alreadi bought gem from telemarket
and whose name ar taken from insid list the caller claim to be a broker repres
an oversea buyer readi to purchas the listen portfolio but invari the buyer must
have a few more stone in the portfoliowhich the caller offer to supplyin order to
make the sale and there ar fee and commiss to be paid
preciou metal
the preciou metal market ha tradition been on of wide varianc price fluctuat
constantli and even expert have troubl decid what the next trend will be telemarket
oper plai on thi instabl with offer of gold silver and platinum onc again
victim ar told price will never be thi good again and that if thei hesit thei will miss a
singular opportun to make a fortun
900 numbers800 numbersintern call
900 number ar usual associ with psychic hotlin phone sex line and other dubiou
enterpris us 900 number custom can dial a prayer or even listen to the easter
bunni some caller insist thei did not know thei were be charg for the servic by
us a tollfre 800 number that then link the caller to the perminut charg promot
ar abl to surreptiti begin charg custom for call 800 number ar often us as
a front in telemarket oper to lead consum to think that a call is free when in fact
there ar hidden charg everywher a particularli viciou combin us a tollfre
number to make a present about commun servic onc the caller dial in the
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11725
computer servic automat put a monthli charg sometim label voicemail
on the caller phone bill
mani oper familiar to law enforc as tradit boiler room move into the toll
number when thei becam wide avail in the 1980 victim dial in think thei will
receiv inform on claim fund from abandon bank account or inherit from
long lost rel credit repair offer and advancefe loan servic us 900 number
extens sweepstak and prize giveawai ar promot thi wai as ar employ
servic real estat educ inform on govern program and auction and biz
op of everi kind the latest ruse us a 900 number to convinc peopl to invest in the 900
number busi
intern call
an offshor version of the 900 number scam us intern phone compani to reap
big dollar caller believ thei ar dial an intern number for free inform
usual about travel contest discount fare or oversea job but the phone number in
guyana and the caribbean charg up to 230 per minut for a record messag that run
for 15 minut the promot get a kickback from the phone compani in on case 37
cent per minut went to the scammer
sell free inform
compani involv in thi kind of scheme take out ad in newspap and magazin or
bui spot on talk radio promis thei can locat govern job get deal on liquid
equip or find student loan all thi inform is avail cheapli or free to the
public through govern offic on the internet and from other sourc on need onli
know where to look
scholarship servic
mayb the most wide broadcast offer in the info racket is the colleg scholarship locat
servic student aid inc a new york citi firm provid an exampl sai guarante
student and their parent that for a 97 fee thei would receiv at least 1000 in
scholarship or grant in realiti govern prosecutor show the defend almost
never obtain scholarship monei for consum sai us a common claus in it
contract to keep from pai refund requir student to produc letter of reject
from everi scholarship on their search list even though the list includ scholarship whose
deadlin had pass or for which the student did not qualifi
consum fraud financi transact
11726 2011 fraud examin manual
whatev inform scholarship servic do provid is avail for littl or noth at
most a 5 or 10 fee from legitim institut the perpetr impli that thei have
insid connect or that thei actual administ the dispers of moni when in realiti
thei mere provid list of scholarship offer by foundat and univers
in most case inform scam sell freeli avail materi there is also a version that
doe offer the inform for free but stick a charg on anywai the intern call
scam promis free inform on travel contest and discount fare the inform
itself doe not cost anyth but the call to get it cost from 3 to 6 a minut for a 15
minut call
chariti front
an increas number of group call themselv nonprofit charit concern ar not
what thei appear veri littl or no monei goe to the advertis caus polic and firemen
associ have in some case lent their name to telemarket fund drive that onli give
about 35 percent of their collect to the group some boiler room oper claim to call
for these groupsor for drive against a dise as or underprivileg childrenwhen thei ar
in no wai affili with the chariti
a twist to thi scam is the imperson of handicap worker by boiler room oper
phone pro call victim claim to be handicap or disabl and attempt to sell light
bulb and other household product the merchandis is price at three time it actual
valu the monei is of cours pocket by the oper
doortodoor promot
sweepstak promot us a chariti front offer the possibl of new car and cash prize
to contributor the raffl approach ty the number of chanc to a set amount
help drive up how much the victim is will to give a favor devic of phoni chariti is
to send schoolag children doortodoor sai thei ar rais monei for antidrug
program or for a group that take underprivileg kid on trip some of the children repeat
what thei ar told in exchang for a few dollar other believ thei will receiv reward and
free trip when in fact thei too ar be scam
prize sweepstak discount servic
the most common giveawai is known as the 1in5 a postcard arriv in the mail tell
the receiv thei have alreadi won a prize a new luxuri vehicl top the list along with
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11727
5000 in cash a diamond necklac a live room set and 500 in gift certif for
cloth and household furnish the odd of win ani of the prize ar astronom
victim ar given trinket or coupon redeem onli for the compani own
shoddi merchandis
winner who call back ar often ask to stipul how thei intend to spend their win
for the compani record or for public materi then thei will be ask to pai a
process fee or to prepai the tax on their win sometim winner pai immedi
by dial a 900 number that charg them for a 10minut call even if thei hang up
immedi thi practic is a further violat of telemarket law which requir a toll
number to disconnect within 30 second after the caller hang up
magazin subscript
a product front for prize hawker is the magazin subscript servic prepaid
subscript offer extract monei from custom through credit card and bank debit
then never deliv the public in other instanc the process fee far exce the
actual valu of the subscript
offic and household suppli
a scam that ha recent becom preval involv copi machin toner an invoic for
toner is sent to a compani the con have usual call beforehand gotten the name of the
employe in charg of suppli and address the invoic to that person although the
offic never order or receiv ani toner the con men ar reli on poor commun
to cover their ruse the invoic will most like be sent to the account depart and
paid if the proper control ar in place at everi level of busi oper thi scheme
should be detect too mani busi howev ar vulner to thi kind of scam
the caller mai get the compani repres to accept a trial or promot ship of
the product he mai claim to be a supplier for the compani or a new salesman from a
regular supplier the product arriv and an invoic follow a coupl of week later if the
compani tri to send the product back it is return to them to avoid further
complic the compani will normal pai the bill just to put an end to the situat
ani sort of offic suppli from paper to shelv to clean product can be part of a
scam medic suppli ship to doctor offic and clinic ar push in a similar fashion
individu household can be the target of these ploi as well water purifi ar often us
consum fraud financi transact
11728 2011 fraud examin manual
in tandem with giveawai offer the victim bui a filter devic at an inflat cost in order
to qualifi for the giveawai pyramidstyl oper often us household product and
healthrel merchandis such as vitamin or skin cream as part of their machin
phish
phish is a popular scheme that involv trick busi or individu into provid
password account number or other sensit data by claim to be from an actual
compani the victim doe busi with a solicit for inform appear to come from
a legitim busi and can occur over the phone such as a call from the victim bank
sai their account ha been compromis and request pin number account number
or password or via email which is the most common techniqu an individu receiv
an email that appear to come from ebai paypal or a financi institut the email state
that the custom must immedi log into hi account in order to updat hi inform
the link direct the individu to a fake site that captur hi identifi inform such as
social secur number and pin mother maiden name and financi account number
it is crucial for peopl to recogn phish so that thei dont fall victim to it
phish occur mostli by email as describ abov the sender of the email pretend
to be a legitim bank govern agenc or retail and ask the recipi to confirm
hi person inform for ani of these or other madeup reason the person
account will be close if thei dont give the inform an order ha been place in
their name or their inform ha been lost becaus of a comput glitch dont ever
respond to these email legitim bank govern agenc and retail would not
email you for your password of other identifi inform
do not click on ani link in an email that ask for your person inform the link
includ in the email sent by phisher will take you to a phoni websit that look just
like the websit of the real compani or agenc if you follow the instruct you
would enter your person inform which would go straight into the hand of
ident thiev
iron phisher mai even sai that thei ar from the fraud depart of popular
compani and ask you to verifi your inform becaus thei suspect you mai be a
victim of ident theft other tactic includ the phisher claim to be from a state
lotteri commiss who request peopl bank inform to deposit their
win in their account again never disclos ani person inform via email
phish can also happen by phone verifi caller ident and contact their compani
for legitimaci instead of fraudster send spam thei might call you and pretend to be
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11729
from a compani or govern agenc make the same kind of fals claim and
ask for your person inform if someon contact you and sai that you have
been a victim of fraud verifi the person ident befor you provid ani person
inform legitim credit card issuer and other compani mai contact you if there
is an unusu pattern indic that someon els might be us on of your account
howev thei onli ask if you made particular transact thei dont request your
account number or other person inform law enforc agenc might also
contact you if youv been the victim of fraud to be on the safe side ask for the
person name the name of the agenc or compani the telephon number and the
address then get the main number and call to find out if the person is legitim
phisher also target peopl who list themselv on job search site thei pretend to be
potenti employ and ask for your social secur number and other person
inform befor give anyon your person inform follow the abov advic
and make sure to verifi the person ident
be suspici if contact unexpectedli and ask for your person inform it is
difficult to determin a compani legitimaci by read an email go to a websit or
talk to someon on the phone if your contact unexpectedli and ask to give out
your person inform a red flag should go up that someth is phishi
legitim compani and agenc do not oper thi wai
act immedi if youv been hook by a phisher if you provid account number
pin or password to a phisher notifi the compani with whom you have the
account right awai for inform about how to put a fraud alert on your file at
the credit report bureau and other advic for id theft victim contact the feder
trade commiss id theft clearinghous wwwconsumergovidtheft or tollfre
8774384338
smish or tish
smish is a hybrid of phish and short messag servic commonli known as text
messag it us much the same approach of phish but deliv an alarm messag via
sm the protocol us to us transmit text mess ag via cellular devic instead of email
crimin activ such as smish can be seen as the prelud to onlin fraud target
mobil devic user as these devic continu to evolv cyber crimin will take
advantag of function to obtain inform as well as deliv mobil malwar to
mobil devic
consum fraud financi transact
11730 2011 fraud examin manual
voic phish or vish
vish is a form of phish attack where email for on reason or anoth direct
recipi to dial a 1800 number where an autom record request that caller enter
person inform us a touchton phone
pharm
pharm is an attack in which a user is fool into enter sensit data such as a
password or credit card number into a malici websit that imperson a legitim
websit it is differ from phish in that the attack doe not have to reli on have the
user click on a link in the email to direct him to the fake websit pharm actual exploit
a vulner in the dn server softwar that allow a hacker to acquir the domain name
for a site and redirect the websit traffic from a legitim site to a fals on so even though
the user type in the correct websit address the pharm program send the user to an
illegitim site that look like the real thing unknowingli the user is then provid
password and inform directli to the hacker
recoveri room
recoveri room oper target those who have alreadi lost monei to a telemarket
scam pose as a consum advocaci group or a law firm telemarket offer victim a
chanc to recov ani fund thei mai have lost and bring the perpetr to justic onc
the victim agre legal investig and other fee will begin to emerg
ponzi and pyramid scheme
definit
a ponzi scheme is gener defin as an illeg busi practic in which new investor
monei is us to make payment to earlier investor a simpl invest scam rake in as
much monei as possibl and then disappear a ponzi stai in busi by turn some of
the monei back into the game a few conspicu reward earli on will whip up interest the
busi will grow and then if theyr smart and lucki the oper will split
everyon involv pretend to mount a legitim organ but littl or no commerci
activ take place payoff ar made from the pool of investor fund the rest is siphon
into oper pocket scheme mai run for at least a year some ponzi have flourish
for a decad or more
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11731
in account term monei paid to ponzi investor describ as incom is actual
distribut of capit it like give awai the store instead of share profit your share
cash reserv
approach thi crime analyt we can see into the mechan of the fraud illeg cash is
hidden in secur or other financi instrument promot us phoni account phoni
book and phoni name success prosecut have to uncov these guis and track the
fund plu the inner work of a ponzi oper have to be summar for a juri
whose member ar probabl not mathematician or account
madoff and stanford ponzi rise again
in earli 2009 ponzi scheme becam headlin new when bernard berni madoff plead
guilti to a 50 billion ponzi scheme the largest in us histori and r allen stanford wa
charg with run an 8 billion dollar ponzi
bernard berni madoff
introduct
on decemb 11 2008 feder bureau of investig agent arrest bernard
berni madoff a 70yearold businessman and former chairman of the nasdaq
stock market and charg him on a singl count of secur fraud accord to the
charg document the arrest came after madoff told two senior employe later identifi
as hi son that hi invest advisori busi wa basic a giant ponzi scheme
estim that investor lost approxim 50 billion in hi fraud feder prosecutor
howev put the amount at 648 billion
background
befor hi arrest madoff enjoi a sterl reput recogn as a financi
mastermind in 1960 madoff found hi invest compani bernard l madoff
invest secur llc with 5000 he earn from hi job as a lifeguard and a
sprinkler instal the busi eventu becam on of the five brokerdeal that
help creat the nasdaq stock exchang which madoff later chair and establish
itself as on of the top market maker busi on wall street the sixth largest in 2008
madoff wa also a wide respect philanthropist devot hi time and wealth to
numer charit caus he not onli establish hi own multimilliondollar privat
consum fraud financi transact
11732 2011 fraud examin manual
foundat that donat monei to educ cultur and health chariti he also serv
on the board of sever nonprofit institut
madoff invest scheme
even though it is not clear when madoff invest fraud began feder investig
believ the fraud mai have begun in the 1970 while madoff himself state that it began in
the 1990 it is clear that madoff unusu consist return show annual
return from eight to twelv percent were not the result of hi invest strategi
befor hi confess madoff claim that he gener the steadi return by emploi a
splitstrik convers invest strategi which is a fairli common approach that
involv a combin of stock and option under thi strategi an investor attempt to
gener predic return and reduc volatil by hold a portfolio of stock close
correl to an index while concurr sell option on a stock index and bui put
option on the same index
in realiti howev madoff did not invest ani of hi client monei accord to irv
picard the truste overse the liquid of madoff asset there wa no evid to
indic secur were purchas for custom account instead madoff simpli deposit
hi client monei into hi busi account which he then us to pai client who request
withdraw in other word madoff wa run a ponzi scheme
unfortun for madoff hi scheme began to unravel in decemb 2008 when the
financi crisi caus an increas demand of cash withdraw from hi client the
increas in redempt caus hi scheme to collaps when there were not enough fund from
new invest to pai them off
how madoff made it happen
unlik most ponzi scheme which collaps in a few year as withdraw exce deposit
madoff con last longer spread farther and caus more loss than ani similar scheme
in histori understand the madoff case rais the question how did madoff fool so
mani peopl for so long of cours there is no singl answer to explain the success of
madoff scheme but there ar sever factor that contribut to it unusu prosper
includ hi abil to attract new investor maintain stabil and avoid detect these
ar explor in the follow section
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11733
attract new investor
madoff abil to attract new investor is on reason for hi scheme success for year
madoff scheme did not collaps becaus he successfulli rais enough monei from new
investor to keep pai return sever factor contribut to madoff s abil to entic
new investor most significantli report of solid longterm and lowrisk return
regardless of the market environ lure new investor through a fals sens of secur
unlik most ponzi scheme madoff did not promis extraordinari return instead he
promis stabil and longterm profit in other word madoff attract new investor by
avoid the appear of risk
similarli hi reput and profession statur provid comfort to hi investor as a
major figur in nasdaq a pioneer market maker and a govern advisor on
market issu madoff rsum wa except madoff also enjoi a longstand
reput as a modest and humbl individu a man who put hi famili first and donat
much of hi time and monei to sever charit caus
moreov madoff lure new investor by promot secreci and exploit the complex
inher to the industri madoff emphas secreci by keep hi investor and invest
strategi from the gener public which creat a sens of exclus and an enigmat
entic in hi invest account addition madoff understood that the complex
and cryptic natur of the secur industri caus investor to feel that it is a disciplin for
peopl who ar much smarter and he exploit thi by market hi splitstrik convers
invest method as too complic for outsid to understand these characterist
allow madoff to shift investor fear from the risk of lose monei to the risk that thei
might miss out on make monei creat an environ ripe for fraudul practic
maintain stabil
in addit to attract new investor some expert suggest that madoff successfulli
avoid larg unexpect withdraw that would lead to the collaps of hi scheme by
target wealthi individu and chariti sinc the wealthi feel ani econom downturn
last and least such investor provid madoff with the monei he need to keep hi scheme
go similarli professor mitchel zuckoff author of ponzi scheme the true stori of
a financi legend argu that by target chariti madoff could avoid the threat of
sudden or unexpect withdraw zuckoff sai that charit foundat ar legal
requir to spend onli five percent of their fund each year and that thi low rate of
withdraw allow madoff scheme to avoid detect as long as he attract new
investor
consum fraud financi transact
11734 2011 fraud examin manual
a void detect
despit multipl sec investig and alleg of fraud begin as earli as 1999
madoff invest scheme continu without detect there ar sever reason for thi
in particular he construct hi invest busi to avoid most regulatori oversight and
other check and balanc although privat invest pool such as hedg fund ar
subject to limit oversight madoff firm wa a differ kind of entiti unlik privat
invest pool which us an outsid brokerag firm to execut their trade madoff firm
wa a brokerdeal with an assetmanag divis allow the firm to process all of
it own trade similarli while most privat invest pool typic keep their client
fund or secur with an extern custodian madoff firm kept it fund inhous
essenti these practic help keep hi activ hidden from view
madoff also avoid the oblig to us a pcaobregist auditor by structur hi
firm as a privat held brokerdeal thi allow hi firm to us an unknown audit
firm with onli three employe on of whom wa a 78yearold live in florida and no
other larg wall street client
equal import is that madoff avoid file requir disclosur of hi firm hold
with the sec madoff did thi by sai that hi firm sold all of it hold for cash at
the end of everi report period
in addit to oper hi busi on the outskirt of regul madoff avoid
detect by discourag the us of prudent investor tool like due dilig audit
statement and understand of invest strategi notabl evid show that madoff
kick some investor out of hi fund for ask too mani question likewis madoff
reportedli shun question from invest media about hi strategi and as note
abov madoff conduct hi invest busi with great secreci and even refus to
provid client with onlin access to their account
red flag
with the benefit of hindsight it is easier to see the red flag in madoff invest advisori
busi and if noth els the madoff saga can provid some simpl lesson to help
identifi and prevent similar ponzi scheme the most appar red flag ar discuss
below
steadi return
the most obviou red flag wa that madoff firm gener consist steadi posit
return dure hi seventeenyear track record with no down year and veri few neg
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11735
month regardless of market condit and even though madoff attribut thi to hi
splitstrik convers invest strategi a techniqu that can gener profit over mani
year thi type of strategi will gener some down month and exhibit more volatil than
madoff report return in other word madoff profit were too good to be true
extrem secreci and lack of transpar
madoff secreci and lack of transpar in the oper of hi busi and invest
process provid yet anoth red flag as disc uss abov report indic that madoff wa
extrem secret regard hi invest strategi specif madoff never clearli
defin hi splitstrik convers strategi which other trader could not duplic and he
refus to answer question ab out hi invest strategi in addit madoff did not
provid hi client with a high level of detail in their monthli statement and refus to
provid onlin access to their account
madoff also kept inform from other employe at hi firm accord to a senior
employe madoff kept the financi statement for the firm under lock and kei and wa
cryptic about hi invest advisori busin ess which he oper from a separ floor
when discuss it with other employe
lack of job segreg
the lack of job segreg wa anoth red flag that should have rais concern about
madoff oper unlik typic hedg fund that us a network of thirdparti servic
provid to perform certain function madoff firm perform these oper intern
and with no thirdparti oversight a hedg fund network of thirdparti servic provid
typic includ an invest manag to manag the asset a broker or broker to
manag the trade a fund administr and a custodianprim broker these third
parti provid essenti check and balanc necessari to protect individu and
institut madoff firm on the other hand perform these function intern madoff
not onli trade hi manag account inhous by oper as a brokerdeal he also
maintain custodi of hi client asset indic that there wa no independ custodian
to verifi the exist of asset
small account firm
on of the most signific red flag wa the firm unknown auditor friehl
horowitz a firm that emploi onli three peopl clearli it seem inconceiv that a
threeperson oper could adequ audit a firm of madoff size and complex
furthermor the account firm had onli on activ account david friehl who
had not regist with the pcaob an independ agenc that wa creat under the
consum fraud financi transact
11736 2011 fraud examin manual
sarbanesoxlei act to help detect fraud similarli the firm wa not peer review a
process in which audit organ assess each other for intern qualiti control
accord to the aicpa the account firm wa not requir to particip in ani peer
review becaus friehl inform the group that the firm had not conduct audit for 15
year
on march 18 2009 friehl becam the second person charg in the fraud scandal
accord to feder prosecutor friehl wa charg with secur fraud aid and
abet investmentadvisor fraud and for file fals audit report to the sec
unusu fee structur
the structur of the firm compens also rais red flag unlik most hedg fund
which charg manag and perform fee madoff firm earn commiss on each
trade thi unusu fee structur rais mani question why would the firm not act like a
hedg fund and profit from big gain why would it let thirdparti distributor get these
fee
tip from more than on sourc
final outsid analyst rais critic question about madoff firm for year for
exampl in 2001 an articl that appear on the marhedg websit titl madoff
top chart skeptic ask how serious question madoff abil to deliv
incred consist return a subsequ barron articl titl dont ask dont
tell rais the same concern note that some on wall street remain skeptic about
how madoff achiev such stun doubledigit return
still the most notabl critiqu came from independ fraud investig harri
markopolo cfe cfa in 1999 markopolo start a campaign to persuad the
sec that madoff return could not be legal gener us the invest strategi
that he claim to us despit receiv littl attent markopolo continu to send
sec offici inform about madoff and in 2005 markopolo present the sec
with a 17page memo titl the world largest hedg fund is a fraud in the memo
markopolo outlin 29 red flag in madoff busi deal and argu that madoff
wa either frontrun client order or oper the world largest ponzi scheme thi
time the sec respond to markopoloss tip and initi an investig
unfortun the investig did not uncov ani evid of a ponzi scheme
final sever financi institut includ goldman sach group inc and credit
suiss group ag either refus to do busi with madoff or advis their custom
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11737
against it in fact goldman sach blacklist madoff firm after it fail to pass their
standard of due dilig
conclus
in 2009 madoff plead guilti to eleven feloni includ on count of secur fraud
on count of wire fraud on count of mail fraud and three count of monei launder he
wa sentenc to 150 year in prison he ha also been order to forfeit 170 billion
dollar the amount prosecutor sai flow through hi busi given the size scope and
complex involv in the fraud the process of unravel madoff web of financi
deal could take year and the full extent of the damag caus by hi scheme mai never
be known
secur and exchang commiss v stanford intern bank et al
r allen stanford a promin financi philanthropist and sponsor of sport team had
been on the radar of regul for year thank to the oddli stabl and gener return
offer by hi firm certif of deposit but recent the secur and exchang
commiss sec perhap inspir by madoff alleg 50 billion ponzi scheme took
a renew interest in stanford and hi oper on februari 27 2009 the sec file
a complaint alleg that stanford three of hi compani and two of hi execut carri
out a massiv ponzi scheme for at least a decad involv billion of dollar of investor
fund
the parti
plaintiff
secur and exchang commiss sec
defend
stanford intern bank ltd sib
stanford group compani sgcinvest advis to sib
stanford capit manag llc scginvest advis to sib
r allen stanford stanfordchairman chief execut offic and sole sharehold of
the stanford oper
jame m davi davisdirector and chief financi offic of sfg and sib
laura pendergestholt pendergestholtc hief invest offic of sfg and a
member of sib invest committe
consum fraud financi transact
11738 2011 fraud examin manual
relief defend
stanford financi group sfg
the stanford financi gr oup bldg inc sfgb
the alleg
the secur and exchang commiss file a number of alleg against the
defend in it first amend complaint file on februari 27 2009 with the us
district court for the northern district of texa dalla divis these alleg
includ
stanford and davi misappropri billion of dollar of investor fund and
falsifi sib financi statement in an effort to conceal their ponzi scheme
pendergestholt facilit the scheme by misrepres to investor that she
manag sib multibillion invest portfolio of asset and emploi a sizabl
team of analyst to monitor the portfolio
sib sold approxim 8 billion of certif of deposit cd through
deceiv investor about the secur of the cd and the asset in which the bank
wa invest
stanford and davi invest an undetermin amount of investor fund in
specul unprofit privat busi control by stanford
stanford and davi fabric the perform of sib invest portfolio in
order to cover up their scheme and to keep investor fund flow in the fabric
financi inform in no wai reveal the true perform of the bank
invest portfolio
sgc and scm advis us materi fals and mislead histor
perform data to sell more than 1 billion of a proprietari mutual fund wrap
program gener fee for sgc and scm in excess of 25 million
the defend violat or aid and abet violat of the secur act of
1933 the secur exchang act of 1934 the invest advisor act of
1940 and the invest compani act of 1940
the red flag
despit be such an opaqu oper oper in a minim regul jurisdict
and offer suspici stabl return on it invest sib did an excel job of
attract investor and field regul for quit some time and whether or not
stanford is guilti of run the alleg 8 billion ponzi scheme remain to be seen but
regardless of the outcom of the case on cannot deni the exist of a number of warn
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11739
sign indic of a ponzi scheme or other invest fraud the red flag discuss below
should have had investor and regul intrigu if not downright apprehens
impress yet oddli stabl return
sib purport to achiev doubledigit return on it invest for the past 15 year not
onli were the return oddli stabl but thei were quit impress especi for such a
liquid invest often more than doubl the return offer by big bank for exampl
the interest rate offer by sib in februari 2009 on a oneyear cd requir a 50000
minimum invest in the unit state wa approxim 45 accord to the
bank websit while bankratecom report the averag interest rate offer by us
bank to be about 2 even more interest is that despit massiv loss in the stock
market and hedg fund in 2008 sib claim to experi a loss of onli 13 for that
period and continu to pai out aboveaverag return
opaqu invest strategi
there wa a stun lack of transpar into the invest strategi us by sib the
bank claim to gener it impress return by invest the cd monei larg in
corpor stock real estat hedg fund and preciou metal but offer few specif even
in it annual report sib strategi is a bit unusu as most issuer of cd invest cd
monei in higheryield us treasuri bond or similarli conserv instrument
market materi claim that the bank wa abl to offer substanti higher return as
a result of invest in a welldiversifi portfolio of highli market secur issu by
stabl govern strong multin compani and major intern bank and
also as a result of antigua low tax and moder overhead cost
incred small audit firm
the 14person antiguabas account firm ca hewlett co seem grossli
inadequ to audit the book of a bank that claim to manag and advis 50 billion in
investor fund but that who stanford reli upon for hi audit need
inbr govern structur
the independ and object of the bank board of director were question given
that the sevenmemb board wa domin by stanford insid famili and friend
veri high level of spend
although sell cd is typic a lowmargin busi stanford wa abl to offer much
higher than averag compens to broker includ larg bonus luxuri car and
expens vacat stanford empir wa also known to spend vast sum of monei on it
consum fraud financi transact
11740 2011 fraud examin manual
mani offic addition stanford compani were a big corpor sponsor of
profession sport team and charit caus and thei contribut heavili to polit
campaign
unusu background of chief invest offic
the qualif of pendergestholt the chief invest offic of sfg and a member of
sib invest committe ar insuffici to explain her meteor rise to the top of
stanford empir she did not have a busi school degre nor did she have ani
experi as an analyst at a wall street firm or larg mutual fund compani all of her
train wa receiv on the job while work for stanford
concern voic by a number of former brokersemploye
over the year there have been a number of grievanc includ lawsuit and public
arbitr case air against sfg and sib by former employe and broker includ
claim that the firm were run a ponzi or pyramid scheme claim that
employeesbrok were dismiss for object to and rais concern about the legal of
the firm practic claim that the firm us investor monei to financ it brokerag arm
and claim that the firm misl investor by offer artifici high yield on their cd
revoc of bank licens in montserrat
prior to stanford intern bank stanford oper guardian intern bank
which also issu question cd in the british territori of montserrat in the
caribbean but in 1991 after the local govern move to revok guardian bank
licens under hazi circumst stanford reloc to antigua and renam hi bank
stanford intern bank
at the time of thi write the onli charg against stanford and davi were civil fraud
charg pendergestholt howev had been arrest by feder prosecutor and charg
with crimin obstruct of justic to which she plead innoc for give mislead
statement to sec investig perhap prosecutor hope to secur a quick guilti plea
from her so that with a plea deal in hand thei can us her as a wit against stanford
and davi regardless of the outcom of the case investor should be wari ani time thei
come across a yield far higher than averag with no clear plausibl and legal explan
illeg pyramid or ponzi scheme
what the differ between an illeg pyramid scheme and a ponzi scheme thei both
us new investor monei to make payoff but theyr run veri differ by their
promot and legal theyr prosecut under differ law
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11741
first well distinguish between legal and illeg pyramid scheme then well show how a
ponzi scheme and an illeg pyramid ar the same thing onli differ
pyramid scheme legal and illeg
illeg pyramid gener revenu by continu recruit new member these oper
mai offer merchandis or servic for sale but the onli signific revenu come from
recruit
some legitim merchandis compani us a pyramid structur to rank their employeeown
and to determin those peopl compens but a pyramid structur becom a
pyramid scheme when the compani make it monei by recruit peopl instead of sell
a product or servic the group deal primarili in new membership join the group allow
the new member to profit by sign up new member the process continu until the
avail pool of new member is drain which happen sooner than on might think
usual there a product or a caus that front the illeg pyramid scheme as a legitim
enterpris promot shill beeswax supplement or claim theyr work to prevent youth
crime a favorit product front offer cours in area like investor educ or self
esteem these materi usual convei veri littl pertin inform in fact theyr
noth more than motiv tract design to make the victim a more enthusiast
particip in the pyramid
in ani case regardless of the product front an illeg pyramid emphas recruit first and
foremost the product or servic take a back seat to get new sucker sign up
as a rule of thumb most court appli the 70 percent rule thi requir that at least 70
percent of distributor profit come from retail sale of cours thi figur can be hard to
verifi distributor routin sign falsifi complianc statement becaus if thei dont
promot warn the author will shut the whole thing down and everyon lose
in the final assess legal rest on what the oper emphas if the compani
emphas the recruit of new member over the sale of product and if the onli wai
to recogn promis rich is through recruit then the oper will like be
classifi as an illeg pyramid
consum fraud financi transact
11742 2011 fraud examin manual
what the differ between an illeg pyramid and a ponzi scheme
illeg pyramid ar promot as pyramid ponzi scheme ar promot as invest
opportun
the kei element in a ponzi scheme is that initi investor ar paid with subsequ
investor monei there is litl or no legitim commerc
the same thing occur in an illeg pyramid nobodi sell the beeswax supplement
theyr all coax new peopl to put up monei the origin member of the pyramid get
rich on subsequ investor monei so a pyramid is a ponzi scheme
how about the obvers is a ponzi scheme a pyramid the distinguish factor of the
illeg pyramid is the continu need for new investor each new member recruit two
member who each recruit two and so forth
ponzi scheme like pyramid requir a steadi march of new investor fund to pai
dividend thi evergrow pile of loot might look like a pyramid when graph so in the
sens that it requir exponenti growth to avoid collaps a ponzi scheme is a pyramid scheme
the differ between a ponzi and a pyramid li in how the oper is promot
illeg pyramid announc themselv as pyramid thei hype level or stage in their literatur
the pyramid structur help draw new player each believ that thei will rise through
the rank of the pyramid to becom golden or fulli vestedwhatev hokei titl the
scammer have concoct
a ponzi scheme on the other hand masquerad as some type of invest in financi
instrument miner right or some other form of specul the particip believ
theyr bui mortgageback secur or partial interest in an oil well thei have no idea
theyr funnel monei into a bottomless pit certainli no on suggest move on to the
next level of the pyramid becaus the pyramid isnt part of the pitch
when an enterprisenuskin intern for exampl promot itself as an
organ with level or stage and the onli wai to rise through the level is to recruit
new member the promot ar run an illeg pyramid scheme befor tim and
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11743
melinda rommel su nuskin thei were true believ sprinkl nuskin product across
their bathroom and kitchen serv splash nuskin answer to tang for breakfast everi
dai and even redecor their hous at the behest of nuskin consult all for the
purpos of snare new recruit the rommel su becaus thei were misl about their
opportun insid the organ thei knew all along thei were join a pyramid thei
just thought it wa a legal on
when an enterpris promot an invest opportun that invest littl or none of the
particip monei and that us new invest dollar to make dividend payment the
promot ar run a ponzi scheme
distinguish between ponzi and pyramid seem a bit academ but the differ
becom signific when perpetr ar brought to justic to prosecut an illeg pyramid
the enforc team need to show that the offend gener revenu mainli through
recruitmentth compani pyramid structur is an element of the charg pyramid
scheme ar sometim charg as illeg lotteri becaus prosecutor have successfulli
argu the particip ar total depend on the action of other for ani compens
in anoth prosecut strategi oper ar charg with fals repres potenti
earn sinc the mathemat limit of the pyramid make the promis 10000 a month
imposs or extrem against the odd again the pyramid structur itself is an issu in
the case
in summari
if oper make the bulk of particip earn depend on recruit and
emphas level and stage in their promot we call thi an illeg pyramid
if oper claim theyr offer an invest opportun but conduct littl or no
commerci activ we call thi a ponzi scheme
categori of ponzi scheme
ponzi scheme ar classifi accord to the front us in their promot the categori
ar pure cash which includ endless chain scheme and fillandsplit game and product front
which includ financi instrument mlm and specul
consum fraud financi transact
11744 2011 fraud examin manual
pure cash scheme
there ar two gener type of pure cash scheme endless chain and fillandsplit game
endless chain
the most outrag pyramid scam dont bother to hide their stripe thei dont us
servic or product to establish their legitimaci instead thei us the chain letter
approach the recipi of the letter send a sum of monei 5 50 100 the amount vari
but isnt usual veri larg to the person who mail them the letter then pass the letter
on to three or four other
probabl studi have shown that 93 to 95 percent of the player in a pyramid everyon
but those at the earliest initi will lose most of their monei fulli half can expect to lose
everyth thei put in
some internet chain have becom known as administ pyramid scheme everi
exchang in the chain is monitor by a central administr who make sure everybodi
plai and pai along the administr take a cut of each transact
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11745
fillandsplit game
the best wai to launch a pure cash pyramid is to jazz it up with game element some kind
of hook to keep player attent focus on their rich and not how stupid their latest
opportun realli is these ar sometim call fillandsplit game a popular version
of thi approach ha been known as airplan each player bui a seat on a fictiti
airplan pai from 200 to 2000 a seat depend on the scale of the game initi
player help recruit new passeng and move up through the rank of crew copilot
and pilot when a flight is fulli book with someth like six passeng four crew
member a copilot and a pilot the plane take off the pilot and crew ar paid for the
flight and everybodi move up the rank just like a real airlin a plane investor ar
constantli look to fill their seat
anoth variat of the fillandsplit game tri to capit on the phenomen profit
yield over the last 15 year by the american stock market call financi network
market climb or anoth financialsound name these pure cash pyramid us a busi
metaphor in their pitch a typic oper spread 15 peopl over four level eight investor
bui into the network as vicepresid abov them ar four presid just below two
cochairman posit at the top sit pretti is the chairman everi time the eight slot
at the bottom ar fill averag price 1500 to 2000 the pyramid split the chairman get
out of the game with a golden parachut and everyon move up the corpor ladder
anxious scan for new recruit
these game ar usual predic on what becom known as affin fraud new player
ar recruit by their affin with exist particip peopl comb religi group or
commun associ for fresh lead affin mai be racial or cultur financi
network for exampl ha target a number of africanamerican commun
church synagogu and other religi organ offer fertil hunt ground and
great cover from promotersan endors from a clergyperson is as good as gold and
law enforc author ar often reluct to meddl in religi affair affin fraud
mai also prei on social group or profession organ
product front
the categori of product front is subdivid into financi instrument mlm and
specul
consum fraud financi transact
11746 2011 fraud examin manual
financi instrument
financi instrument such as stock borrow certif currenc exchang loan
scam and invest poolsar perfect tool for the ponzi artist charl ponzi victim
in 1920 thought thei were invest in postal repli coupon that ponzi assur everyon
yield whop profit by plai off the exchang rate of intern currenc in our
own time as legal tender in mexico brazil and asia rollercoast from on extrem to the
next the currenc exchang still make an ideal ponzi front
a stock market that gain 25 to 30 percent a year and individu stock quadrupl
sometim in a matter of month encourag the impress that all anyon ha to do is put
down their monei and wait by the mailbox unscrupul promot like to tout new item
like internet stock and biotechnolog startup but ani product will do even in thi wire
ag commod futuresfrom soybean to pork belliesar still number among the
most common bait for ponzi scheme
financi instrument ar especi effect front becaus most peopl dont understand
how legitim financi oper take place when wall street is set aflutt by
deriv of futur contract and hedg fund ar bet that the market will rise at the
same time theyr bet it will fall how is an averag investor with 20000 suppos to
understand hi option
multilevel market
when most peopl hear about a pyramid scheme thei think multilevel market or mlm
as it often abbrevi these organ hawk nutrit supplement household good
cosmet televis antenna insur long distanc phone servic everyth from
antiqu to zinc also among the offer might be copi of how to make a million dollar in
an mlm on of the industri monster monei maker is a string of train materi
design to pump the sale forc into ever higher feat of huckstership
math remain the great enemi as well as the prime tool of mlm promot scratch
matric never pyramid on a chalkboard and comput what 20 peopl mail monei to a
distributor hous everi month would amount to in a year time these shiller ignor
other aspect of the equat first the market for ani product outsid those own by larg
nation brand is extrem small cash in on a submarket requir an excess of savvi
financ and luck which most mlmer lack in spade then there pyramid
mathemat after a coupl of level you ru n out of peopl will to hear your spiel
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11747
which wa alreadi less than 5 percent of ani area popul in fact between 90 and 95
percent of mlm oper fail in their first two year compar to a 7080 percent failur
rate for small busi in gener
as a rule of thumb ani organ that recruit distributor into a pyramidstyl
compens plan offer big payoff for recruit sai more than 100 per recruit and
spend more time trumpet it distributor level than it product line is probabl illeg
specul
for the purpos of thi cours the term specul describ ani invest proposit not
cover as financi instrument or mlm thi includ franchis offer and busi
opportun in gener workathom promot and invest in area like real estat
or miner right these ar good oldfashion invest except when theyr ponzi
scheme
franchis scam hawk such opportun as pai phone busi or vend machin by
their natur such busi ar spread out geograph and dont involv much direct
contact with the promot and the franchis holder
workathom promot ar also favorit tool of the franchis scammer comput
technolog is a popular front sinc thousand of peopl realli ar set up busi from
their home a few earli dividend check per the ponzi playbook ar often enough to
overcom a client hesit and provok a more sizeabl invest then the promot
can fold up and move to anoth state or anoth coast
bigmonei specul often base their highflown claim in the ground beneath our feet
land and the miner drawn from it like gold coal and oil ha ancient been regard as
the ultim commod the ground is the fundament of everi human endeavor so perhap
the land swindl is also the fundament of fraud someon somewher it seem ha alwai
been sell flood lot to homestead salt gold mine with chunk of pyrit or
assur a rich merchant the new aqueduct will cut across the thousand acr of desert he
just bought for a song
obvious a commerci environ that thrive on specul is ripe for ponzi fraud
rememb the ponzi element in a ponzi scheme is onli a techniqu give back a few
dollar to sweeten the pot anyth that can coax peopl to part with their monei from
consum fraud financi transact
11748 2011 fraud examin manual
emu farm to underwat land develop can be run as a ponzi all the name ponzi
realli mean is that a few mark get paid thi lend a competit element to an otherwis
runofthemil fraud instead of everyon lose some lucki player do make monei
specul fraud dont alwai start out as con but when their rollercoast dip mani
specul find it too tempt to hang on and ride thei figur thei can phoni their wai
through the crisi and pick up again later again it math that usual doom these player
thei simpli cant make monei fast enough to feed the deficit thei need a payoff so big
noth short of a miracl or more fraud will suffic
specul can quickli get caught in a chain reaction where each fraud demand more
fraud by the time these organ ar shut down theyr spend half of their resourc
or more just cover up their crimin act
spot pyramid scheme
almost everyon know what a pyramid scheme is peopl see them expos on televis
and read about them constantli in magazin and newspap so if everyon is so well
inform about the pyramid how doe it surviv
it could be that familiar ha lull the public into a fals sens of secur pyramid have
sever strong weapon at their dispos
thei do pai off unlik a simpl con game in which the fraudster throw the ruse grab
the cash and exit pyramid build up the take by pai initi investor thi make
for excel testimoni earli player circul the word and bring in new mark initi
payoff also keep earli player come back payoff make the enterpris look legitim
and fuel the expans process charl phillip elliot ran hi invest busi
pyramidstyl for 16 year take in more than 60 million from 1100 investor when
elliot wa bust a busi associ quip elliot paid like a slot machin he lull
everyon to sleep 2
thei oper mainli through preexist affili commun group religi
organ and social club all make entic target for pyramid ani pyramid
requir a healthi pool of particip so a larg group alreadi gather togeth is ideal
besid that pyramid know how to manipul the trust that peopl place in these
group
2 holzman todd busi datelin octob 1987 page 16ff
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11749
thei us ingenu and fals logic in their pitch the product front avail for
pyramid ar myriad from bath soap to electron front in financi instrument
and real estat ar especi effect becaus most peopl dont understand how those
busi work anywai pure cash game find clever metaphorslik a conceptu
airplan or a busi execut hierarchi to make themselv attract
pyramid of everi stripe us a seduct though fals logic in their pitch everybodi ha
friend and associ you onli have to sign up three or four peopl below you of cours
the law of mathemat spell doom to thi logic there simpli arent enough player to keep
even a small pyramid run three peopl each find three peopl will quickli plai out
their avail friend and associ if not mathemat then social there also a
reason limit on how quickli monei can grow
the pyramid then is built to overcom peopl most common misgiv about invest
promot offer far more than an undertak of great advantag nobodi to know what it
is thei ar veri specif in their prospectu the offer sound good and within it own
logic make sens the opportun is usual pitch by someon familiar to the victim
or at least by someon with an affin the victim trust most importantli the pyramid doe
return peopl monei with the incred profit attach as promis
speed is anoth potent weapon in the pyramid arsen con sai get in now or regret it
forev thei dont have time becaus of market demand or commit elsewher
for the person to check out the deal that becaus a moder amount of due dilig
research will expos the deal as a scheme
the final factor is greed a recent poll quot in charl whitlock easi monei reveal
that when peopl receiv telephon call from a bogu invest compani on in twenti
took the bait the victim had no prior contact with the salesperson or the compani but
still five percent of them bought but there wa a catch the poll also report that
consid all those stung by a telephon fraud onli two percent of those call
themselv trust and just two percent of those who call themselv openmind had
been the victim of fraud simpli put person with healthi live strong famili ti and an
honest work ethic ar not as like to get burn as peopl who ar lone desper and out
to make a quick buck of cours as our exampl have shown the rang of peopl caught in
pyramid scheme ha no bound plenti of victim ar experienc care profession
who have either let down their guard or becom ensnar by the cleverest of sham
consum fraud financi transact
11750 2011 fraud examin manual
franchis fraud
franchis is part of the american dream a gatewai to busi ownership for million of
american franchis is estim to account for more than 40 percent of all retail sale in
the unit state a percentag that is expect to reach 50 percent in a few short year
accord to a report issu by the hous committe on small busi but the dream of
busi ownership can be easili shatter by fraud
franchis regul
in 1978 the us feder trade commiss ftc enter the realm of franchis regul
by enact disclosur requir and prohibit concern franchis and
busi opportun venturesth ftc rule 16 cfr part 436 as state by the
ftc the rule is design to enabl potenti franchise to protect themselv befor
invest by provid them with inform essenti to an assess of the potenti
risk and benefit to meaning comparison with other invest and to further
investig of the franchis opportun as thi mission statement suggest the ftc rule
address the disclosur made by franchis to potenti franchise as oppos to ongo
issu in the relationship between franchis and franchise and other issu that aris in the
termin of franchis relationship
but the 1978 enact of the ftc rule did not lead to the erad of fraud claim in
franchis relationshipsamong the rule defici it doe not creat a privat civil
action mani state legislatur have enact law that supplement the ftc rule illinoi is a
good exampl of a progress state in franchise law the rule howev preempt ani
inconsist state disclosur law
the ftc franchis rule
the ftc franchis rule prohibit fraud in the initi sale of a franchis in which the
franchis affect interst commerc under the rule franchisor must furnish potenti
franchise with written disclosur provid import inform about the franchisor
the franchis busi and the franchis relationship and give them at least 10 busi
dai to review it befor invest
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11751
franchisor mai make the requir disclosur by follow either the rule disclosur
format or the uniform franchis offer circular ufoc guidelin prepar by state
franchis law offici
the rule impos six differ requir in connect with the advertis offer
licens contract sale or other promot of a franchis in or affect commerc
the rule requir franchisor to give potenti investor a basic disclosur document at
the earlier of the first facetofac meet or 10 busi dai befor ani monei is paid
or an agreement is sign in connect with the invest
if a franchisor make earn claim whether histor or forecast thei must have a
reason basi and prescrib substanti disclosur must be given to a potenti
investor in write at the same time as the basic disclosur
the rule affect onli ad that includ an earn claim such ad must disclos the
number and percentag of exist franchise who have achiev the claim result
along with cautionari languag their us trigger requir complianc with the rule
earn claim disclosur requir
the franchisor must give investor a copi of it standardform franchis and relat
agreement at the same time as the basic disclosur and final copi intend to be
execut at least five busi dai befor sign
the rule requir franchisor to make refund of deposit and initi payment to
potenti investor subject to ani condit on refund state in the disclosur
document
while franchisor ar free to provid investor with ani promot or other materi thei
wish no written or oral claim mai contradict inform provid in the requir
disclosur document
the ftc alon ha jurisdict to enforc the rule howev ani misrepresent in a
ufoc certainli could be us to support claim for fraud under state statutori andor
common law the ftc rule preempt inconsist state law as a practic matter it creat
a minimum disclosur standard which mani state have equal or enhanc by statut
state law
more than half of the state have enact either gener franchis disclosur law or busi
opportun law or both approxim 15 state have enact franchis disclosur law
that creat a caus of action for failur to regist a franchis with the design state
consum fraud financi transact
11752 2011 fraud examin manual
agenc andor failur to provid the appropri disclosur to the prospect franchise in a
time manner those state includ california hawaii illinoi indiana maryland michigan
minnesota new york north dakota oregon rhode island south dakota virginia
washington and wisconsin these state law give franchis purchas import legal
right includ the right to bring privat lawsuit for violat of the state disclosur
requir the state statut provid damag or resciss as the remedi avail to
the success franchise
about 25 state have adopt law that regul the offer and sale of a busi opportun
and such legisl might be applic franchis agreement those state includ alaska
california connecticut florida georgia illinoi indiana iowa kentucki louisiana
main maryland michigan minnesota nebraska new hampshir north carolina ohio
oklahoma south carolina south dakota texa utah virgina and washington
other remedi
common law fraud
the failur of the ftc to outlaw fraud in franchis specif beyond the disclosur
phase doe not leav a defraud franchise without remedi common law fraud is
applic in gener a common law fraud action requir proof of a know or recklessli
fals represent or omiss of materi fact relianc and injuri
addition a contract mai be voidabl for fraud in the induc which occur when on
parti enter into a contract base on the other parti fraud for exampl if on parti
deliber misrepres materi fact to the other the contract will be unenforc at
the option of the aggriev parti but claim of fraud in the induc disclosur fraud
ar often defeat by carefulli draft languag in the franchis agreement
rico
the racket influenc and corrupt organ act rico 18 usc 1961 et seq
is the most power antifraud statut avail to civil litig becaus it provid for
automat trebl tripl of damag plu attornei fee and costsand rico is highli
relev to franchis there have been sever case where class action plaintiff have
establish rico claim base on the ongo systemwid fraud that had occur
concern the advertis fund
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11753
overview of franchis
under the ftc rule as well as the statutori andor common law of all or almost all of the
state there ar three prerequisit to appli the rule to a busi format or product
franchis trademark signific control or assist and requir payment
trademark
the franchis offer the right to distribut good or servic that bear the franchis
trademark servic mark trade name advertis or other commerci symbol
signific control or assist
the franchis exercis signific control over andor offer substanti assist to the
franchise in the oper of the franchis busi
requir payment
the franchise is requir to pai the franchis these payment usual includ initi
franchis fee and ongo royalti that ar calcul as a percentag of sale net of sale
tax anoth typic fee is a transfer fee that is applic on the sale of a franchis
fraud in franchis mai occur at each stage of the franchis relationship creat
disclosur relationship and termin issu
disclosur issu
disclosur issu aris when the franchis fail to commun materi inform or
disclos fals inform to induc the franchise to purchas a franchis that he would
not have otherwis purchas two prime exampl of potenti mislead inform
ar earn claim and success rate
earn claim
assum that a prospect franchise reli upon earn claim publish by the franchis as
a kei factor in hi decis to bui the franchis but those earn claim ar materi
mislead or even blatantli fals thi is a prime exampl of disclosur fraud in connect
with the franchis induc of potenti franchise to bui the franchis
disclosur fraud histor ha been the primari target of franchis regul the ftc
report that from 1989 to 1992 100 percent of it franchis enforc case were base
on alleg that the franchis had provid fraudul or mislead earn claim but
consum fraud financi transact
11754 2011 fraud examin manual
surprisingli the ftc doe not requir franchis to disclos earn the ftc rule
provid for the disclosur of earn claim regard actual or potenti sale incom
cost or profit of either exist or prospect franchise is option but if a franchis
elect to make earn claim it must have a reason basi for those claim
absent publish earn claim the prospect franchise is vulner to nonwritten
boast earn claim made by franchis salespeopl who make their live sell
franchis instead of sell the underli good or servic those nonwritten claim mai
turn out to be fals but the franchis mai try to protect itself by includ in the written
franchis agreement a no relianc or integr claus that state in effect
franchise acknowledg that thi agreement is the entir agreement of the parti and
that in enter into thi agreement he or she is not reli upon ani statement or
represent that mai have been made on or befor the date of thi agreement which ar
not expressli made a part of thi agreement
claus similar to thi on often have been us to defeat claim of fraud submit by
franchise who were induc to sign a contract base upon the franchis verbal
represent
success rate
anoth import disclosur issu is a franchis claim that x percent usual a high
percentag of it store have been success in other word thei have remain in
continu oper from open dai to the present but the franchis salesperson mai
not have told the franchise that a number of store were sold mani time and in each sale
the old franchise sold the store back to the franchis who resold it to a new franchise
would that addit inform be materi to the prospect franchise would failur
to disclos that inform amount to fraud
the ftc rule doe not requir franchis to disclos resal or turnov from on
franchise to the next
relationship issu
fraud in franchis is not limit to disclosur fraud onc the franchis relationship is
establish the franchis and franchise stand in a busi relationship that typic
involv the transact of fund at sever level under a seri of contract
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11755
the payment of royalti under the franchis or licens agreement for the right to us
the franchis trademark trade name and busi system
the payment of rent under a leas or subleas of real properti andor equip
contribut to an advertis fund
all of these financi transact mai be subject to claim for breach of contract fraud or
breach of a fiduciari duti of cours to determin the exact claim you must consult the
exact languag in the franchis agreement
numer issu also mai aris in the cours of the franchis relationship each of which
reflect an inher tension between the interest of franchis and franchise
train and support ha the franchis provid the level of train and technic
support that wa promis
control what degre of control is the franchis en titl to exercis over the franchise
product supplier and price to what extent mai the franchis deriv profit from
the franchise supplier relationship
new product to what extent doe the franchis have a duti to introduc new product
to keep ahead of the competit onc the decis to introduc new product is made
is the franchis held to ani standard of care to ensur that the product is success
expans or contract of the system doe the franchis natur desir to expand the
franchis system conflict with a franchise de sire to maxim profit at hi locat
convers what duti if ani doe a franchis ow to franchise in a particular
market if the franchis plan to withdraw from that market
encroach to what extent doe the franchis have a duti to refrain from open
new outlet too close to exist unit how close is too close if the licens
agreement is silent
expans by the franchise to what extent is an individu franchise desir to expand in
conflict with what is best for the system as a whole
reinvest mai a franchis requir a franchise to reinvest a portion of hi revenu
back into the busi doe it depend on whether the franchise own or leas the
real estat
termin issu
the end of a franchis relationship also mai provid ground for litig
renew doe a franchis have a duti to renew a franchise beyond the initi term of
hi licens agreement
consum fraud financi transact
11756 2011 fraud examin manual
earli termin under what circumst mai a franchis termin a franchis befor
the expir of hi contractu term
sale of a franchis under what circumst mai a franchis veto a franchise
propos sale of hi franchis to a thirdparti
posttermin restrict on competit to what extent mai the franchis restrict the
franchise right to compet after termin even if a franchise is allow to
compet after the franchis relationship is end the franchis mai sometim validli
demand that the franchise leav hi busi telephon number to the franchis as it
depart the system
ident theft
ident theft is an increasingli frequent type of fraud that is nondiscriminatori in natur
anyon can be target the victim might be a colleg student a retire a schoolteach or a
success attornei even corpor ar suscept to ident theft
2010 ident fraud survei report
accord to the 2010 ident fraud survei report conduct by javelin strategi research
the number of ident fraud victim in the us ha increas to 11 million from 10 million
report in the 2009 report although the total annual fraud amount increas by 125
percent over the previou year to 54 billion the report found that detect and resolut
effort ar work well
some of the kei find of the survei were
the mean consum cost of ident fraud decreas 25 percent from 496 per incid
in 2008 to 373 per incid in 2009 as a result of faster detect lower fraud amount
and quicker resolut time
social network fraud and potenti threat will like escal in the upcom year
on of the danger of social network site is the public displai of person
inform person page and account profil can expos sensit person
identifi inform and hint on how to easili find it crimin can harvest thi
inform to take over account or open fraudul account
contrari to prior year data onlin ident theft method constitut 42 percent of
fraud case in 2009 the other signific group of known case occur through
tradit method when a crimin can make direct contact with the consum
person inform the common method of access includ
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11757
obtain from a lost or stolen wallet checkbook credit card or other physic
document
access while conduct a purchas or transactionaccess by friend
acquaint rel or inhom employe
stolen from a compani that handl your financi data
stolen paper mail
although there is no univers definit of ident theft the depart of justic offer
the follow definit
ident theft and fraud ar crime in which someon wrongfulli obtain and us anoth
person person data in some wai that involv fraud or decept typic for econom
gain
person identif data includ name address social secur number date of birth
mother maiden name or other identifi inform the perpetr exploit thi
inform by open bank or credit card account take over exist account
obtain loan leas car or apart or appli for wireless telephon and util
servic in the victim name without hi knowledg
technolog advanc that facilit the electron transfer of person inform
and the transmiss of financi transact have greatli contribut to the recent increas
in occurr of ident theft as such technolog continu to develop thi type of fraud
will like remain a seriou problem that affect mani peopl
the profil
unlik some fraudster who steal as the result of a perceiv need most ident thiev
make a live steal ident for profit or at the veri least to supplement their incom
gener although it can be an employe friend or rel gener the fraudster usual
fall into on or more profil
been convict serv time in prison wish to conceal hi ident
been convict serv time in prison and look for a safer wai to commit a crime
and stai out of prison
colleg student look for an easi wai to work hi wai through school
landlord
rental car agent
consum fraud financi transact
11758 2011 fraud examin manual
illeg alien need an ident
illeg telemarket
common wai of obtain inform
while you might think that you ar care with your person inform in realiti a lot of
inform can be easili found and acquir by ident thiev without you even realiz
it an innoc inquiri for the most basic of inform such as verifi an address or
mother maiden name for a banker file can be the start of a financi nightmar the
most common wai inform is obtain ar
sort through discard trash
shoulder surf
rifl through cowork desk drawer
theft of mail incom or outgo
us an accomplic within the organ
solicit identifi through fals job applic scheme
telephon compani health club and school
certif and licens place on workplac wall
us pretext ruse or gag call
rental and loan applic
public record
the internet
sort through discard trash
most peopl do not destroi their person financi data thei simpli throw it awai with the
rest of their trash for pickup by the garbag collector on their regularli schedul dai
solicit for preapprov credit card ar some of the most valuabl piec of trash that
an ident thief can steal addition dumpster dive as it is more popularli known as
can yield check credit card and bank statement or other record that bear your name
address and telephon number in addit to target an individu trash dumpster
diver target the trash at bank insur compani hospit and other busi
locat that an individu ha no control over
shoulder surf
shoulder surf is anoth popular wai that the ident thief obtain inform the
person watch from a nearbi locat and listen to someon telephon convers or
watch the number be punch for a call card or credit card thu obtain enough
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11759
inform to us or procur a credit card ident thiev also watch potenti victim as
thei fill out bank deposit slip thu get account inform
rifl through cowork desk drawer
when peopl leav for break go to lunch or take vacat or sick leav mani if not most
do not lock up their desk or offic mani peopl also leav person item in their desk
drawer such as bank statement monthli credit card statement or mortgag coupon
book all of which have us inform for an ident thief
theft of mail incom or outgo
theft of mail in either direct provid us inform to the fraudster outgo
check left for the mail carrier to pick up provid bank account number and other
inform that can be us for illeg purpos
exampl
us just a driver licens number and bank account number a thief wa abl to
withdraw more than 30000 from a secur guard check account in thi case the
thief us the drivethrough at the secur guard bank to deposit a seri of stolen monei
order and simultan make larg withdraw
us an accomplic within the organ
sometim the ident thief is abl to compromis someon within an organ and
obtain enough inform where credit can be obtain it mai be a bank employe who
ha access to social secur number and bank balanc or an insur clerk who ha
access to person inform such as name address social secur number and medic
inform all us when assum someon ident
solicit identifi through fals job applic scheme
fill out a job applic might also be the sourc of inform to ident thiev
peopl believ that thei ar fill out a job applic when in realiti thei ar onli
suppli person inform to a thief
util compani health club and school
util compani health club and school all carri identifi that a fraudster can make us
of onc again the social secur number is us on mani applic and is a kei to
obtain other inform
consum fraud financi transact
11760 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a california woman us a stolen social secur number to obtain thousand of dollar
in credit and then file for bankruptci in the name of her victim she wa sentenc to 16
month in feder prison in addit to the prison term she wa order to pai restitut
in the amount of 13928 and pai a 5000 crimin fine
she admit that she assum the ident of anoth woman with a similar name in order
to obtain loan that she wa not qualifi to receiv the fbi began investig the case
after it wa contact by the victim an english professor at a univers in georgia the
professor had graduat from a colleg in arizona that the defend also briefli attend
and both women had receiv student loan that were administ through the same
compani
due to a comput mixup document belong to the professor which includ her
social secur number were sent to the defend shortli thereaft the professor began
receiv telephon call from compani that she had never heard of claim she ow them
larg sum of monei
certif diploma licens place on workplac wall
someth as innoc as a diploma profession certif or licens can be the
identifi inform that a fraudster us to obtain a fals ident in the case of a
profession licens some state requir that it be displai in a promin place
consequ inform such as the name address and licens number is readili avail
to the thief
us pretext ruse or gag call
us pretext ruse or gag call claim to be a person to whom person inform
would normal be releas is common in an ident theft sinc there is no wai to verifi
the person on the end of a phone line with photo identif have onli a small amount
of inform can yield the addit data the fraudster seek
for exampl a number of individu have report be call by peopl claim to be
court personnel the caller state that there is an outstand warrant for the individu due
to unpaid ticket or failur to appear for juri duti when the individu protest hi
innoc the caller sai that it must be a mistak and ask the individu to provid hi
driver licens number social secur number and birth date so that the caller can confirm
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11761
that a mistak ha been made the caller now ha all the inform need to steal the
individu ident
rental and loan applic
almost without except rental and loan applic yield enough inform that can be
us to establish a fals ident an applic name social secur number previou
address employ histori telephon number and credit histori ar requir to
complet the applic onc the thief get a hold of that inform it is usual quit
easi to establish an ident
public record
public record yield a wealth of person data for the ident thief real estat record tax
lien licens litig record and in some state driver licens number all reveal
enough inform that can be us to steal a person ident or least provid a start for
the fraudster
the internet
the internet offer mani opportun to the ident thief it ha made much inform
avail to more peopl at a small cost it ha also been an attract place for ident
thiev to find their victim onc you have log on inform you thought wa privat
might now be trace by anyon who is interest in find person inform about you
identifi inform such as password credit card number and in some case bank
inform ha been made avail via the internet spam or unsolicit email is
frequent respond to by mani peopl who ar unawar that the sole purpos of the e
mail is to obtain person inform
exampl
a midwestern woman wa accus of try to get a 25000 loan through an illinoi
bank us person inform she found on the internet the victim a colleg professor
call polic when the bank sent the complet applic to her home rather than to the
home of the accus the same woman reportedli obtain a mastercard under anoth
professor name and ran up almost 3000 in charg
in addit some databas compani sell inform your person inform onlin
to person or organ that you might not want to have that inform thu
increas the chanc for fraud and abus for exampl inform you provid by
consum fraud financi transact
11762 2011 fraud examin manual
respond to a questionnair onlin might be collect and sold to insur and drug
compani without your knowledg the same can be true when appli for a lowinterest
credit card or consum loan do you know who is actual receiv the inform that
you provid onlin there is no physic address to check out in most case
the internet also is a sourc for inform broker for a fee inform broker will
reveal the most person aspect of your life from financi inform to medic
inform for fee as low as 40 per search thei will disclos everyth from nonpublish
telephon number to the locat of your safeti deposit box some of it is legal
and can be found in public record but some of it is illeg
track down the thief
there ar mani wai that the fraud examin can track down an ident thief some requir
the assist of law enforc while other do not exampl of techniqu that have
been successfulli us to catch an ident thief ar
establish surveil of the address in question
have overnight deliveri servic flag the address in question
subpoena telephon record for the telephon be us by the perpetr
contact credit bureau and have them fl ag the true account holder file
contact the social secur administr to determin if the number is list twice in
the system
obtain video from retail show the perpetr make purchas us the
victim ident
obtain a copi of the perpetr pictur on the fictiti driver licens
track down address and telephon number that do not belong to the victim but show
up in their file
have the victim notifi the fraud examin when further breach occur
report the fraud to law enforc
confront the fraudster
if the fraudster ha been identifi and is to be confront the fraud examin should keep
the follow in mind
on initi contact call the fraudster by the wrong name gener he will then produc
identif in the name of the victim
try to establish the fraudster true ident
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11763
for safeti reason us caution when confront the thief never forget that the
fraudster could be a convict felon who doe not want to go back to prison
feder ident theft statut
there ar two primari feder law that address ident theft the ident theft and
assumpt deterr act and the ident theft penalti enhanc act
ident theft and assumpt deterr act
in octob 1998 congress pass the ident theft and assumpt deterr act
ident theft act to address the problem of ident theft specif the act outlaw the
intent and unauthor us of anoth individu identif with the intent to
commit a crime
it carri a maximum term of 15 year imprison a fine and crimin forfeitur of ani
person properti us or intend to be us to commit the offens the penalti is
increas to a maximum of 30 year imprison if the offens is commit to facilit
an act of terror ident theft scheme mai also involv other violat such as mail
fraud wire fraud credit card fraud or financi institut fraud
violat of the act ar investig by feder investig agenc such as the us secret
servic the fbi and the us postal inspect servic and ar prosecut by the
depart of justic
ident theft penalti enhanc act
in august 2004 congress pass the ident theft penalti enhanc act 18 usc
1028a thi act strengthen feder law on ident theft by creat a crime of aggrav
ident theft aggrav ident theft occur when an individu us a stolen ident to
commit other crime specif thi law provid that where on knowingli transfer
possess or us without law author a mean of identif of anoth dure and
in relat to ani feloni violat ofor relat to fraud embezzl fals statement
and the like an addit term of imprison of two year will be impos on the
individu in april 2005 the unit state sentenc commiss went an extra step to
impos consecut mandatori minimum sentenc of two and five year depend on the
underli offens of misus a stolen identif the guidelin becam effect
novemb 1 2005
consum fraud financi transact
11764 2011 fraud examin manual
see the chapter on the law relat to fraud in the legal section for more inform
about thi act
exampl
a wisconsin man wa sentenc to 21 month imprison and three year supervis
releas after plead guilti to ident theft the defend wa also order to pai
restitut total 62850
the perpetr pled guilti to us anoth man ident to obtain employ with a
clean compani then us that employ to commit a burglari
through hi job at the clean compani the fraudster gain access to the offic of the
wisconsin suprem court where he took six comput monitor own by the state of
wisconsin the monitor were recov almost immedi follow the burglari after the
thief abandon the vehicl that he wa drive
grammleachblilei act
the grammleachblilei act which protect custom financi inform held by
bank work in person financ creat privaci oblig for financi institut
specif financi institut have privaci oblig under the act financi privaci
rule and safeguard rule the financi privaci rule requir financi institut to
provid their custom with privaci notic explain the institut polici for
collect and share person financi inform convers the safeguard rule
requir all financi institut to design implement and maintain safeguard to protect the
confidenti and integr of custom person inform
addition the grammleachblilei act includ a provis that prohibit pretext
thi statut make it illeg for anyon to obtain custom inform from financi
institut by imperson someon els or make fals fictiti or fraudul
statement it also prohibit solicit someon els to engag in pretext violat of
thi provis can result in a fine imprison of up to 5 year or both
more inform about other provis of the grammleachblilei act can be found in
the sourc of inform chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin
manual
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11765
red flag rule
on januari 1 2008 the ident theft red flag regul red flag rule which updat
section of the fair and accur credit transact act of 2003 becam effect issu
by the feder trade commiss ftc and five feder bank regulatori agenc the red
flag rule requir financi institut and creditor ie bank institut retail
util car dealer etc to develop and implement a written ident theft prevent
program to detect prevent and mitig the risk of ident theft for both new and exist
account in numer industri includ financi servic util health care and
telecommun
the agenc also issu guidelin to assist financi institut and creditor in develop
and implement a program includ a supplement that provid 26 exampl of ident
theft red flag
more inform about the red flag rule can be found in the financi institut
fraud chapter abov
state law
state have also pass law relat to ident theft below is a list of us state and
territori that have pass such law other state mai be consid legisl in their
next legisl session in addit where specif law on ident theft have not been
pass there mai be remedi under other state law
alabama alabama code 13a8192
alaska alaska stat 1146565 570
arizona ariz rev stat 132008
arkansa ark code ann 537227
california cal penal code 53058
colorado colo rev stat 185902
connecticut conn stat 53a129 crimin
conn stat 52571h civil
delawar del code ann tit 5 854
district of columbia dc offici code 2232270204
florida fla stat ann 817568
georgia ga code ann 169120 through 128
guam 9 guam code ann 4680
consum fraud financi transact
11766 2011 fraud examin manual
hawaii hi rev stat 70883968
idaho idaho code 183126 crimin
illinoi 720 ill comp stat 516g13
indiana ind code 3543535
iowa iowa code 715a8 crimin
kansa kan stat ann 214018
kentucki ky rev stat ann 514160
louisiana la rev stat ann 146716
main me rev stat ann tit 17a 905a
maryland md code ann art 27 231
massachusett mass gen law 39737e
michigan mich comp law 44565
minnesota minn stat ann 609527
mississippi miss code ann 971985
missouri mo rev stat 570223
montana mon code ann 456332
nebraska ne rev stat 28608 620
nevada nev rev state 205463465
new hampshir nh rev stat ann 63826
new jersei nj stat ann 2c2117
new mexico nm stat ann 3016241
new york ny cl penal 1907719084
north carolina nc gen stat 141132023
north dakota ndcc 1212311
ohio ohio rev code ann 291349
oklahoma okla stat tit 21 15331
oregon or rev stat 165800
pennsylvania 18 pa con stat 4120
rhode island ri gen law 1149114
south carolina sc code ann 1613510530
south dakota sd codifi law 2230a31
tennesse tca 3914150 crimin
tca 471821012103 2105 civil
texa tex penal code 3251
utah utah code ann 7661101 1104
vermont vermont code 132030
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11767
virginia va code ann 1821863
washington wash rev code 935020
west virginia w va code 61354
wisconsin wi stat 943201
wyom wyo stat ann 63901
us virgin island 14 vi code ann 3003
prevent fals ident fraud
ident theft prevent and ident manag standard panel
in septemb 2006 the american nation standard institut ansi and the better
busi bureau bbb establish the ident theft prevent and ident manag standard
panel idsp 4 as a crosssector initi to catalog exist standard relat to ident theft
prevent and to identifi area where addit standard and best practic ar need to
help busi and other organ further prevent ident fraud in januari 2008 the
idsp releas a twovolum report provid a detail inventori of standard and best
practic that can be us to prevent ident theft and a number of recommend for
secur enhanc around the issuanc of ident credenti and the exchang and
mainten of ident data the ansibbb idsp report avail for download at no
charg at wwwansiorgidsp is a us tool for busi govern agenc and other
organ that wish to evalu and augment their current ident theft prevent and
ident manag practic
consum protect measur
how do you protect yourself and your client from ident theft some of the us
method ar
befor provid person inform make sure the individu or busi request
it ha a valid reason for requir the inform
never write your credit card number or social secur number on check or on the
outsid of envelop
dont give account number over the telephon or to personscompani you ar not
familiar with
4 report summari excerpt from final report volum 1 find and recommend publish by
the ansibbb ident theft prevent and ident manag standard panel januari 31 2008
consum fraud financi transact
11768 2011 fraud examin manual
dont us cordless or cellular telephon or email to transmit financi or privat
person inform
keep all financi document in a secur place
if you have your driver licens inform preprint on your check shred cancel
check befor discard them
check your financi inform regularli look for what should and shouldnt
be there
obtain a copi of your credit report on a regular basi
tear up or shred preapprov credit applic
have yourself taken off of prescreen list
mail bill from the post offic or your busi locat
consid have your name and telephon number remov from the telephon
directori or have the address remov
dont provid person inform over the telephon unless you initi the call and
know who you ar speak with
if telemarket compani call tell them under the feder telephon consum
protect act i want to be on your do not call list
keep your birth certif in a safe place
choos password that will be difficult to crack and us differ password for
all account
chang password and pin code often
dont put your social secur number on ani document that you arent legal
requir to
shred ani paper with financi inform and identifi rather than simpli throw
them in the trash
in addit insur compani ar now offer insur for ident theft for an annual
fee the polici cover the cost of clear the policyhold name and correct their
financi record includ legal expens loan reapplic fee telephon and certifi
mail charg notari expens and lost wage for the time it take to deal with the fraud
what to do if your ident is stolen
start keep detail record
file a polic report with your local law enforc agenc and keep a copi of that
report mani bank and credit agenc requir such a report befor thei will
acknowledg that a theft ha occur
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11769
if your wallet or purs is stolen immedi cancel your credit and debit card and get
replac put a stop payment on all lost or stolen check
report unauthor charg and account to the appropri credit issuer and credit
bureau immedi by phone and in write chang account number or close all
account that ar affect by the fraudul activ
check for and repair further breach of your ident
notifi law enforc agenc
feder trade commiss wwwftcgov
feder bureau of investig wwwfbigov
local and state agenc
contact the three primari credit report bureau to have a secur alert or freez
place on your report and request a copi of your credit report and review it for
unauthor account activ
equifax 800 5256285 or 888 7660008
experian formerli trw 888 3973742
tran union 800 6807289
for further inform on identifi theft pleas visit the feder trade commiss
inform page at wwwconsumergovidtheft
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11801
comput and internet fraud
over the last four decad comput system have improv dramat thei ar more
power smaller cheaper and more userfriendli as thei have advanc comput have
prolifer in our societi our busi and our person live most modern busi
and govern depend on their comput system to support their oper from
personnel to financi manag and everyth in between
initi comput us to support busi and govern process were back up
with hard copi if the comput went down the hard copi were us and everyon went
back to manual form and process howev in todai environ most busi and
govern process could not surviv without the comput there ar few hard
copi backup
comput have becom the mainstai of busi and govern process without
todai comput entir busi and govern oper would almost ceas to
function imagin try to manual process tax return us robot compil budget
build automobil build weapon system check law enforc file or get cash from
autom teller machin atm without the aid of comput
the prolifer of cheap power userfriendli comput ha enabl more and more
peopl to us them and more importantli reli on them as part of their normal wai of life
as busi govern agenc and individu come to increasingli depend on
comput as a necessari tool so do the crimin thei us comput to support their
illeg oper comput crime and fraud ar increas and will no doubt continu to
increas as more comput ar network internation thu give global access to
comput crimin
the follow result were deriv from the 2009 comput crime and secur survei
conduct by the comput secur institut
respond report big jump in incid of password snif financi fraud and
malwar infect
onethird of respond organ were fraudul repres as the sender of a
phish messag
averag loss due to secur incid were down from 289000 per respond to
234244 per respond
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11802 2011 fraud examin manual
twentyf percent of respond felt that over 60 percent of their financi loss
were due to nonmalici action by insid
respond were satisfi though not overjoi with all secur technolog
most respond felt their invest in endus secur awar train wa
inadequ but most felt their invest in other compon of their secur
program were adequ
when ask what action were taken follow a secur incid 22 percent of
respond state that thei notifi individu whose person inform wa
breach and 17 percent state that thei provid new secur servic to user or
custom
when ask what secur solut rank highest on their wishlist mani respond
name tool that would improv their visibl such as better log manag secur
inform and event manag secur data visual and secur dashboard
respond gener said that regulatori complianc effort have had a posit effect
on their organ secur program
the csi figur also includ data about the occurr of threat to cybersecur in 2009
compar to those in 2008
643 percent of respond experienc malwar infect compar to 2008 50
percent
292 percent experienc denialofservic attack compar to 2008 21 percent
173 percent experienc password snif compar to 9 percent in 2008
135 percent experienc web site defac compar to 2008 6 percent
76 percent experienc instant messag abus down from 21 percent in 2008
unlik tradit fraud case comput fraud case can be difficult for the fraud examin
becaus thei
lack a tradit paper audit trail
requir an understand of the technolog us to commit the crime
usual requir an understand of the technolog of the victim comput
veri often requir the us of on or more specialist to assist the fraud examin even
when the fraud examin is comput liter
befor explor the specif of high tech crime howev let us clarifi the comput
function in the commiss of these scheme comput crime is most often thought of as a
crime that is commit with the aid of a comput yet the comput ha variou role in
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11803
high tech crime both as tool and target accord to donn b parker a cybercrim
author and author the function of the comput in crime is fourfold in fight
comput crime mr parker describ how the comput serv as an object a subject a tool
and a symbol
the comput as an object comput and network system ar themselv often object or
target of crime subject to physic sabotag theft or destruct of inform
the comput as a subject accord to parker comput ar the direct subject of crime
when thei ar the environ in which technologist commit crime thi categori
includ viru attack
the comput as a tool comput ar us as the mean to commit crime whether
embezzl theft of proprietari inform or hack
the comput as a symbol comput lend fraudster an air of credibl and ar often
us to deceiv victim into invest and pyramid scheme
in these four capac common comput crime includ
data alter
unauthor access and entri to system and inform
read anoth email without permiss
data destruct and sabotag
internet consum fraud
sale of proprietari data
desktop counterfeit
data extort
disclosur of confidenti data
ident theft
electron letter bomb
softwar piraci
pbx fraud
voicemail fraud
cellular telephon fraud
stolen longdist call card
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11804 2011 fraud examin manual
comput fraud versu comput crime
a line that should be drawn is that between comput fraud and comput crime term that
ar commonli us interchang with littl distinct made between the two some
substanti differ exist between them howev as we shall see
comput fraud
a gener definit of comput fraud is
ani defalc or embezzl accomplish by tamper with comput program data
file oper equip or media and result in loss sustain by the organ
whose comput system wa manipul
the distinguish characterist of comput fraud is that access occur with the intent to
execut a fraudul scheme comput fraud statut have establish two veri import
principl
first the statut contain definit of computerrel term these statut allow the
prosecutor to sidestep have to explain to the juri technic comput speak and it
cumbersom fit with common law terminolog
second the statut creat an offens base on proof of access with a particular intent
success in carri awai properti monei doe not have to be proven trace the flow
of proce is like to be difficult without paper record and access might be the onli
provabl event
most state have defin comput fraud as an attempt crime by view the comput as a
protect asset the protect is independ of the actual loss to the owner as a result of
the intrus
comput crime
comput crime differ from comput fraud in two major wai employe who as a part of
their normal duti have access to the comput ar deem to have author access and
thu do not come under the law against access manipul alter or destruct of
data includ comput softwar is independ of fraudul or other scheme such
action doe not fit into the normal vandal crime becaus the data is intang
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11805
computerassist crime
it is sometim said that most comput fraud is not comput crime but involv the us
of comput instead of other mean to break the law in some case these tradition
illeg act can yield more loot by recours to the high speed of the comput these ar in
realiti computerassist crime and the exist crimin statut can be appropri
appli to them howev where detect and proof problem ar exacerb by the
involv of electron media comput fraud law ar invalu for
effect prosecut
inform crime
in some case the comput is an activ weapon these kind of case ar term inform
crime the crime would not be possibl without comput technolog exampl of
inform crime includ the theft of comput time softwar and data
comput hack
as the number of comput and comput user increas so doe the number and type of
hacker a 2007 studi by the univers of ma ryland a jame clark school of engin
report that hacker attack comput with internet connect everi 39 second or about
2244 time a dai in addit a 2007 research report conduct by whitehat a websit
secur servic provid show that as mani as 90 percent of all websit remain
vulner to some form of comput hack
although the term hacker wa origin us to describ a comput enthusiast the term ha
now evolv to mean someon seek unauthor access to comput system and the
inform contain therein it includ organ employe member of hacker
gang and hacker for profit motiv vari accord to the target system inform
desir and the perpetr while hack wa onc commonli thought of as a precoci
teenag hobbi it ha chang dramat in the last twenti year to encompass a larg
and divers group
definit
hack is basic break into comput and telecommun system by learn
the vulner of variou hardwar and softwar and us a comput to systemat
guess the user system identif and password
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11806 2011 fraud examin manual
hacker us variou rogu softwar applic to penetr a system or sometim thei
enlist the help of the user surreptiti by instal a program that is download via an e
mail or by visit a websit these program oper in the background of the infect
comput and can disabl secur set and captur inform that is sent back to
the hacker
but the most direct wai of gain access to a comput is to us someon els password
or gener without author a password of on own password ar design to
keep comput safe if you dont know the password the machin will not run howev
most user choos password that while not easi to crack follow certain pattern peopl
usual pick someth familiar and easi as their password a deepsea fisherman us
marlin the man secretari who receiv a mug about soar with the eagl and
work with turkei from her boss last christma us turkei as her password there
ar list circul among hacker of the most like password
if the hacker know or can learn someth about hi target hi job is even easier that
fisherman for exampl probabl ha a huge marlin mount on hi wall it locat directli
in the man line of sight as he log on each morn it a good guess thi gui will have
marlin or reel or someth els fishi in hi password a simpl lesson here realword
password even in variat ar not secur the safest password combin letter number
and other special charact such as punctuat
social engin
anoth mean of gain access to a system involv simpl decept the hacker us hi
verbal skill to deceiv victim into disclos inform thei ought not to divulg or
convinc victim to commit act that facilit the hacker scheme often pose as an
employe or someon hire by the organ the hacker easili deceiv real employe
into reveal inform in order to research hi scheme he mai avail himself of
document in the compani dumpster such as intern telephon directori and
correspond
the hacker mai assum a number of differ guis to accomplish thi decept he mai
pose as a new or temporari worker and ask inform system employe for a password
so that he can begin work he mai also pose as someon in a posit of author and
intimid employe into reveal confidenti inform
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11807
sometim overt decept is not requir in larg corpor hacker can take advantag
of the anonym among employe by don offic attir thei can blend into the crowd
and thu perus the premis perhap gain a password written down at an employe
desk in the process
hacker comput manipul
trojan hors
a trojan hors is the covert placement of instruct in a program that caus the
comput to perform unauthor function but usual still allow the program to perform
it intend purpos thi method is on of the most commonli us techniqu in
computerbas fraud and sabotag
spywar
spywar is a type of malwar short for malici softwar that is instal on comput and
collect littl bit of inform at a time about user without their knowledg the presenc
of spywar is typic hidden from the user and can be difficult to detect the most
common us of spywar for fraud is the theft of person inform includ financi
inform such as credit card number
trap door
when develop larg program programm insert instruct for addit code and
intermedi output capabl the design of comput oper system attempt to
prevent thi from happen therefor programm insert instruct that allow them to
circumv these control hacker take advantag of these trap door
salami techniqu
salami techniqu involv the execut of unauthor program us to steal small
amount of asset from a larg number of sourc without notic reduc the whole
for exampl in a bank system the amount of interest to be credit to an account is
typic round off a fraudster might set up the system so that instead of round off the
number that fraction of it is credit to a special account own by the perpetr
logic bomb
a logic bomb is a comput program execut at a specif time period or when a specif
event occur for exampl a programm can write a program to instruct the comput to
delet all personnel and payrol file if hi name were ever remov from the file
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11808 2011 fraud examin manual
data diddl
data diddl is the chang of data befor or dure entri into the comput system
exampl includ forg or counterfeit document us for data entri and exchang
valid disk and tape with modifi replac
scaveng and dumpster dive
scaveng involv obtain inform left around a comput system in the comput
room trash can and so on dumpster dive refer to glean sensit inform from
an organ trash receptacl and dumpster
data leakag
data leakag is the remov of inform by smuggl it out as part of a print
document encod the inform to look like someth differ and remov it from
the facil
piggybackingimperson
piggyback and imperson ar frequent us to gain access to restrict area
exampl includ follow someon in through a door with a badg reader electron
us anoth user identif and password to gain comput access and tap into
the termin link of a user to caus the comput to believ that both termin ar the same
person
simul and model
simul and model is a comput manipul techniqu us the comput as a tool
or instrument to plan or control a crimin act
wire tap
wire tap into a comput commun link is anoth techniqu us by hacker
thi method enabl perpetr to read the inform be transmit between
comput or between comput and termin
network weav
thi techniqu more commonli known as loop involv us numer network in an
attempt to avoid detect for exampl a hacker might dial into compani as pbx system
to obtain an outsid line that can be us to dial into compani bs network if compani b
can track the origin of the hacker call it w ill lead them to compani a not to the hacker
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11809
the abov is a rel simpl exampl hacker have been known to loop through 15 or
20 differ network befor arriv at their final destin network weav can make it
extrem difficult for an investig or fraud examin to trace the point of origin for a
specif telephon call or data transmiss
alter the wai a system gener password
not all password ar suppli by user some ar gener by a comput system
random function for exampl mani internet servic provid isp give firsttim
user a randomli gener password and sometim a random user name as well which
get the person onlin then the user chang the login inform to their
own prefer
by learn how a certain system random work the hacker can imit the gener
of valid password or alter how the system oper for exampl with some tinker the
random can be set to give everi new user the same seemingli random password
evbdcl8 but that wont work for long it better to have the machin make a password
built off some inform about the user that is publicli avail us a rel simpl
set of algorithm a hacker can convert a user name such as halbfish into an obscur
look string like rueavzhr letter ar read as number by comput speak ascii
code so the algorithm ar us sine valu to convert the ascii valu into a new set
of number
here a good exampl of how manipul a random work denni ritchi who
help develop unix technolog report how a hacker attack on compani system
comput offici at the compani had their system gener password each eight
charact long mix letter and digit in a brute forc attack it should have taken 112
year to crack the nearli 3 trillion possibl howev the random on the compani
system could onli take 32768 seed for password the hacker us hi own machin to
gener and test each of those combin us accord to ritchi a total of onli
about on minut of machin time in less time than the averag commerci break run on
televis the hacker breach a seemingli impenetr system
buffer overflow exploit
buffer overflow exploit ar on of the largest problem in comput secur todai in all
applic program there ar buffer that hold data these buffer have a fix size if an
attack send too much data into on of these buffer the buffer overflow the server
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11810 2011 fraud examin manual
then execut the data that overflow as a program thi program mai do ani number of
thing like send password to russia alter system file or instal
backdoor depend on what data the attack sent to the buffer
privileg escal exploit
privileg escal exploit grant administr or rootlevel access to user who previous
did not have such access for exampl an account exist on all window nt and 2000
server call guest thi account by default ha no password anyon can login to the
server us thi guest account and then us a common privileg escal exploit call
getadmin to gain administratorlevel access to the system mani other privileg escal
exploit exist such as hackdll and other these exploit ar veri us sinc thei allow
anyon who ha ani level of access to a system to easili elev their privileg level and
perform ani activ thei desir
backdoor
when attack obtain rootlevel access to a server us a buffer overflow exploit or a
privileg escal exploit for exampl thei will want to do two thing
instal a backdoor
cover their track
backdoor allow attack to remot access a system again in the futur for exampl the
attack mai have us a particular secur hole to get rootlevel access to a comput
howev over time that particular secur hole mai be close prevent the attack from
access the system again in order to avoid be shut out in the futur attack instal
backdoor these backdoor take differ form but all allow an attack to access the
server again without go through the standard login procedur and without have to
repeat the attack that gave them access in the first place mani worm instal backdoor as a
part of their malici payload code red ii for exampl instal a backdoor that provid
access to the c and d drive of the compromis web server from anywher on the
internet other common backdoor program ar netbu and backorific which allow
attack to remot control a compromis server onc a backdoor is establish the
hacker retreat and cover hi track to keep the initi attack unnot
http exploit
http exploit involv us the web server applic to perform malici activ
these attack ar veri common and ar grow in popular becaus firewal typic
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11811
block most traffic from the internet to keep it awai from corpor server howev
http traffic us for web brows is almost alwai allow to pass through firewal
unhind thu attack have a direct line to the web server if thei can coerc the web
server into perform malici activ thei can access resourc that would otherwis
be unavail
antihack measur
becaus hacker requir dialin capabl to gain access the best prevent strategi is to
elimin as mani dialin port as possibl unfortun the trend todai is to instal more
not fewer dialin capabl becaus telecommut and custom connect ar drive
the demand for more dialin capabl the follow ar some prevent measur that can
be implement
welcom screen ar usual proudli displai at signin with a messag such as
welcom to the xyz corpor comput network
to discourag unauthor us such a screen might be replac with on that inform
the user that he is about to access a proprietari network addition the screen should
warn that unauthor access is prohibit and will be prosecut under the law the
screen should not identifi either the organ or the network
secur polici should be establish and dissemin throughout the organ
these polici should includ train for all employe custom who will appreci
the addit secur and other who have a need to access the network
callback modem should be us wherev practic these modem will answer an
incom call and requir the sender to enter a password onc the caller ha identifi
himself the modem will termin the connect and dial a previous establish
phone number when the prearrang number is call the sender must again perform
the signon procedur
secur softwar packag should be secur to the highest level possibl most major
softwar compani todai have to releas updat and patch to their softwar everi so
often check your softwar vendor websit on a regular basi for new secur patch
or us the new autom patch featur that some compani offer
password should be us in accord with sound secur practic for exampl
password should be chang period everi 90 dai is suggest
password should be of suffici length to deter guess a minimum of 8
charact is suggest
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11812 2011 fraud examin manual
password of transfer or termin employe should be chang immedi
most purchas softwar come with a ve ndor suppli password that is us for
instal and then delet all packag should be audit to ensur that these default
password which ar wide known have been chang
encrypt should be consid for sensit data file password file and sensit
comput program
commun softwar should termin ani connect whether dialin or direct
connect after
a reason number of unsuccess attempt to enter a valid password usual no
more than three
a termin direct connect or dialin ha been connect for a period of time with
no activ thi is call timingout
the termin connect will requir redial into the network andor reperform
the login and verif process some compani requir the data secur offic to
issu a new password befor the user can login again
hacker public and commun should be review to learn the current jargon
and hacker handl which ar the name that hacker us for their onlin persona
hacker have us the internet quit effici to commun with each other while
produc a signific amount of hack document and program almost ani
hacker websit will contain a larg number of text file that explain how to hack or
how variou system oper mani of these file will also explain the standard
vulner of the system and the best method to penetr their secur
hacker detect measur
an adequ hacker detect program contain three primari compon
almost all commun system maintain a log file that record all success and
unsuccess system access attempt these also allow for the print of report
contain signon and signoff activ these report should be print out regularli and
review by the data secur offic where possibl special report should be print
on the number of unsuccess access attempt these attempt at log into the
system should be follow up by data secur to determin their caus
the data secur function should have suffici resourc and staff to administ
password maintain the secur softwar review system activ report and follow up
on all potenti secur violat
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11813
final period review of telecommun secur should be perform by
consult andor intern or extern auditor if the latter have the necessari
experi and qualif
hack insur
dure the past three year a hand of cyberinsur have begun offer coverag
specif design to address new form of inform ag exposur these ecommerc
risk can includ theft damag or disclosur of data denial of servic attack theft of
intellectu properti unauthor access loss of revenu infring of copyright and
trademark and the consequ damag to busi reput these type of ecommerc
risk ar cover by what is known as firstparti coverag
thirdparti coverag cover the compani if it is be su for problem caus by
technolog product error and omiss the pilfer public releas or misus of sensit
or confidenti inform the unwit spread of disrupt virus hacker tamper to
the inform and advertis carri on websit emailfacilit sexual harass and
privaci infring
mani busi believ that their tradit busi coverag will suffic or fail that
their web host or isp will cover damag caus by ani of the abov in both case thei ar
probabl wrong unless your busi insur polici or internet servic level agreement
specif includ languag address ecommerc liabil ani damag will probabl not
be cover
electron mail
email ha revolution the abil of busi to interact swiftli and inde global
busi ha embrac the email system wholeheartedli few organ do not provid
some form of intern electron commun due to the speed at which busi can
now interact and conduct busi as well as the rel cost advantag email enjoi over
other mean of commun the number of new email user will no doubt continu
to boom
email doe howev also give organ a degre of vulner asid from
employe us it for person correspond email can be us to sabotag and crash
organ network forward virus or even simpl viru hoax ar often enough to
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11814 2011 fraud examin manual
overload a system us email through such system as the internet endow sender with
ident protectionth origin sender of the messag can be disguis or obscur
therefor becaus a sender ident can be conceal sensit busi inform can
be safe forward to an unauthor address
consid
compani employe now possess the abil to quickli disclos sensit compani
materi to outsid parti increas the opportun for corpor espionag
compani that emploi a companywid email system can now be held respons for
ani uneth or illeg activ conduct by employe on the email system
compani must now be concern with the repercuss of the action of ani
disgruntl or rash employe the speed with which an email can be fire off creat
the opportun for illadvis commun
onc an email messag ha left a compani system it mai travel through ani number
of foreign email system befor reach it destin an email transmiss can
quit easili be intercept or compromis without the us of encrypt softwar
without a securityenhanc email system the receiv of an email messag ha littl
assur that the email is authent email address can be easili spoof or clone
by a knowledg user
email can be deliv almost instantan anywher the network comput and
softwar exist to handl it transmiss and recept in fact on of the emerg secur
problem concern email is the huge volum of space requir to archiv old messag in
some organ peopl ar regularli ask to cull through their old email messag and
delet those no longer need in addit some organ will delet ani old email
messag left on the mail server machin after a certain amount of time eg on or two
month
email secur concern
sinc email ha becom a fact of life for most organ it is appropri to discuss
some email secur concern from both a userbas and an organiz perspect
organ often fail to set boundari for employe regard email and mai later face
legal ramif as a result
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11815
email ownership
who own email messag on an organ system thi is the common question but
it is not necessarili the right question an email messag that an employe wrote himself is a
work of authorship and as such the rule of copyright appli in gener if the employe
wrote the messag as part of hi duti for hi employ ie in the scope of your
employ the employ own the copyright if the email wa not part of the employe
duti someth person or relat to anoth activ whether permit by the employ
or not then the user ha copyright but the employ as owner of the system on which it
wa creat or pass through mai have some right to the copi on the system if an
employe is forward a messag written by someon els the issu get even more
complic for instanc doe the origin author have the right or the intent to
author ani forward
organiz liabil
as with ani commun media legal issu of the internet ar emerg at a rapid rate
with a lot of discuss but ar of limit consensu so far it can be said that employ do
have some liabil for how employe us a compani email system the issu ar similar
to an employe us of the compani telephon the compani postag meter the compani
vehicl and so on
the best gener advic is to exercis some caution when deal with an email system
within the compani email can becom a vehicl for sexual harass for creat a
hostil work environ or set up gambl pool outsid the compani employe
can us email to oper their own busi or to send out fabric messag in the
name of other employe or their employ some employ monitor their email system
which present legal issu such as invas of privaci email ha also been us to gather
evid against employ or employe of cours there ar no more danger and pitfal
of email than there ar of ani form of commun whether insid or outsid the
organ the telephon and postal system ar just as capabl of such problem
as with ani potenti liabil issu employ must set guidelin for the proper intern and
extern us of email just as thei would for the proper us of the compani telephon
stationeri and postag vehicl and so on for instanc the organ should have a
polici remind employe in write that email must not be us to send inappropri
and unprofession messag includ
harass other user of the system
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11816 2011 fraud examin manual
consum unreason amount of avail resourc
intention send other user virus
evad softwar licens or copi mechan
crashingdisrupt system servic
imperson anoth user anywher on the internet
bypass system secur mechan
translat encrypt materi without author
eavesdrop on other email interact
us the system for ani person gain either monetarili or polit unless permit
by the organ
a number of promin liabil law firm recommend some monitor of email but thi
decis should not be taken lightli and not just becaus of employe privaci concern
for instanc the fact that the compani doe try to monitor email mai be us against the
compani when someth slip through that monitor
due to rapid growth of the internet and email there is a great deal of uncertainti in the law
organ mai want to seek legal counsel in establish proper us guidelin and
befor take disciplinari action against employe becaus of alleg abus
comput virus
virus ar hidden comput program that us all the comput resourc therebi
shut down the system or slow it down significantli comput virus typic us
the infect comput resourc to replic itself and spread the infect to other
comput system on a network or through the internet via email comput virus rang
from the rel harmless displai a messag or greet to shutdown of entir
comput network for extend period
a comput viru is a program that contain instruct code to attack softwar the attack
might eras data or displai a messag on the screen the comput viru can copi itself to
other program thi copi abil can affect larg network in recent year virus have
disrupt larg network and caus the expenditur of million of dollar in staff and
machin hour to remov these virus and restor normal oper
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11817
hoax
a massiv amount of media attent in recent year ha focus on comput virus mani
of the viru scare that occur howev ar hoax while that is on on hand fortun
these phoni warn caus harm of their own thei slow down transmiss of
inform and have been known to caus overload of organiz email network
most of these fraudul warn urg recipi to forward thi to everyon you know
befor forward a question warn it is wise to consult a few of the author who
track virus the follow site can be access to confirm or debunk viru notif
wwwsymanteccomavcenterhoaxhtml
wwwvmythscom
wwwfsecurecomvirusinfohoax
wwwsnopescom
type and terminolog of comput virus
macro viru
a macro is an instruct that carri out program command automat mani common
applic eg word process spreadsheet and slide present applic make
us of macro macro virus ar macro that selfrepl if a user access a document
contain a viral macro and unwittingli execut thi macro viru it can then copi itself
into that applic startup file the comput is now infect a copi of the macro
viru resid on the machin
ani document on that machin that us the same applic can then becom infect if
the infect comput is on a network the infect is like to spread rapidli to other
machin on the network moreov if a copi of an infect file is pass to anyon els
for exampl by email or cd the viru can spread to the recipi comput thi
process of infect will end onli when the viru is notic and all viral macro ar
erad
macro virus ar the most common type of virus and ar usual spread via email
messag contain infect attach macro virus can be written with veri littl
specialist knowledg and these virus can spread to ani platform on which the applic
is run howev the main reason for their success is that document ar exchang far
more frequent than execut or disk a direct result of email popular and web us
open the email attach infect your ma chine the viru overwrit certain file on
your hard drive and send itself out to everyon in your email address book thi
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11818 2011 fraud examin manual
attach will most like come from someon you know consequ the best
protect against such virus is to simpli not open ani attach unless you ar sure that
it is viru free if your unsur ask for the sender to confirm that the attach wa
intend for you
boot sector virus
the boot sector is the first logic sector of a hard disk or floppi disk seventyf to 90
percent of virus have been boot sector virus these virus us system bio replac the
boot sector and move the boot sector to anoth locat it then write a copi of it own
program code that will run everi time the system is boot or when program ar be run
a boot sector cannot infect a comput if it is introduc after the machin is run the
oper system an exampl of a boot sector viru is pariti boot thi viruss payload
displai the messag pariti check and fr eez the oper system render the
comput useless thi viru messag is taken from an actual error messag that is displai
to user when a comput memori is faulti as a result a user whose comput is infect
with the pariti boot viru is led to believ that the machin ha a memori fault rather than a
disrupt viru infect
parasit virus
parasit virus attach themselv to program known as execut when a user launch
a program that ha a parasit viru the viru is surreptiti launch first to cloak it
presenc from the user the viru then trigger the origin program to open the parasit
viru becaus the oper system understand it to be part of the program is given the
same right as the program to which the viru is attach these right allow the viru to
replic instal itself into memori or releas it payload in the absenc of antiviru
softwar onli the payload might rais the normal user suspicion a famou parasit viru
call jerusalem ha a payload of slow down the sy stem and eventu delet everi
program the user launch
tsram virus
termin and stai resid tsr virus usual hide in memori and caus system crash
depend on their memori locat the tsr take control of the oper system by
pass it request to do each time do is execut the viru cascad b is a tsr viru
that sometim caus the system to crash it also caus charact to fall down the screen
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11819
applic softwar virus
these type of virus copi their viru code to a program file and modifi the program so the
viru code get execut first the viru doe thi by write over the exist code or
attach itself to the program file the more sophist type replic themselv with a
com extens each time the user access an execut program file the viru vienna is a
type of applic viru it increas infect file by 648 byte and destroi the system by
make it reboot when run certain program
multipartit virus
multipartit virus share some of the characterist of boot sector virus and file virus
which increas it abil to spread thei can infect com and ex file and the boot sector
of the comput hard drive
on a comput boot up with an infect diskett a typic multipartit viru will first
resid in memori and then infect the boot sector of the hard drive from there the viru can
infect a pc entir environ thi type of viru account for a larg number of
infect
the tequila viru is a type of multipartit viru tequila is a memori resid master boot
sector partit tabl and ex file infector it us a complex encrypt method and
garbl to avoid detect when a program infect with tequila is execut the viru will
modifi the hard disk master boot sector if it is not alreadi infect the viru also copi
itself to the last six sector of the system hard disk when the workstat is later reboot
from the system hard disk tequila will becom memori resid onc tequila is memori
resid it infect ex file when thei ar execut
the chkdsk command will indic the system ha 3072 fewer byte of memori than
what is instal infect ex program increas in size by 2468 byte though the file
length increas cannot be seen in the disk directori list becaus the viru hide it
tequila activ four month after the initi date of infect at thi time and everi
month thereaft the viru will displai a graphic and the follow messag execut mov
ax fe03 int 21 kei to go on
polymorph virus
polymorph virus creat vari though fulli function copi of themselv as a wai to
avoid detect by antiviru softwar some polymorph virus us differ encrypt
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11820 2011 fraud examin manual
scheme and requir differ decrypt routin thu the same viru mai look
complet differ on differ system or even within differ file other polymorph
virus vari instruct sequenc and us fals command in the attempt to thwart antiviru
softwar on of the most advanc polymorph virus us a mutat engin and
randomnumb gener to chang the viru code and it decrypt routin
spanska4250 is a type of polymorph viru thi viru infect program file file with ex
and com extens when on of the program is infect the viru hide in the
comput memori spanska4250 remain in memori on the lookout to infect program
execut by user onc spanska4250 carri out it infect the size of the infect
program will increas by 4250 byte the viru size moreov the follow messag will
be displai c spanska 97 thi viru us an antitrac techniqu to make it more
difficult to detect in addit it us the system date to encrypt itself so it will be possibl to
find up to 366 differ variant of thi viru
stealth virus
stealth virus ar more sophist virus thei constantli chang their pattern in an
effort to blend into the system thei attempt to avoid detect by bypass do interrupt
call when thei ar instal and remov their code from the infect file befor the file is
access by the request program
the 4096 viru is a type of stealth viru it increas the file size by 4096 byte and decreas
the memori by approxim 6kb the messag frodo live might appear in the
middl of the screen if the infect file is run on septemb 21 it caus the system
to crash
mutat engin virus
thi modern dai viru us a special languagedriven algorithm gener that enabl it to
creat an infinit varieti of origin encrypt algorithm it avoid the checksum detect
method like stealth virus by not chang the infect file size each time thei replic
thei produc a new and differ code
network virus
it wa just a matter of time befor networkspecif virus were develop to attack the
increas number of local area network lan and other type of network come
onlin these virus ar gener develop to attack the file server
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11821
the boot sector and partit tabl virus infect the boot oper of the file server thi
viru doe not spread from the workstat to the file server howev if you ar us
netwar it can caus the softwar to lose the locat of it partit tabl on the file server
if the file server is boot with an infect disk
virus that infect program seem to be limit to infect file on the server howev
becaus the file ar continu be access by workstat thi type of viru is
difficult to contain
at least two netwarespecif virus have been discov in europ on is the gp1 get
password 1 viru it wa allegedli creat to penetr novel secur featur and then
spread throughout the network the second cz2986 viru in czechoslovakia thi viru
place itself in memori and intercept netwar function call when the workstat log in to
the server after it collect 15 user namepassword combin it save them in an infect
file and us them to gain access to the network
worm
a worm is a selfrepl program that resid as a file on a system execut an
autonom process and deliber move from system to system it look for other
node on the network copi itself to them and caus the selfcopi to execut on other
node these program find network util show node name monitor network traffic
and randomli select network identif code as well as other mischief
an exampl of a worm is the sql slammer which race across the globe and wreak havoc
on the internet in januari 2003 thi worm doubl the number of comput it infect
everi 85 second in the first minut of it appear the worm which exploit a flaw in
microsoft corpor sql server databas softwar caus damag by rapidli replic
itself and clog the pipelin of the global data network the worm did not eras or caus
damag to desktop comput but wa design to replic itself so fast and so effect
that no other traffic could get through network
viru carrier
virus can infect comput system from mani sourc some of the more common viru
carrier ar
unknown or uncheck applic softwar
softwar or media brought in by employe
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11822 2011 fraud examin manual
program download from modem bulletin board
unsolicit email
vendor and supplier with infect softwar
uncontrol and share program applic
demonstr softwar
freewar and sharewar
viru indic
the follow ar some of the indic that a comput might exhibit suggest that it
might be infect
a sudden and sometim dramat decreas of free space on your media
the system suddenli and for no appar reason slow down it commandrespons
time
an increas in the size of some file
there ha been a chang in the length of execut file a chang in their content or a
chang in their file datetim stamp
an unexpect number of disk access especi to particular file
the oper system andor other program suddenli begin behav in unpredict
wai sometim disk file that should be there cannot be access or ar suddenli
eras with no warn
unusu messag and graphic
unabl to bootup the system
unabl to access file
unexplain and repeat mainten repair
system or data file disappear or becom fragment
unexplain chang in memori
unexplain chang in program size
resid antivir softwar program displai messag that a viru ha been encount
note that until the sourc of the viru ha been identifi and remov from the system
antivir system might continu inform the oper that a viru is be encount
and remov
viru protect
comput user should take measur to protect their comput against virus some of
the step that can be taken ar
do not us a disk to boot your system
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11823
if you must boot your system from a disk make sure it is properli label and
continu protect
dont instal sharewar or other untest program on your system but if you do dont
put them in the root directori
in a network environ dont place untest program on the server
if you ar share inform on disk ensur thei onli contain inform and no
execut file
us current antiviru softwar to detect potenti virus
back up all program and file
write virusfre warranti and indemn into your purchas order and contract
alwai writeprotect your system and program disk
teach comput user about comput virus so that thei can recogn them
alwai us caution when open email attach
antiviru softwar oper
convent disk scanner
thi is the standard viru check program it is run when the user request it and it scan the
content of the disk directori or file that the user want for ani boot sector andor file
that contain virus that it recogn base on the viru descript inform in it viru
definit file usual run manual by the user either as a prevent mainten activ
or when a viru is suspect scan can also be autom through the us of a program
schedul
heurist scanner
these scanner inspect execut file for code us algorithm to identifi oper that
would indic an unknown viru thei might also examin macro to detect viruslik
behavior
behaviorbas detect scanner
these applic run continu look for behavior that might indic viru activ
for exampl instruct to format a hard drive
chang detect scanner
chang detect scanner gener a databas of characterist for execut file and
check for chang to these file that might signifi a viru attack
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11824 2011 fraud examin manual
inocul
thi is a total differ approach to viru detect instead of look for the virus
themselv thi techniqu look for the chang that the virus make to file and boot
sector start with a clean system the softwar inocul each boot sector and
program file by store a snapshot of inform about it base on it content and size
then period it reexamin these file to see if anyth ha chang if it ha then the
util will inform the user if the user hasnt made the chang the viru mai have
the main advantag of thi type of viru detect is that sinc it is look at the effect of
the viru it doesnt need to know what the viru itself is thi mean it will detect even new
virus without requir updat viru definit file all of the time the disadvantag and
why it is not us that often is that it gener a substanti amount of fals posit
investig viru infect
viru infect can be investig by take the follow action
isol the system and all media
run antiviru softwar
document find
interview the system custodian and all user and determin
symptom
damag
prior cleanup conduct
access control in place and work
system malfunct
person media us
unauthor media us
viru identif
follow the audit trail of the infect
determin the sourc of the virusperson system or media
make user awar of protect polici and procedur
ensur countermeasur ar in place and work
track cost of viru problem
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11825
internet fraud
a boom segment of comput fraud internet fraud ha becom a grow concern to the
law enforc commun thi type of fraud ha prolifer and will continu to
prolifer becaus of the ripe condit that exist on the world wide web for fraudul
activ the internet is still a develop technolog for much of intern busi
and thu ha not been subject to much litig or polic the law that do current
appli to the internet ar difficult to enforc sinc the internet cross virtual everi
intern border on the planet the lack of intern law and the difficulti enforc
those law give internet fraudster a better than averag chanc of avoid captur
and punish
for consum to retain their confid in internet transact the percept that the
internet is a safe wai to shop and do busi must be foster consum awar of
onlin fraud must be rais without caus a loss of consum confid thi difficult
endeavor mai requir an unpreced effort by the privat sector in conjunct with law
enforc consequ privat investig resourc mai be call upon in greater
number than ever given law enforc defici in the area of comput fraud
internet fraud scheme
accord to the 2009 internet crime report the internet crime complaint center ic3
receiv 336665 complaint relat to fraudul and nonfraudul issu on the internet
the total dollar loss from all refer case of fraud wa 5597 million with a median dollar
loss of 575 per complaint all complaint receiv by ic3 ar access to feder state
and local law enforc to support activ investig trend analysi and public
outreach and awar effort
the top ten 2009 ic3 complaint categori ar as follow
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11826 2011 fraud examin manual
internet scheme percentag of complaint
fbi scam 166
nondeliverymerchandis scam 119
advanc fee 98
ident theft 82
overpay fraud 73
miscellan fraud 63
spam 62
credit card fraud 60
auction fraud 57
comput damag 45
the internet present fraudster with myriad opportun to multipli the devic at their
dispos some fraudster have even us reput of charit organ to exploit
the most benevol of human impuls perhap the best wai to guard against internet
facilit scam is to simpli stai inform keep inform of the latest scam on the
internet mai enabl internet user to recogn and report these scam instead of lose
monei to on of them
modem hijack
accord to the feder trade commiss thi scheme is design to exploit internet
user while user ar onlin their comput modem ar secretli disconnect from their
isp and reconnect to the internet onli thi time through an expens intern line
victim have usual download a special viewer program from a websit offer free
comput imag onc activ the download materi began the hijack
disconnect and reconnect process longdist charg continu to mount until
victim shut down their comput even if their internet connect had alreadi been
termin
internet commerc
much ha been made in the nation media about the danger of provid credit card
number to compani on the internet and it is understand that mani busi and
individu have apprehens concern internet commerc the internet is the most
imperson form of commun and it is also the least well known to most user thi
concern the feel that a crimin might be lurk in the shadow of the internet scare
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11827
mani potenti custom from make that initi transact there ar some precaut
to be taken befor purchas onlin item but conduct busi transact on the
internet is ultim as safe as make an order from a compani via the telephon
get rich quick
enter the phrase get rich quick in an internet search engin result in site with name like
50000 first 10 month secret of the millionair and best busi resourc center these type
of site hawk everyth from home busi to invest opportun some push
home and internetbas busi other sell point is that telemarket close all sale
the common denomin in these type of scheme is that consum who spend monei
on them find themselv with worthless materi and inform
the medium through which victim ar snare lend the scam a fals appear of
credibl glossi websit give the oper an offici air but as with all getrichquick
scheme victim ar suck in through their desir to make easi monei
pyramid scheme
the triedandtru pyramid ha found a hightech home on the internet as in most pyramid
scheme the initi particip of the scheme ar reward handsom while the
particip who join the scheme later ar bilk out of their invest monei
foreign trust
inform on thi scheme is easili found on the internet the setup cater to the desir to
avoid tax for a fee the compani purport to be abl to creat a foreign trust to which
taxpay can transfer their asset sinc the trust is not within the taxpay countri the
logic goe the asset ar not subject to taxat
the logic is faulti for sever reason first if the taxpay deriv us from the fund in the
trust accord to law those fund ar consid taxabl incom thu consum who fall
for thi scam subject themselv to prosecut for tax evas
that is of cours onli if the trust is set up at all some of the oper of thi scheme
simpli take consum monei and disappear and sadli those ar the consum who get
off lightli other who have fallen for thi pitch find that thei have transfer all of their
asset to a trust of which thei ar not the beneficiari their asset then legal belong to
anoth entiti and get them transfer back to their control is virtual imposs
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11828 2011 fraud examin manual
chain letter
thi fraud ha onc again becom popular due to the internet email capabl instead
of send numer letter through the mail as fraudster were forc to do in the past e
mail capabl allow the fraudster to compos on letter and send thousand of copi to
potenti victim the letter sent to unsuspect target gener forewarn of the grave
danger that await the target should he not repli to the letter the letter ask for a small cash
donat in exchang for the target piec of mind that no bad tide will be spread
provid exampl of some of the unfortun who did not heed the letter the monei
should be sent to a po box the email often instruct
invest and secur fraud
websit that offer invest or secur advic ar not in short suppli mani of these
site ar reput but an illicit cottag industri ha been born on mani of these site a
fraudul websit will claim to have insid inform about the valu of a given stock
suggest that someth unexpect will soon happen to that compani when the
unknow stock investor take the advic of the supposedli knowledg invest
advisor the advisor manipul the stock price to hi advantag
spam
spam involv send email to subscrib whose name appear on electron version
of the phone list and post ad to the plethora of discuss and chat group us the
internet these post ar often disguis to look like tip from individu citizen who
ar supposedli engag in a law enterpris when in fact thei ar part of an internet
boiler room
counterfeit check scam
thi scam ha sever variat but usual start with the victim offer someth for sale
on the internet usual it is a big ticket item somehow the fraudster ha obtain a
legitim check from a person or compani scan it and alter it to support the scheme
the fraudster then contract with the victim to bui the item but must suppli a down
payment first the check is deliv by a highli recogn intern carrier such as
fedex further ad to the fals impress that thi is a legitim deal the victim
deposit the check but befor it clear the fraudster request a refund and back out of the
deal offer to let the victim keep a portion of the fund for hi troubl the victim
forward part of the monei back of cours the victim later learn that hi bank ha revers
the deposit amount becaus the check wa no good the fraudster usual claim to be in
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11829
anoth countri and must therefor us a middl man such as a lawyer to facilit the
transact on their behalf thi is design to creat a sens of fals secur for the victim
anoth variat on thi scheme involv a seemingli chanc meet in a harmless chat
room onc the chat relationship develop the fr audster explain that thei ar in a foreign
countri and need some help it seem that thei ar unabl to cash certain travel check in
their countri and ask for the victim help to cash the check for them in the unit state
and then send them a monei order less a small token of their appreci thei usual
invent some unfortun circumst or urgenc for the request the first time it occur the
check ar good and everyth work out in a second request thei ask for the victim help
again thi time it a much larger amount and thi time the check ar counterfeit the
victim unknowingli particip in a forgeri by pass the counterfeit check
phish
phish scam ar some of the fastestgrow threat on the internet accord to the
gartner research firm more than 5 million us consum lost monei to phish attack in
the 12 month end in septemb 2008 an almost 40 percent increas over the 36 million
who lost monei in phish attack in the 12 month end in august 2007 although the
number of consum who lost monei to phish attack increas in 2008 the averag
custom loss per incid in 2008 wa 351 down 60 percent from 2007
the definit of phish is to trick peopl into provid their person and financi
inform by pretend to be from a legitim compani agenc or organ in thi
type of scam phisher typic us email to direct internet user to websit that look like
legitim ecommerc site such as onlin bank retail or govern agenc
phisher actual control these site and us them to steal sensit inform such as bank
account detail and password phisher can also us the phone to hunt for victim person
inform some pose as employ and call peopl who have list themselv on job
search websit other call pretend to be from a compani or govern agenc make
the same kind of fals claim and ask for person inform phisher mai also
undertak technic subterfug scheme to plant crimewar onto pc to steal inform
directli such as us keylog system to intercept custom onlin account user name
and password
opinion vari but the amount of time it take for an unprotect person comput to
becom infect with a viru or malwar can rang from four to thirtyfour minut to aid
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11830 2011 fraud examin manual
in prevent phish comput should be arm with spam filter antiviru and anti
spywar softwar and a firewal and kept up to date a spam filter can help reduc the
number of phish email receiv antiviru softwar which scan incom messag
for troublesom file and antispywar softwar which look for program that have been
instal on a comput and track a user onlin activ without their knowledg can
protect user against pharm and other techniqu that phisher us firewal prevent
hacker and unauthor commun from enter a user computerwhich is
especi import if on ha a broadband connect becaus their comput is open to
the internet whenev it turn on look for program that offer automat updat and
take advantag of free patch that manufactur offer to fix newli discov problem
in order to prevent ident theft through phish email comput user should
complet delet unsolicit email from bank credit union invest firm and
govern agenc with which thei do not have an establish relationship if the
recipi doe have an exist relationship with the suppos origin of the email the
better busi bureau recommend call the organ to confirm whether or not the
email is legitim befor take ani further action comput user on the go should be
wari of enter password or sensit inform into a comput that isnt their such as
at an internet caf librari comput lab or airport kiosk wifi network either on the road
or in the consum own home present even more opportun for ident thiev the
easiest wai to protect a wifi network at home is to not broadcast the servic set identifi
a safe rule of thumb is to avoid exchang sensit inform over a wifi connect
and wait until a safe network can be access
spear phish
spear phish is a target attack gener focus on a corpor entiti the ruse is meant
to fool the corpor employe into believ that the phish email origin not from a
bank or financi institut but from their own it or hr depart the goal is to obtain
the employe user name and password to access the corpor network
vish
voic phish or vish is the act of leverag voic over internet protocol voip
technolog in us the telephon system to fals claim to be a legitim enterpris in an
attempt to scam user both consum and busi into disclos person inform
govern financi institut as well as onlin auction and their payment servic can
be target of voic phish
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11831
a vish scheme is gener transmit as an incom record telephon messag that
us a spoof fraudul caller id match the ident of a misrepres organ
the messag us an urgent pretext to direct unsuspect user to anoth telephon
number the victim is invit to punch their person inform on their telephon
keypad the crimin captur the kei tone and convert them back to numer format
there ar sever type of inform at risk from thi type of scheme thi can includ ani
numer person inform payment card inform number expir date and
the last three digit print on the signatur panel pin person identif number
social secur number date of birth bank account number and passport number
secur expert have seen anoth variat of vish where the crimin will leav a
voicemail messag or make telephon call direct peopl to the bogu phone number
with voic over internet protocol voip and other internetbas telephon technolog
crimin can now make call inexpens and can mask their ident and their locat
and even make it look like thei ar call from a legitim compani on caller displai
some potenti us of the person inform that is gather from victim includ
control of the victim financi account open new bank account transfer bank
balanc appli for loan credit card and other goodsservic make luxuri
purchas hide crimin activ receiv govern benefit and obtain a
passport
anoth version of vish involv the send of text messag to cell phone claim the
recipi onlin bank account ha expir the messag instruct the recipi to renew
their onlin bank account by us the link provid
smish or tish
smish is a hybrid of phish and short messag servic commonli known as text
messag it us much the same approach of phish but deliv an alarm messag
via sm the protocol us to transmit text messag via cellular devic instead of email
crimin activ such as smish can be seen as the prelud to onlin fraud target
mobil devic user as these devic continu to evolv cyber crimin will take
advantag of function to obtain inform as well as deliv mobil malwar to
mobil devic
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11832 2011 fraud examin manual
rock phish
on type of phish attack ha been particularli effect the rock phish it estim
that rock phish account for roughli half of all phish attack as measur by the
number of uniqu url rock phisher have target nation and region bank
throughout the us europ and latin america toward the end of 2007 thei broaden
their scope to includ onlin brokerag inform servic treasuri manag
compani and even social network site
like most phisher rock phisher us botnet to send massiv amount of phish email
to huge volum of internet user the email contain a messag from a financi
institut hopefulli entic user to click on a fraudul url there is some indic
that thei cycl through multipl email list and attempt to reach the internet user most
like to us the brand that thei ar target unlik most phisher thei dont compromis
a web server and instal a phish site instead an elabor process is implement
wherebi multipl domain name ar regist at multipl registrar often with less known
countrycod base toplevel domain multipl dn domain name system server ar also
set up which provid name to ip servic for the pool of domain name the ip address
us and there mai be upward of 100 at a time point to multipl compromis server
that simpli forward web connect to the real phish site these proxi server typic
handl connect for multipl target at a time
it is interest to note that befor these bogu domain ar identifi and block
fraudster have alreadi done the damag look at a rock phish url on see random
number with a few alphabet charact in it these ar alphanumer figur these figur
ar us to make the url string uniqu complex and difficult to differenti from a
legitim on
rock phisher have an advanc grasp of technolog us fast flux architectur to chang
name server and site locat in an instant autom proxi server to such an extent that
if on is down it automat switch to the next therefor thei ar abl to lengthen
the life span of rock phish url and make them stealthier
on of the best wai to combat rock phish is to implement a sender polici framework
spf or domain kei on your email system more and more isp ar reject or at least
send to the spam folder email that fail spf or domain kei authent
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11833
pharm
pharm is an attack in which a user is fool into enter sensit data such as a password
or credit card number into a malici websit that imperson a legitim websit it is
differ from phish in that the attack doe not have to reli on have the user click on
a link in the email to direct him to the fake websit pharm actual exploit a
vulner in the dn server softwar that allow a hacker to acquir the domain name for
a site and redirect the websit traffic from a legitim site to a fals on so even though the
user type in the correct websit address the pharm program send the user to an
illegitim site that look like the real thing unknowingli the user is then provid
password and inform directli to the hacker
combat internet fraud
conduct busi on the internet is gener a safe proposit that can be made even
more so through a few addit safeti precaut
encrypt ani confidenti inform or credit card number should be encrypt in
their entireti an encrypt system is made up of a cryptograph function which
scrambl an electron transmiss and an invers decrypt function which restor the
transmiss to it origin state encrypt hardwar and softwar can be us to
scrambl ani commun by util a complex mathemat formula the onli wai
to unscrambl an encrypt messag is to provid the uniqu answer kei thu unlock
the messag encrypt is the best method to stymi wouldb interceptor of compani
transact
custom valid becaus the internet offer user an addit layer of anonym
busi should instal some form of a custom valid safeguard in their internet
purchas system thi mai includ a custom code or password that the custom can
identifi himself with befor purchas a product as well the busi should
distinguish itself to the custom ensur that no on els can fals assum the
compani ident
intern network secur organ that conduct busi on the web should never
under ani circumst keep their financi inform databas on their web server
a knowledg comput hacker can sometim penetr internet websit and
financi inform is the primari target of these hacker for obviou reason
therefor the databas that maintain a compani financi inform should be a
complet intern system untouch from the internet thi safeguard will help
ensur that sensit inform is not compromis in ani wai
firewal firewal ar advanc softwar program that effect lock up access to
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11834 2011 fraud examin manual
an internet site or email transmiss firewal ar design to control the interfac
between a network and the internet thi technolog survei incom and outgo
transmiss between the network and the internet stop ani question
transmiss attempt to access a sensit area while firewal ar not foolproof thei do
provid an addit layer of protect against internet attack or breach of secur
more inform about scam perpetr agai nst busi and individu can be found
in the previou chapter consum fraud
electron commerc
electron commerc or ecommerc is becom a major form of retail market
advertis and interperson commun the hardwar infrastructur requir for
highspe data voic and video transmiss to and from privat home is be
introduc to residenti street everywher
we have all heard peopl talk about their fear about put their credit card number
person identif number pin street address phone number and other person
inform out on the internet in realiti there is veri littl differ between secur
electron commerc and secur ani other kind of inform system resourc
in addit to these tradit goal of inform system secur confidenti
integr and avail there ar a few that ar more directli relat to network
transact which is exactli what ecommerc consist of
authent thi requir address the problem of identifi the parti of an
ecommerc transact to each other we want to make sure that we can determin
with whom we or our comput ar commun
nonrepudi nonrepudi can help ensur that no parti to an ecommerc
transact can later deni that the transact occur we need some wai to be abl to
recogn a signatur between ecommerc parti just as we reli on written signatur
on paper document
while recent year have seen an increas in the number of consum and busi will
to conduct transact onlin there still exist some hesit to fulli embrac ecommerc
technolog it is case like the on describ below that caus consum to lose confid
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11835
in ecommerc in the follow exampl a hacker craft a sophist scam that hurt
million of consum
exampl
albert gonzal had alreadi been caught hack into the indian govern websit
and traffick a million creditdebt card number befor he wa caught steal mani
more creditdebit card number from tjx compani the compani that oper retail
store such as tj maxx and marshal after two year worth of sensit data and 456
million credit card and debit card number were compromis tjx compani notifi the
author of their data leakag
start in 2005 albert found nonsecur wireless network on tjx compani system
and work with other to identifi vulner server to attack infiltr and later us to
jumpbox into other more secur server from there he and hi conspir were abl to
instal malwar us to steal data and snif softwar onto the network of tjx and all
the store oper under them even outsid of the unit state tjx discov the
breach in decemb of 2006 and wa under the belief that thei had onli been lose data
for six to seven month after further investig howev thei found that thei had been
lose sensit data sinc 2005 but by the time tjx had even start discov the
extent of their secur breach albert had alreadi move on to bigger and better oper
in 2008 albert wa arrest on charg relat to hack into other compani
network and he now face 1525 year in prison
isp messag ar also us to sneak trojan hors program onto a user comput the
user is tempt with free pornograph pictur or softwar that will boost their comput
perform when the attach file is open it trigger a program that surreptiti
collect the subscrib account name and password which ar then relai to the hacker
who sent the messag
mani expert sai that it is current possibl to have secur transact over the internet
becaus the latest encrypt technolog and secur protocol allow for thi howev
fulli realiz standard ar not yet in place for all businesstobusi or businesstocustom
transact some current secur protocol do not permit nonrepudi of
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11836 2011 fraud examin manual
data which is requir if firm serious want to conduct busi over the internet
howev the arriv of standard for us smart card technolog will transform internet
busi and commerc as a whole smart card technolog offer a solut to the major
secur transact requir name data integr user authent and non
repudi of data smart card technolog also involv the applic of thirdparti trust
relationship to the internet
appli encrypt to ecommerc secur
gener speak the solut offer by convent and publickei encrypt
technolog ar usual adequ to ensur that ecommerc transact ar as secur as the
valu of transact requir
the vast major of transmiss over the internet and the world wide web ar not
encrypt in ani wai if there is no need to hide the content of a messag or
commun there is littl need to expend resourc on the encrypt of such traffic and
the decrypt at the other end encrypt can be an expens solut whether in term
of actual monetari cost or the cost in increas comput load on the user machin
the need of the organ to keep confidenti transmiss secret should be weigh
against the effort and cost of encrypt
smart card
the cost and ineffici of manual appli encrypt techniqu could prevent some
organ from fulli engag in ecommerc activ fortun a rel
inexpens solut is avail in the us of smart card technolog
a smart card is a creditcard size plastic card embed with an integr circuit chip that
make it smart thi marriag between a conveni plastic card and a microprocessor
allow an immens amount of inform to be store access and process either
onlin or offlin smart card can store sever hundr time more data than a convent
card with a magnet stripe the inform or applic store in the ic chip is
transfer through an electron modul that interconnect with a termin or a card reader
a contactless smart card ha an antenna coil that commun with a receiv antenna to
transfer inform depend on the type of the embed chip smart card can be
either memori card or processor card
memori card ani plastic card is made smart by includ an ic chip but the chip
mai simpli be a memori storag devic memori card can hold thousand of time
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11837
more memori than a magnet stripe card nevertheless it function ar limit to basic
applic such as phone card
processor card smart card with a fullfledg microprocessor on board can function
as a processor devic that offer multipl function such as encrypt advanc secur
mechan local data process complex calcul and other interact process
most storedvalu card integr with identif secur and inform
purpos ar processor card onli processor card ar truli smart enough to offer the
flexibl and multifunction desir in ecommerc
the top three intern market in smart card product ar 1 miniatur subscrib
ident modul sim that fit insid mobil phone 2 bank card and 3
identif card specif those us by govern and larg corpor
most smart card issu todai ar memori card with limit process capabl
howev modern technolog is constantli make advanc toward increas these
capabl
insid threat
by far the greatest threat to inform system in term of comput crime come from
employe insid an organ it is not uncommon for oper media librarian
hardwar technician and other staff member to find themselv in posit of
extraordinari privileg in relat to the kei function and asset of their organ a
consequ of thi situat is the probabl that such individu ar frequent expos
to temptat
a further complic is the tendenc on the part of manag to toler less stringent
supervisori control over inform system personnel the premis is that the work is not
onli highli technic and special but difficult to understand and control as an exampl
system softwar support is often entrust to a singl programm who gener the
version of the oper system in us establish password or other control list and
determin the log and account featur to be us in addit such personnel ar
often permit and sometim encourag to perform these duti dure nonprim shift
period when demand on comput time ar light as a result mani of the most critic
softwar develop and mainten function ar perform in an unsupervis
environ it is also clear that oper librarian and technician often enjoi a degre
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11838 2011 fraud examin manual
of freedom quit differ from that which would be consid normal in a more
tradit employ area
insid ar typic awar of the hole in the system of intern control and often exploit
weak just to see if thei can get awai with it the most preval method of
commit comput fraud is probabl alter or falsif of input transact
andor document includ
alter of input
alter of output
data file manipul
commun system
oper system
comput oper
characterist
the characterist of the tradit insid comput fraudster ar veri similar to those of
the hacker or other comput crimin intellig hard work seldom take time off
bore with the routin of the job and ha a veri larg ego mani comput technician have
demonstr a greater loyalti to the technolog than to the organ for which thei
work thi technolog loyalti can creat an attitud that ani behavior is accept if it is in
the name of technolog
the follow ar indic of insid comput fraud
access privileg beyond those requir to perform assign job function
except report not review and resolv
access log not review
product program run at unusu hour
lack of separ of duti in the data center
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11839
comput secur
effect secur
effect comput secur ensur the avail of accur data in time to meet an
organ need at a cost that is commen surat with the risk involv kei element
ar
protect data and program from intent or inadvert unauthor alter or
destruct
maintain the confidenti integr and avail of data
protect the data center from physic threat such as fire flood and intent
destruct
have the capabl to restor data center oper in case of complet destruct
the most import step is to obtain manag support for effect secur without
such support ani secur plan will falter
secur the commun network
some commun network ar veri larg veri complex and technic demand
the task of effect secur these network is demand and requir the close
cooper of both network and secur administr the object of data and voic
network is to provid connect with accept respons time userfriendli access and
a secur mode at an accept cost to the organ
password
password ar the predomin form of authent valid user effect password
administr is essenti for maintain secur password should be of suffici length
usual a minimum of eight charact and a combin of letter number and other
charact such as punctuat mark to avoid guess group password and share of
password should be prohibit so as to maintain individu account password of all
termin employe should be revok immedi secur administr often
coordin the notif of termin employe with the personnel function
employe who have chang job function or transfer should have their old password
cancel and new on issu if appropri
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11840 2011 fraud examin manual
other network secur
secur a comput network by mean of logic control is a difficult but necessari
requir for ensur the safeti of a comput system from attack by outsid logic
control includ manag secur polici user authent system data access
control network firewal secur awar train encrypt algorithm penetr
test intrus detect softwar and incid respons plan
network secur can also be provid by a combin of design hardwar devic and
softwar data encrypt is carri out by a combin of hardwar and softwar
encrypt data is scrambl by a formula us a uniqu kei and can onli be unscrambl
with the same formula and kei at the receiv end the decis to us encrypt should be
made in light of the risk and after a costbenefit analysi drawback to encrypt ar the
cost of the hardwar and softwar the cost of the administr and the inher delai
incur by the extra step requir for process
digit signatur ar becom more common in part becaus congress and mani state
have pass legisl to legitim the electron sign of document in 2000 the
electron signatur in global and nation commerc act esign act becam
effect thi feder statut basic provid a mechan wherebi ani document that is
requir to be sign can be sign electr onic the esign act doe not requir a
parti to us or accept electron signatur electron contract or electron record but
rather seek to facilit the us of electron signatur and document by uphold their
legal effect regardless of the type or method select by the parti the esign act is also
technologyneutr and doe not requir a specif type or method that busi and
consum must us or accept in order to conduct their electron transact the act
regul ani transact involv interst or foreign commerc howev mani state
have enact their own digit signatur law which regul pure intrast transact
addition mani state and feder agenc includ the intern revenu servic and the
secur and exchang commiss ar encourag the us of electron file and digit
signatur as a mean to speed up the collect and process of inform
biolog access verif long the favorit stuff of movi maker is now avail
thi verif techniqu includ fingerprint palm print voic print signatur and
retina scan
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11841
profil softwar authent user by monitor their statist characterist such as
type speed and keystrok touch smart card access devic ar similar to an atm card like
atm card thei ar suscept to loss and forgeri
the most effect compon of intern secur ar educ report facil and
vigor disciplinari action for offend includ prosecut of illeg act an
enterprisewid employe awar program should be combin with formal train in
the area of inform secur for employe to fulfil their secur respons thei
should know what inform need to be kept confidenti how to recogn threat to
secur and how to us backup and other aid for their desktop machin give
employe incent such as bonus to follow secur guidelin howev will be the
most effect motiv
protect the network from extern threat requir some addit consider the
less an extern perpetr know about the technolog environ for exampl type of
hardwar and softwar packag us the harder it is to obtain fraudul access part of
the secur polici should address how much and what kind of inform regard the
technolog of an organ should be made public
organ should guard against provid too much access to third parti there is
pressur to establish connect by market purchas research and other branch
connect should be grant onli after it ha been establish that the benefit outweigh
the risk and cost
the risk assess process
as organ grow their inform technolog and data chang both in type and
quantiti assumpt made about secur need to be updat the vehicl for updat is
the risk assess thi is a zerobas process that should be perform period a
risk assess is an analysi of the secur object of confidenti integr
and avail
each data element should be examin to determin the impact if it is disclos lost or
enter incorrectli onc thi inform is collect the secur measur in place should
be review to determin whether thei provid necessari safeguard the risk assess
process is a timeconsum process to undertak and mani organ emploi outsid
secur consult to reduc it impact on daytodai oper
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11842 2011 fraud examin manual
intern control in the data center
in most instanc computerrel crime ar veri difficult to detect an intrud mai be
abl to gain unauthor access to a network or comput system perpetr whatev
crimin activ wa plan and retreat without anyon be awar of the intrus much
less the crimin activ that ha taken place so how doe an organ becom awar
that it inform resourc have been compromis by someon either insid or outsid
of the organ with crimin intent a few possibl includ
a strong set of polici and standard to defin for employe and manag what the
compani deem as unaccept or unauthor activ
strong physic secur to thwart those intent upon the theft of physic asset of the
organ
central system access control and data object protect
strong secur for the organ applic program
intrus detect hardwar and softwar for network and commun resourc
audit of system and violat log
all of these mechan if us correctli will alert the organ of inappropri
action thi all assum of cours that someon is keep an ey out for except and
violat all of the secur polici and standard the intrus detect softwar the
violat log and the access control will mean absolut noth if the organ is not
commit to appli them properli and maintain them adequ
gener control over a data center ar relev for all applic the gener control
categori includ system mainten implement of new system includ
develop comput oper system softwar includ secur and
telecommun softwar and data file
system mainten
all program and system chang should be approv in write programm should not
have access to the product librari but onli to test librari all program that ar to be
modifi should be move into a test librari by someon other than a programm all
complet program chang should be test and the result approv by both data center
and user personnel befor be place into product adequ program document
should be approv for all program chang user personnel should be notifi when
modifi program will be place into product
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11843
implement control
implement control ar those control over the develop of or purchas of a new
applic all new system request should be made in write a system develop life
cycl methodolog should be us for develop and implement inhous or purchas
packag all new system request should be approv by the appropri manag
level user should be involv in the project from design through final test all test
result should be approv by both data center manag and user personnel there
should be an implement plan for place the new system into product
comput oper
comput oper control ar control that govern the daytodai oper of the
comput system there should be an approv schedul for all product run all system
activ should be review by data center manag ani unusu program execut
should be investig and resolv a log of unusu event such as abend abnorm
termin of a program execut or rerun should be kept by oper staff and also
should be review by data center manag access to the comput room should be
restrict to author personnel all third parti such as technician should be
accompani by a data center employe door to the data center should be secur
system softwar
control over system softwar includ those that govern the instal of the comput
system the commun softwar and the secur softwar data center manag
should approv the system softwar select as well as the chosen option and paramet
system softwar should be test befor implement in a product environ
note that thi might not be possibl for the oper system itself
data file
control over data file ensur that correct file ar us for each product job and that
adequ backup file exist datafil label bypass option should be disabl a data file
manag system should be us to record and locat all data file data file backup
copi should be made and store in a secur facil offsit backup file copi should be
maintain in case of a disast in the data center util that can modifi data file should
be remov from the system and us onli under manag supervis live data file
should not be us for test
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11844 2011 fraud examin manual
access and telecommun control
in the 1960 and 1970 access control meant ensur that there wa a lock on the
comput room door as onlin system were implement the definit of access evolv
to includ logic access in addit to physic access logic access refer to ani locat
where someon can sign on to the system that signon access can be a direct connect or
a dialup in todai onlin realtim and in terconnect world it is easi to forget physic
guard over comput equip comput equip must be physic secur thi
should includ network server telephon system comput commun control
and person comput with sensit data
access and telecommun control should achiev the follow object
provid physic secur over equip user and inform
protect critic data from loss damag or unauthor disclosur
ensur network reliabl by us appropri hardwar and softwar
prevent unauthor access and us of the network
ensur system avail
meet user requir
separ of duti
separ of duti is a kei element in a welldesign intern control system it is also
fundament to detect and prevent fraud programm should not oper the
comput have unsupervis access to product program or have access to product
data set data file user should not have access to the product program code
comput oper should not perform comput program adequ supervis
should be provid by personnel who do not actual perform the work
log and histori file
comput system maintain a varieti of histori file or log these log record activ in the
follow area
mainfram activ
program execut
data file access
date time and durat
user id that initi a particular action
error messag
equip malfunct
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11845
commun activ
user id
termin identifi
dialin port identifi
date time and durat
error messag
equip malfunct
secur softwar activ
user id
unsuccess login attempt
modif to the password file and access capabl
these log were origin design to help in troubleshoot the system and correct
error these file contain a veri valuabl audit and fraud examin trail of system
activ and ar now us for intern control function the log should be review by a
respons data center offici and evid should exist of thi review mani of the histori
file have a limit capac and can be forc into wrap if not print period
wrap forc the softwar to record at the begin of the file if the file is full and not
print out
secur softwar
there ar a number of good secur softwar packag on the market for all mainfram
and most minicomput secur packag avail for pc ar less numer local area
network have some secur packag avail but still reli primarili on the individu user
in a standalon mode or the mainfram secur in a connect mode the purchas and
instal of a secur packag might provid a fals sens of secur most of these
packag ar design to be instal in a phase approach becaus of the complex of
the task
these option and decis about secur softwar should be review by manag
for exampl most mainfram secur packag allow a minimum of three level of secur
log mode mere log all system access to defin program and data file warn mode tell the
user if he is access a program or file that is not author for the password he ha
emploi activ is also log fail mode will not allow a user to access defin data file
and program without the proper password thi is the highest level of secur and the onli
on that provid adequ protect anoth veri import consider involv the
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11846 2011 fraud examin manual
manual supervis of data provid by secur packag usual in the form of access log
a secur packag need consist review to protect against possibl violat
intern control in comput applic
intern control establish check and balanc to prevent on person from control the
entir financi transact compet and trustworthi employe ar obvious a necessari
element of a good intern control system no employe with a known histori of dishonesti
should be hire
asset and record which can be easili appropri or destroi should be physic
safeguard thei should be safeguard by lock physic secur and other method to
ensur that thei will not be misappropri all account system reli on proper
document miss document should be regard as a red flag of possibl fraud
someon independ of the transact must check the account control the
knowledg that all work is check is a power fraud deterr the element of sound
intern control do not chang in a computer environ object do not chang
but techniqu do
control techniqu
control techniqu commonli us in computer system ar list below
oneforon check consist of check each sourc document against a detail list
process by the comput thi techniqu is normal us for lowvolum input
becaus of the cost and time involv
batchcontrol total involv manual group transact at the input stage and
manual establish a control total over the entir group the method us includ
document count item or line count dollar total and cash total
in comput sequenc check the comput verifi the preassign serial number of
input transact and report miss or duplic number
comput match consist of the comput match the input data to inform
held on the master file or suspens file unmatch item ar report for investig
program edit check ar comput program procedur that edit data exampl
includ
reason
depend
exist
format
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11847
mathemat accuraci
rang
digit verif
prior data match
prerecord input is us to reduc error dure data entri
control object
welldesign comput applic have builtin control for all function the major
control object is complet of input
input complet control techniqu ar oneforon check batch control total comput
sequenc check and comput match input accuraci control ensur that data is initi
record correctli and convert correctli to machineread form input accuraci control
techniqu ar oneforon check batch control total comput match program
edit and prerecord input
updat accuraci ensur that the correct master file account is updat correctli with the
correct transact updat accuraci control techniqu ar oneforon check batch control
total comput match and program check updat control complet ensur that all
data enter and accept by the system updat the master file onc and onli onc updat
control complet techniqu ar oneforon check batch control total comput sequenc
check and comput match
author control ensur that onli valid transact ar process that all transact
process ar author by manag and that transact repres event that actual
occur author techniqu us ar oneforon check and program check
mainten control provid that data is kept uptod or identifi unusu data requir
further action thei also ensur that data store on file is not chang except through the
normal process cycl mainten control techniqu ar us for oneforon check
batch control total and program check
evalu applic control
evalu intern control in an applic system requir a thorough understand of
the system the first phase inform gather consist of collect inform about
the industri and the risk associ with that industri conduct ratio analysi and peer
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11848 2011 fraud examin manual
comparison to identifi aberr understand how manag run the busi and
determin if there ar strong budgettoactu control in the organ
evalu is the second phase and consist of the us of questionnair andor matric to
evalu the intern control and to identifi intern control weak analyz the
result is necessari to determin if a weak exist andor the extent of ani weak a
result report should be prepar that includ recommend
endus comput intern control
endus comput or distribut process ha emerg sinc the advent of microcomput
and provid endus with equip such as pc and process capabl
exampl includ microcomput develop tool such as spreadsheet databas
program and download part of an applic and it associ file for process on a
local area network either connect to the mainfram or in a standalon mode
sever control concern have been identifi as a result of endus comput
data center control over the equip itself backup access control local password
administr etc might not be implement by the end user
local develop spreadsheet or databas applic might not have all the control
typic found in mainfram system
access can be compromis by the end user by instal a modem and phone line
connect to a local area network or standalon pc and not inform data secur
about the arrang
conduct an investig regard comput crime
onc an organ ha receiv an indic that a possibl crimin violat ha
occur by mean of it inform system resourc a preliminari investig into the
alleg should be conduct to achiev the follow goal
1 determin if inde a crime ha been commit thi is the critic step in the
intern investig the organ must be care to differenti between
inadvert comput misus and deliber crimin intent the compani intern
auditor physic and inform secur specialist and senior manag
should be involv in make thi type of decis
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11849
2 determin the statu of the crime when did the incid begin where did the
intrus come from intern or extern is the incid still occur if not still
occur when did it stop
3 review the organ secur and audit polici and procedur to determin the
best method for continu the investig
4 determin the need for law enforc assist the organ will have to
decid if the violat is seriou enough to call in the polic or other law
enforc entiti most comput crime ar not report to law enforc
due to sever factor includ the organ desir to keep it flaw and
weak from be expos to it custom and stockhold thi is a difficult
decis for the compani to make howev as we also mention earlier if
compani dont report comput crime then law enforc will be powerless to
help prevent and solv them and comput crimin will feel thei have a free hand
to continu their activ
handl the evid
on of the major differ between investig computerrel crime and
convent crimin activ is the volatil of the evid that resid in the comput
themselv inde the evid of a comput intrus might be eras or alter as part
of the intrus itself it is therefor veri import for the organ andor law
enforc personnel to deal quickli and decis with evid of suspect comput
relat crimin activ
the admiss of evid obtain from comput in a court case is realli no differ
from the admiss of ani other type of evid the evid must be
relev
support by a foundat for it introduct into court
legal obtain
properli identifi
properli preserv
in the handl of comput data in crimin investig the examin or investig
must be awar of some of the vulner of comput evid
the investig must ensur that turn off power to comput equip will not
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11850 2011 fraud examin manual
destroi or eras evid that is requir for the investig
the readwrit head of hard disk drive must be park in a retract posit so that
power down the disk drive will not caus the readwrit head to contact the surfac
of the disk platter
be awar that magnet storag media ar vulner to magnet field and that evid
might be eras without the investig be awar of the erasur if the media ar
brought close to a sourc of a magnet field
be awar that other equip attach to the comput might be need to complet
the investig into the data that resid in the comput
the investig should writeprotect all diskett that ar be us in the investig
so that thei cannot be written upon inadvert
integr of evid
there ar certain issu that must be consid when process comput evid these
area should be consid regardless of whether the incid will be process as a crimin
offens for prosecut or possibl civil litig even if the organ decid to take
no action at all how a comput fraud examin is conduct might have potenti civil
liabil implic for both the organ andor the fraud examin
should the fraud examin discov evid on a comput system he must be abl to state
unequivoc that the evid wa not chang in ani wai by their action thi requir
that strict forens methodolog be follow to satisfi the stringent evidentiari standard
necessari to ensur the integr of the evid beyond a reason doubt for possibl
court present therefor fraud examin must be awar of the follow issu that
relat to the gather of comput evid
search seizur expect of privaci
the first question that should be ask in a comput fraud examin pertain to the
expect of privaci for ani employe or outsid who might be involv in the incid
for exampl in on incid an employe wa caught us a compani comput for
person us the compani had never establish comput us polici the employe had
never been formal notifi that person us of the comput wa prohibit and that the
compani had the right to inspect the content of the comput at ani time therefor when
a supervisor discov inappropri person file on the employe comput the
employe protest the act as an invas of hi privaci
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11851
thi demonstr that appropri polici can be critic in the abov circumst the
compani might have creat a situat where thei would actual need to obtain a court
order or a search warrant through a law enforc agenc just to examin the content of
their own comput
there is specif word that should be us in the construct of a search warrant
involv either comput or telecommun equip how the equip and
magnet media ar describ will be critic to the success of the court case
presearch prepar
obtain as much intellig as possibl regard ing the locat of the potenti evid is
veri desir befor write the search warrant affidavit question that fraud examin
should consid might includ
determin the type of comput system that will be involv in the search what
oper system is us ar the comput network togeth
determin how mani peopl will be need to conduct the search in on case
approxim 17 network file server were involv with multipl router and dialup
modem a team of onli two investig would need at least four to six hour to
complet a seizur of thi magnitud
if expert wit with a specif expertis ar requir dure the search identifi and
clear them befor the search warrant is written depend on the circumst their
credenti should possibl be includ in the warrant affidavit befor thei ar approv
by the magistr issu the search warrant the time to discov that an expert
wit ha a crimin convict is befor the search warrant affidavit ha even been
written not when the wit take the stand to testifi in a crimin proceed
determin the resourc that will be requir to successfulli conduct the search if a
great deal of equip is to be seiz consid how the equip will be transport
from the locat obtain suffici box label bag and other suppli at thi time
consid the time of the search in anoth case an assist district attornei
request assist in the execut of a search warrant when detect arriv thei
discov that the da want them to seiz more than 30 comput includ 3 file
server thi wa at 3 pm and the da then told the detect that the author to
execut the search warrant expir at 5 pm natur the detect could not possibl
have conduct the seizur within that time frame and in thi case the evid wa lost
a better strategi would have been to time the execut of the search warrant for 5 pm
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11852 2011 fraud examin manual
on a fridai afternoon thi would give the entir weekend to conduct the search if
necessari
search warrant affidavit construct
the construct of search warrant ha been affect by both advanc in technolog
and the evolv natur of crimin law fraud examin must now consid sever
problem not encount befor for exampl the fraud examin must know how to write
a warrant to seiz tangibl properti that contain intang evid further the fraud
examin must be allow to convert that evid into a humanread form ie
comput storag devic such as disk or cdrom which contain inform that
cannot be view without the aid of some electron devic
the warrant must allow for such conting as the abil to seiz data file pertin to
the case that ar mix with data file that have noth to do with the case but resid on the
same storag devic the warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizur of
all comput evid relev to the investig but narrow enough to exclud all
materi that is not thi can be an extrem difficult standard to meet at time and might
depend on the magistr to whom the affidavit is present
to satisfi the particular requir of the fourth amend the fraud examin
must be abl to justifi each and everi item that might contain evid for exampl state
that all printer should be seiz might be consid to be overli broad unless the fraud
examin can justifi the need for each specif printer
howev with some thought fraud examin should be abl to justifi the search and
seizur for everyth that thei need to complet the search for evid item to be seiz
might contain ani or all of the follow depend upon the natur of the fraud case
comput
comput compon
comput peripher
word process equip
modem
monitor
printer
plotter
optic scanner
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11853
data storag devic
magnet
laser
optic
tape
pcmcia
zip or jaz drive
cabl wire cord
storag media
floppi disk
hard disk
magnet tape reel
pcmcia ram card
cdrom
magneticopt disk
digit audio tape dat
person data manag
flash ram card consid digit camera storag
usb thumb drive
comput program
oper system
applic softwar
util program
compil
interpret
document
manual
printout
file list
all relat document should be cover by the word of the search warrant and
seiz along with the comput system thi document could be critic in the analysi
of the system hardwar and softwar document could indic chang that have been
made to the system that will help the fraud examin avoid damag the system the fact
that access control product have been ad to the system might be a help piec of
inform for the fraud examin
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11854 2011 fraud examin manual
process evid for remov
the search for and seizur of technic equip requir specif procedur that must be
follow by fraud examin to guarante the integr of evid and to protect both the
organ and the individu fraud examin from civil litig these guidelin ar
written to satisfi the evidentiari requir for crimin prosecut and each step in the
process is there for a reason fraud examin who deviat from these guidelin should be
abl to justifi their action if call into question later
1 if possibl befor execut a search warrant where comput equip andor
magnet storag media is to be seiz try to make sure that someon will be present
who is familiar with comput equip to assist in the identif of the variou
compon
2 it is critic that anyon not involv in the investig be kept awai from ani
comput equip and not be allow to touch ani of the equip thi
includ ani person not directli involv in handl the comput and relat
equip it is possibl for a suspect or ani person touch onli on kei of a
system keyboard when a comput is oper to destroi evid limit the
number of personnel respons for process computerrel evid to
maintain the integr of thi evid
3 if the person seiz the system ha the appropri train and expertis it might be
us to observ the video displai of the system inform might be displai that
will be of valu in the case if thi occur document with a closeup photograph of the
video screen take care if us a camera with a flash that the flash doe not reflect
back into the camera len
4 if a comput or peripher is not cover by the respect search warrant leav it
alon until a supplement warrant can be obtain
5 if the comput is to be remov from the locat do not enter anyth via the
system keyboard or attempt to read inform from the system or ani associ
magnet media
6 do not move the comput ani more than is necessari until it is properli secur
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11855
even then extrem care should be taken as sudden motion could caus the
destruct of data or damag to the equip itself
7 photograph the overal view of the comput system wide view move the equip
as littl as possibl befor take thi photograph to indic how the equip wa
origin posit consid videotap the confisc procedur for complet
document of all action perform howev caution is advis sinc the video
will captur everyth that is said and done specul statement or leviti should be
restrict
8 document the state of the comput when first observ wa it oper what wa
displai on the monitor screen etc
9 depend on the experi of the person seiz the system it might be advis to
unplug the power from the central process unit cpu befor take ani further
action unplug the power at the wall outlet if access even though thi action will
lose ani data in random access memori it might prevent the comput from delet
or chang other data n o te thi appli to sta nd alon microcomput onli
and doe not includ comput connect to a local area network lan
10 turn off the power to all other compon andor piec of peripher equip
such as printer video displai crt or monitor etc be awar that mani
peripher util random access memori which can contain evid that will be
lost when power is remov
11 if possibl photograph all cabl connect usual in the rear of the system befor
disconnect
12 disconnect all compon that ar attach to an extern power suppli onli eg
from an electr wall socket etc
13 never connect or disconnect ani of the cabl of the system when the comput is
oper thi could result in physic damag to the system compon andor
peripher equip
14 label all cabl connect includ ani telephon cabl that ar connect to the
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11856 2011 fraud examin manual
system so that the system can be reconstruct at a later time for analysi
15 again photograph all cabl connect befor photograph try to arrang the
cabl connector label in such a wai that thei will be visibl in the photograph
16 label each item of equip that will be confisc thi includ the cpu
monitor printer etc each item that ha a remov exterior case should be seal
with a tamperproof evid tape especi the cpu case thi will help to prevent
later alleg that compon were remov or alter
17 consider should be given to separ closeup isol photograph for each
item to be seiz these closeup shot will serv the purpos of provid more
specif identif of seiz item and respond to possibl futur alleg of
physic damag to a seiz item
18 document the locat of all item seiz which room specif locat in the room
refer to photograph the person who seiz the item serial number special
identif mark etc
19 check all disk drive to determin if thei contain a disk if so remov the disk from
the drive and place it in a disk sleev writeprotect the disk immedi label the
particular disk drive to show which drive the disk came from and then label a paper
bag to indic that the disk wa taken from the label drive place the disk in the
paper bag and seal it
20 place a cardboard insert or a throwawai disk into the disk drive and secur the drive
door shut to secur the drive head for transport cardboard insert ar special
made for thi purpos if none ar avail a disk of the particular size that contain
no data might be us prefer a new unus disk
21 check ani other remov storag media drive remov ani storag media thei
contain and label the media for identif purpos thi includ compon
such as optic drive extern tape drive iomega drive cdrom etc
22 if there is ani uncertainti as to what a piec of equip is do not specul just
label the equip with a uniqu identifi number and secur the item for later
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11857
analysi howev be prepar to justifi the seizur of a compon that might or
might not be cover in the search warrant
23 when all compon and cabl have been label and document disconnect the
cabl from their respect compon and secur the cabl
24 if cover in the search warrant confisc all relat manual and other
document and all magnet media also confisc ani other item that might be
evid in the case and that ar cover by the term of the search warrant
25 if at all possibl after all equip and magnet media have been label and
inventori each item should be store in a paper bag or a cardboard box and seal
to keep out dust larg item such as the cpu andor printer could be store in
larg paper bag or larg box smaller item such as disk and cd could be store
in sandwichbag size paper bag thi practic will protect these item from
unnecessari exposur to dust an addit label should be attach to the bag
identifi the content of the bag along with ani identifi number such as the
number of an evid tag note plastic bag such as garbag and sandwich
bag should not be us to store evid
26 ensur that adequ support is given to all item when thei ar be move
27 thoroughli document the inventori of everyth to be remov from the locat
thi will be requir for the search warrant return if applic but also serv to
provid a measur of liabil protect for the person seiz the system
basic comput procedur ar essenti when process evid these precaut must
be follow explicitli when work with comput
do not eat drink or smoke close to the comput system or near ani of the storag
media such as disk or cd crumb liquid andor smoke particl could all
potenti damag the equip or store data if thi happen it becom veri
difficult if not imposs to recov the data and evid
do not fold or bend disk or touch the magnet media insid the disk cover
do not write on a disk on a label of a disk or on a bag that contain a disk write on a
label and then place the label on the disk if it is necessari to write on a disk us a soft
felttip pen
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11858 2011 fraud examin manual
do not place magnet media near magnet field as thi could caus damag magnet
field strong enough to damag data ar more common than you might think
do not expos magnet media to either extrem heat or cold temperatur outsid of
the rang from 4090 degre fahrenheit can damag the data
do not fingerprint magnet media the particl of fingerprint powder ar almost
imposs to remov from the media surfac and the drive will not be abl to read the
data contain on the media perman damag to the drive equip could
also result
evid storag
after a comput system ha been seiz most crimin justic agenc have a central
evid storag facil where the equip is transport and store until it is either
process further or need in court in the major of case the special storag
requir of comput system ar not address
the storag environ should be in a locat that is
rel dustfre
both temperatur and humid control
free of magnet and electron field
possibl threat to magnet media
telephon
radio speaker
radio transmitt
copi machin
plastic garbag or sandwich bag
degauss equip
electr fan
undershelf light heat
leav media in vehicl trunk dure ex treme temperatur either hot or cold
magnet
proxim to a radiat or an open heat vent
evid analysi
the primari concern dure the analysi of electron evid is to maintain the integr of
the evid thi mean that procedur must be develop to ensur that no alleg
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11859
can be rais in court that the methodolog us dure analysi could have damag or
alter the hardwar media or data that constitut the evid
current there ar no special evid analysi laboratori avail to most crimin
justic agenc to analyz comput electron or magnet evid the us secret
servic and the fbi both have such capabl but unless the case is of critic import
these laboratori process onli case investig by those agenc
understand the term
to effect analyz the data store within a comput the fraud examin must have a
practic understand of the basic oper of a comput and how it store inform
the fraud examin must also have the expertis to access the data at the most basic level
without thi knowledg inform could be hidden from view or store within other file
or locat not usual access by the comput
each new develop in technolog bring with it new concept and a new vocabulari
the modern fraud examin must stai current on the term us to describ technolog
develop tool and practic as he mai be ask to explain such concept as part of
the engag in the result report or as an expert wit dure consequ
legal proceed
fraud examin must also be educ in the us of the variou softwar util that will
enabl them to analyz the electron data util such as norton util will be of great
assist in investig involv person comput there ar sever util
applic that autom a great deal of the evid analysi process howev you
should not us these program unless you have been properli train
evid inventori
mani time comput seiz as evid ar onli inventori accord to the inform
avail on the outsid of the cpu case name the make model and serial number of
the particular unit the compon insid the cpu case ar never examin fraud
examin must consid that there could liter be thousand of dollar of equip
insid thi case inadequ inventori of comput equip leav the organ and
possibl the fraud examin in a precari liabil posit should ani of thi equip be
damag or lost
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11860 2011 fraud examin manual
in analyz and search magnet or optic media for potenti evid the fraud
examin should consid the follow
mirror copi
viru detect
keyword search
hidden and delet file
file slack area
file signatur
encrypt file
mirror copi
if possibl the fraud examin should make an exact duplic or mirror copi of ani
media that is to be analyz thi will ensur that no chang or damag occur to the
origin evid thi will not be possibl in all case due to a lack of equip or other
resourc but should be consid as the ideal procedur
when there is no altern but to analyz the origin of the seiz evid consider
should be given to us util softwar to lock the disk so that no inform can be
written to the disk thi will protect the integr of the origin evid and prevent
inadvert alter of the origin data
viru detect
all data storag media should be examin for comput virus thi will serv not onli to
protect the fraud examin own equip but also will protect the fraud examin from
possibl alleg that he infect the seiz media with a comput viru
keyword search
due to the tremend storag capac of contemporari comput media it might be more
cost effect for the fraud examin to conduct a keyword search of the media search
for kei word name date account number etc that ar materi to the fraud case thi
will minim the amount of time us to complet the analysi and also protect the fraud
examin from possibl alleg that their search wa overli broad
hidden and delet file
most comput oper system allow file to be design as hidden file when so
design the file might not be visibl to normal search procedur such as displai a
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11861
disk directori util program exist to show these hidden file fraud examin should
inspect these file to determin if thei were intention hidden becaus thei contain
evid
in addit mani comput user do not realiz that an initi command to delet a file
doe not necessarili mean that the file content have been destroi with the appropri
util program eras file can be uneras and review by the fraud examin
file slack area
there is a differ in most oper system between the logic size of a file and the
physic size of the file the logic size pertain to the size in the number of byte that
the file occupi in a directori list thi is the number that is displai for file size
the physic size of a file depend on how the oper system store file in most
oper system the disk is organ into design block call cluster file occupi a
whole number of cluster even if the logic size of the file is smaller than the cluster size in
these case differ in space between the physic file space and the logic file space is
call the file slack area thi area might contain data from previouslyeras file that could
contain evid unless the fraud examin ha a special util to identifi and investig
the file slack area potenti evid possibl locat there could be miss
file signatur
when review a directori list in a file manag such as window explor the type
of file is on of the option that might displai thi inform might indic that the file
is an applic or that it is a word document or some other type howev thi
design is usual base on the extens of the file and might not be an accur
indic of the file content
for exampl if a file were creat in microsoft word and save with the file name of
murder confessiondoc the directori list would correctli indic that thi file wa a
word document howev if the file were renam as angelex the directori list
would mistakenli indic that the file wa an applic even though the content of the
file itself have not chang
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11862 2011 fraud examin manual
inspect each and everi file on seiz media would be tremend tediou and veri
timeconsum howev there ar util program that can autom thi process and
report ani discrep such as the on describ abov
encrypt file
should the fraud examin come across file that have been encrypt dure the analysi of
seiz comput media sever consider aris
first of all util program exist to decrypt document encrypt by mani of the more
common busi softwar applic such as microsoft word and wordperfect there
ar also sever compani who special in thi type of decrypt
secondli there is preced for forc the suspect to divulg the decrypt code through a
court order consid onc again that the comput is onli a contain and that the
encrypt is an addit lock that is prohibit the fraud examin from review the
content for potenti evid if a valid search warrant exist author the examin
of the data thi would be no differ than a court order a suspect to unlock a file cabinet
to allow the inspect of it content
comput crime law
intern law
with a global commun network such as the internet the odd have dramat
increas that a crime mai have been perpetr in a foreign nation or that record relat
to a portion of the commun transmiss mai have pass through anoth countri
thi can caus tremend complic for a fraud examin attempt to pursu hi
investig
victim of scam origin oversea usual find themselv with virtual no recours
recent comput equip and softwar scam oper in former communist nation
have specif target us user languag commun and distanc obstacl ar
nearli insurmount in work with foreign law enforc offici to resolv such
case in the futur greater intern cooper will be necessari to combat
intern high tech crime
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11863
recent howev the us ha taken two substanti step to combat the inconsist in
intern law pertain to comput fraud first on septemb 29 2006 the unit
state becam a parti to the council of europ convent on cybercrim which is the
onli legal bind multilater instrument specif address computerrel crime
help protect citizen against comput hack and internet fraud as well as crime
involv electron evid parti to the convent ar commit to harmon
nation law to improv investig techniqu and to increas cooper
second the us is an activ particip in the subgroup on hightech crime at g8 lyon
group which wa creat to enhanc the abil of g8 countri to prevent investig
and prosecut crime involv comput network commun and other new
technolog on signific accomplish of the subgroup wa the creation of a
network that allow law enforc author of member nation to receiv rapid
cooper in investig comput crime
feder law
there ar mani law that can be us to prosecut comput crime and fraud in the
unit state the basic law us to prosecut comput and other high tech crime ar
divid into the feder law and state law
comput fraud and abus act titl 18 us code section 1030
most comput crime ar prosecut under tradit fraud theft and embezzl
statut a statut enact in 1984 titl 18 us code section 1030 make certain
computerrel activ a specif feder offens more inform on section 1030 is set
out in the law relat to fraud chapter in the law section of the fraud examin manual
in brief section 1030a prohibit seven act involv protect comput
a protect comput under thi section includ
a comput that is us exclus by a financi institut or the unit state
govern
ani comput the us of which affect a comput us by a financi institut or the
feder govern
a comput that is us in interst or foreign commerc or commun
briefli section 1030a prohibit us a protect comput
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11864 2011 fraud examin manual
to commit espionag 18 usc 1030a1
to obtain without author certain govern financi institut or
commerci inform 18 usc 1030a2
to access without author a govern comput 18 usc 1030a3
to commit fraud 18 usc 1030a4
to transmit a program code or command to damag a protect comput or to access
a protect comput that result in damag 18 usc 1030a5
for traffick in password 18 usc 1030a6
to transmit extortion threat 18 usc 1030a7
section 1030a5 and 1030a4 ar discuss in further detail below
comput fraud titl 18 us code section 1030a4
as note abov section 1030a4 outlaw fraud involv protect comput there ar
three element of the crime which includ
knowingli access a protect comput without author or exceed
author
with the intent to defraud and
therebi obtain anyth of valu more than 5000 over the cours of a year
caus comput damag titl 18 us code section 1030a5
section 1030a5 which appli to comput us in interst or foreign commerc or
commun outlaw caus comput damag but it contain two categori of
offens depend on intent the first categori provid that it is illeg to knowingli
transmit a program code or command that intention caus damag a protect
comput thi offens appli even if the individu had author to access the
comput
the second categori provid that it is illeg to access a protect comput without
author that result in damag unlik the first categori thi offens doe not requir
intent to damag onli the intent to access the inform
unlaw action under the first categori of section 1030a5 violat includ
imprison up to on year andor a fine violat under the second categori of section
1030a5 mai receiv up to five year imprison not more than 10 year for repeat
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11865
offend andor a fine both categori provid a civil remedi for ani person who suffer
damag as a result of a violat of section 1030a5
to appli section 1030a5 requir that the defend conduct caus damag to a
comput due to it broad the definit allow section 1030a5 to appli in variou
situat includ instanc where an act caus inform to be delet or chang
where an intrud alter the wai a comput oper or where an act make inform
unavail even if an intrud did not make ani alter and the comput system work
as it did befor some court have rule that access and copi privat data from
protect comput mai caus damag to the data under section 1035a5
penalti
the comput fraud and abus act provid both crimin and civil liabil section 1030
includ crimin punish provis howev it provid differ penalti depend
on the specif conduct the act also provid civil remedi for individu that suffer
damag result from section 1030 violat
canspam act titl 18 us code section 1037
the canspam act or the control the assault of nonsolicit pornographi and
market act attempt to reduc the amount of unsolicit commerci email which is
also known as spam by establish nation standard for send email solicit to
reduc the amount of spam the canspam act provid sever provis that appli to
individu or compani send spam more specif the act prohibit sever
decept andor fraudul practic commonli us in spam includ the prohibit of
us decept subject line us decept header inform and requir sender
identif penalti under the canspam act includ punish by a fine andor
imprison for not more than five year
access devic fraud titl 18 us code section 1029
titl 18 us code section 1029 crimin the product us traffick or possess
of unauthor or counterfeit access devic access devic ar devic that allow access to
account fund most importantli section 1029 proh ibit the fraudul us of credit card
howev becaus congress broadli defin the term access devic section 1029 also
appli to crime us other access devic number includ debit card atm card
person identif number pin comput password or ani other thing of valu
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11866 2011 fraud examin manual
or that can be us to initi a transfer of fund other than a transfer origin sole by
paper instrument
ident theft and assumpt deterr act of 1998 titl 18 us code section 1028
as discuss in the consum fraud section the growth of ident theft led congress to
pass the ident theft and assumpt deterr act which make ident theft a feder
crime thi act outlaw the intent and unauthor us of anoth individu
identif with the intent to commit a crime the ident theft and assumpt
deterr act carri a maximum term of 15 year imprison a fine and crimin
forfeitur of ani person properti us or intend to be us to commit the offens the
penalti is increas to imprison of up to 30 year if the offens is commit to
facilit an act of terror
interst transport of stolen properti itsp titl 18 us code section 2314
the itsp statut prohibit the transport transmitt or transfer of fraudul
receiv good ware merchandis secur or monei in interst or foreign commerc
when valu at 5000 or more prosecutor of ten us the itsp statut in fraud prosecut
in conjunct with mail fraud count wire fraud count or to provid feder jurisdict in
their absenc to appli the itsp statut requir that an individu transport the proce
which must valu at least 5000 across state lin es defend also violat the statut if thei
induc their victim to travel in interst commerc as part of the scheme to defraud
court mai aggreg item valu at less than 5000 as part of the same scheme to meet
the valu requir
addition it is clear that section 2314 appli when defend steal tangibl item which
qualifi as good ware or merchandis that contain intellectu properti howev court
have had vari opinion on the character of intellectu properti as good ware
merchandis secur or monei when an individu steal intang properti through
intang mean
electron commun privaci act of 1986
the electron commun privaci act of 1986 ecpa codifi at 18 usc
25102521 27012710 31213126 govern the illeg intercept of electron
commun and the unauthor access of electron store data
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11867
the ecpa is divid into three part the wiretap act the store commun act and
the pen regist act which regul pen regist and trap and trace devic thi section
howev focus on the wiretap act and the store commun act
the wiretap act titl 18 us code section 25102521
in respons to privaci breach congress enact the wiretap act which prohibit anyon
from intention intercept or attempt to intercept ani wire oral or electron
commun
focus on it applic to comput fraud the wiretap act prohibit the intent
intercept of certain electron commun includ email it doe not govern
store commun under the wiretap act an intercept occur by the acquisit of
the content of ani electron commun through the us of ani devic most court
have held that intercept occur onli when the protect commun ar obtain
contemporan with their transmiss
addition most court agre that intercept doe not occur when an individu obtain
access to an electron store copi of the commun whether such storag occur
pre or postdeliveri and even if the storag last onli a few millisecond as a result the
wiretap act is often inadequ to protect electron commun sent over the internet
the wiretap act also contain sever except to prosecut includ the consent
except which provid that parti to the commun mai author other to
intercept the transmiss
remedi for violat the wiretap act includ crimin sanction and civil relief a crimin
violat under the act is a feloni and is punish by up to five year imprison
andor fine under a privat caus of action a court mai award the plaintiff equit relief
actual damag punit damag and attornei fee
store commun act titl 18 us code section 2701
as part of the electron commun privaci act congress enact the store
commun act sca to protect store electron commun such as email
and voicemail by prohibit the unauthor access of such commun that ar in
storag more specif the sca prohibit unlaw access to a facil which provid an
electron commun servic and then obtain alter or prevent author
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11868 2011 fraud examin manual
access to a wire or electron commun while it is electron store in such
a system
unlik intercept under the wiretap act an electron commun fall under the sca
onc a system receiv and store it howev like the wiretap act the sca includ a
consent except under thi except a servic provid mai disclos electron
commun with the law consent of the origin an addresse or the intend
recipi
the sca includ both civil and crimin penalti concern civil penalti the sca
provid a privat right of action and allow appropri relief includ equit relief
damag and attornei fee regard crimin penalti the sca provid that if the first
offens is commit for purpos of commerci advantag malici destruct or
damag or privat commerci gain punish mai includ a fine andor imprison for
up to five year for ani subsequ offens penalti includ a fine andor imprison
for not more than 10 year in ani other case where it is a first offens court mai impos a
fine or imprison for not more than six month or both for all subsequ convict
court mai impos a fine andor imprison for up to 10 year
mail and wire fraud titl 18 u s code section 1341 and 1343
as discuss abov a comput mai be the tool us to commit tradit crime includ
mail and wire fraud due to the broad reach of the mail and wire fraud statut prosecutor
mai us these tradit crimin statut to prosecut comput fraud in basic term the
law prohibit the us of mail or wire includ the internet in further of a fraudul
scheme design to obtain monei or properti
sever case have held that the feder mail and wire fraud statu appli to comput fraud
furthermor prosecutor mai us these statut in addit to or in lieu of case that
implic trade secret counterfeit or illicit label counterfeit document or packag
or counterfeit trademark servic mark or certif mark howev court disagre on
whether the mail and wire fraud statut reach crimin copyright infring
penalti under the mail and wire fraud statu includ fine imprison up to five year
or both howev if the violat affect a financi institut the violat mai receiv
fine up to 1000000 imprison up to thirti year or both
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11869
fals statement titl 18 us code section 1001
prosecutor most often us section 1001 to prosecut fals statement made to law
enforc or regulatori offici not made under oath in the cours of an offici
investig or on an applic for such thing as feder employ credit and visa
applic prosecutor mai also us section 1001 in lieu of the misdemeanor provis of
the ir code for file fals document with tax return
section 1001 violat mai implic other feder law includ comput fraud 18
usc 1030a4 and internet fraud eg auction fraud or phish by make fals
statement in ani matter within the jurisdict of the govern
the econom espionag act of 1996 titl 18 us code section 1831183 9
the econom espionag act of 1996 eea make the theft of trade secret a feder
crimin offens the eea outlaw two type of trade secret misappropri section 1831
crimin econom espionag which is the theft of a trade secret to benefit a foreign
govern instrument or agent and section 1832 crimin the theft of commerci
trade secret to obtain an econom advantag
section 1831 and 1832 provid signific penalti for trade secret violat if done to
benefit a foreign govern the theft of trade secret is punish by up to fifteen year
imprison and up to a 500000 fine trade secret theft for commerci benefit is
punish by up to 10 year imprison and up to a 250000 fine the eea howev
doe not provid ani civil remedi
addition prosecutor can appli the eea to a wide varieti of misconduct becaus it
crimin attempt and conspiraci to violat the eea the same penalti appli to these
offens with increas penalti if the trade secret misappropri benefit a foreign
govern foreign instrument or a foreign agent
moreov the eea author the attornei gener to commenc a civil action seek
injunct relief to prevent further disclosur of a trade secret by the defend or third
parti
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11870 2011 fraud examin manual
crimin infring of a copyright titl 17 us code section 506 and titl 18 us code section 2319
titl 17 us code section 506 crimin will copyright infring and defin what
conduct is prohibit while titl 18 us code section 2319 impos the crimin
punish for a copyright infring convict which is to be ad to ani other
penalti impos by other provis or law
copyright law grant copyright holder six exclus right to their work includ the right
to reproduct gener infring occur if an individu exercis ani on of the
copyright holder exclus right without author or other legal author howev
not all infring ar crimin offens instead section 506 provid that copyright
infring is crimin if an individu willfulli reproduc or distribut for commerci
advantag or privat financi gain on or more copi of copyright work total in
retail valu 1000 or more
section 2319 impos punish for both feloni and misdemeanor crime feloni
penalti attach when the infring consist of the reproduct or distribut of 10 or
more copi of copyright work within 180 dai that taken togeth ar worth more than
2500 or when the violat involv distribut of a work be prepar for
commerci distribut over a comput network access to member of the public
altern misdemeanor crime attach when the infring consist of ani of
the follow
infring of reproduct or distribut right for privat financi gain or
commerci advantag regardless of the exact volum or valu of the infring
infring of reproduct or distribut right of on or more copi of
copyright work within 180 dai that ar worth a total retail valu of 1000 or more
and it doe not involv privat financi gain or commerci advantag or
infring of right other than reproduct or distribut for privat financi gain
or commerci advantag
in 1997 presid clinton sign the no electron theft act into law which amend the
copyright law to prohibit electron infring and extend the copyright infring
to includ act that do not necessarili give rise to a profit
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11871
limit on exclus right comput program titl 17 us code section 117
although copyright law provid copyright holder the exclus right to reproduct thi
right is subject to a number of limit includ section 117 which allow the copi of
copyright softwar in limit circumst under section 117 the owner of a copi of a
comput program is allow to make addit copi of such program in two instanc
first owner mai copi a comput program if it is necessari for the us of the comput
program second user mai make a copi for archiv purpos to prevent loss due to hard
drive failur and the like
even though the law author copi made under section 117 limit there ar
restrict all copi must be destroi when the possess of a comput program
ceas to be deem right furthermor ani copi made in accord with thi section
mai be transfer but must be accompani by the origin program from which copi
were made and with all right in the program
digit millennium copyright act titl 17 us code section 12011205
the advent of the internet and digit media ha led to an increas in intellectu copyright
infring in respons to thi develop congress enact the digit millennium
copyright act of 1998 dmca the dmca outlaw the us of comput and other
electron devic to infring against copyright holder exclus right to further thi goal
the dmca provid liabil limit for transmit copyright materi onlin the
dmca also provid crimin penalti for circumv copyright protect system
which ar set forth in section 1201 and for compromis the integr of copyright
manag inform pursuant to section 1202
violat under either section 1201 or 1202 ar subject to a maximum of five year
imprison up to 500000 fine or both subsequ offens ar subject to a maximum
of 10 year a maximum fine of 1000000 or both
electron fund transfer crimin liabil titl 15 us code section 1693n
congress design thi legisl to allow consum the eas and benefit of electron fund
transfer while defin the right and liabil of the parti involv in such transact
section 1693n appli to paperless monei transfer between account includ atm
transact debit and credit card transact pointofsal po debit transact
telephon transfer and accord to the feder deposit insur corpor fdic
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11872 2011 fraud examin manual
ani other electron bank transact that can result in the withdraw of cash from
your bank account
in particular thi statut attach crimin liabil to the act of
give fals or inaccur inform under the bank law and regul or
fail to provid inform requir under the bank law and regul
it also prohibit certain action affect commerc includ
us attempt to us or conspir to us ani fraudul obtain debit
instrument with knowledg of fraudul charact to obtain anyth with an
aggreg valu of at least 1000 within a oneyear period or
transport attempt to transport or conspir to transport a fraudul debit
instrument with unlaw or fraudul intent and knowledg or
sell or transport in interst or foreign commerc of ani fraudul debit
instrument with knowledg or
receiv conceal us or transport anyth that is proce from a fraudul
activ and that ha a valu exceed 1000 within ani oneyear period or
receiv conceal us sell or transport of on or more ticket for interst
or foreign transport that have a valu aggreg 500 or more and were obtain
by us of a fraudul debit instrument or
furnish monei properti servic or anyth els of valu aggreg
1000 or more within a oneyear period in conjunct with the us of a fraudul
debit instrument
state law
at the state level statut that might be of us in prosecut comput crime would
includ the penal code violat of larceni in it mani form fals pretens forgeri
fraud embezzl vandal properti destruct malici mischief proprietari
inform theft commerci briberi and extort but most state now expressli provid
penalti for crime perpetr by us of comput or perpetr against comput see
the law section for a complet list of state comput fraud statut
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11873
govern inform on cybercrim
doj comput crime and intellectu properti section
the comput crime and intellectu properti section ccip of the crimin divis of
the us depart of justic do provid a number of excel resourc regard
comput and internet fraud
their web address is wwwcybercrimegov on that site the ccip ha inform about
comput crime encrypt electron commerc hack legal issu relat to comput
crime privaci issu and intern issu among other
thei also have some superb inform regard the search and seizur of comput
includ the ccipss manual entitl search and seiz comput and obtain electron
evid in crimin investig addition thei have set forth the feder crimin code
section relat to search as well as materi about the fourth amend and the
internet the materi on search and seizur can be access directli at the follow site
wwwcybercrimegovsearchinghtml
dh nation cyber secur divis
the nation cyber secur divis ncsd of the depart of homeland secur
dh work with public privat and intern entiti to ensur the secur of
cyberspac and us cyber asset the ncsd ha the follow two primari object
build and maintain an effect nation cyberspac respons system
implement a cyberrisk manag program for the protect of critic
infrastructur
more inform about the ncsd can be found at
httpwwwdhsgovxaboutstructureeditorial0839shtm
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11901
public sector fraud
govern fraud audit standard
standard for audit of govern organ program activ and function and of
govern assist receiv by contractor nonprofit organ and other non
govern organ have been develop by the comptrol gener of the unit
state govern account offic gao these standard ar by and larg taken
from gener accept audit standard as establish by the aicpa howev
govern audit standard also known as the yellow book go beyond the aicpa
standard gener accept govern audit standard gaga ar requir to be
follow by auditor and audit organ when mandat by law regul agreement
contract or polici these standard includ the follow classif
gener standard
fieldwork standard for financi audit
report standard for financi audit
field work standard for perform audit
report standard for perform audit
the yellow book also provid separ gener field work and report standard for
attest engag howev the follow discuss will focu on those standard
applic to financi and perform audit engag
gener standard appli to both financi and perform audit and relat to
independ of the audit organ and it individu auditor
us of profession judgment in the perform of work and the prepar of relat
report
compet of the audit staff
audit qualiti control and assur
extern peer review
financi audit provid an independ assess as to whether financi statement ar
present fairli in accord with gener accept account principl or other
recogn criteria other object of financi audit which provid for differ level of
assur and entail variou scope of work mai includ
public sector fraud financi transact
11902 2011 fraud examin manual
report on intern control complianc with law and regul and provis of
contract and grant agreement as thei relat to financi transact system and
process
provid special report for specifi element account or item of a financi
statement
review interim financi inform
issu letter for underwrit and certain other request parti
report on the control over the process of transact by servic organ
and
audit complianc with regul relat to feder award expenditur and other
government financi assist in conjunct with or as a byproduct of a financi
statement audit
perform audit provid assur or conclus on certain audit object base on
evalu against object criteria such as specif requir measur or defin
busi practic perform audit includ engag relat to assess program
economi effici and effect inter nal control complianc and prospect
analys
the follow ar the gao standard or portion thereof that relat to the govern
auditor respons pertain to fraud the standard includ in the follow section
reflect the version of the standard adopt by the gao in of juli 2007
field work standard for financi audit chapter 4
gaga field work standard for financi audit includ the three aicpa gener
accept standard of field work and five other standard specif to govern financi
audit cover auditor commun consid the result of previou audit detect
materi misstat from violat or abus develop element of a find and audit
document
detect materi misstat result from violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or from abus
410 auditor should design the audit to provid reason assur of detect
misstat that result from violat of provis of contract or grant
agreement and could have a direct and materi effect on the determin of
financi statement amount or other financi data signific to the audit object
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11903
411 if specif inform come to the auditor attent that provid evid
concern the exist of possibl violat of provis of contract or grant
agreement that could have a materi indirect effect on the financi statement the
auditor should appli audit procedur specif direct to ascertain whether
such violat have occur when the auditor conclud that a violat of
provis of contract or grant agreement ha or is like to have occur thei
should determin the effect on the financi statement as well as the implic for
other aspect of the audit
412 abus involv behavior that is defici or improp when compar with behavior
that a prudent person would consid reason and necessari busi practic
given the fact and circumst abus also includ misus of author or
posit for person financi interest or those of an immedi or close famili
member or busi associ abus doe not necessarili involv fraud violat of
law regul or provis of a contract or grant agreement
413 if dure the cours of the audit auditor becom awar of abus that could be
quantit or qualit materi to the financi statement auditor should
appli audit procedur specif direct to ascertain the potenti effect on the
financi statement or other financi data signific to the audit object after
perform addit work auditor mai discov that the abus repres
potenti fraud or illeg act becaus the determin of abus is subject
auditor ar not requir to provid reason assur of detect abus
develop element of a find
414 audit find mai involv defici in intern control fraud illeg act
violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus the element
need for a find depend entir on the object of the audit thu a find
or set of find is complet to the extent that the audit object ar satisfi
when auditor identifi defici auditor should plan and perform procedur to
develop the element of the find that ar relev and necessari to achiev the
audit object the element of an audit find ar discuss in paragraph 415
through 418
415 criteria the law regul contract grant agreement standard measur
expect perform defin busi practic and benchmark against which
perform is compar or evalu criteria identifi the requir or desir state
or expect with respect to the program or oper criteria provid a context
for evalu evid and understand the find
public sector fraud financi transact
11904 2011 fraud examin manual
416 condit condit is a situat that exist the condit is determin and
document dure the audit
417 caus the caus identifi the reason or explan for the condit or the factor
or factor respons for the differ between the situat that exist condit
and the requir or desir state criteria which mai also serv as a basi for
recommend for correct action common factor includ poorli design
polici procedur or criteria inconsist incomplet or incorrect
implement or factor beyond the control of program manag auditor
mai assess whether the evid provid a reason and convinc argument for
why the state caus is the kei factor or factor contribut to the differ
418 effect or potenti effect the effect is a clear logic link to establish the impact or
potenti impact of the differ between the situat that exist condit and
the requir or desir state criteria the effect or potenti effect identifi the
outcom or consequ of the condit when the audit object includ
identifi the actual or potenti consequ of a condit that vari either
posit or neg from the criteria identifi in the audit effect is a measur
of those consequ effect or potenti effect mai be us to demonstr the
need for correct action in respons to identifi problem or relev risk
consider of fraud and illeg act
427 under both the aicpa standard and gaga auditor should plan and perform
the audit to obtain reason assur about whether the financi statement ar
free of materi misstat whether caus by error or fraud recogn the
possibl that a materi misstat due to fraud could be present is import
for achiev thi object howev absolut assur is not attain and thu
even a properli plan and perform audit mai not detect a materi misstat
result from fraud
428 under both the aicpa standard and gaga auditor should design the audit to
provid reason assur of detect materi misstat result from
illeg act that could have a direct and materi effect on the financi statement if
specif inform come to the auditor attent that provid evid
concern the exist of possibl illeg act that could have a materi indirect
effect on the financi statement the auditor should appli audit procedur
specif direct to ascertain whether an illeg act ha occur when an
illeg act ha or is like to have occur auditor should determin the effect on
the financi statement as well as the implic for other aspect of the audit
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11905
report standard for financi audit chapter 5
gaga report standard for financi audit includ four aicpa gener accept
standard of report and eight other standard specif to govern financi audit the
addit gaga standard relat to
report auditor complianc with gaga
report on intern control and on complianc with law regul and provis
of contract or grant agreement
report defici in intern control fraud illeg act violat of provis of
contract or grant agreement or abus
commun signific matter in the auditor report
report on restat of previouslyissu financi statement
report view of respons offici
report confidenti or sensit inform and
distribut report
report defici in intern control fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus
510 for financi audit includ audit of financi statement in which auditor
provid an opinion or disclaim auditor should report as applic to the
object of the audit and base upon the audit work perform 1 signific
defici in intern control identifi those consid to be materi
weak 2 all instanc of fraud and illeg act unless inconsequenti and 3
violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus that could have a
materi effect on the financi statement
fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus
515 under aicpa standard and gaga auditor have respons for detect
fraud and illeg act that have a materi effect on the financi statement and
determin whether those charg with govern ar adequ inform about
fraud and illeg act gaga includ addit report standard when auditor
conclud base on suffici appropri evid that ani of the follow either
ha occur or is like to have occur thei should includ in their audit report
the relev inform about
a fraud and illeg act that have an effect on the financi statement that is more
than inconsequenti
public sector fraud financi transact
11906 2011 fraud examin manual
b fraud and illeg act that have an effect on the financi statement that is more
than inconsequenti determin of financi statement amount or other
financi data signific to the audit and
c abus that is materi either quantit or qualit
516 when auditor detect violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or
abus that have an effect on the financi statement that is less than materi but
more than inconsequenti thei should commun those find in write to
offici of the audit entiti determin whether and how to commun to
offici of the audit entiti fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract
or grant agreement or abus that is inconsequenti is a matter of profession
judgment auditor should document such commun
517 when fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or
abus either have occur or ar like to have occur auditor mai consult with
author or legal counsel about whether publicli report such inform would
compromis investig or legal proceed auditor mai limit their public
report to matter that would not compromis those proceed and for
exampl report onli on inform that is alreadi a part of the public record
report find directli to parti outsid the audit entiti
518 auditor should report known or like fraud illeg act violat of provis of
contract or grant agreement or abus directli to parti outsid the audit entiti
in the follow two circumst
a when entiti manag fail to satisfi legal or regulatori requir to
report such inform to extern parti specifi in law or regul auditor
should first commun the failur to report such inform to those charg
with govern if the audit entiti still doe not report thi inform to the
specifi extern parti as soon as practic after the auditor
commun with those charg with govern then the auditor should
report the inform directli to the specifi extern parti
b when entiti manag fail to take time and appropri step to respond to
known or like fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant
agreement or abus that 1 is like to have a materi effect on the financi
statement and 2 involv fund receiv directli or indirectli from a
govern agenc auditor should first report manag failur to take
time and appropri step to those charg with govern if the audit
entiti still doe not take time and appropri step as soon as practic after
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11907
the auditor commun with those charg with govern then the
auditor should report the entiti failur to take time and appropri step
directli to the fund agenc
519 the report in paragraph 518 is in addit to ani legal requir to report
such inform directli to parti outsid the audit entiti auditor should
compli with these requir even if thei have resign or been dismiss from
the audit prior to it complet
520 auditor should obtain suffici appropri evid such as confirm from
outsid parti to corrobor assert by manag of the audit entiti that it
ha report such find in accord with law regul and fund
agreement when auditor ar unabl to do so thei should report such inform
directli as discuss in paragraph 518
present find in the auditor report
521 in present find such as defici in intern control fraud illeg act
violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus auditor should
develop the element of the find to the extent necessari to achiev the audit
object clearli develop audit find as discuss in paragraph 414 through
418 assist manag or oversight offici of the audit entiti in understand
the need for take correct action if auditor suffici develop the element of
a find thei mai provid recommend for correct action
522 auditor should place their find in perspect by describ the natur and
extent of the issu be report and the extent of the work perform that
result in the find to give the reader a basi for judg the preval and
consequ of these find auditor should as applic relat the instanc
identifi to the popul or the number of case examin and quantifi the result
in term of dollar valu or other measur as appropri if the result cannot be
project auditor should limit their conclus appropri
field work standard for perform audit chapter 7
gaga ha adopt four field work standard for perform audit the field work
standard for perform audit relat to plan the audit supervis staff obtain
suffici appropri evid and prepar audit document
public sector fraud financi transact
11908 2011 fraud examin manual
audit risk
705 audit risk is the possibl that the auditor find conclus
recommend or assur mai be improp or incomplet as a result of
factor such as evid that is not suffici andor appropri an inadequ audit
process or intent omiss or mislead inform due to misrepresent
or fraud the assess of audit risk involv both qualit and quantit
consider factor such as the time frame complex or sensit of the
work size of the program in term of dollar amount and number of citizen serv
adequaci of the audit entiti system and process to detect inconsist
signific error or fraud and auditor access to record also impact audit risk
audit risk includ the risk that auditor will not detect a mistak inconsist
signific error or fraud in the evid support the audit audit risk can be
reduc by take action such as increas the scope of work ad expert
addit review and other resourc to the audit team chang the
methodolog to obtain addit evid higher qualiti evid or altern
form of corrobor evid or align the find and conclus to reflect
the evid obtain
plan
711 auditor should assess audit risk and signific within the context of the audit
object by gain an understand of the follow
a the natur and profil of the program and the need of potenti user of the
audit report
b intern control as it relat to the specif object and scope of the audit
c inform system control for purpos of assess audit risk and plan
the audit within the context of the audit object
d legal and regulatori requir contract provis or grant agreement
potenti fraud or abus that ar signific within the context of the audit
object and
e the result of previou audit and attest engag that directli relat to
the current audit object
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11909
legal and regulatori requir provis of contract or grant agreement fraud or abus
730 in plan the audit auditor should assess risk of fraud occur that is
signific within the context of the audit object audit team member should
discuss among the team fraud risk includ factor such as individu incent
or pressur to commit fraud the opportun for fraud to occur and
ration or attitud that could allow individu to commit fraud auditor
should gather and assess inform to identifi risk of fraud that ar signific
within the scope of the audit object or that could affect the find and
conclus for exampl auditor mai obtain inform through discuss with
offici of the audit entiti or through other mean to determin the suscept
of the program to fraud the statu of intern control the entiti ha establish to
detect and prevent fraud or the risk that offici of the audit entiti could overrid
intern control an attitud of profession skeptic in assess these risk assist
auditor in assess which factor or risk could significantli affect the audit
object
731 when auditor identifi factor or risk relat to fraud that ha occur or is like
to have occur that thei believ ar signific within the context of the audit
object thei should design procedur to provid reason assur of
detect such fraud assess the risk of fraud is an ongo process throughout
the audit and relat not onli to plan the audit but also to evalu evid
obtain dure the audit
732 when inform come to the auditor attent indic that fraud that is
signific within the context of the audit object mai have occur auditor
should extend the audit step and procedur as necessari to 1 determin whether
fraud ha like occur and 2 if so determin it effect on the audit find if
the fraud that mai have occur is not signific within the context of the audit
object the auditor mai conduct addit audit work as a separ engag
or refer the matter to other parti with oversight respons or jurisdict
report standard for perform audit chapter 8
accord to gaga the report standard for perform audit relat to the form of
the report the report content and report issuanc and distribut
public sector fraud financi transact
11910 2011 fraud examin manual
report find
818 auditor should report defici in intern control that ar signific within the
context of the object of the audit all instanc of fraud illeg act unless thei
ar inconsequenti within the context of the audit object signific violat
of provis of contract or grant agreement and signific abus that have
occur or ar like to have occur
fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant agreement and abus
821 when auditor conclud base on suffici appropri evid that fraud illeg
act signific violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or
signific abus either ha occur or is like to have occur thei should report
the matter as a find
822 when auditor detect violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or
abus that ar not signific thei should commun those find in write to
offici of the audit entiti unless the find ar inconsequenti within the
context of the audit object consid both qualit and quantit factor
determin whether or how to commun to offici of the audit entiti fraud
illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or abus that is
inconsequenti is a matter of the auditor profession judgment auditor should
document such commun
823 when fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or
abus either have occur or ar like to have occur auditor mai consult with
author or legal counsel about whether publicli report such inform would
compromis investig or legal proceed auditor mai limit their public
report to matter that would not compromis those proceed and for
exampl report onli on inform that is alreadi a part of the public record
report find directli to parti outsid the audit entiti
824 auditor should report known or like fraud illeg act violat of provis of
contract or grant agreement or abus directli to parti outsid the audit entiti
in the follow two circumst
a when entiti manag fail to satisfi legal or regulatori requir to
report such inform to extern parti specifi in law or regul auditor
should first commun the failur to report such inform to those charg
with govern if the audit entiti still doe not report thi inform to the
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11911
specifi extern parti as soon as practic after the auditor
commun with those charg with govern then the auditor should
report the inform directli to the specifi extern parti
b when entiti manag fail to take time and appropri step to respond to
known or like fraud illeg act violat of provis of contract or grant
agreement or abus that 1 is signific to the find and conclus and
2 involv fund receiv directli or indirectli from a govern agenc
auditor should first report manag failur to take time and appropri
step to those charg with govern if the audit entiti still doe not take
time and appropri step as soon as practic after the auditor
commun with those charg with govern then the auditor should
report the entiti failur to take time and appropri step directli to the
fund agenc
825 the report in paragraph 824 is in addit to ani legal requir to report
such inform directli to parti outsid the audit entiti auditor should
compli with these requir even if thei have resign or been dismiss from
the audit prior to it complet
826 auditor should obtain suffici appropri evid such as confirm from
outsid parti to corrobor assert by manag of the audit entiti that it
ha report such find in accord with law regul and fund
agreement when auditor ar unabl to do so thei should report such inform
directli as discuss in paragraph 824
fals claim and statement
intention fals statement such as fals elig declar for govern benefit
and fals claim mai be offens themselv or could be part of broader scheme involv
misappropri contract or procur fraud and corrupt
feder law prohibit fals claim
there ar a number of feder statut relat to fals claim and statement made to the
feder govern among the most us ar
fals fictiti or fraudul claim 18 us code 287
fals statement 18 us code 1001
conspiraci to defraud the govern 18 us code 286
public sector fraud financi transact
11912 2011 fraud examin manual
the major fraud act 18 us code 1031
obstruct of feder audit 18 us code 1516
these statut ar discuss in greater detail in the law section there ar also a number of
civil remedi discuss in the law section includ the civil fals claim act program
fraud civil remedi and the civil monetari penalti law cmpl
under 18 us code 1001 a fals statement ca n be oral written sworn or unsworn sign
or unsign the person must make the fals statement knowingli and willfulli which is
satisfi by show that the person act deliber and with knowledg that the
represent wa fals conceal by failur to fulli disclos requir inform is also
a violat the statement need not be made directli to the govern it can be made to a
thirdparti as long as it involv a matter within the jurisdict of ani government
depart or agenc
the statement must be materi but there is no requir that the govern suffer an
actual loss the materi of the fals statement is judg by the capabl of the statement
to influenc govern action
exampl of fals claim
some exampl of fals claim and statement includ
falsifi contractor qualif
fals certif or assur
fals record or invoic
invoic from nonexist compani
claim made in duplic or alter invoic
bill for fictiti employe
bill for good and servic not provid
inflat cost or substitut of cheaper good
other exampl of fals claim and statement might includ fals statement about
employe fictiti transact and falsifi document
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11913
fals statement concern employe
exampl
a meat pack compani in nebraska pled guilti to social secur number misus
social secur benefit fraud harbor alien and file fals employ document the
compani wa fine 103000 the settlement came after feder agent raid the plant
arrest more than 300 peopl of those arrest most agre to deport without
hear the compani admit to harbor alien but it claim that illeg worker
were never hire knowingli
fictiti transact
exampl
a former supervisori account in the environment protect agenc pled guilti to
defraud the epa of 28000 she admit that she enter fals inform into the
epa integr financi manag system result in her receiv 23 us
treasuri check which she later deposit into her credit union account after receiv the
fund she made entri into the financi report system to balanc the account
fals document
exampl
a former real estat salesperson wa indict and arrest for submit fals statement to
a mortgag corpor in an attempt to qualifi a veteran for a vaguarante loan the
indict charg that the individu deposit fund into a credit union account belong
to the veteran then submit a document to the mortgag corpor reflect the fals
and fictiti account balanc the loan defaul ted and result in a loss to the va of
44708
detect
the ultim detect method for fals statement is the examin of sourc document
thi audit approach is call trace or insideout that is from the sourc document
out to the report or financi statement
howev the auditor might be alert to the possibl of fals statement if ani of the
follow red flag ar present
public sector fraud financi transact
11914 2011 fraud examin manual
failur to produc document in a time manner
failur to respond to inquiri in a time manner
inadequaci in report requir for exampl untim report incomplet
report and other
failur to have an adequ inform gather and retriev system
alter or miss document
photocopi or duplic document
failur to have adequ support document for report and summari data
failur to produc document in a time manner
thi might be an indic that there ar no sourc document to substanti the summari
data for exampl if cost ar submit for reimburs and the cost have not been
incur then there will be no support data
failur to respond to inquiri in a time manner
thi might also be an indic that there is no sourc document it can also be an
indic that the inform is not readili retriev thi area should howev be
approach with caution if new and differ inform is request the contractor or
agenc might have to redesign it system in order to retriev the request inform
caus an unanticip time delai it is import the request for propos includ
adequ specif for respond to data request
inadequaci in report requir
if the requir report ar consist late incomplet or unsatisfactori thi might be an
indic that the sourc data is either unavail nonexist or it cannot be retriev
sourc data is deriv from sourc document if the sourc document is fals
then summar the correspond data becom an increasingli more difficult problem
failur to have adequ inform gather and retriev system
thi along with the red flag concern the sourc document assist the auditor in
determin whether or not the scope of the audit should be increas and if so in
what area
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11915
alter or miss document
fraud ar often conceal by alter or misplac support document the tenac
of the auditor to obtain and examin the sourc document will go a long wai in prove
fals statement
photocopi or duplic document
transact should be author and record base on origin document not
duplic duplic or photocopi document is subject to alter and
manipul
failur to have adequ support document for report and summari data
for support document to be adequ it must be suffici compet and relev
in addit the auditor must appli common sens to the sourc document for exampl ar
the amount too high or too low do thei includ odd time place andor peopl
these ar all indic that there might be fals statement therefor these red flag might
alert the auditor to select a larger sampl of sourc document for examin
beneficiari fraud
beneficiari fraud tend to be perpetr by individu without collus or briberi the
motiv for thi type of fraud is person gain or reduct of loss by the perpetr
an exampl of thi type of fraud might includ a taxpay who claim an unearn tax credit
on hi feder incom tax return thi person ha perpetr a fraud against the
govern
some report case typifi these fraud ar
social secur fraud
fals claim for benefit
supplement secur incom ssi fraud
fraudul social secur number
improp bill procedur
fals medicar claim
kickback
public sector fraud financi transact
11916 2011 fraud examin manual
scheme
social secur fraud
exampl
an indiana woman wa sentenc to 512 year incarcer suspend order to
make restitut of 40800 and fine 10 000 for conceal her mother death and
forg and cash her social secur benefit check an outofst rel had told
polic it wa difficult to believ that her mother who wa in her seventi wa alwai
indispos when thei call polic found the woman remain in a padlock mobil home
next to the woman hous
exampl
a washington dc woman wa found to have wrongfulli convert 34 social secur
widow benefit check made payabl to her de ceas mother therebi improperli receiv
13400 from the social secur administr aggrav circumst were found
in that she wrongfulli convert an addit 190 social secur check and attempt to
conceal her misconduct by ly to the ssa field repres regard the whereabout of
her deceas mother the administr law judg found that the woman wa liabl
under the program fraud civil remedi act for have submit claim she knew were
fals she therefor had to pai the maximum amount of penalti and assess which
total 196800
fals claim for benefit
exampl
a new jersei council woman admit to steal more than 17000 in social secur
disabl benefit from 2007 to 2009 accord to her attornei she had been unabl to
work becaus of surgeri and pain in her back and had receiv disabl benefit of 600
per month for a total of for six year howev she had been work at her famili
restaur for a portion of the time that she wa claim disabl she wa ask to help
out there after her mother death in 2007 on a temporari basi which over time becam
on a daili basi she resign from her post repaid the monei and wa sentenc to on
year probat
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11917
supplement secur incom ssi fraud
exampl
a california woman wa convict of murder three of seven ssi beneficiari found
buri in the yard of her board hous she had been charg with murder all seven
boarder plu two found elsewher for their benefit the oig investig who assist
in identifi the victim and the theft of their benefit check also prove that the woman
had imperson on of the victim in attempt to obtain dalman a drug found in
seven of the bodi she wa sentenc to life imprison without possibl of parol
fraudul social secur number
exampl
nine individu were sentenc to prison in illinoi for term rang from 2 to nearli
5 year for a seri of scheme through which thei defraud sever insur compani
thei obtain approxim 500000 by submit fals claim under fraudul
ssn in 27 incid in sever citi throughout the unit state the claim were base
on automobil and slipandfal accid that were either stage or never occur in
addit three of the defend two of whom were insur compani employe stole
blank check from an insur compani and cash them on forg endors for
68000 the group move from citi to citi us fals name and ssn which made
them difficult to find or identifi
improp bill procedur
exampl
a utah physician wa convict on 32 feder count of mail fraud submit fals
claim and aid and abet although he wa exclud from particip in the
medicar and state health care program in 1987 for similar crime he continu to
submit claim under the name and provid number of physician who perform servic
at hi clinic he also upcod claim and bill for servic not render he wa sentenc
to 56 month in prison and 3 year probat upon releas fine 50000 and assess a
special victim assess fee
public sector fraud financi transact
11918 2011 fraud examin manual
fals medicar claim
exampl
a speech therapist wa sentenc in minnesota to 16 month incarcer for caus the
submiss of fals medicar claim he contract with a therapi compani to bill
medicar and medicaid for hi work in sever nurs home the compani report that
he overst time spent with patient claim up to 20 hour a dai he claim to
provid speech therapi to a patient sever dai after the patient death and to nurs
home resid he had never met he wa also observ us flash card with a blind
resid he wa order to pai restitut ion of 40000 and a fine of 25000
kickback
exampl
the former bill clerk and 14 former patient of a georgia chiropractor were sentenc in
a kickback scheme cost medicar and more than 30 insur compani million of
dollar all were incarcer and order to pai fine and restitut the chiropractor
and hi offic manag wife had paid employe 10 percent of each week revenu and
patient 33 percent of whatev the carrier paid on their claim claim were submit for
patient and their famili regardless of whether thei were treat in on instanc bill
were submit for 169 person supposedli trea ted in on dai more than 40 person have
been sentenc thu far includ the chiropractor and hi wife who earlier receiv lengthi
jail sentenc and were order to pai 22 million in restitut
detect
as with fals statement perpetr by manag the best detect method for
beneficiari fraud will requir the examin of sourc document or develop comput
program to identifi fraudul pattern
in either a perform audit or a financi audit the fraud examin should includ some
step to determin if there is a high occurr rate for beneficiari fraud by select a
random sampl of recipi beneficiari and examin the document support the
benefit the auditor might be abl to estim the potenti of beneficiari fraud scheme
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11919
govern initi to reduc fraud
the depart of defens dod
thi depart long notori for it wast and abus ha dramat increas it fraud
detect and prevent effort in recent year a full complement of auditor and
investig ar assign to detect and prevent fraud contract offic ar train to
recogn and requir to promptli report ani possibl fraudul situat major
govern contractor ar assign a dod auditor who work onsit increas the
chanc of possibl procur fraud be report the measur taken to combat fraud
in thi agenc have proven quit effect with increas prosecut and recoveri
within the dod sever investig agenc exist
defens crimin investig servic
air forc offic of special investig
armi crimin investig command
naval crimin investig servic
in addit to their other investig duti each of these agenc pursu fraud case
involv militari personnel civilian employe and contractor
voluntari disclosur
the voluntari disclosur program wa begun by dod in 1986 and allow contractor to
inform dod of irregular while the program doe not state that voluntari disclosur will
exempt contractor from prosecut or suspens it doe note that voluntari disclosur
and full cooper ar strong indic of an attitud of contractor integr even in the
wake of disclosur of potenti crimin liabil
certain criteria exist for contractor to claim thei made a voluntari disclosur while
voluntari disclosur of wrongdo mai not exempt a corpor from prosecut it
certainli is a contribut factor in the decis of whether to prosecut the criteria includ
that
the admiss must come from the corpor not an individu employe
ani disclosur precipit by the knowledg that new of the fraud mai soon leak out
and caus a govern investig would not allow the contractor to claim voluntari
disclosur
after the disclosur ha been made the corpor must take immedi step to
public sector fraud financi transact
11920 2011 fraud examin manual
correct the damag done the govern and disciplin the offend parti
full cooper with the govern investig is essenti
defens contract audit agenc dcaa
the dcaa is essenti an audit agenc that review procur contract it ha the
author to subpoena contractor record if fraud is suspect govern supplier with
larg contract usual ar assign their own dcaa auditor the defens contract audit
manual explain fraud report procedur for dcaa auditor report of fraud ar pass
to dcaa counsel and the assist director and from there to the appropri dod or
feder investig branch dcaa auditor ar train to look for
poor intern control
bad financi situat
inadequ account record
poor timekeep system
a mix of commerci fixedpric and costtyp contract
a background of fraud
manag domin by on or a few individu
individu with lavish lifestyl beyond their incom
no or few intern and extern audit
defens logist agenc dla
larger go vernment contractor have staff from thi agenc station in their facil their
purpos there is to serv as contract administr and inspect personnel if a dla
employe work in thi capac suspect contract or procur fraud a report is made
to dod legal personnel fraud case ar investig by the defens logist agenc
crimin investig activ dcia
the depart of justic
the unit state depart of justic doj is the feder govern execut
depart that is respons for enforc the law and administr justic the doj is
head by the unit state attornei gener unit state attornei which ar under the
direct of the attornei gener serv as the nation litig thei conduct most of the
trial work in which the unit state is a parti includ the prosecut of fraud case
thei also indict individu negoti settlement and recov damag
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11921
the doj and the feder govern have increas their effort to curb fraud and abus in
the feder spend in 2006 for exampl the depart of justic doj form the
nation procur fraud task forc to promot the earli detect prevent and
prosecut of procur fraud sinc it creation more than 300 procur fraud
case have result in crimin convict and the recoveri of hundr of million of
dollar in civil settlement and judgment also presid obama recent clarifi hi
posit on procur fraud by order an overhaul of the feder contract system
vow to strengthen oversight to maxim transpar and account
furthermor accord to a report issu by the offic of the attornei gener nation
prioriti for the investig and prosecut of white collar crime procur fraud
ha been a primari area of investig effort by the doj sinc 1980
such effort ar necessari becaus the feder govern spend trillion of dollar each
year on a wide varieti of program eg nation defens and homeland secur social
secur medicar and medicaid antipoverti program interest on the nation debt
educ veteran spend unemploy benefit farm subsidi etc and such
expenditur creat numer opportun for corrupt player to commit procur
fraud against the govern accord to the govern account offic gao
loss from fraud misus and other type of improp payment ar about 100 billion a
year
moreov feder expenditur ar increas dure fiscal year fy 2009 the feder
govern spent about 352 trillion up 18 percent from fy 2008 and the feder
govern is project to spend 36 trillion in fy 2010 thu the threat of govern
fraud scheme is also increas and as a result there is a grow need to detect prevent
and prosecut thi type of fraud
the govern messag is clear offend will be prosecut and punish to the full
extent of the law
divis
the doj is compris of sever divis includ the crimin divis and the civil
divis
the crimin divis which is head by an assist attornei gener is respons for
enforc feder crimin law
public sector fraud financi transact
11922 2011 fraud examin manual
within the justic depart crimin divis two offic ar primarili occupi with
whitecollar crime the public integr secti on and the fraud section the public integr
section review antifraud program involv whitecollar crime by public offici the
fraud section duti includ
investig and prosecut complex sensit or multidistrict case involv major
whitecollar crime either develop by the section or as request by us attornei
offic
provid train to feder state and local investig and prosecutor
develop and implement nation whitecollar crime enforc polici
the civil divis of the doj repres the feder govern in civil case accord to
it websit the civil divis litig reflect the divers of govern activ
involv for exampl the defens of challeng to presidenti action nation secur
issu benefit program energi polici commerci issu such as contract disput
bank insur patent fraud and debt collect all manner of accid and liabil
claim enforc of immigr law and civil and crimin violat of consum
protect law
the depart of health and human servic offic of the inspector gener
the depart of health and human servic offic of the inspector gener oig
investig feder medicaid fraud case it overse state medicaid fraud control unit it
can sanction fraudul provid by impos exclus and civil monetari penalti and it
refer it investig find to the doj
healthcar fraud and abus control program
the healthcar fraud and abus control program hcfac which is jointli direct by
the doj and the oig overse state medicaid agenc and provid ongo forum and
train for state offici on fraud control
center for medicar and medicaid servic
the center for medicar and medicaid servic cm is a feder agenc wi thin the us
depart of health and human servic it provid each state with technic assist
guidanc and oversight for medicaremedicaid fraud prevent and detect effort it
overse each state fraud and abus effort it keep the medicaid allianc for program
safeguard which provid assist against fraud and abus in work order and it
provid a nation forum for medicaid fraud and abus issu
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11923
feder investig agenc
in the unit state sever feder agenc have investig jurisdict over whitecollar
crime case some of the primari investig agenc ar discuss below
the feder bureau of investig
as the princip investig arm of the doj the feder bureau of investig fbi
investig feder fraud case and it refer it investig find to the unit state
attornei offic
the inspector gener
in the unit state mani agenc us inspector gener ig to conduct investig
of misconduct wast fraud theft and certain type of crimin activ relat to the
agenc oper
the intern revenu servic crimin investig divis
the intern revenu servic ir crimin investig divis investig potenti
crimin violat of the intern revenu code and relat financi crime
prosecut the govern employe role
the govern employe will frequent work with investig from the appropri
govern agenc some of the investig will be specialist while other handl a great
varieti of case in addit some investig ar assign to civil case while other will
special in crimin activ
common problem of investig
regardless of the profession variat mani problem ar common among these
investig sever exampl ar set forth below
lack of familiar with terminolog
mani investig assign to fraud and whitecollar crime case lack a busi
background thi is both a strength and weak it is a strength in that thei will normal
ask the same question and be confus on the same issu as a juri of laymen it is a
weak in that mani investig ar confus over account concept and the auditor
must explain these concept in nontechn languag
public sector fraud financi transact
11924 2011 fraud examin manual
wide varieti of case assign
the typic investig for a govern agenc must investig a wide varieti of case
and therefor might not be intim familiar with your type of case
case load
like auditor most govern investig have more case than thei can handl thei
therefor look for the most egregi violat or the on in which proof is easili at hand
for that reason investig tend to place more relianc on wit than on document
reluct of govern prosecutor
an investig will not investig case that prosecutor will not accept although not
prosecutor themselv investig tend to develop a sixth sens for what will be
prosecut and what will not thi issu is address below
kei issu face investig
investig ar look to maxim the costbenefit relationship of their resourc in
gener thei believ that auditor ar too readi to place undu relianc on document
and do not understand the concept of juri appeal which is detail in the next section
the typic investig will ask
what is the evid is it clear and convinc
who ar the wit ar thei credibl
what is the amount of the loss can it be proven
what is the intent of the perpetr can it be demonstr that there wa malic
aforethought
how difficult is the case to investig is it necessari to review ream of document
look for evid
overcom the reluct to investig
the auditor can best overcom reluct of the investig to work a case by us good
salesmanship in thi regard the follow suggest ar help
present your case in person not over the telephon
spend a littl time establish a relationship with the investig if you dont know him
summar your case in on sentenc if you cannot there is littl realist hope of
prosecut
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11925
after summar the case fill in the detail do not overwhelm the investig with
minutia
pledg the resourc of your agenc in help provid backup
follow up period with the investig after the case ha been refer but be
care of make a pest of yourself
offer an expert wit if necessari rememb though if you testifi in a crimin case
you might be exclud from sit in on your own case due to rule concern
wit
interview govern offici
more and more frequent high govern offici find themselv the subject of
investig into allegedli fraudul activ in todai climat of complaint and
accus a high offici mai be question intens on subject rang from
misalloc park space or person us of frequent travel mile on the trivial end to
briberi and conflict of interest on the seriou side
regardless of the serious of the alleg the accus will trigger an allout
investigationaudit into the matter thi is true whether the sourc of the alleg is a
reliabl on or an anonym tipster the issu is not the lack of discret in decid what
case to investig but how to conduct interview of senior offici
assign the interview
peopl assign to interview high offici will find that there ar both similar and
differ with normal interview
the first rule is to ensur that the interview is not subordin to the subject of the
interview thi is no problem for outsid entiti such as an independ counsel or even an
inspector gener but where auditor or investig need to interview someon far up in
their own chain of command problem mai aris
if there is ani possibl that the high offici could influenc the career of the interview
either present or in the futur someon els should be chosen agenc should be abl to
call on outsid entiti to conduct such interview where appropri in ani event ani hint
by the offici of help or harm to the interview should be document and report
public sector fraud financi transact
11926 2011 fraud examin manual
the term high offici appear to encompass a homogen group but in realiti anyon
from a naiv or brash polit appointe to a grizzl and canni veteran civil servant with
mani such interview under hi belt mai be encount the best method of interview
will therefor depend on a number of factor
is the interviewe suspect of wrongdo
is he like to be cooper ar there file or previou interview who can be
consult
is he like to be embarrass by the result of the inquiri even though not person
culpabl
these and other factor will determin whether the interview should be humbl
deferenti apologet matter of fact or aggress obvious no on mode fit all subject
or all situat howev the interview should not be cow by the subject posit
although feign humil mai be appropri
the warn dilemma
a crucial element in interview a high offici as with the interview of ani public
employe is proper regard for the constitut right of the subject a seri of case in
the 1960 such as murphi v waterfront commiss of new york harbor 378 us 52 1964
garriti v new jersei 385 us 493 1967 and gardner v broderick 392 us 273 1968 ar
instruct in short the unit state suprem court held that a public employe cannot be
compel to answer jobrel question concern hi own possibl crimin conduct
under threat of disciplinari action eg remov without violat hi right under the selfincrimin
claus of the fifth amend the choic between job forfeitur and selfincrimin
said the court is inher coerciv and in effect a choic between the
rock and the whirlpool put anoth wai a public employe cannot be put in a posit
wherein he will incrimin himself if he tell the truth will subject himself to perjuri
prosecut if he li or will set himself up for a remov action if he refus to cooper
thu the issu of what warn if ani to give the subject must be address
if the high offici is reason believ to be mere a thirdparti wit no warn ar
requir and he is oblig to respond to the question in fact most agenc have a
provis in their polici and procedur manual that mandat cooper the follow
is typic
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11927
requir to cooper
employe must furnish testimoni or fulli disclos inform in their knowledg or
possess concern ani matter of offici interest to ani feder court board panel
tribun agent or offici author to conduct a particular inquiri investig hear
trial or other proceed or to act upon such testimoni or inform when direct to do
so by proper author in thi regard employe must answer ani proper question under
oath or affirm if requir includ furnish or author the releas of
inform relat to their financi affair which ha reason relationship to matter of
offici interest
an agenc tabl of offens and penalti then delin the punish for failur
to cooper
howev befor these rule can be util in a case where the offici is suspect of
wrongdo a threshold determin of whether or not the violat is potenti crimin
and not whether a prosecutor would in fact accept it must be made if the alleg is
inher administr ie noncrimin in natur such as a misus of vehicl or give
the appear of a conflict of interest the fifth amend doe not come into plai and
the offici must cooper in the same fashion as if he were a thirdparti wit instruct
is the merit system protect board 1981 decis in ashford v bureau of prison 6 mspb 389 mspr 458 81 fmsr 7044
administr warn
the offici should be advis of hi oblig to cooper via the agenc socal
administr warn which will read similar to the follow
under the applic agenc polici and procedur manual you ar requir to disclos
ani inform in your possess pertain to the matter under investig and answer
ani proper question ask of you
you mai be subject to disciplinari action for your failur or refus to answer proper
question relat to the perform of your duti as an employe you mai also be subject
to crimin prosecut for ani fals answer that you give to ani such question do you
understand thi
public sector fraud financi transact
11928 2011 fraud examin manual
it should be note that there is never a right to lie even if incorrect warn or no warn
were given onli silenc would be accept
crimin investig
if on the other hand the high govern offici is the subject of an actual or potenti
crimin investig a total differ situat aris as note abov a public employe
cannot be compel to cooper or face loss of hi job the first step mai well be
attempt to secur the voluntari cooper of the individu with clear and full knowledg
on hi part of the possibl consequ mani agenc have develop their own word
but the beckwith or civiletti warn is often us
you have the right to remain silent if your answer mai tend to incrimin you
anyth you sai mai be us as evid both in an administr proceed or ani
futur crimin proce ding involv you
if you refus to answer the question pose to you on the ground that the answer mai
incrimin you you cannot be discharg sole for remain silent howev your silenc
can be consid in an administr proceed for it evidentiari valu that is warrant
by the fact surround your case
thi warn clearli disclos it voluntari natur and the possibl advers consequ of
cooper but in realiti advers consequ for fail to cooper under these
circumst ar neglig
declin of prosecut
if the interviewe declin to cooper voluntarili the interview must make an elect if
he absolut need the statement of the offici to ascertain what occur he must forego
ani us of the statement or of ani evid deriv from the statement in a subsequ
crimin prosecut in fact the interview must secur a declin of prosecut from a
prosecutor and thu elimin the fifth amend problem the unit state court and
most state court onli confer immun to an offici who must cooper pursuant to an
agenc regul although at least on state suprem court ha mandat transact
immun in ani event a heavi burden is impos on the govern to show that it
subsequ crimin case wa not taint by the compel statement and a decis to
compel an interview will ordinarili preclud the option of crimin prosecut
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11929
to ensur that the interviewe ha been advis of hi oblig to cooper in a declin
crimin case the kalkin warn must be given immedi follow the abov
mention administr warn
you ar further advis that the answer you give to question pertain to the matter
present under investig or ani inform or evid that is gain by reason of your
answer cannot and will not be us against you in ani subsequ crimin proceed
except that you mai be subject to crimin prosecut for ani fals answer that you give to
ani question do you understand thi
failur to compli with thi elabor and complex arrai of warn requir can and
unfortun often doe ruin otherwis wellrun investig of senior offici two
addit case worth read ar kalkin v unit state 473 f2d 1391 ctcl 1973 and
weston v depart of hous and urban develop 724 f2d 943 cafc 1983 a final kei
point to rememb is that a failur to give a proper warn by ani interview with or
without offici author to bind the govern will in fact do so
legal counsel
the higher the offici to be interview the more like he is to be cogniz of hi right to
the presenc of counsel and hi abil to afford on high offici ar also frequent
shock by the fact that thei mai not be entitl to represent in fact govern
employe ar more often than not in a posit where no right to counsel in an interview
exist simpli put if the offici is be interview as a wit onli and not as a suspect
or if the matter is strictli administr or if although crimin in natur a decis ha
been made not to prosecut there is simpli no right to the presenc of an attornei or ani
other person repres
miranda warn of cours ar limit to those situat where the interviewe is in
custodi or otherwis depriv of hi freedom of action in ani signific wai ie is in jail
under arrest or in a situat that ha all the trap of a formal arrest such situat will
rare aris see beckwith v unit state 425 us 341 1976 howard v offic of personnel
manag 86 fmsr 5342 1986 ashford v bureau of prison supra
onli where crimin liabil is a possibl and the interview is thu voluntari in natur will
the offici be abl to insist on the presenc of a lawyer as a condit of hi cooper it
is import to rememb howev that even though an offici mai not have the right to
public sector fraud financi transact
11930 2011 fraud examin manual
counsel the decis as to whether or not to allow it is a tactic on and in a particular case
mai be the quickest and most effici mean to secur the desir inform
obstruct the investig
an offici who declin to be interview or to answer certain question act at hi own
peril if under order from hi own superior or on the advic of counsel in fact a superior
who tell hi employe of whatev rank that thei do not have to cooper with
investig commit action misconduct often overlook is the abil of high
offici to influenc underl to be less than forthcom or to misplac kei
document
when appropri the high offici should be remind of all public employe oblig
to assist in the factfind process interview should make no assumpt in advanc of
ani high offici integr or lack thereof final the high offici who offer the i wa
conduct my own investig stori usual get no further than did the abscam
defend
rule of procedur
those who interview high offici must avoid extrem of procedur and should as a
gener rule neither act overli belliger nor kowtow to them basic rule of procedur in
the area of warn and represent appli to these peopl as much as to the gener
popul of public employe what is differ is the high offici abil to influenc
other and their particular suscept to embarrass public and a good interview
will turn these trait to hi own advantag in hi quest for a truth recit of what did in
fact occur
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12001
contract and procur fraud
the detect and proof of fraud in contract and procur area requir expertis in the
law of contract in compani or agenc polici and rule and about industri standard
and practic
element of a contract
a contract is a mutual agreement oral or written between two or more parti that must
contain the follow element
compet parti
law subject matter or object
legal consider
mutual promis
mutual oblig
to be success in detect and prove fraud the fraud examin must establish object
criteria to evalu the contract the fraud examin must have an understand of proper
contract procedur at the presolicit solicit and negoti and perform
and administr phase
phase of a contract
presolicit phase
the activ typic involv dure presolicit ar
need recognit
notic of intent to contract
develop of specif
award criteria
the fraud examin should look for variat from standard or accept procedur and
the absenc of proper document
contract and procur fraud financi transact
12002 2011 fraud examin manual
the most promin scheme involv at thi phase of contract or procur ar
determin need
bid specif
determin need
the typic fraud in the need recognit phase of the contract negoti is collus
between the buyer and contractor where the buyer employe receiv a gratuiti or
kickback for recogn a need for a particular product or servic
bid specif
bid specif and statement of work detail the type and amount of good and
servic to be provid ar prepar to assist in the select process thei ar intend to
provid both potenti bidder and the select offici with a firm basi for make and
accept bid
a wellwritten contract will contain specif standard and statement of work that
clearli detail the right and entitl of the contractor carelessli written specif
standard and statement of work make it easier for a contractor to claim at a later time that
he is entitl to more monei than the buyer intend to pai
sometim the buyer personnel and the contractor deliber collud to write vagu
specif at other time there is an agreement to amend the contract to increas the
price immedi after the award on contractor actual develop a cost enhanc
plan which identifi all the chang he would make in order to doubl the cost of the
contract befor it wa even sign
poorli written specif
in some instanc the fraud is commit sole by the contractor base on poorli written
specif in the instanc of poorli written specif it is easi for the contractor to
deliv a product or servic that is price higher than what wa order
vagu specif
in other instanc vagu specif ar deliber written by the buyer in collus with
the contractor so that more monei can be claim later
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12003
agreement to amend contract
in situat where there is collus between the buyer and supplier there is sometim an
agreement to award the contract base on skimpi specif and then increas the price
later onc the contract ha been award through amend to the contract
detect bid specif
the follow is a list of potenti red flag for fraud involv specif
provid the contractor with inform or advic on a preferenti basi
us statement of work specif or sole sourc justif develop by or in
consult with a contractor who will be permit to bid
permit consult who assist in the prepar of the statement of work
specif or design to perform on the contract as subcontractor or consult
split cost into separ categori to avoid review
write specif not consist with past similar procur
solicit and negoti phase
fraud scheme involv dure thi phase typic involv collus between the buyer and
contractor and contractor of compet compani in the bid process scheme in thi
phase also involv defect price
bid submiss scheme
bid submiss scheme can take on mani form thei can involv anyon in the contract
cycl such as a buyer or contract offici engin technic repres qualiti or
product assur repres or subcontractor liaison employe anyon who can
influenc the award of a contract
exampl of bid submiss scheme ar
prematur open of bid
alter bid
unjustifi extens of bid open date
control bid open
falsifi bid log and document
contract and procur fraud financi transact
12004 2011 fraud examin manual
detect bid submiss scheme
to detect bid submiss scheme the fraud examin should be awar of
accept of late bid
falsif of document or receipt to get a late bid accept
chang in bid after other bidder price ar known
chang in bid date
receipt of late bid
last bid usual receiv the bid
bidrig scheme
most bidrig fraud scheme involv collus between contractor of compet
compani dure the bid process
bid rotat
collus bid occur when a group of prospect vendor exchang inform on
contract solicit take turn at submit the low bid
bid suppress
in thi type of scheme on or more competitor agre with at least on other competitor to
refrain from bid or agre to withdraw a previous submit bid so that a contractor
bid will be accept other form of thi activ involv agreement by competitor to
fabric bid protest or to coerc supplier and subcontractor not to deal with
nonconspir who submit bid
a variat of bid suppress occur when competitor make arrang to refrain from
compet in a design portion of a market thi might be accomplish base on
custom or geograph area the result of such a divis is that compet firm will not
bid or will submit onli complementari bid discuss below when request for bid ar
issu in the competitor unassign area
complementari bid
complementari bid also known as protect or shadow bid occur when
competitor submit token bid that ar too high to be accept or if competit in price
then on special term that will not be accept such bid ar not intend to secur the
buyer accept but ar mere design to give the appear of genuin bid
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12005
phantom bid
sever compani have been caught creat dummi compani to submit a varieti of bid
on a singl contract that wai thei give the appear of vigor competit while
actual bid against themselv
detect bid rig
to detect these type of fraud the fraud examin must be alert for
unsuccess bidder who later becom subcontractor
wide dispar in bid price
same contractor who bid on all project with rotat low bidder
other qualifi vendor who fail to submit bid
bid protest from lose qualifi bidder
split up requir so contractor can each get a fair share and can rotat bid
a rotat pattern to win bidder
a geograph pattern to win bidder
joint ventur bid by firm who could have bid individu
defect price scheme
defect price occur dure the negoti contract process when contractor fail to
disclos accur cost or price data in their price propos result in an increas
contract price
exampl of defect price scheme gener involv the submiss of inflat labor
cost and inflat materialpart cost other scheme involv
the us of vendor other than the on propos
not disclos document on vendor discount
chang make or bui decis
not disclos residu materi inventori
inflat cost by channel work under contract through a dummi compani
withhold inform on batch purchas
detect defect price scheme
to detect defect price scheme the fraud examin should be alert for the follow
failur to updat cost or price data even though it is known that past activ show
that cost or price have decreas
failur to correct known system defici that can lead to defect price
contract and procur fraud financi transact
12006 2011 fraud examin manual
repeat denial by the contractor of the exist of histor record
delai in the releas of data to the buyer to preclud possibl price reduct
alter support data
contract perform and administr phase
contract perform activ includ chang order time review of complet portion
prior to signoff and releas of moni and assess of deliver for complianc with
the term of the contract includ qualiti control there ar two basic scheme perpetr
dure the perform phase product substitut and mischarg account materi
and labor
product substitut
in order to increas profit the contractor might emploi a product substitut scheme
fail to meet the contract specif in the area of either quantiti or qualiti of
product exampl of scheme involv product substitut includ
deliveri of inferiorsubstandard materi
deliveri of materi that have not been test
falsif of test result
deliveri of us surplu or rework part
deliveri of counterfeit product
submiss of fals certif certif ar statement that part or materi ar
new domest manufactur and meet the contract specif concern qualiti
and quantiti or that the compani is minor own
deliveri of commerci equival hardwar
pass off or special creat sampl for inspect
surreptiti movement of inspect tag to uninspect good
substitut of lookalik good
detect product substitut scheme
the follow is a list of potenti red flag for product substitut scheme
high percentag of product return to vendor for noncompli with specif
product complianc certif miss
complianc certif sign by lowlevel employe with no qualiti assur
respons
materi test done by supplier us hi own personnel and facil
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12007
laboratori test report ar ident as to sampl descript and test result vari
onli as to date and lot number test
highest profit product line have the highest number of materi return author or
reship
in order to detect these type of fraud the fraud examin should consid the follow
audit procedur
conduct both routin and unannounc inspect and test
carefulli review the inspect and test report
request assist from outsid technic personnel to conduct afterthefact test
interview personnel and other for indic of noncompli
review correspond and contract file for indic of noncompli
mischarg
account mischarg
account mischarg ar defin as knowingli charg unallow cost to the buyer
conceal or misrepres them as allow cost or hide them in account such as
offic suppli that ar not usual audit close anoth common variat involv
charg type of cost or independ research and develop to other cost categori
materi mischarg
materi mischarg ar usual limit to raw materi that can be us on mani differ
contract product or divert for person us numer case have been discov where
the buyerown materi which wa us on a similar contract for exampl commerci
show up on the account record as be us in the manufactur process for the
subject contract for exampl govern
detect materi mischarg
materi mischarg can be detect by exam in materi cost transfer these might
includ transfer
from govern contract to commerci
via ani type of suspens or hold account
from ongo job to job not schedul for deliveri until far into the futur
from prior lot work order to current or futur work order
to inventori writeoff account
to scrap account
contract and procur fraud financi transact
12008 2011 fraud examin manual
of materi order and charg in excess of contract requir
of seemingli unrel materi charg on rout slip
in which materi standard ar not updat over period of time when the contractor
recogn improv in manufactur technolog or product design
in which a signific varianc exist between propos versu negoti vendor price
labor mischarg
labor cost ar perhap more suscept to mischarg than ar materi cost becaus
employe labor can readili be charg to ani contract the onli wai to ensur that labor
cost ar charg to the correct account is to actual observ the work of each employe to
determin the contract on which he is work then determin from the account record
that the employe cost is charg to the proper contract
there ar sever scheme involv mischarg labor cost some of the more promin
on ar
transfer of labor cost
time and charg do not agre with contractor bill
fictiti time card
chang made to individu time card
time card charg by supervisor
detect labor mischarg
labor mischarg can sometim be detect by examin the follow
distinct laborcharg pattern on research and develop
signific increas in charg to overhead account for exampl idl time down
time and nonappli time
reclassif or reorgan of employe from indirect to direct charg
chang in the laborcharg relationship between certain task or type of labor
decreas in indirect expens pool
increas labor hour with no correspond increas in materi us or unit
ship
actual hour and dollar consist at or near budget amount
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12009
comput program
the comput can have a tremend impact on fraud examin gener program
can be easili written that will identifi suspici activ without have to manual review a
volumin amount of data thi is more conduc to detect fraud as well as
be a more effici us of a fraud examin time comput program can be written to
identifi the follow
vendor with post offic box address
vendor with address in common with employe address
contractor who were unsuccess bidder who ar now subcontractor
payment to a particular vendor over a specifi period of time
vendor payment that were initi or paid outsid the normal system for exampl
hand carri or approv
employe who ar assign to more than on contract on ani given dai
2011 fraud examin manual 2101
