2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Intercepting Checks Before Delivery/POOR CONTROL OF SIGNED CHECKS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


POOR CONTROL OF SIGNED CHECKS 
Unfortunately, employees are often able to intercept signed checks because of poor internal 
controls. For instance, many employees simply find signed checks left unattended in the 
work areas of the persons who signed them or the persons charged with their delivery. In 
these cases it is easy for the perpetrator to steal the check. Another common breakdown 
occurs when the person who prepares a check is also involved in the delivery of that check 
once it has been signed.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.517 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.518                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A high-level manager with authority to disburse employee benefits instructed accounts 
payable personnel to return signed benefits checks to him instead of immediately delivering 
them to their intended recipients. These instructions were not questioned due to the 
manager’s level of authority within the company. The perpetrator simply took the checks 
that were returned to him and deposited them  into his personal bank account, forging the 
endorsements of the intended payees.  
 
In addition to the preceding example, secretaries or clerks who prepare checks for their 
bosses to sign are often responsible for mailing those checks. It is very simple for those 
employees to make out a fraudulent check and obtain a signature, knowing that the boss will 
give the signed check right back to them. This scheme is indicative of the key problem with 
occupational fraud: trust. In order for an office to run efficiently, high-level employees must 
be able to rely on their subordinates. Yet this reliance is precisely what puts subordinates in a 
position to defraud their employer.  
 



:


poor control of sign check
unfortun employe ar often abl to intercept sign check becaus of poor intern
control for instanc mani employe simpli find sign check left unattend in the
work area of the person who sign them or the person charg with their deliveri in
these case it is easi for the perpetr to steal the check anoth common breakdown
occur when the person who prepar a check is also involv in the deliveri of that check
onc it ha been sign
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1517
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1518 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a highlevel manag with author to disburs employe benefit instruct account
payabl personnel to return sign benefit check to him instead of immedi deliv
them to their intend recipi these instruct were not question due to the
manag level of author within the compani the perpetr simpli took the check
that were return to him and deposit them into hi person bank account forg the
endors of the intend paye
in addit to the preced exampl secretari or clerk who prepar check for their
boss to sign ar often respons for mail those check it is veri simpl for those
employe to make out a fraudul check and obtain a signatur know that the boss will
give the sign check right back to them thi scheme is indic of the kei problem with
occup fraud trust in order for an offic to run effici highlevel employe must
be abl to reli on their subordin yet thi relianc is precis what put subordin in a
posit to defraud their employ
