2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Altering Checks Prepared by Others: Inserting a New Payee


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Altering Checks Prepared by Others: Inserting a New Payee 
The method used to alter the payee designation on a check depends largely on how that 
check is prepared and intercepted. (Incidentally, the amount  of the check may also be altered 
at the same time and by the same method as the payee designation.) Checks prepared by 
others can be intercepted by any of the methods discussed in the forged endorsements 
section above. When the perpetrator intercepts a check that has been prepared by someone 
else, there are basically two methods that may be employed to change the payee. The first is 
to insert the false payee’s name in place of  the true payee’s. The true name might be 
scratched out with a pen or covered up with white-out. Another name is then entered on the 
payee designation line. These kinds of alterations are usually simple to detect.  
 
A more sophisticated method occurs when the perpetrator of the fraud enters the accounts 
payable system and changes the names of payees before checks are generated. This can be 
accomplished by anyone with a password that permits access to the accounts payable  
address file.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An accounts payable employee was so trusted that her manager allowed her to use his 
computer password in his absence. The password permitted access to the accounts payable 
address file. This employee waited until the manager was absent, then selected a legitimate 
vendor with whom her company did a lot of business. She held up the vendor’s invoices for 
the day, and after work used the manager’s log-in code to change the vendor name and 
address to that of a fictitious company. The new name and address were run through the 
accounts payable cycle with an old invoice number, causing a fraudulent check to be issued. 
The victim company had an automated duplicate invoice test, but the perpetrator 
circumvented it substituting “1” for “I” and “0” (zero) for capital “O.” The next day, 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.521 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.522                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 the employee would replace the true vendor’s name and address, and mutilate the check 
register so that the check payable to the fi ctitious vendor was concealed. Approximately 
$300,000 in false checks was issued using this method.  
 



:


alter check prepar by other insert a new paye
the method us to alter the paye design on a check depend larg on how that
check is prepar and intercept incident the amount of the check mai also be alter
at the same time and by the same method as the paye design check prepar by
other can be intercept by ani of the method discuss in the forg endors
section abov when the perpetr intercept a check that ha been prepar by someon
els there ar basic two method that mai be emploi to chang the paye the first is
to insert the fals paye name in place of the true paye the true name might be
scratch out with a pen or cover up with whiteout anoth name is then enter on the
paye design line these kind of alter ar usual simpl to detect
a more sophist method occur when the perpetr of the fraud enter the account
payabl system and chang the name of paye befor check ar gener thi can be
accomplish by anyon with a password that permit access to the account payabl
address file
exampl
an account payabl employe wa so trust that her manag allow her to us hi
comput password in hi absenc the password permit access to the account payabl
address file thi employe wait until the manag wa absent then select a legitim
vendor with whom her compani did a lot of busi she held up the vendor invoic for
the dai and after work us the manag login code to chang the vendor name and
address to that of a fictiti compani the new name and address were run through the
account payabl cycl with an old invoic number caus a fraudul check to be issu
the victim compani had an autom duplic invoic test but the perpetr
circumv it substitut 1 for i and 0 zero for capit o the next dai
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1521
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1522 2011 fraud examin manual
the employe would replac the true vendor name and address and mutil the check
regist so that the check payabl to the fi ctitiou vendor wa conceal approxim
300000 in fals check wa issu us thi method
