2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Bank Reconciliations


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Bank Reconciliations 
Copies of the bank reconciliations and account analysis should be obtained along with the 
complete set of bank statements on all checking and savings accounts, as well as certificates 
of deposit and other interest bearing and non-interest bearing accounts. From the 
reconciliations, perform the following tests: 
• Confirm the mathematical accuracy of the reconciliation. 
• Examine the bank statement for possible alterations. 
• Trace the balance on the statement back to the bank cut-off and bank confirmation 
statements. 
• Foot the balance to the company’s ledger. 
                                                          
2 George Georgiades, Audit Procedures  (New York: Harcourt Brace Professional Publishing, 1995). 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.531 
• Trace the deposits in transit to the bank cut-off statement to ensure recording in  
proper period. 
• Examine canceled checks and compare to the list of outstanding checks. 
• Sample supporting documentation of checks written for a material amount. 
• Verify supporting documentation on outstanding checks written for a material amount. 
• Verify accuracy of nonoperational-cash or ca sh-equivalent accounts (CDs and other 
investment accounts). Analysis should include the verification of the institution holding 
the funds, interest rate, maturity date, beginning and ending balances, and current period 
activity. Book and bank balances should be compared and any accruals of interest 
analyzed.3 
 



:


bank reconcili
copi of the bank reconcili and account analysi should be obtain along with the
complet set of bank statement on all check and save account as well as certif
of deposit and other interest bear and noninterest bear account from the
reconcili perform the follow test
confirm the mathemat accuraci of the reconcili
examin the bank statement for possibl alter
trace the balanc on the statement back to the bank cutoff and bank confirm
statement
foot the balanc to the compani ledger
2 georg georgiad audit procedur new york harcourt brace profession publish 1995
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1531
trace the deposit in transit to the bank cutoff statement to ensur record in
proper period
examin cancel check and compar to the list of outstand check
sampl support document of check written for a materi amount
verifi support document on outstand check written for a materi amount
verifi accuraci of nonoperationalcash or ca shequival account cd and other
invest account analysi should includ the verif of the institut hold
the fund interest rate matur date begin and end balanc and current period
activ book and bank balanc should be compar and ani accrual of interest
analyzed3
