2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Check Disbursement Controls


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Check Disbursement Controls 
The following list of activities will help tighten controls and possibly deter employees from 
giving in to the temptation to commit check fraud. 
• Check “cutting” and preparation is not done by a signatory on the account.  
• Checks are mailed immediately after signing. 
• Theft control procedures are adhered to (see below). 
• Accounts payable records and addresses are secure from possible tampering. Changes in 
vendor information should be verified. 
• Bank statements should be reviewed diligently ensuring that amounts and signatures 
have not been altered. 
• Bank reconciliations should be completed immediately after monthly statements are 
received. The Uniform Commercial Code states that discrepancies must be presented 
within 30 days from the bank statement in order to hold the bank liable.  
• Bank reconciliations are not made by signatories on the account.  
• Bank statements should be reconciled and reviewed by more than one person.  
• Appropriate separation of duties should be documented and adhered to. 
• Detailed comparisons are routinely made between check payees and the payees listed in 
the cash disbursement journal. 
• Personnel responsible for handling and coding checks are periodically rotated, keeping 
total personnel involved to a minimum. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.533 



:


check disburs control
the follow list of activ will help tighten control and possibl deter employe from
give in to the temptat to commit check fraud
check cut and prepar is not done by a signatori on the account
check ar mail immedi after sign
theft control procedur ar adher to see below
account payabl record and address ar secur from possibl tamper chang in
vendor inform should be verifi
bank statement should be review dilig ensur that amount and signatur
have not been alter
bank reconcili should be complet immedi after monthli statement ar
receiv the uniform commerci code state that discrep must be present
within 30 dai from the bank statement in order to hold the bank liabl
bank reconcili ar not made by signatori on the account
bank statement should be reconcil and review by more than on person
appropri separ of duti should be document and adher to
detail comparison ar routin made between check paye and the paye list in
the cash disburs journal
personnel respons for handl and code check ar period rotat keep
total personnel involv to a minimum
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1533
