2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Payroll Fraud/Falsified Hours and Salary


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Falsified Hours and Salary   
The most common method of misappropriating funds from the payroll is the overpayment 
of wages. For hourly employees, the size of a paycheck is based on two factors: the number 
of hours worked and the rate of pay. It is therefore obvious that for an hourly employee to 
fraudulently increase the size of his paycheck, he must either falsify the number of hours he 
has worked or change his wage rate. (See “Falsified Hours and Salary” flowchart.) Since 
salaried employees do not receive compensation based on their time at work, in most cases 
these employees generate fraudulent wages by increasing their rates of pay. 
 
When discussing payroll frauds that involve overstated hours, one must first understand how 
an employee’s time at work is recorded. Time is generally kept by one of three methods. 
Time clocks may be used to mark the time when an employee begins and finishes work. The 
employee inserts a card into the clock at the beginning and end of work, and the time is 
imprinted on that card. In more sophisticated systems, computers may track the time 
employees spend on the job based on log-in codes or a similar indicator. Finally, timecards 
showing the number of hours an employee worked on a particular day are often prepared 
manually by the employee and approved by his manager.  
 



:


falsifi hour and salari
the most common method of misappropri fund from the payrol is the overpay
of wage for hourli employe the size of a paycheck is base on two factor the number
of hour work and the rate of pai it is therefor obviou that for an hourli employe to
fraudul increas the size of hi paycheck he must either falsifi the number of hour he
ha work or chang hi wage rate see falsifi hour and salari flowchart sinc
salari employe do not receiv compens base on their time at work in most case
these employe gener fraudul wage by increas their rate of pai
when discuss payrol fraud that involv overst hour on must first understand how
an employe time at work is record time is gener kept by on of three method
time clock mai be us to mark the time when an employe begin and finish work the
employe insert a card into the clock at the begin and end of work and the time is
imprint on that card in more sophist system comput mai track the time
employe spend on the job base on login code or a similar indic final timecard
show the number of hour an employe work on a particular dai ar often prepar
manual by the employe and approv by hi manag
