2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Payroll Fraud/Fictitious Sales


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Fictitious Sales 
Establishing unobtainable sales quotas that employees think are arbitrary will increase the 
pressure to establish fictitious performance levels. If the pressure becomes significant, the 
employee might resort to adding fictitious sales and accounts receivable to meet the sales 
quotas. 
 
An employee can falsify the amount of sales he has made in one of two ways, the first being 
the creation of fictitious sales. The manner in which fictitious sales are created depends on 
the industry in which the perpetrator operates. Fictitious sales might be constructed by the 
creation of fraudulent sales orders, purchase orders, credit authorizations, packing slips, 
invoices, and so on. On the other hand, a culprit might simply ring up a false sale on a cash 
register. The key is that a fictitious sale is created, that it appears to be legitimate, and that 
the victim organization reacts by issuing a commission check to the perpetrator.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.565 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.566                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE  
An unscrupulous insurance agent took advant age of his company’s incentive commissions, 
which paid $1.25 for every $1.00 of premiums generated in the first year of a policy. The 
agent wrote policies to fictitious customers, paid the premiums, and received his 
commissions, which created an illicit profit on the transaction. For instance, if the fraudster 
paid $100,000 in premiums, he would receive $125,000 in commissions, a $25,000 
profit. No payments were made on the fr audulent policies after the first year.  
 
If a salesperson’s primary compensation is based on sales, without regard to collection, then 
there is an incentive to produce quantity rather than quality sales. It is natural for companies 
to push for higher sales levels to sustain growth. If the salespersons’ compensation is based 
solely on quantity and not on a combination of quantity and  quality, however, then the 
compensation incentive is misplaced. This might create an atmosphere which, if coupled 
with opportunity, will produce inflated or fictitious sales. 
 



:


fictiti sale
establish unobtain sale quota that employe think ar arbitrari will increas the
pressur to establish fictiti perform level if the pressur becom signific the
employe might resort to ad fictiti sale and account receiv to meet the sale
quota
an employe can falsifi the amount of sale he ha made in on of two wai the first be
the creation of fictiti sale the manner in which fictiti sale ar creat depend on
the industri in which the perpetr oper fictiti sale might be construct by the
creation of fraudul sale order purchas order credit author pack slip
invoic and so on on the other hand a culprit might simpli ring up a fals sale on a cash
regist the kei is that a fictiti sale is creat that it appear to be legitim and that
the victim organ react by issu a commiss check to the perpetr
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1565
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1566 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an unscrupul insur agent took advant ag of hi compani incent commiss
which paid 125 for everi 100 of premium gener in the first year of a polici the
agent wrote polici to fictiti custom paid the premium and receiv hi
commiss which creat an illicit profit on the transact for instanc if the fraudster
paid 100000 in premium he would receiv 125000 in commiss a 25000
profit no payment were made on the fr audul polici after the first year
if a salesperson primari compens is base on sale without regard to collect then
there is an incent to produc quantiti rather than qualiti sale it is natur for compani
to push for higher sale level to sustain growth if the salesperson compens is base
sole on quantiti and not on a combin of quantiti and qualiti howev then the
compens incent is misplac thi might creat an atmospher which if coupl
with opportun will produc inflat or fictiti sale
