2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD 
 
Basic Principles of Criminal Law 
Whereas civil law is that body of law that provides remedies for violations of private rights, 
criminal law deals with offenses of a public nature. A criminal defendant in a federal or state 
court is presumed innocent. He also has the right to remain silent, to confront accusers, to 
be advised by counsel, to have a speedy trial in front of peers, as well as other protections. 
And under the U.S. criminal justice system, the government bears the burden of proving the 
accused guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, and it is expected to scrupulously observe the 
rights of the defendant.  
 
Also, in the criminal system, the government must adhere to the principal guarantees of 
individual rights, which are established by the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendments. These 
amendments are applied to the states under the “due process” clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment.  
 
The procedures described in this chapter primarily refer to federal rules. Individual state 
procedures might differ. 
 
Fourth Amendment 
To review, the Fourth Amendment guarantees the right of all citizens to be free from 
unreasonable searches and seizures; it provides the right of people to be: 
 
… secure in their persons, ho uses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and 
seizure, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported 
by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or 
things to be seized. 
 
Fifth Amendment 
The Fifth Amendment guarantees subjects of a criminal investigation the right to refuse to 
answer questions or to provide certain personal information that might be incriminating. 
The text of this amendments states: 
 
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a 
presentment of indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or 
in the Militia, when in actual service in time of War or public danger; nor shall any person be 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.502  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall he be compelled 
in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, 
without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just 
compensation. 
 
Sixth Amendment 
The Sixth Amendment affords subjects in a criminal investigation the right to counsel, the 
right to confront (cross-examine) the witnesses against them, and the right to a speedy trial: 
 
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to speedy and public trial, by an 
impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which 
district shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause 
of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for 
obtaining witnesses in his favor; and to have the assistance of counsel for his defense. 
 
Fourteenth Amendment 
The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment incorporates these federal rights 
and makes them applicable to the states. The Fourteenth Amendment provides: 
 
Section 1. All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction 
thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall 
make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the 
United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due 
process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. 
 
 
Arrest and Interrogation 
The Fourth Amendment guarantees the right of all citizens to be free from unreasonable 
searches and seizures. This means that the government cannot make an arrest unless there is 
probable cause to believe that the suspect committed an offense. The “probable cause” 
requirement of the Fourth Amendment is the standard by which a police officer is 
authorized to make an arrest to obtain an arrest warrant.  
 
An arrest occurs whenever a reasonable person would not feel free to leave. Although the 
Fourth Amendment does not necessitate warrants for all arrests, they are required under 
some circumstances: 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.503 
• Arrests in private homes 
• Arrests for minor offenses that are not committed in the arresting officer’s presence 
 
Although a warrant is required in some circumstances, the Supreme Court has identified 
situations in which warrants are not required. For example, a police officer or private citizen 
may make an arrest in public without a warrant if a felony is committed in his presence. This 
exception is designed to remove the “intoler able burdens” a uniform warrant requirement 
would create for law enforcement.  
 
In addition, the Supreme Court has held that a person arrested without a warrant is entitled 
to prompt judicial determination of probable cause before that person can be detained for 
any extended period. 
 
Not all police stops are arrests that require probable cause. In Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968), 
the Supreme Court held that the police may briefly detain and question a person for 
investigative purposes if there are specific “articulable” reasons to do so. A valid stop may 
yield evidence to effect an arrest. If the police arrest or detain unlawfully, any statements or 
evidence obtained as a result will be suppressed. The suspect may still be prosecuted, 
however, if other untainted evidence of wrongdoing exists. 
 
Interrogation of Suspects 
After the arrest, the suspect is placed in custody. While in custody, the police can interrogate 
the suspect to obtain information or a confession, but there are limits on such 
interrogations.  
 
The Fifth Amendment provides that a person cannot be compelled to give information that 
may incriminate him in a criminal case, but it applies only to: 
• Compelled “testimonial statements:” The Fifth Amendment applies only to testimonial 
statements (i.e., any testimony or communicative evidence that might tend to incriminate 
the individual, either directly or indirectly, by leading the government to incriminating 
evidence). Nontestimonial conduct, such as compelling a suspect to appear in a line-up, 
give handwriting samples, or submit to blood or alcohol tests, is not barred by the Fifth 
Amendment. 
• Individuals : The Fifth Amendment applies only to individuals; business entities, including 
sole proprietorships and other organizations, do not have a Fifth Amendment privilege. 
 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.504  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Fifth Amendment protects an individual’s personal papers that are not voluntarily 
prepared, including tax returns, if incriminating. Documents such as appointment books, 
correspondence, and other records that the subject prepared without government 
compulsion are not covered by the Amendment and must be produced. 
 
To ensure that every citizen has the opportunity to exercise this fundamental right, the 
Supreme Court ruled in the landmark case of Miranda v. Arizona, 348 U.S. 436 (1966), that 
the police must give the following warnings (known as the Miranda  warnings) before 
interrogating any suspect held in custody: 
• That the suspect has the right to remain silent 
• That any statements can be used against him at trial 
• That the suspect has a right to the assistance of an attorney 
• That an attorney will be appointed to represent the suspect if he cannot afford to retain 
one 
 
Miranda warnings are required only if the suspect is (1) interrogated (2) while held in custody  
(3) by public authorities. Certain exceptions to the warning requirement apply, such as when 
immediate questioning is necessary to ensure public safety. The warnings generally are not 
required when a person is being questioned by private parties. 
 
Once a suspect asserts the right to remain silent, all questioning must cease until counsel is 
provided. If the defendant thereafter decides to make a statement, the government must 
show that it was the result of a voluntary, knowing waiver of his rights. 
 
The Supreme Court, however, made major revisions to the Miranda warnings in three 
separate cases decided in 2010. In one case, the Court upheld a version of the Miranda 
warnings that told a suspect of his right to a lawyer before, rather than during, 
interrogation. In a second case, the Court ruled that a suspect’s request for a lawyer is good 
for only 14 days after the suspect is released from custody. Finally, in a third case, the Court 
held that suspects must tell police that they are going to remain silent if they want to invoke 
their “right to remain silent” and stop an interrogation.  
 
                                                 
4 Florida v. Powell, 130 S. Ct. 1195 (Feb. 23, 2010).  
5 Maryland v. Shatzer, 130 S. Ct. 1213, 1223 (Feb. 24, 2010). 
6 Berghuis v. Thompkins, 130 S. Ct. 2250 (June 1, 2010).  
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.505 
Apart from the Miranda requirements, a confession also must be voluntary, not coerced by 
physical or psychological means. Some inducement is permissible, such as informing the 
suspect that a confession might result in treatment that is more lenient. Using deceit and 
trickery to extract a confession, such as telling the suspect that an accomplice had confessed 
when in fact he had not, is treated differently by different courts, some permitting such 
confessions, others not. No confession will be admitted if the circumstances under which it 
was obtained render it unreliable. 
 
For more information on the applicability of the Fifth Amendment to investigations 
conducted by nongovernment personnel, please refer to the “Individual Rights” chapter.  
 
 
The Charging Process 
Once the government has arrested someone for a crime, the person under arrest must be 
brought before a magistrate without “unnecessary delay.” This is known as the “initial 
appearance.” At this time, the arresting officer must swear to a complaint, establishing 
probable cause, if the arrest was without a warrant. The defendant will then be advised of 
the nature of the complaint, of the right to retain counsel or to appointed counsel, and of 
the general circumstances under which pre-trial release may be obtained. 
 
For most offenses, individuals that are in police custody can post bail and be released 
pending trial. Bail is a money bond to ensure that defendants will show up for trial. If a 
defendant fails to show up, the bond is forfeited, and a warrant for the defendant’s arrest is 
issued. 
 
The Eighth Amendment, however, prohibits “excessive bail.” The Supreme Court has held 
that the Eighth Amendment does not absolutely require pre-trial release, only that if bail is 
appropriate, it be set no higher than necessary to assure the defendant’s presence at trial. If, 
under the circumstances, the presiding judge decides that release would pose a serious threat 
to the safety of the community or to a particular individual, or that no amount of bail or 
particular conditions of release would prevent the defendant from fleeing, the judge can 
deny bail to keep the defendant in custody. 
 
At the initial appearance, a defendant who has not yet been indicted also is informed of his 
right to a preliminary examination. This is a formal, adversary hearing before a judge where 
the defendant may be represented by counsel and can cross-examine witnesses. The purpose 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.506  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of the hearing is to determine whether there is probable cause to hold the defendant for 
further proceedings, not to establish guilt or innocence. Because of its limited purpose, 
hearsay and even illegally obtained evidence can be admissible. Motions to suppress must be 
made to the trial court. 
 
If the magistrate determines at the preliminary examination that there is no probable cause, 
the complaint will be dismissed and the defendant released. But the government may 
institute a subsequent prosecution for the same offense, presumably with better evidence. 
Preliminary examinations often are used by defense counsel as an opportunity to get free 
“discovery” of the details of the prosecution’s case.  
 
Because some defendants may use preliminary examinations to obtain information, some 
prosecutors prefer to obtain a grand jury indictment. A grand jury indictment is held to 
satisfy the probable cause requirements of the Fifth Amendment and precludes the need for 
the preliminary examination. (Every state in the U.S. has provisions for a grand jury, but not 
all use the option.) 
 
The Grand Jury 
The grand jury is an investigative body that is empowered to issue subpoenas for testimony 
and documents to determine whether a violation of the law has occurred. The grand jury 
consists of 16 to 23 people sworn as jurors who meet in secret deliberation, usually in 
biweekly or monthly sessions, to hear witnesses and other evidence presented by prosecutors 
and to vote on indictments. An indictment, or true bill, must be agreed upon by at least 12 
jurors voting without the prosecutor present. 
 
The hearing is a non-adversarial proceeding. The accused has no right to be informed of its 
deliberations, to know the evidence against him, or to confront the accusers. The accused 
also has no absolute right to appear, and if he does, may not be accompanied by counsel. 
However, the accused may periodically leave the grand jury to consult with the attorney. 
 
These severe limitations on the rights of the accused are thought by some to be justified on 
the grounds that they are necessary to investigate criminal activity effectively and that the 
grand jury has only the power to accuse, not to convict, the defendant. The defendant, if 
indicted, has full constitutional protections at trial. The grand jury’s power has been severely 
criticized by many legal and public interest groups. Abuse of its processes can do severe 
damage to innocent parties, particularly public figures to whom an indictment alone can be 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.507 
devastating. For this reason, defense counsel in major white-collar cases now often begins its 
defense at the grand jury stage to try to convince prosecutors not to indict — rather than 
waiting, as was traditionally the case, until an indictment is returned. 
 
The grand jury has the right to subpoena witnesses and documents. Refusals to appear or 
produce may be punishable as contempt, with fines or jail terms until the subpoena is 
complied with or the grand jury term expires. A witness or target of the grand jury retains 
the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
 
A grand jury may be used to obtain evidence of possible violations of the criminal law, and 
its process may not be used as a ruse to obtain evidence for parallel civil actions. A common 
example of such parallel proceedings would be investigation of possible antitrust violations. 
The grand jury may, however, with the appropriate court order, make evidence available to 
the proper government authorities for a civil proceeding, as long as the primary purpose of 
its inquiry was to enforce the criminal laws. Access by private parties via court orders to 
grand jury evidence for use in private civil proceedings is unlikely to be granted because of 
secrecy requirements, unless substantial need is demonstrated. 
 
Immunity 
In the course of a grand jury investigation or a criminal trial, the prosecution may apply for a 
court order compelling testimony from a witness under a grant of immunity. Because 
immunized testimony cannot be used against the witness in any criminal proceeding, such an 
order does not violate the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
 
An immunity order  protects the witness only from prosecution from past crimes about which 
testimony is compelled; other, undiscovered crimes are not covered, nor is the witness 
immune from prosecution for perjury based on the immunized testimony. Such testimony 
also may be used against the witness in a civil proceeding.  
 
Although it is legally permissible to prosecute an immunized witness on the basis of other 
testimony and evidence, as a matter of practice this is seldom done because of policy 
considerations and the difficulty of demonstrating — as the law requires — that the 
subsequent prosecution was not in any way based on the compelled testimony. 
 
A decision to immunize a witness is solely within the discretion of the prosecution. If the 
application meets statutory requirements, the court must grant the order. If the immunized 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.508  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
witness refuses to testify — out of fear of reprisal or for any other reason — the witness will be 
found in contempt and jailed until he agrees to testify or the grand jury term expires. The 
witness can then be summoned before a new grand jury and the process repeated indefinitely 
or until a judge decides that there is no possibility that further incarceration will induce 
cooperation. 
 
Indictment and Information 
In the federal system, all offenses punishable by death must be charged by indictment; all 
felonies (generally crimes punishable by imprisonment for a year or more) must be 
prosecuted by indictment, unless the defendant waives the requirement, in which case the 
prosecution may proceed by the filing of an “information.” An information is a charge signed 
only by the prosecutor without the involvement of the grand jury. A misdemeanor may be 
charged by either an indictment or information. 
 
Arraignment 
Once the defendant is formally charged, he is brought before the court to enter a plea. This 
process is called the arraignment. A defendant named in an indictment, if not already in 
custody, may be arrested on a warrant. Alternatively—more often in white-collar crime 
cases — the defendant is summoned to appear before a magistrate at a stated time and place 
to be arraigned.  
 
The arraignment must take place in open court, and it consists of reading the indictment or 
information to the defendant and calling on him to enter a plea. The defendant may plead 
guilty, not guilty, or nolo contendere. If the defendant pleads guilty, the sentencing phase of the 
criminal justice process begins. A plea of not guilty sets in motion the adjudicative process as 
described below. A plea of nolo contendere means the defendant does not contest the charges, 
without formally admitting or denying them. A defendant may plead nolo only with the 
consent of the court. If accepted, a nolo plea is the same as a plea of guilty for purposes of 
punishment, but it cannot be used as a formal admission of guilt. This makes it a favored 
plea for corporate defendants facing subsequent civil litigation. 
 
Before the court will accept a guilty plea, it must follow procedures to ensure that the plea is 
voluntary and accurate; that is, that there is a “factual basis” for the plea. This usually means 
that the defendant must admit to committing acts that satisfy each element of the offense. In 
some circumstances, however, a defendant may be allowed to enter an Alford plea (named 
after the Supreme Court case that upheld the practice) under which he pleads guilty, 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.509 
although continuing to assert innocence. Such a plea may be made to obtain the benefits of a 
plea agreement and to avoid potentially more dire consequences, such as the death penalty, if 
the defendant is convicted after trial. Before the court accepts an Alford  plea, it must 
determine that there is strong evidence of guilt and that the defendant understands the 
consequences.  
 
Prosecutorial Discretion and Plea Bargains 
Whether criminal cases are actually brought to trial might depend on prosecutorial discretion, 
meaning that the decision to prosecute is left to the discretion of the appropriate 
jurisdictional authority. Prosecutors exercising this discretion consider issues like the 
potential for deterrence, the strength of the available evidence, and the resources (time, 
labor, money) incurred by going to trial. In general, the question is about the chances for 
obtaining a guilty verdict, but it is also about the cost and demands of achieving that verdict. 
According to federal statistics, about 84 percent of the people arrested are prosecuted; 62 
percent of these are convicted, and 34 percent are incarcerated. Cases can be handled 
through plea bargains or cooperative agreements, which are discussed below, in exchange for 
assistance, so it is difficult to say, statistically, how “successful” prosecutorial efforts have 
been. However, when public officials take a case to court, they are generally armed and 
ready — of those cases that do go to trial, more than 90 percent end in conviction. 
 
High-level crimes, especially those involving public figures, may require special approval 
from the U.S. Department of Justice before it  may be tried. White-collar crime is sometimes 
prosecuted on the basis of declination guidelines that set out dollar amounts below which cases 
are not accepted. A prosecutor’s office might decide, for example, that securities frauds of 
less than $500,000 will not be brought to trial. Because of the immense effort required to 
prosecute many fraudulent acts, prosecutors have to weigh the cost and exertion of going to 
court versus the amount available for recovery. Accordingly, many businesses are turning to 
civil actions to redress fraud. As the criminal courts become more and more jammed, 
companies can often speed up the process by filing their own civil action. Although the 
perpetrator cannot be given jail time as a result of a purely civil action, he can be ordered to 
pay back the ill-gotten funds.  
 
Prosecuting attorneys also have the power to settle charges with a plea bargain arrangement, 
avoiding the expenditures of time and effort involved at trial. About 90 percent of criminal 
defendants never go to trial, opting instead for a deal. Critics have charged that the plea  
 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.510  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
privilege is abused by cynical prosecutors and leads to dangerous offenders being released 
quickly and without retribution. 
  
The U.S. Supreme Court disagrees. A majority decision in 1971 declared that the plea 
bargain is a “highly desirable” part of the justice system because it “leads to prompt and 
largely final disposition” in most cases; it “a voids much of the corrosive impact of enforced 
idleness” suffered by defendants who aren’t released on bail; it reduces the chances that an 
accused person will commit a crime while free on bail; and it “enhances whatever may be the 
rehabilitative prospects” of the guilty by “shortening the time between charge and 
disposition” ( Santabello v.  New York, 404 U.S. 257, 261 (1971)). 
 
Plea bargains also can be a boon to offenders. A plea bargain is a negotiation between the 
parties that settles a criminal case. After entering a plea bargain, some offenders are released 
from any prosecution whatsoever, and others receive lesser charges. In a study of white-
 collar criminals, more than 42 percent of cooperating defendants were charged with just one 
violation of the law, while only 30 percent of noncooperating defendants were so lucky. 
 
Once charges are filed against them, white-collar defendants are more likely to insist on a 
trial than other offenders are. On average, considering all federal indictments, only about 10 
percent of those accused of committing a crime plead not guilty and proceed to trial. But 
more than 18 percent of defendants in white-collar cases (nearly double the average) insist 
on their trial. People accused of securities fraud are especially likely to demand their day in 
court, with well over half of these defendants pleading not guilty. 
 
Corporate Deferred Prosecution Agreements 
Generally, deferred prosecution agreements occur when prosecutors file criminal charges 
against a company, but then agree not to prosecute the claims as long as the company 
successfully complies with the deferral agreement’s terms. Essentially, deferred prosecution 
agreements help companies avoid indictment, trial, and conviction while providing 
prosecutors with another channel for disposing a corporate case that punishes malfeasance 
and effectuates changes in a company’s culture. 
 
The Burden of Proof in Criminal Trials 
In criminal cases, the verdict must be based on assurance beyond a reasonable doubt. Conversely, 
civil trials requires only a “preponderance of the evidence” to support a decision; therefore, 
criminal trials are tougher. Plainly put, beyond a reasonable doubt requires that jurors and 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.511 
judges hearing criminal cases to be as sure as they possibly can that the defendant committed 
the acts as charged. In purely philosophical terms, there might always be room for doubt 
(“Well, did he really…?”). Fraud charges can be especially hard to prove because the 
evidence is by its nature overwhelmingly circumstantial (i.e., composed of documents and 
their interpretation versus the testimony of eyewitnesses). But arch skepticism is hardly 
practical in making necessary legal decisions. Deciding “beyond a reasonable doubt” entails 
making the most assured judgment possible based on the evidence as presented. The appeals 
process recognizes that more than one examination of the charge(s) might be necessary to 
ensure an accurate, fair-minded verdict.  
 
The prosecution is responsible for proving the charges against the defendant. The 
Constitution guarantees that the accused is presumed innocent until the prosecution shows 
otherwise. The presumption of innocence  means that, until the prosecution proves every element 
of a charge beyond a reasonable doubt, the defendant must be found not guilty, even if he 
offers no evidence in his defense. 
 
Pre-trial Motions in Criminal Court 
Criminal trials, like civil proceedings, often begin with pre-trial motions. Some of these are 
the same regardless of the type of court (civil or criminal). For example, both criminal and 
civil defendants can make motions in limine  to exclude certain evidence, can ask that the charge 
or complaint be made more definite and certain, or can request a postponement of the trial 
date. Other motions are particular  to the criminal process.  
 
Some pre-trial motions typically used in criminal trials are discussed below. 
 
Motion for Severance 
This motion occurs in cases involving multiple defendants that are to tried at the same trial. 
This motion asks that the defendants be tried separately, or at least that this particular 
defendant’s trial be conducted separately. 
 
Motion to Suppress Evidence 
A motion to suppress evidence argues that evidence that was improperly obtained, is 
impertinent or unduly prejudicial, or violates some other right, and it asks the court to issue 
an order that the evidence be excluded from consideration. In many cases motions to 
exclude evidence — decided at a suppression hear ing, where the judge (without a jury) rules 
on the propriety of the government’s conduct — are more important than the trial itself. If 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.512  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the defense is able to exclude certain pieces of evidence (e.g., seized narcotics, a tainted 
confession, or critical books and records), the prosecution might be forced to dismiss the 
charges (at least temporarily) for lack of adequate proof. But an unsuccessful suppression 
motion might be followed by renewed interest by the defendant in a plea bargain. 
 
Motion for a Change of Venue 
This motion asks the judge to move the trial to another court because the defendant cannot 
receive a fair trial due to public prejudice.  
 
Motion to Dismiss  
A motion to dismiss asks a judge to throw out the lawsuit because the opposing party’s 
argument is legally unsound. There are several grounds upon which a defendant may request 
that the indictment be dismissed. The most common reasons supporting motions to dismiss 
are discussed below.  
 
VIOLATING THE DEFENDANT’S RIGHT TO A SPEEDY TRIAL 
The indictment may be dismissed for violations of a defendant’s right to a speedy trial, when 
the trial date exceeds a certain amount of time after the charge (usually 70 days). A related 
basis for the motion is alleging pre-indictment delay, when, for example, the prosecution 
took an excessively long time in bringing the indictment.  
 
SELECTIVE PROSECUTION 
When multiple perpetrators are involved in a criminal act, a defendant may claim “selective 
prosecution,” accusing the authorities of targeting some individuals and exonerating others 
without cause. Defendants also may allege “vindictive prosecution.” If, after being 
exonerated on one charge, a person is charged with another, more serious charge, the 
individual may claim vindictive prosecution. 
 
VIOLATING THE DOUBLE JEOPARDY CLAUSE 
The “Double Jeopardy” clause of the Fifth Amendment — which prevents someone from 
being tried for the same crime twice — may be used to request a dismissal. Dismissal motions 
also may claim that the indictment is invalid because it is based on tainted evidence, 
insufficient evidence, or illegally seized evidence. 
 
A MOTION CHALLENGING THE SUFFICIENCY OF THE INDICTMENT 
Rule 7 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure requires the indictment to contain a plain, 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.513 
concise, and definite statement of the essential facts constituting the charge(s) against the 
defendant. As discussed previously, the indictment must, therefore, allege all of the essential 
elements of the crimes charged, including the requisite criminal intent where required by 
statute. If the indictment is deficient, then the defense can challenge it. The defense may 
challenge the indictment if the prosecution failed to plead an essential element of the fraud 
offense or plead the necessary facts. But even if an indictment is dismissed for insufficiency, 
the prosecution is usually free to re-file the indictment.   
 
EXAMPLE  
If a defendant is charged with mail fraud, the indictment must specifically describe the details of 
the fraudulent scheme perpetrated through the use of the mail and must set forth the false 
representations. (See United States v. Hess, 124 U.S. 483 [1888].) If the indictment fails 
to do this, the court will dismiss the indictment. However, the victory might be short-lived. Even 
though the indictment is dismissed, the prosecution usually is free to re-file the indictment.  
 
DUPLICITY 
Rule 8(a) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure requires that each count of an 
indictment state one and only one offense. A count that charges two or more offenses is 
duplicitous. Unfortunately, what constitutes a single offense often is hard to determine with 
white-collar criminal statutes. Single and continuing offenses, committed for several 
objectives or by multiple means, like mail or wire fraud or conspiracy, may be charged in one 
count, although they alternatively could be charged as separate and distinct counts. 
Generally, however, if the separate violations are all a part of the same criminal scheme, they 
can be alleged in the same count. This is sometimes preferable for the defendant because if 
all of the violations are alleged in one count, it looks to the jury as if the defendant has 
committed one fraud rather than 50 separate frauds.  
 
MULTIPLICITY 
Multiplicity is the opposite of duplicity. Multiplicity occurs when two or more counts charge 
essentially the same offense, thereby exposing the defendant to cumulative punishment for 
one offense. In essence, multiplicity occurs when a defendant is charged twice for the same 
offense, exposing him to double the punishment. 
 
Discovery 
Discovery refers to the formal process whereby the parties to litigation collect evidence and 
learn the details of the opposing side’s case. Both the defendant and prosecution have 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.514  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
statutory rights to certain pre-trial discovery. The defendant may inspect copies of all 
relevant statements made by him (or, if a corporation, by its employees) in the custody of the 
government, a copy of the accused’s prior criminal record, and all documents, items, test 
results, and other evidence the government intends to introduce at a trial or that are 
necessary to the defense. But the defendant does not have an absolute right to see copies of 
prior statements made by a witness against him until such witness testifies at trial. In many 
cases, however, particularly fraud prosecutions where there is less risk of reprisal or 
tampering with witnesses, the government may voluntarily produce these statements before 
trial. 
 
Discovery Under Rule 16 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 16 identifies the information that each side must 
disclose. Generally, the defense is entitled to inspect and copy statements made by the 
defendant. The defense also may inspect the defendant’s prior record, material documents, 
tangible objects, and examination and test reports. 
 
If, and only if, the defendant requests discovery of documents and objects, or of 
examination and test reports, the government may seek similar kinds of materials from the 
defense. Any items that must be disclosed are required to be disclosed “as soon as 
reasonably possible.” The court may regulate the discovery process by entering protective 
orders or punishing the failure to timely provide the proper information.  
 
The rule allows the defense to obtain statements the defendant made to third parties, as well 
as government agents, if the statements were reduced to writing. Therefore, any written 
statements made by the defendant to the CFE investigating the case, if the statements were 
turned over to law enforcement or the government, must be produced. But oral statements 
made to third parties (i.e., nongovernmental agents) generally are protected from discovery. 
 
SUMMARY OF RULE 16 DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 
• Statements of the defendant. Upon the defendant’s request, the government must disclose 
any relevant written or recorded statements made by the defendant. This includes written 
records of any relevant statements made by the defendant to a government agent, either 
before or after arrest, as well as any recorded testimony of the defendant made before a 
grand jury, which relates to the offense charged.  
• The defendant’s prior record. Upon the defendant’s request, the government must furnish a 
copy of the defendant’s prior criminal record, if it exists.  
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.515 
• Documents and tangible objects. Upon the defendant’s request, the government must allow 
the defendant to inspect and copy or photograph any books, papers, documents, 
photographs, tangible objects, buildings, or places which (1) are material to the 
preparation of the defendant’s case; (2) are intended for use as evidence at trial by the 
government; or (3) were obtained from the defendant or belong to the defendant. 
• Reports of examinations and tests.  Upon the defendant’s request, the government must allow 
the defendant to inspect and copy any results or reports of physical or mental 
examinations, scientific tests, or experiments that are material to the preparation of the 
defense or that the government plans to use as evidence at trial.  
• Expert witnesses.  Upon the defendant’s request, the government must provide a written 
summary of the testimony to be given by its expert witnesses. This summary must 
include the expert’s opinions, the basis of those opinions, and the qualifications of the 
expert.  
 
While the state has a broad duty to disclose evidence in criminal cases, there are limits to 
what it must turn over to the defense. The defendant does not have a right to the work 
product of the state, which includes reports, memoranda, and other internal documents 
made by the government attorney in preparing for and prosecuting the case. In addition, the 
defendant does not have a right to inspect statements made by government witnesses prior 
to the time the witness actually testifies.  
 
The Jencks Act (18 U.S.C. § 3500) 
The Jencks Act permits the defendant to obtain, prior to cross-examination, a government 
witness’s prior statements (or portions thereof) that relate to the subject matter of his 
testimony on direct examination. However, the statute also protects statements from 
discovery until after the direct examination has been completed. The statements that must be 
produced include not only the written statements signed by the witness, but also may include 
notes or memoranda of government agents or prosecutors which set forth what the witness 
said during interviews. 
 
Exculpatory Information (Brady Material) 
The prosecutor has an ethical responsibility not to use evidence that is false and must correct 
testimony that he knows is false. In 1963, the Supreme Court (in the case of Brady v. 
Maryland, 373 U.S. 83) expanded the prosecution’s duty further. Under Brady, the 
prosecution must disclose all evidence requested by the defendant that is material to guilt or 
punishment (i.e., evidence that would tend to exculpate  him or reduce his penalty). The 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.516  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
government is expressly forbidden from concealing evidence that would call the charges into 
question. 
 
Disclosures by the Defendant 
Prosecution has similar privileges to learn the substance of the defense’s case and the basis 
for the accused person’s not-guilty plea. If the defendant requests disclosure of the 
prosecution’s documents and tangible objects, reports of examinations and tests, and its 
expert witnesses, then the prosecution is correspondingly entitled to disclosure of these 
items from the defense. The prosecution is not, of course, entitled to disclosure of the 
defendant’s work product, nor is it entitled to statements made by prospective witnesses to 
the defendant or his attorneys.  
 
 
The Trial Process 
Under the Sixth Amendment, the accused is entitled to a “speedy and public trial, by an 
impartial jury, in the state and district wherein the crime [was] committed …” In federal 
courts, the Speedy Trial Act mandates that the defendant be indicted within 30 days of arrest 
and tried within 70 days of notice of the charges, excluding delays caused by certain 
enumerated circumstances. If the time limits are not adhered to, the court may dismiss the 
case with or without prejudice, depending on the circumstances. 
 
Jury Selection 
The Constitution requires that “the trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall 
be by Jury …” In the federal system, the defendant may waive the right with the consent of 
the court and prosecution. Petty offenses do not require a trial by jury.  
 
Most criminal cases are tried by a jury of 12 with at least two alternates, but the parties may 
stipulate to a lesser number. The jury is expected to be impartial. For the jury selection 
process, called voir dire, the prospective jurors are brought into the courtroom, and they are 
questioned by the parties or the court to determine their suitability. Jurors are asked about 
their background, employment, general beliefs and principles, knowledge of the actual case 
or cases like it, whether they know any of the parties in the case or their attorneys—virtually 
anything that might elucidate the potential juror’s state of mind is fair game. (Provided, of 
course, the material is relevant to the case; outright character assassination is not part of jury 
selection, though some jurors have felt otherwise, especially in high-publicity trials.) 
 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.517 
There are three ways potential jurors are dismissed. In the first instance, the judge exercises 
discretion and dismisses a juror upon his own initiative. This happens when a juror fails to 
meet the minimum qualifications or is otherwise unable to serve.  
 
The second method dismisses individuals for cause (i.e., a request that a prospective juror be 
dismissed because his predispositions make him unfit to serve as a juror). Each party may 
remove any number of prospective jurors for cause, such as admitted bias or prejudice. 
Challenges for cause are not limited in number. 
 
The third way to dismiss jurors is by exercising a peremptory challenge. A peremptory challenge  
allows a litigant to remove someone from the jury panel without comment or justification. 
Peremptory challenges allow a party to remove a juror for virtually any reason. A party, 
however, cannot use its peremptory challenges in a way that is solely influenced by race, 
ethnicity, or gender. And unlike challenges for cause, peremptory challenges are limited in 
number.  
 
Additionally, the defendant may challenge the entire jury pool — called the venire — if the 
selection procedures systematically exclude certain groups, such as minorities, women, or 
young people.  
 
The jury that hears the case (the petit jury) is not required to reflect a cross-section of the 
community or contain individuals of the same race or age as the defendant. 
 
Opening Statements 
Once the jury is selected and sworn, and after some introductory remarks by the judge, the 
actual trial begins with the opening statements. The opening statements allow each side to 
present their positions to the jury; it lets them outline the evidence they will present and 
what the evidence will prove. In general, the prosecution presents its opening statement first. 
In it, the prosecutor usually explains the charges, outlines the evidence he intends to 
produce, and tells the jury that the prosecution will ask for a verdict of guilty. The 
prosecutor is not permitted to argue the case at this point; that will be done at the end. The 
defense counsel then gives an opening statement, although on occasion it will wait until the 
defense case begins. 
 
Presenting Evidence 
After the opening statements, each side presents its case. That is, each side presents 
witnesses and exhibits to build its case.  
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.518  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In general, the side with the burden of proof presents its case first. Thus, in criminal trial, the 
prosecution presents its case first because it bears the burden of proving every element of 
the offense beyond a reasonable doubt. The defense is under no obligation to produce any 
evidence at any time. 
 
The trial begins by calling witnesses to the stand for direct examination — the initial questioning 
by the side that called the witness. After the direct examination, the opposing party can 
submit these witnesses to cross-examination, referring to questioning of one side’s witness by 
the opposing side, but the opposing party may waive this right and proceed without 
questions. After cross-examination is complete, the party that called the witness can, if it 
chooses, reopen direct (referred to as redirect examination ), which may be followed by re-cross  
questioning by the opposing party. At the end of questioning, each witness is dismissed, 
though the person can be called again later by either side. 
 
Most evidence presented in court comes from di rect testimony. As a general rule, a witness’s 
testimony must be confined to facts within personal knowledge rather than conjecture or 
opinion. A duly qualified expert witness, however, may give an opinion if the court 
determines that it will assist the jury to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in 
issue. Accountants and fraud examiners may be (and often are) called to testify in fraud cases 
as lay witnesses, experts, or both. See the chapter on “Testifying as an Expert Witness” for 
more information. 
 
The Sixth Amendment guarantees a defendant the right to confront and cross-examine 
witnesses. This is a principal reason why hearsay evidence — statements made out of court 
and not based on a witness’ direct knowledge — generally is excluded. Under the Sixth 
Amendment’s confrontation clause, a witness’s out-of-court statements are not admissible at 
trial unless the witness is testifying at trial and is subject to cross-examination. When hearsay 
is used instead of live testimony, the defendant can argue that the hearsay declarant was a 
witness and that the defendant was not afforded the opportunity to confront the witness. If 
a judge unduly restricts a defendant’s right to probe the prosecution’s witnesses’ credibility 
or knowledge of the facts, a conviction may be reversed.  
 
During trial, a party may object to the admission of evidence. The admission of evidence and 
objections thereto are ruled on by the trial judge. The rules of evidence are complex but can 
be summarized as follows: they intend to limit the evidence presented to the jury to only 
matters relevant to the specific charges, and to exclude unreliable or unduly prejudicial 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.519 
evidence. The same piece of evidence, however, may be admissible or inadmissible 
depending on the specific reason for which it is being offered. For example, evidence of 
other similar crimes or wrongful acts by the defendant may not be offered by the 
prosecution merely to show that the defendant is more likely to have committed the crime 
charged. But the same evidence may be introduced to prove intent, if disputed by the 
defendant, to rebut a claim of accident or mistake, or to impeach false testimony by the 
accused. 
 
At the close of the prosecution’s case, the defense usually moves for a judgment of acquittal 
on the ground that the prosecution’s evidence — even if believed—is legally insufficient to 
convict. If the judge grants the motion, the trial ends and the defendant is acquitted. If the 
motion is denied, the defendant may elect to present evidence or may rest. 
 
After the prosecution has presented its case, the defense will make its case. If the defendant 
elects to testify, he is subject to cross-examination, and the prosecution may impeach the 
defendant’s credibility by showing prior convictions. This usually is a deathblow to the 
defense and is the reason many defendants do not testify. The judge, however, may exclude 
such evidence as unduly prejudicial, particularly if the prior crime is remote in time or did 
not involve dishonesty or false statements. 
 
A defendant is entitled to call character witnesses on his behalf who often have no 
knowledge of the charges or facts in issue, but who are prepared to testify to the defendant’s 
character. Such testimony must be given in the form of the witness’s opinion or testimony as 
to the defendant’s general good reputation; testimony as to specific incidents of good 
conduct is not permitted because such would prove too confusing and time-consuming. 
Moreover, because any character evidence is ci rcumstantial at best, it is considered 
permissible to limit the testimony to reputation or opinion. Character witnesses may be 
asked on cross-examination if they have “heard about” alleged wrongful or dishonest acts by 
the accused, including a prior conviction. 
 
Common Legal Issues in Fraud Cases 
Two general types of legal issue — one subst antive, the other procedural — are often 
encountered in fraud examinations. The substantive issue includes the proving of each 
element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt, including the element of intent (if intent, 
in fact, is an element). The procedural issue includes the right to counsel and the manner in 
which fraud examiners employed by law enforcement have conducted arrests, searches and 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.520  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
seizures, and interrogations. Fraud examiners are most likely to encounter legal problems 
over such issues as the condition, organization, and sanctity of their work papers and their 
audit assumptions if the case is based on an accounting hypothesis (net worth method, for 
example). 
 
Often, accounting data used as evidence is challenged as not meeting the hearsay exceptions. 
In general, the issues that arise with such evidence is whether the proffered documentary 
evidence is the “best” evidence, and whether secondary evidence is admissible when the best 
evidence is unavailable.  
 
Similarly, questions about the business records exception to the hearsay rule often arise. That 
is, a party questions whether a record was made in the ordinary course of doing business or 
was made in books of account contemporaneously with a business transaction.  
 
Another issue often encountered is the expertness of a fraud examiner called to provide 
expert testimony (opinion evidence). A party may challenge an expert witness’s credentials, 
and they may call another expert to question the first expert’s opinions. 
 
Legal Defenses 
A defense is an assertion by a defendant in a criminal or civil suit that seeks to explain away 
guilt or civil liability for damages. The more common defenses include:  
• Alibi 
• Consent 
• De minimis  infraction (trivial) 
• Duress 
• Entrapment 
• Ignorance 
• Mistake 
• Infancy 
• Insanity 
• Necessity 
• Protection of property 
• Self-defense 
• Public duty 
• Legal impossibility 
• Protection of others   
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.521 
A defendant might also raise a defense based on statutes of limitations, proper venue, and 
proper jurisdiction. 
 
In criminal fraud cases where intent is an element of the crime, defense attorneys may 
advance a number of “smoke screen” theories to excuse their clients of guilt (i.e., by alleging 
some inhibiting factor to the formulation of intent). For example, while ignorance of the law 
might be no excuse, it can persuade a jury, particularly if the crime is complex and financial 
in nature (e.g., an income tax evasion case where the net worth method of income 
reconstruction has been utilized). Some types of computerized embezzlements fit this 
category, too, as does bank fraud, securities fraud, and price-fixing conspiracies. In short, 
while ignorance of the law might not be an excuse, it sometimes induces pity or sorrow.  
 
Likewise, a defendant might use innocent mistak e, advanced age, sickness, and illiteracy to 
evoke sympathy, and while they may not work as defenses, they may persuade the judge or 
jury to be lenient in sentencing. 
 
Insanity may be used as a defense—and often is—in crimes of violence. But to make an 
insanity defense, the defendant generally must provide notice of the insanity defense before 
trial.  
 
The defenses that cause prosecutors the most headaches are assertions of poor investigative 
work (e.g., improper arrests, searches, seizures, and interrogations, improper handling and 
documentation of evidence, privacy invasions, and libeling, slandering, and defaming the 
defendant during the investigation). In fraud examinations, a defendant might make 
allegations of sloppy auditing and mishandling of work papers. 
 
Also, the increased use of the undercover approach in criminal investigations has led to an 
increase in the use of entrapment defenses. Entrapment occurs when law enforcement 
officers or government agents induce a person to commit a crime that he is not previously 
disposed to commit. To make this defense, the defendant claims that the peace officer or 
undercover agent solicited, encouraged, or incited the criminal act, and without that 
incitement, the defendant claims that he would not have committed the act. 
 
Rebuttal Witnesses 
After the defense rests, the court may permit the prosecution to call rebuttal witnesses and 
permit the defense to put on rebuttal evidence. At the close of all evidence, the defense may 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.522  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
make or renew its motion for a judgment of acquittal. The court may reserve its decision, 
submit the case to the jury, and decide the motion before or after the jury returns with a 
verdict. The motion may be made for the first time and granted even after the jury brings in 
a guilty verdict. 
 
Proposed Jury Instructions  
At the close of the evidence, the jury usually is temporarily discharged and the parties meet 
with the judge to submit proposed jury instructions to the court. Usually, jury instructions 
are read to the jury after closing arguments, and the instructions will include such matters as 
the basic elements of the charges, the definition of reasonable doubt, the prosecution’s 
burden, and, if requested by the defense, the warning that no adverse inference may be 
drawn from the failure of the defendant to testify. Some defense attorneys, however, do not 
request adverse inference instructions because they believe it merely reminds the jury of the 
accused’s failure to explain or defend his conduct. 
 
Each side is entitled to instructions on the law supporting its theory of the case if there is 
any credible evidence in its favor even if there is substantial evidence to the contrary. If a 
request to instruct the jury is denied, a party must object and state the grounds for its 
objection before the jury retires to preserve its right to appeal. This is an extremely 
important point for defense counsel because jury instruction errors provide fertile ground 
for reversals on appeal. 
 
Closing Arguments 
After both sides have presented their evidence, they make their closing arguments. The 
closing arguments provide the jury with a final opportunity to hear each side’s positions. The 
prosecution argues first, the defense follows, and the prosecution has the opportunity for 
final rebuttal.  
 
The remarks in closing arguments are limited to issues pertinent to the case and confined to 
evidence presented during the trial. Improper comments during closing may be objected to 
by the opposing attorney, and the judge may strike them from the record if the objection is 
sustained. In extreme situations, a closing argument deemed improper may result in a 
mistrial; the present proceedings are terminated, and if the plaintiff or prosecutor chooses, a 
new trial date set. 
 
The prosecutor is held to a particularly high standard in closing argument. He may not 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.523 
misstate the evidence, express a personal opinion as to the defendant’s guilt or the credibility 
of witnesses, or otherwise make prejudicial or inflammatory remarks. The prosecutor is 
expected to stick to the facts and to the reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom.  
 
In most cases, the defense’s closing argument focus on attacking the motives and credibility 
of the government’s witnesses and emphasizes the heavy burden of proof the government 
bears. 
 
Instructions to the Jury 
After both parties have presented their closing arguments, the next step is for the judge to 
instruct the jury. In a jury trial, the judge presents a charge, or instructions, to the jury. Again, 
the instructions state the legal issues to be considered in a case, define any unusual terms, 
and tell the jury specifically what it must decide, reviewing the complaint or indictment 
count by count if necessary. A verdict charge form will state the decisive issues in a question-and-answer 
format; the jury uses the questions to focus their deliberation. 
 
Jury Deliberations 
After hearing instructions, the jury retires for its deliberations and selects a foreperson. 
Generally, the verdict must be unanimous. But in some states, such as Oregon and 
Louisiana, a jury can return a conviction with only 10 of 12 votes. If the jury is unable to 
reach a verdict, the judge will declare a mistrial. If there is a mistrial, the defendant can be 
retried if the prosecution elects to do so; double jeopardy does not attach unless the 
defendant is acquitted after the jury is sworn. 
 
Verdict of the Jury 
If the jury reaches a verdict, the foreperson or the bailiff announces the verdict in open 
court. Either party may request that the jury be polled, that is, that each juror be asked 
individually whether he concurred in the verdict. If any juror answers “no,” the jury must 
return for further deliberations or may be discharged. 
 
 
Sentencing 
Following a guilty verdict, the judge must impose a sentence without unnecessary delay. 
Prior to the sentencing hearing, a probation officer will prepare a pre-sentence report that 
will review the defendant’s character, background, associates, prior criminal record, and 
other factors relevant to setting an appropriate sentence. The report will recommend a 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.524  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
particular sentence or range of sentence. The Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure require 
that the pre-sentence report contain a victim impact statement, that is, an assessment of the 
financial, social, psychological, and medical impact upon, and cost to, the victim of the 
crime. This information may be used to set the punishment or to support a possible 
restitution order. The defendant and his counsel are allowed to review all or parts of the 
probation report except the sentencing recommendation. 
 
At the sentencing hearing, the defendant, counsel, and the prosecutor may be heard before a 
sentence is imposed. The court may impose a fine, a term of imprisonment, or both, or place 
the defendant on probation for a specified period and under certain conditions. The court 
may order restitution to the victims in addition to a fine or prison term, or as a condition of 
probation. A federal statute provides that a defendant who has been found guilty of fraud 
may be ordered to give notice to the victims, apparently to protect the public from further 
fraudulent acts by the defendant and to alert the victims to the possibility of civil recoveries. 
 
Sentences of imprisonment for two or more offenses may be ordered to run consecutively 
or concurrently, depending on the nature and severity of the offenses and other factors. In 
federal court, a defendant may be fined up to twice the pecuniary gain realized from the 
crime, or twice the loss sustained by the victim as an alternative to the statutory amounts. 
 
Sentencing Guidelines 
The Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 provided for the development of guidelines for the 
sentencing of individual and organizational offenders. The individual guidelines became 
effective in 1987, and the guidelines for organizations in 1991. In April 2010, the U.S. 
Sentencing Commission modified sentencing guidelines for organizations, especially as they 
relate to compliance programs. The changes will become effective on November 1, 2010, 
barring any Congressional modifications or rejection. 
 
Individual Guidelines 
Under the guidelines, sentencing determinations are made by cross-referencing the base offense 
level assigned to a particular offense with the “defendant’s criminal history category.” There 
are 43 basic offense levels (murder and treason being level 43 offenses) and six criminal 
history categories. Adjustments may be made up or down in each table based on the 
particular facts and circumstances of the case. For example, the base offense level for crimes 
involving fraud or deceit is six, but if the fraud involved a loss of more than $2,000, more 
than minimal planning, or other aggravating circumstances, the base offense level can be 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.525 
substantially increased. The final applicable offense level is then coordinated with the 
criminal history category of the defendant (which is computed on a point basis according to 
the number and type of previous convictions and other factors) to arrive at the final 
sentencing level. The court may depart from the recommended sentence if unique factors 
are present, but any such departure must be supported by specific reasons. 
 
As an example, a defendant with no prior convictions convicted of fraud involving the loss 
of $10,000 would be sentenced to a term of four to 10 months, absent unusual 
circumstances. If the fraud resulted in the loss of $1 million, involved more than minimal 
planning, and was perpetrated by a defendant who had a previous conviction punishable by 
more than a year in prison, the recommended term of imprisonment would be 41 to 51 
months. Under the Sentencing Act, the defendant will serve a substantial amount of the 
sentence he receives (a small reduction is possible for good behavior); the Sentencing Act 
abolished parole in federal cases. 
 
Sentencing of Organizations 
The sentencing guidelines for organizations were designed to reconcile the wide disparity in 
federal sentencing.  
 
Corporations and other organizations may be criminally liable for offenses committed by 
their agents if committed in the scope of the agent’s duty and with the intended purpose of 
benefiting the organization. 
 
Sentencing guidelines for organizations indicate that: 
• The court must, whenever practicable, order the organization to remedy any harm 
caused by the offense. 
• If the organization operated primarily for a criminal purpose, the fine should be set 
sufficiently high to divest the organization of all assets. 
• The fine range for any other organization should be based on the seriousness of the 
offense and the culpability of the organization. Culpability generally will be determined 
by the steps taken by the organization prior to the offense to prevent and detect criminal 
conduct, the extent of involvement in or tolerance of the offense by the organization’s 
personnel, and the organization’s response after an offense had been committed. 
 
SETTING THE AMOUNT OF THE FINE 
When an organization is convicted of a federal offense, the fine it must pay is determined by 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.526  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
calculating the “base fine” and any culpability multiplier. First, the base fine is arrived at by 
determining the greatest of: 
• The amount from the offense level fine table 
• The pecuniary gain to the organization from the offense 
• The pecuniary loss from the offense caused by the organization, to the extent the loss 
was caused intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly 
  
The fine amounts on the base offense level fine table range from $5,000 to $72,500,000. 
Next the court calculates the appropriate multipliers for the base fine level, depending on the 
particular circumstances. Factors that are considered include: 
• Involvement in or tolerance of criminal activity 
• History 
• Whether the organization violated a judicial order or injunction during the offense 
• The existence of an effective program to prevent and detect violations of law 
• Any self-reporting, cooperation, and acceptance of responsibility 
• Obstruction of justice by the organization 
 
The culpability score is then converted to a multiplier that generates the recommended fine 
range. The court will consider a number of additional factors to determine where in the 
range the actual fine will be imposed. An organization must be ordered to serve a period of 
probation if the court finds that: 
• It is necessary to secure payment of restitution, to enforce a remedial order, or to ensure 
completion of community service 
• If a monetary penalty is ordered and has not been paid at the time of sentencing and 
probation is necessary to ensure payment 
• It is necessary to ensure that changes are made to reduce the likelihood of crime 
• It is necessary to accomplish Sentencing Act purposes 
• If the defendant organization sentence does not include a fine 
 
The length of probation may not exceed five years. In addition, the court has discretion to 
order the defendant organization to publicize its conviction and the nature of the offense. 
The court also may order the organization to make periodic reports to the court or the 
probation department and subject itself to unannounced examinations of its books and 
records. Finally, the court may order the organization to develop and submit for court 
approval an effective compliance program. 
 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.527 
EFFECTIVE PROGRAM TO DETECT AND PREVENT VIOLATIONS OF LAW 
Under the guidelines, if a convicted organization has an effective compliance program in 
place at the time of the offense, the sentencing judge will consider the organization’s acts of 
due diligence in trying to prevent the illegality when deciding whether to increase or mitigate 
the sentence. The guidelines define effective compliance program  as one that is reasonably 
designed, implemented, and enforced so that it generally will be effective in preventing and 
detecting criminal conduct.  
 
The most significant change under the modified sentencing guidelines for organizations 
concerns the sentence reduction credit for having an effective compliance program. Before 
the guidelines were modified, organizations were disqualified from receiving a reduction in 
sentencing for maintaining an effective compliance program if a “high-level person” was 
involved with the fraudulent activity. Under the modified guidelines, however, involvement 
of a high-level person is no longer an automatic bar from effective compliance program 
credit, but the amendments impose several conditions to receive a reduction under these 
circumstances, including a direct reporting requirement to the governing authority (board or 
audit committee).  
 
See the chapter on “Fraud Prevention Programs” in the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual for more information about developing a corporate 
compliance policy. 
 
DUE DILIGENCE 
The organization must take at least seven minimum steps to meet the requirement of due 
diligence: 
• Implement policies defining standards and procedures to be followed by the 
organization’s agents and employees 
• Assign specific high-level personnel ultimate responsibility to ensure compliance 
• Use due care not to delegate significant discretionary authority to people whom the 
organization knows or should have known had a propensity to engage in illegal activities 
• Communicate standards and procedures to all agents and employees and require 
participation in training programs 
• Take reasonable steps to achieve compliance, e.g., by the use of monitoring and auditing 
systems, and by having and publicizing a reporting system where employees can refer 
criminal conduct without fear of retribution (hot line or ombudsman program) 
  
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.528  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Consistently enforce standards through appropriate discipline ranging from reprimand to 
dismissal 
• After detection of an offense, the organization must take all reasonable steps to 
appropriately respond to the offense and to prevent further similar offenses, including 
modifying its program and appropriate discipline for the individuals responsible for the 
offense and for those who failed to detect it 
 
 
Appeal 
A convicted individual has the right to appeal the trial court’s decision. The defendant is 
advised of his right to appeal at the sentencing hearing. A notice of appeal must be filed 
within 10 days or, absent a showing of excusable neglect, the right is lost. 
 
Generally, an appeal may be made only for errors of law to which the defendant made timely 
objection at trial or in pre-trial proceedings. The failure to object is said to waive any claims 
of error. The underlying rationale for this rule is that a timely objection permits the trial 
judge to correct any error when it occurs, eliminating the delay and expense of an appeal and 
possible new trial.  
 
Although the general rule provides that a defendant can only appeal errors he objected to 
during trial, very serious errors that are plain, on the record, and affect the defendant’s 
substantial rights may be raised on an appeal even without a timely objection. 
 
An appellate court will reverse a conviction only if it finds error that denied the defendant a 
fair trial. Essentially, an appellate court will not reverse a conviction unless it finds error that 
affected the “substantial rights” of the defendant; “harmless error” that does not affect the 
jury’s decision is tolerated. 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.601 



:


crimin prosecut for fraud
basic principl of crimin law
wherea civil law is that bodi of law that provid remedi for violat of privat right
crimin law deal with offens of a public natur a crimin defend in a feder or state
court is presum innoc he also ha the right to remain silent to confront accus to
be advis by counsel to have a speedi trial in front of peer as well as other protect
and under the us crimin justic system the govern bear the burden of prove the
accus guilti beyond a reason doubt and it is expect to scrupul observ the
right of the defend
also in the crimin system the govern must adher to the princip guarante of
individu right which ar establish by the fourth fifth and sixth amend these
amend ar appli to the state under the due process claus of the fourteenth
amend
the procedur describ in thi chapter primarili refer to feder rule individu state
procedur might differ
fourth amend
to review the fourth amend guarante the right of all citizen to be free from
unreason search and seizur it provid the right of peopl to be
secur in their person ho us paper and effect against unreason search and
seizur shall not be violat and no warrant shall issu but upon probabl caus support
by oath or affirm and particularli describ the place to be search and the person or
thing to be seiz
fifth amend
the fifth amend guarante subject of a crimin investig the right to refus to
answer question or to provid certain person inform that might be incrimin
the text of thi amend state
no person shall be held to answer for a capit or otherwis infam crime unless on a
present of indict of a grand juri except in case aris in the land or naval forc or
in the militia when in actual servic in time of war or public danger nor shall ani person be
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2502 2011 fraud examin manual
subject for the same offens to be twice put in jeopardi of life or limb nor shall he be compel
in ani crimin case to be a wit against himself nor be depriv of life liberti or properti
without due process of law nor shall privat properti be taken for public us without just
compens
sixth amend
the sixth amend afford subject in a crimin investig the right to counsel the
right to confront crossexamin the wit against them and the right to a speedi trial
in all crimin prosecut the accus shall enjoi the right to speedi and public trial by an
imparti juri of the state and district wherein the crime shall have been commit which
district shall have been previous ascertain by law and to be inform of the natur and caus
of the accus to be confront with the wit against him to have compulsori process for
obtain wit in hi favor and to have the assist of counsel for hi defens
fourteenth amend
the due process claus of the fourteenth amend incorpor these feder right
and make them applic to the state the fourteenth amend provid
section 1 all person born or natur in the unit state and subject to the jurisdict
thereof ar citizen of the unit state and of the state wherein thei resid no state shall
make or enforc ani law which shall abridg the privileg or immun of citizen of the
unit state nor shall ani state depriv ani person of life liberti or properti without due
process of law nor deni to ani person within it jurisdict the equal protect of the law
arrest and interrog
the fourth amend guarante the right of all citizen to be free from unreason
search and seizur thi mean that the govern cannot make an arrest unless there is
probabl caus to believ that the suspect commit an offens the probabl caus
requir of the fourth amend is the standard by which a polic offic is
author to make an arrest to obtain an arrest warrant
an arrest occur whenev a reason person would not feel free to leav although the
fourth amend doe not necessit warrant for all arrest thei ar requir under
some circumst
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2503
arrest in privat home
arrest for minor offens that ar not commit in the arrest offic presenc
although a warrant is requir in some circumst the suprem court ha identifi
situat in which warrant ar not requir for exampl a polic offic or privat citizen
mai make an arrest in public without a warrant if a feloni is commit in hi presenc thi
except is design to remov the intol abl burden a uniform warrant requir
would creat for law enforc
in addit the suprem court ha held that a person arrest without a warrant is entitl
to prompt judici determin of probabl caus befor that person can be detain for
ani extend period
not all polic stop ar arrest that requir probabl caus in terri v ohio 392 us 1 1968
the suprem court held that the polic mai briefli detain and question a person for
investig purpos if there ar specif articul reason to do so a valid stop mai
yield evid to effect an arrest if the polic arrest or detain unlawfulli ani statement or
evid obtain as a result will be suppress the suspect mai still be prosecut
howev if other untaint evid of wrongdo exist
interrog of suspect
after the arrest the suspect is place in custodi while in custodi the polic can interrog
the suspect to obtain inform or a confess but there ar limit on such
interrog
the fifth amend provid that a person cannot be compel to give inform that
mai incrimin him in a crimin case but it appli onli to
compel testimoni statement the fifth amend appli onli to testimoni
statement ie ani testimoni or commun evid that might tend to incrimin
the individu either directli or indirectli by lead the govern to incrimin
evid nontestimoni conduct such as compel a suspect to appear in a lineup
give handwrit sampl or submit to blood or alcohol test is not bar by the fifth
amend
individu the fifth amend appli onli to individu busi entiti includ
sole proprietorship and other organ do not have a fifth amend privileg
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2504 2011 fraud examin manual
the fifth amend protect an individu person paper that ar not voluntarili
prepar includ tax return if incrimin document such as appoint book
correspond and other record that the subject prepar without govern
compuls ar not cover by the amend and must be produc
to ensur that everi citizen ha the opportun to exercis thi fundament right the
suprem court rule in the landmark case of miranda v arizona 348 us 436 1966 that
the polic must give the follow warn known as the miranda warn befor
interrog ani suspect held in custodi
that the suspect ha the right to remain silent
that ani statement can be us against him at trial
that the suspect ha a right to the assist of an attornei
that an attornei will be appoint to repres the suspect if he cannot afford to retain
on
miranda warn ar requir onli if the suspect is 1 interrog 2 while held in custodi
3 by public author certain except to the warn requir appli such as when
immedi question is necessari to ensur public safeti the warn gener ar not
requir when a person is be question by privat parti
onc a suspect assert the right to remain silent all question must ceas until counsel is
provid if the defend thereaft decid to make a statement the govern must
show that it wa the result of a voluntari know waiver of hi right
the suprem court howev made major revis to the miranda warn in three
separ case decid in 2010 in on case the court upheld a version of the miranda
warn that told a suspect of hi right to a lawyer befor rather than dure
interrog in a second case the court rule that a suspect request for a lawyer is good
for onli 14 dai after the suspect is releas from custodi final in a third case the court
held that suspect must tell polic that thei ar go to remain silent if thei want to invok
their right to remain silent and stop an interrog
4 florida v powel 130 s ct 1195 feb 23 2010
5 maryland v shatzer 130 s ct 1213 1223 feb 24 2010
6 berghui v thompkin 130 s ct 2250 june 1 2010
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2505
apart from the miranda requir a confess also must be voluntari not coerc by
physic or psycholog mean some induc is permiss such as inform the
suspect that a confess might result in treatment that is more lenient us deceit and
trickeri to extract a confess such as tell the suspect that an accomplic had confess
when in fact he had not is treat differ by differ court some permit such
confess other not no confess will be admit if the circumst under which it
wa obtain render it unreli
for more inform on the applic of the fifth amend to investig
conduct by nongovern personnel pleas refer to the individu right chapter
the charg process
onc the govern ha arrest someon for a crime the person under arrest must be
brought befor a magistr without unnecessari delai thi is known as the initi
appear at thi time the arrest offic must swear to a complaint establish
probabl caus if the arrest wa without a warrant the defend will then be advis of
the natur of the complaint of the right to retain counsel or to appoint counsel and of
the gener circumst under which pretrial releas mai be obtain
for most offens individu that ar in polic custodi can post bail and be releas
pend trial bail is a monei bond to ensur that defend will show up for trial if a
defend fail to show up the bond is forfeit and a warrant for the defend arrest is
issu
the eighth amend howev prohibit excess bail the suprem court ha held
that the eighth amend doe not absolut requir pretrial releas onli that if bail is
appropri it be set no higher than necessari to assur the defend presenc at trial if
under the circumst the presid judg decid that releas would pose a seriou threat
to the safeti of the commun or to a particular individu or that no amount of bail or
particular condit of releas would prevent the defend from flee the judg can
deni bail to keep the defend in custodi
at the initi appear a defend who ha not yet been indict also is inform of hi
right to a preliminari examin thi is a formal adversari hear befor a judg where
the defend mai be repres by counsel and can crossexamin wit the purpos
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2506 2011 fraud examin manual
of the hear is to determin whether there is probabl caus to hold the defend for
further proceed not to establish guilt or innoc becaus of it limit purpos
hearsai and even illeg obtain evid can be admiss motion to suppress must be
made to the trial court
if the magistr determin at the preliminari examin that there is no probabl caus
the complaint will be dismiss and the defend releas but the govern mai
institut a subsequ prosecut for the same offens presum with better evid
preliminari examin often ar us by defens counsel as an opportun to get free
discoveri of the detail of the prosecut case
becaus some defend mai us preliminari examin to obtain inform some
prosecutor prefer to obtain a grand juri indict a grand juri indict is held to
satisfi the probabl caus requir of the fifth amend and preclud the need for
the preliminari examin everi state in the us ha provis for a grand juri but not
all us the option
the grand juri
the grand juri is an investig bodi that is empow to issu subpoena for testimoni
and document to determin whether a violat of the law ha occur the grand juri
consist of 16 to 23 peopl sworn as juror who meet in secret deliber usual in
biweekli or monthli session to hear wit and other evid present by prosecutor
and to vote on indict an indict or true bill must be agre upon by at least 12
juror vote without the prosecutor present
the hear is a nonadversari proceed the accus ha no right to be inform of it
deliber to know the evid against him or to confront the accus the accus
also ha no absolut right to appear and if he doe mai not be accompani by counsel
howev the accus mai period leav the grand juri to consult with the attornei
these sever limit on the right of the accus ar thought by some to be justifi on
the ground that thei ar necessari to investig crimin activ effect and that the
grand juri ha onli the power to accus not to convict the defend the defend if
indict ha full constitut protect at trial the grand juri power ha been sever
critic by mani legal and public interest group abus of it process can do sever
damag to innoc parti particularli public figur to whom an indict alon can be
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2507
devast for thi reason defens counsel in major whitecollar case now often begin it
defens at the grand juri stage to try to convinc prosecutor not to indict rather than
wait as wa tradition the case until an indict is return
the grand juri ha the right to subpoena wit and document refus to appear or
produc mai be punish as contempt with fine or jail term until the subpoena is
compli with or the grand juri term expir a wit or target of the grand juri retain
the fifth amend right against selfincrimin
a grand juri mai be us to obtain evid of possibl violat of the crimin law and
it process mai not be us as a ruse to obtain evid for parallel civil action a common
exampl of such parallel proceed would be investig of possibl antitrust violat
the grand juri mai howev with the appropri court order make evid avail to
the proper govern author for a civil proceed as long as the primari purpos of
it inquiri wa to enforc the crimin law access by privat parti via court order to
grand juri evid for us in privat civil proceed is unlik to be grant becaus of
secreci requir unless substanti need is demonstr
immun
in the cours of a grand juri investig or a crimin trial the prosecut mai appli for a
court order compel testimoni from a wit under a grant of immun becaus
immun testimoni cannot be us against the wit in ani crimin proceed such an
order doe not violat the fifth amend right against selfincrimin
an immun order protect the wit onli from prosecut from past crime about which
testimoni is compel other undiscov crime ar not cover nor is the wit
immun from prosecut for perjuri base on the immun testimoni such testimoni
also mai be us against the wit in a civil proceed
although it is legal permiss to prosecut an immun wit on the basi of other
testimoni and evid as a matter of practic thi is seldom done becaus of polici
consider and the difficulti of demonstr as the law requir that the
subsequ prosecut wa not in ani wai base on the compel testimoni
a decis to immun a wit is sole within the discret of the prosecut if the
applic meet statutori requir the court must grant the order if the immun
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2508 2011 fraud examin manual
wit refus to testifi out of fear of repris or for ani other reason the wit will be
found in contempt and jail until he agre to testifi or the grand juri term expir the
wit can then be summon befor a new grand juri and the process repeat indefinit
or until a judg decid that there is no possibl that further incarcer will induc
cooper
indict and inform
in the feder system all offens punish by death must be charg by indict all
feloni gener crime punish by imprison for a year or more must be
prosecut by indict unless the defend waiv the requir in which case the
prosecut mai proce by the file of an inform an inform is a charg sign
onli by the prosecutor without the involv of the grand juri a misdemeanor mai be
charg by either an indict or inform
arraign
onc the defend is formal charg he is brought befor the court to enter a plea thi
process is call the arraign a defend name in an indict if not alreadi in
custodi mai be arrest on a warrant alternativelymor often in whitecollar crime
case the defend is summon to appear befor a magistr at a state time and place
to be arraign
the arraign must take place in open court and it consist of read the indict or
inform to the defend and call on him to enter a plea the defend mai plead
guilti not guilti or nolo contender if the defend plead guilti the sentenc phase of the
crimin justic process begin a plea of not guilti set in motion the adjud process as
describ below a plea of nolo contender mean the defend doe not contest the charg
without formal admit or deni them a defend mai plead nolo onli with the
consent of the court if accept a nolo plea is the same as a plea of guilti for purpos of
punish but it cannot be us as a formal admiss of guilt thi make it a favor
plea for corpor defend face subsequ civil litig
befor the court will accept a guilti plea it must follow procedur to ensur that the plea is
voluntari and accur that is that there is a factual basi for the plea thi usual mean
that the defend must admit to commit act that satisfi each element of the offens in
some circumst howev a defend mai be allow to enter an alford plea name
after the suprem court case that upheld the practic under which he plead guilti
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2509
although continu to assert innoc such a plea mai be made to obtain the benefit of a
plea agreement and to avoid potenti more dire consequ such as the death penalti if
the defend is convict after trial befor the court accept an alford plea it must
determin that there is strong evid of guilt and that the defend understand the
consequ
prosecutori discret and plea bargain
whether crimin case ar actual brought to trial might depend on prosecutori discret
mean that the decis to prosecut is left to the discret of the appropri
jurisdict author prosecutor exercis thi discret consid issu like the
potenti for deterr the strength of the avail evid and the resourc time
labor monei incur by go to trial in gener the question is about the chanc for
obtain a guilti verdict but it is also about the cost and demand of achiev that verdict
accord to feder statist about 84 percent of the peopl arrest ar prosecut 62
percent of these ar convict and 34 percent ar incarcer case can be handl
through plea bargain or cooper agreement which ar discuss below in exchang for
assist so it is difficult to sai statist how success prosecutori effort have
been howev when public offici take a case to court thei ar gener arm and
readi of those case that do go to trial more than 90 percent end in convict
highlevel crime especi those involv public figur mai requir special approv
from the us depart of justic befor it mai be tri whitecollar crime is sometim
prosecut on the basi of declin guidelin that set out dollar amount below which case
ar not accept a prosecutor offic might decid for exampl that secur fraud of
less than 500000 will not be brought to trial becaus of the immens effort requir to
prosecut mani fraudul act prosecutor have to weigh the cost and exert of go to
court versu the amount avail for recoveri accordingli mani busi ar turn to
civil action to redress fraud as the crimin court becom more and more jam
compani can often speed up the process by file their own civil action although the
perpetr cannot be given jail time as a result of a pure civil action he can be order to
pai back the illgotten fund
prosecut attornei also have the power to settl charg with a plea bargain arrang
avoid the expenditur of time and effort involv at trial about 90 percent of crimin
defend never go to trial opt instead for a deal critic have charg that the plea
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2510 2011 fraud examin manual
privileg is abus by cynic prosecutor and lead to danger offend be releas
quickli and without retribut
the us suprem court disagre a major decis in 1971 declar that the plea
bargain is a highli desir part of the justic system becaus it lead to prompt and
larg final disposit in most case it a void much of the corros impact of enforc
idl suffer by defend who arent releas on bail it reduc the chanc that an
accus person will commit a crime while free on bail and it enhanc whatev mai be the
rehabilit prospect of the guilti by shorten the time between charg and
disposit santabello v new york 404 us 257 261 1971
plea bargain also can be a boon to offend a plea bargain is a negoti between the
parti that settl a crimin case after enter a plea bargain some offend ar releas
from ani prosecut whatsoev and other receiv lesser charg in a studi of white
collar crimin more than 42 percent of cooper defend were charg with just on
violat of the law while onli 30 percent of noncooper defend were so lucki
onc charg ar file against them whitecollar defend ar more like to insist on a
trial than other offend ar on averag consid all feder indict onli about 10
percent of those accus of commit a crime plead not guilti and proce to trial but
more than 18 percent of defend in whitecollar case nearli doubl the averag insist
on their trial peopl accus of secur fraud ar especi like to demand their dai in
court with well over half of these defend plead not guilti
corpor defer prosecut agreement
gener defer prosecut agreement occur when prosecutor file crimin charg
against a compani but then agre not to prosecut the claim as long as the compani
successfulli compli with the deferr agreement term essenti defer prosecut
agreement help compani avoid indict trial and convict while provid
prosecutor with anoth channel for dispos a corpor case that punish malfeas
and effectu chang in a compani cultur
the burden of proof in crimin trial
in crimin case the verdict must be base on assur beyond a reason doubt convers
civil trial requir onli a preponder of the evid to support a decis therefor
crimin trial ar tougher plainli put beyond a reason doubt requir that juror and
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2511
judg hear crimin case to be as sure as thei possibl can that the defend commit
the act as charg in pure philosoph term there might alwai be room for doubt
well did he realli fraud charg can be especi hard to prove becaus the
evid is by it natur overwhelmingli circumstanti ie compos of document and
their interpret versu the testimoni of eyewit but arch skeptic is hardli
practic in make necessari legal decis decid beyond a reason doubt entail
make the most assur judgment possibl base on the evid as present the appeal
process recogn that more than on examin of the charg might be necessari to
ensur an accur fairmind verdict
the prosecut is respons for prove the charg against the defend the
constitut guarante that the accus is presum innoc until the prosecut show
otherwis the presumpt of innoc mean that until the prosecut prove everi element
of a charg beyond a reason doubt the defend must be found not guilti even if he
offer no evid in hi defens
pretrial motion in crimin court
crimin trial like civil proceed often begin with pretrial motion some of these ar
the same regardless of the type of court civil or crimin for exampl both crimin and
civil defend can make motion in limin to exclud certain evid can ask that the charg
or complaint be made more definit and certain or can request a postpon of the trial
date other motion ar particular to the crimin process
some pretrial motion typic us in crimin trial ar discuss below
motion for sever
thi motion occur in case involv multipl defend that ar to tri at the same trial
thi motion ask that the defend be tri separ or at least that thi particular
defend trial be conduct separ
motion to suppress evid
a motion to suppress evid argu that evid that wa improperli obtain is
impertin or unduli prejudici or violat some other right and it ask the court to issu
an order that the evid be exclud from consider in mani case motion to
exclud evid decid at a suppress hear ing where the judg without a juri rule
on the proprieti of the govern conduct ar more import than the trial itself if
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2512 2011 fraud examin manual
the defens is abl to exclud certain piec of evid eg seiz narcot a taint
confess or critic book and record the prosecut might be forc to dismiss the
charg at least temporarili for lack of adequ proof but an unsuccess suppress
motion might be follow by renew interest by the defend in a plea bargain
motion for a chang of venu
thi motion ask the judg to move the trial to anoth court becaus the defend cannot
receiv a fair trial due to public prejudic
motion to dismiss
a motion to dismiss ask a judg to throw out the lawsuit becaus the oppos parti
argument is legal unsound there ar sever ground upon which a defend mai request
that the indict be dismiss the most common reason support motion to dismiss
ar discuss below
violat the defend right to a speedi trial
the indict mai be dismiss for violat of a defend right to a speedi trial when
the trial date exce a certain amount of time after the charg usual 70 dai a relat
basi for the motion is alleg preindict delai when for exampl the prosecut
took an excess long time in bring the indict
select prosecut
when multipl perpetr ar involv in a crimin act a defend mai claim select
prosecut accus the author of target some individu and exoner other
without caus defend also mai alleg vindict prosecut if after be
exoner on on charg a person is charg with anoth more seriou charg the
individu mai claim vindict prosecut
violat the doubl jeopardi claus
the doubl jeopardi claus of the fifth amend which prevent someon from
be tri for the same crime twice mai be us to request a dismiss dismiss motion
also mai claim that the indict is invalid becaus it is base on taint evid
insuffici evid or illeg seiz evid
a motion challeng the suffici of the indict
rule 7 of the feder rule of crimin procedur requir the indict to contain a plain
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2513
concis and definit statement of the essenti fact constitut the charg against the
defend as discuss previous the indict must therefor alleg all of the essenti
element of the crime charg includ the requisit crimin intent where requir by
statut if the indict is defici then the defens can challeng it the defens mai
challeng the indict if the prosecut fail to plead an essenti element of the fraud
offens or plead the necessari fact but even if an indict is dismiss for insuffici
the prosecut is usual free to refil the indict
exampl
if a defend is charg with mail fraud the indict must specif describ the detail of
the fraudul scheme perpetr through the us of the mail and must set forth the fals
represent see unit state v hess 124 us 483 1888 if the indict fail
to do thi the court will dismiss the indict howev the victori might be shortliv even
though the indict is dismiss the prosecut usual is free to refil the indict
duplic
rule 8a of the feder rule of crimin procedur requir that each count of an
indict state on and onli on offens a count that charg two or more offens is
duplicit unfortun what constitut a singl offens often is hard to determin with
whitecollar crimin statut singl and continu offens commit for sever
object or by multipl mean like mail or wire fraud or conspiraci mai be charg in on
count although thei altern could be charg as separ and distinct count
gener howev if the separ violat ar all a part of the same crimin scheme thei
can be alleg in the same count thi is sometim prefer for the defend becaus if
all of the violat ar alleg in on count it look to the juri as if the defend ha
commit on fraud rather than 50 separ fraud
multipl
multipl is the opposit of duplic multipl occur when two or more count charg
essenti the same offens therebi expos the defend to cumul punish for
on offens in essenc multipl occur when a defend is charg twice for the same
offens expos him to doubl the punish
discoveri
discoveri refer to the formal process wherebi the parti to litig collect evid and
learn the detail of the oppos side case both the defend and prosecut have
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2514 2011 fraud examin manual
statutori right to certain pretrial discoveri the defend mai inspect copi of all
relev statement made by him or if a corpor by it employe in the custodi of the
govern a copi of the accus prior crimin record and all document item test
result and other evid the govern intend to introduc at a trial or that ar
necessari to the defens but the defend doe not have an absolut right to see copi of
prior statement made by a wit against him until such wit testifi at trial in mani
case howev particularli fraud prosecut where there is less risk of repris or
tamper with wit the govern mai voluntarili produc these statement befor
trial
discoveri under rule 16
feder rule of crimin procedur 16 identifi the inform that each side must
disclos gener the defens is entitl to inspect and copi statement made by the
defend the defens also mai inspect the defend prior record materi document
tangibl object and examin and test report
if and onli if the defend request discoveri of document and object or of
examin and test report the govern mai seek similar kind of materi from the
defens ani item that must be disclos ar requir to be disclos as soon as
reason possibl the court mai regul the discoveri process by enter protect
order or punish the failur to time provid the proper inform
the rule allow the defens to obtain statement the defend made to third parti as well
as govern agent if the statement were reduc to write therefor ani written
statement made by the defend to the cfe investig the case if the statement were
turn over to law enforc or the govern must be produc but oral statement
made to third parti ie nongovernment agent gener ar protect from discoveri
summari of rule 16 disclosur requir
statement of the defend upon the defend request the govern must disclos
ani relev written or record statement made by the defend thi includ written
record of ani relev statement made by the defend to a govern agent either
befor or after arrest as well as ani record testimoni of the defend made befor a
grand juri which relat to the offens charg
the defend prior record upon the defend request the govern must furnish a
copi of the defend prior crimin record if it exist
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2515
document and tangibl object upon the defend request the govern must allow
the defend to inspect and copi or photograph ani book paper document
photograph tangibl object build or place which 1 ar materi to the
prepar of the defend case 2 ar intend for us as evid at trial by the
govern or 3 were obtain from the defend or belong to the defend
report of examin and test upon the defend request the govern must allow
the defend to inspect and copi ani result or report of physic or mental
examin scientif test or experi that ar materi to the prepar of the
defens or that the govern plan to us as evid at trial
expert wit upon the defend request the govern must provid a written
summari of the testimoni to be given by it expert wit thi summari must
includ the expert opinion the basi of those opinion and the qualif of the
expert
while the state ha a broad duti to disclos evid in crimin case there ar limit to
what it must turn over to the defens the defend doe not have a right to the work
product of the state which includ report memoranda and other intern document
made by the govern attornei in prepar for and prosecut the case in addit the
defend doe not have a right to inspect statement made by govern wit prior
to the time the wit actual testifi
the jenck act 18 usc 3500
the jenck act permit the defend to obtain prior to crossexamin a govern
witnesss prior statement or portion thereof that relat to the subject matter of hi
testimoni on direct examin howev the statut also protect statement from
discoveri until after the direct examin ha been complet the statement that must be
produc includ not onli the written statement sign by the wit but also mai includ
note or memoranda of govern agent or prosecutor which set forth what the wit
said dure interview
exculpatori inform bradi materi
the prosecutor ha an ethic respons not to us evid that is fals and must correct
testimoni that he know is fals in 1963 the suprem court in the case of bradi v
maryland 373 us 83 expand the prosecut duti further under bradi the
prosecut must disclos all evid request by the defend that is materi to guilt or
punish ie evid that would tend to exculp him or reduc hi penalti the
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2516 2011 fraud examin manual
govern is expressli forbidden from conceal evid that would call the charg into
question
disclosur by the defend
prosecut ha similar privileg to learn the substanc of the defens case and the basi
for the accus person notguilti plea if the defend request disclosur of the
prosecut document and tangibl object report of examin and test and it
expert wit then the prosecut is correspondingli entitl to disclosur of these
item from the defens the prosecut is not of cours entitl to disclosur of the
defend work product nor is it entitl to statement made by prospect wit to
the defend or hi attornei
the trial process
under the sixth amend the accus is entitl to a speedi and public trial by an
imparti juri in the state and district wherein the crime wa commit in feder
court the speedi trial act mandat that the defend be indict within 30 dai of arrest
and tri within 70 dai of notic of the charg exclud delai caus by certain
enumer circumst if the time limit ar not adher to the court mai dismiss the
case with or without prejudic depend on the circumst
juri select
the constitut requir that the trial of all crime except in case of impeach shall
be by juri in the feder system the defend mai waiv the right with the consent of
the court and prosecut petti offens do not requir a trial by juri
most crimin case ar tri by a juri of 12 with at least two altern but the parti mai
stipul to a lesser number the juri is expect to be imparti for the juri select
process call voir dire the prospect juror ar brought into the courtroom and thei ar
question by the parti or the court to determin their suitabl juror ar ask about
their background employ gener belief and principl knowledg of the actual case
or case like it whether thei know ani of the parti in the case or their attorneysvirtu
anyth that might elucid the potenti juror state of mind is fair game provid of
cours the materi is relev to the case outright charact assassin is not part of juri
select though some juror have felt otherwis especi in highpubl trial
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2517
there ar three wai potenti juror ar dismiss in the first instanc the judg exercis
discret and dismiss a juror upon hi own initi thi happen when a juror fail to
meet the minimum qualif or is otherwis unabl to serv
the second method dismiss individu for caus ie a request that a prospect juror be
dismiss becaus hi predisposit make him unfit to serv as a juror each parti mai
remov ani number of prospect juror for caus such as admit bia or prejudic
challeng for caus ar not limit in number
the third wai to dismiss juror is by exercis a peremptori challeng a peremptori challeng
allow a litig to remov someon from the juri panel without comment or justif
peremptori challeng allow a parti to remov a juror for virtual ani reason a parti
howev cannot us it peremptori challeng in a wai that is sole influenc by race
ethnic or gender and unlik challeng for caus peremptori challeng ar limit in
number
addition the defend mai challeng the entir juri pool call the venir if the
select procedur systemat exclud certain group such as minor women or
young peopl
the juri that hear the case the petit juri is not requir to reflect a crosssect of the
commun or contain individu of the same race or ag as the defend
open statement
onc the juri is select and sworn and after some introductori remark by the judg the
actual trial begin with the open statement the open statement allow each side to
present their posit to the juri it let them outlin the evid thei will present and
what the evid will prove in gener the prosecut present it open statement first
in it the prosecutor usual explain the charg outlin the evid he intend to
produc and tell the juri that the prosecut will ask for a verdict of guilti the
prosecutor is not permit to argu the case at thi point that will be done at the end the
defens counsel then give an open statement although on occas it will wait until the
defens case begin
present evid
after the open statement each side present it case that is each side present
wit and exhibit to build it case
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2518 2011 fraud examin manual
in gener the side with the burden of proof present it case first thu in crimin trial the
prosecut present it case first becaus it bear the burden of prove everi element of
the offens beyond a reason doubt the defens is under no oblig to produc ani
evid at ani time
the trial begin by call wit to the stand for direct examin the initi question
by the side that call the wit after the direct examin the oppos parti can
submit these wit to crossexamin refer to question of on side wit by
the oppos side but the oppos parti mai waiv thi right and proce without
question after crossexamin is complet the parti that call the wit can if it
choos reopen direct refer to as redirect examin which mai be follow by recross
question by the oppos parti at the end of question each wit is dismiss
though the person can be call again later by either side
most evid present in court come from di rect testimoni as a gener rule a witnesss
testimoni must be confin to fact within person knowledg rather than conjectur or
opinion a duli qualifi expert wit howev mai give an opinion if the court
determin that it will assist the juri to understand the evid or to determin a fact in
issu account and fraud examin mai be and often ar call to testifi in fraud case
as lai wit expert or both see the chapter on testifi as an expert wit for
more inform
the sixth amend guarante a defend the right to confront and crossexamin
wit thi is a princip reason why hearsai evid statement made out of court
and not base on a wit direct knowledg gener is exclud under the sixth
amend confront claus a witnesss outofcourt statement ar not admiss at
trial unless the wit is testifi at trial and is subject to crossexamin when hearsai
is us instead of live testimoni the defend can argu that the hearsai declar wa a
wit and that the defend wa not afford the opportun to confront the wit if
a judg unduli restrict a defend right to probe the prosecut wit credibl
or knowledg of the fact a convict mai be revers
dure trial a parti mai object to the admiss of evid the admiss of evid and
object thereto ar rule on by the trial judg the rule of evid ar complex but can
be summar as follow thei intend to limit the evid present to the juri to onli
matter relev to the specif charg and to exclud unreli or unduli prejudici
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2519
evid the same piec of evid howev mai be admiss or inadmiss
depend on the specif reason for which it is be offer for exampl evid of
other similar crime or wrong act by the defend mai not be offer by the
prosecut mere to show that the defend is more like to have commit the crime
charg but the same evid mai be introduc to prove intent if disput by the
defend to rebut a claim of accid or mistak or to impeach fals testimoni by the
accus
at the close of the prosecut case the defens usual move for a judgment of acquitt
on the ground that the prosecut evid even if believedi legal insuffici to
convict if the judg grant the motion the trial end and the defend is acquit if the
motion is deni the defend mai elect to present evid or mai rest
after the prosecut ha present it case the defens will make it case if the defend
elect to testifi he is subject to crossexamin and the prosecut mai impeach the
defend credibl by show prior convict thi usual is a deathblow to the
defens and is the reason mani defend do not testifi the judg howev mai exclud
such evid as unduli prejudici particularli if the prior crime is remot in time or did
not involv dishonesti or fals statement
a defend is entitl to call charact wit on hi behalf who often have no
knowledg of the charg or fact in issu but who ar prepar to testifi to the defend
charact such testimoni must be given in the form of the witnesss opinion or testimoni as
to the defend gener good reput testimoni as to specif incid of good
conduct is not permit becaus such would prove too confus and timeconsum
moreov becaus ani charact evid is ci rcumstanti at best it is consid
permiss to limit the testimoni to reput or opinion charact wit mai be
ask on crossexamin if thei have heard about alleg wrong or dishonest act by
the accus includ a prior convict
common legal issu in fraud case
two gener type of legal issu on subst antiv the other procedur ar often
encount in fraud examin the substant issu includ the prove of each
element of the offens beyond a reason doubt includ the element of intent if intent
in fact is an element the procedur issu includ the right to counsel and the manner in
which fraud examin emploi by law enforc have conduct arrest search and
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2520 2011 fraud examin manual
seizur and interrog fraud examin ar most like to encount legal problem
over such issu as the condit organ and sanctiti of their work paper and their
audit assumpt if the case is base on an account hypothesi net worth method for
exampl
often account data us as evid is challeng as not meet the hearsai except
in gener the issu that aris with such evid is whether the proffer documentari
evid is the best evid and whether secondari evid is admiss when the best
evid is unavail
similarli question about the busi record except to the hearsai rule often aris that
is a parti question whether a record wa made in the ordinari cours of do busi or
wa made in book of account contemporan with a busi transact
anoth issu often encount is the expert of a fraud examin call to provid
expert testimoni opinion evid a parti mai challeng an expert witnesss credenti
and thei mai call anoth expert to question the first expert opinion
legal defens
a defens is an assert by a defend in a crimin or civil suit that seek to explain awai
guilt or civil liabil for damag the more common defens includ
alibi
consent
de minimi infract trivial
duress
entrap
ignor
mistak
infanc
insan
necess
protect of properti
selfdefens
public duti
legal imposs
protect of other
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2521
a defend might also rais a defens base on statut of limit proper venu and
proper jurisdict
in crimin fraud case where intent is an element of the crime defens attornei mai
advanc a number of smoke screen theori to excus their client of guilt ie by alleg
some inhibit factor to the formul of intent for exampl while ignor of the law
might be no excus it can persuad a juri particularli if the crime is complex and financi
in natur eg an incom tax evas case where the net worth method of incom
reconstruct ha been util some type of computer embezzl fit thi
categori too as doe bank fraud secur fraud and pricefix conspiraci in short
while ignor of the law might not be an excus it sometim induc piti or sorrow
likewis a defend might us innoc mistak e advanc ag sick and illiteraci to
evok sympathi and while thei mai not work as defens thei mai persuad the judg or
juri to be lenient in sentenc
insan mai be us as a defenseand often isin crime of violenc but to make an
insan defens the defend gener must provid notic of the insan defens befor
trial
the defens that caus prosecutor the most headach ar assert of poor investig
work eg improp arrest search seizur and interrog improp handl and
document of evid privaci invas and libel slander and defam the
defend dure the investig in fraud examin a defend might make
alleg of sloppi audit and mishandl of work paper
also the increas us of the undercov approach in crimin investig ha led to an
increas in the us of entrap defens entrap occur when law enforc
offic or govern agent induc a person to commit a crime that he is not previous
dispos to commit to make thi defens the defend claim that the peac offic or
undercov agent solicit encourag or incit the crimin act and without that
incit the defend claim that he would not have commit the act
rebutt wit
after the defens rest the court mai permit the prosecut to call rebutt wit and
permit the defens to put on rebutt evid at the close of all evid the defens mai
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2522 2011 fraud examin manual
make or renew it motion for a judgment of acquitt the court mai reserv it decis
submit the case to the juri and decid the motion befor or after the juri return with a
verdict the motion mai be made for the first time and grant even after the juri bring in
a guilti verdict
propos juri instruct
at the close of the evid the juri usual is temporarili discharg and the parti meet
with the judg to submit propos juri instruct to the court usual juri instruct
ar read to the juri after close argument and the instruct will includ such matter as
the basic element of the charg the definit of reason doubt the prosecut
burden and if request by the defens the warn that no advers infer mai be
drawn from the failur of the defend to testifi some defens attornei howev do not
request advers infer instruct becaus thei believ it mere remind the juri of the
accus failur to explain or defend hi conduct
each side is entitl to instruct on the law support it theori of the case if there is
ani credibl evid in it favor even if there is substanti evid to the contrari if a
request to instruct the juri is deni a parti must object and state the ground for it
object befor the juri retir to preserv it right to appeal thi is an extrem
import point for defens counsel becaus juri instruct error provid fertil ground
for revers on appeal
close argument
after both side have present their evid thei make their close argument the
close argument provid the juri with a final opportun to hear each side posit the
prosecut argu first the defens follow and the prosecut ha the opportun for
final rebutt
the remark in close argument ar limit to issu pertin to the case and confin to
evid present dure the trial improp comment dure close mai be object to
by the oppos attornei and the judg mai strike them from the record if the object is
sustain in extrem situat a close argument deem improp mai result in a
mistrial the present proceed ar termin and if the plaintiff or prosecutor choos a
new trial date set
the prosecutor is held to a particularli high standard in close argument he mai not
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2523
misstat the evid express a person opinion as to the defend guilt or the credibl
of wit or otherwis make prejudici or inflammatori remark the prosecutor is
expect to stick to the fact and to the reason infer that can be drawn therefrom
in most case the defens close argument focu on attack the motiv and credibl
of the govern wit and emphas the heavi burden of proof the govern
bear
instruct to the juri
after both parti have present their close argument the next step is for the judg to
instruct the juri in a juri trial the judg present a charg or instruct to the juri again
the instruct state the legal issu to be consid in a case defin ani unusu term
and tell the juri specif what it must decid review the complaint or indict
count by count if necessari a verdict charg form will state the decis issu in a questionandansw
format the juri us the question to focu their deliber
juri deliber
after hear instruct the juri retir for it deliber and select a foreperson
gener the verdict must be unanim but in some state such as oregon and
louisiana a juri can return a convict with onli 10 of 12 vote if the juri is unabl to
reach a verdict the judg will declar a mistrial if there is a mistrial the defend can be
retri if the prosecut elect to do so doubl jeopardi doe not attach unless the
defend is acquit after the juri is sworn
verdict of the juri
if the juri reach a verdict the foreperson or the bailiff announc the verdict in open
court either parti mai request that the juri be poll that is that each juror be ask
individu whether he concur in the verdict if ani juror answer no the juri must
return for further deliber or mai be discharg
sentenc
follow a guilti verdict the judg must impos a sentenc without unnecessari delai
prior to the sentenc hear a probat offic will prepar a present report that
will review the defend charact background associ prior crimin record and
other factor relev to set an appropri sentenc the report will recommend a
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2524 2011 fraud examin manual
particular sentenc or rang of sentenc the feder rule of crimin procedur requir
that the present report contain a victim impact statement that is an assess of the
financi social psycholog and medic impact upon and cost to the victim of the
crime thi inform mai be us to set the punish or to support a possibl
restitut order the defend and hi counsel ar allow to review all or part of the
probat report except the sentenc recommend
at the sentenc hear the defend counsel and the prosecutor mai be heard befor a
sentenc is impos the court mai impos a fine a term of imprison or both or place
the defend on probat for a specifi period and under certain condit the court
mai order restitut to the victim in addit to a fine or prison term or as a condit of
probat a feder statut provid that a defend who ha been found guilti of fraud
mai be order to give notic to the victim appar to protect the public from further
fraudul act by the defend and to alert the victim to the possibl of civil recoveri
sentenc of imprison for two or more offens mai be order to run consecut
or concurr depend on the natur and sever of the offens and other factor in
feder court a defend mai be fine up to twice the pecuniari gain realiz from the
crime or twice the loss sustain by the victim as an altern to the statutori amount
sentenc guidelin
the sentenc reform act of 1984 provid for the develop of guidelin for the
sentenc of individu and organiz offend the individu guidelin becam
effect in 1987 and the guidelin for organ in 1991 in april 2010 the us
sentenc commiss modifi sentenc guidelin for organ especi as thei
relat to complianc program the chang will becom effect on novemb 1 2010
bar ani congression modif or reject
individu guidelin
under the guidelin sentenc determin ar made by crossreferenc the base offens
level assign to a particular offens with the defend crimin histori categori there
ar 43 basic offens level murder and treason be level 43 offens and six crimin
histori categori adjust mai be made up or down in each tabl base on the
particular fact and circumst of the case for exampl the base offens level for crime
involv fraud or deceit is six but if the fraud involv a loss of more than 2000 more
than minim plan or other aggrav circumst the base offens level can be
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2525
substanti increas the final applic offens level is then coordin with the
crimin histori categori of the defend which is comput on a point basi accord to
the number and type of previou convict and other factor to arriv at the final
sentenc level the court mai depart from the recommend sentenc if uniqu factor
ar present but ani such departur must be support by specif reason
as an exampl a defend with no prior convict convict of fraud involv the loss
of 10000 would be sentenc to a term of four to 10 month absent unusu
circumst if the fraud result in the loss of 1 million involv more than minim
plan and wa perpetr by a defend who had a previou convict punish by
more than a year in prison the recommend term of imprison would be 41 to 51
month under the sentenc act the defend will serv a substanti amount of the
sentenc he receiv a small reduct is possibl for good behavior the sentenc act
abolish parol in feder case
sentenc of organ
the sentenc guidelin for organ were design to reconcil the wide dispar in
feder sentenc
corpor and other organ mai be crimin liabl for offens commit by
their agent if commit in the scope of the agent duti and with the intend purpos of
benefit the organ
sentenc guidelin for organ indic that
the court must whenev practic order the organ to remedi ani harm
caus by the offens
if the organ oper primarili for a crimin purpos the fine should be set
suffici high to divest the organ of all asset
the fine rang for ani other organ should be base on the serious of the
offens and the culpabl of the organ culpabl gener will be determin
by the step taken by the organ prior to the offens to prevent and detect crimin
conduct the extent of involv in or toler of the offens by the organ
personnel and the organ respons after an offens had been commit
set the amount of the fine
when an organ is convict of a feder offens the fine it must pai is determin by
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2526 2011 fraud examin manual
calcul the base fine and ani culpabl multipli first the base fine is arriv at by
determin the greatest of
the amount from the offens level fine tabl
the pecuniari gain to the organ from the offens
the pecuniari loss from the offens caus by the organ to the extent the loss
wa caus intention knowingli or recklessli
the fine amount on the base offens level fine tabl rang from 5000 to 72500000
next the court calcul the appropri multipli for the base fine level depend on the
particular circumst factor that ar consid includ
involv in or toler of crimin activ
histori
whether the organ violat a judici order or injunct dure the offens
the exist of an effect program to prevent and detect violat of law
ani selfreport cooper and accept of respons
obstruct of justic by the organ
the culpabl score is then convert to a multipli that gener the recommend fine
rang the court will consid a number of addit factor to determin where in the
rang the actual fine will be impos an organ must be order to serv a period of
probat if the court find that
it is necessari to secur payment of restitut to enforc a remedi order or to ensur
complet of commun servic
if a monetari penalti is order and ha not been paid at the time of sentenc and
probat is necessari to ensur payment
it is necessari to ensur that chang ar made to reduc the likelihood of crime
it is necessari to accomplish sentenc act purpos
if the defend organ sentenc doe not includ a fine
the length of probat mai not exce five year in addit the court ha discret to
order the defend organ to public it convict and the natur of the offens
the court also mai order the organ to make period report to the court or the
probat depart and subject itself to unannounc examin of it book and
record final the court mai order the organ to develop and submit for court
approv an effect complianc program
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2527
effect program to detect and prevent violat of law
under the guidelin if a convict organ ha an effect complianc program in
place at the time of the offens the sentenc judg will consid the organ act of
due dilig in try to prevent the illeg when decid whether to increas or mitig
the sentenc the guidelin defin effect complianc program as on that is reason
design implement and enforc so that it gener will be effect in prevent and
detect crimin conduct
the most signific chang under the modifi sentenc guidelin for organ
concern the sentenc reduct credit for have an effect complianc program befor
the guidelin were modifi organ were disqualifi from receiv a reduct in
sentenc for maintain an effect complianc program if a highlevel person wa
involv with the fraudul activ under the modifi guidelin howev involv
of a highlevel person is no longer an automat bar from effect complianc program
credit but the amend impos sever condit to receiv a reduct under these
circumst includ a direct report requir to the govern author board or
audit committe
see the chapter on fraud prevent program in the fraud prevent and deterr
section of the fraud examin manual for more inform about develop a corpor
complianc polici
due dilig
the organ must take at least seven minimum step to meet the requir of due
dilig
implement polici defin standard and procedur to be follow by the
organ agent and employe
assign specif highlevel personnel ultim respons to ensur complianc
us due care not to deleg signific discretionari author to peopl whom the
organ know or should have known had a propens to engag in illeg activ
commun standard and procedur to all agent and employe and requir
particip in train program
take reason step to achiev complianc eg by the us of monitor and audit
system and by have and public a report system where employe can refer
crimin conduct without fear of retribut hot line or ombudsman program
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2528 2011 fraud examin manual
consist enforc standard through appropri disciplin rang from reprimand to
dismiss
after detect of an offens the organ must take all reason step to
appropri respond to the offens and to prevent further similar offens includ
modifi it program and appropri disciplin for the individu respons for the
offens and for those who fail to detect it
appeal
a convict individu ha the right to appeal the trial court decis the defend is
advis of hi right to appeal at the sentenc hear a notic of appeal must be file
within 10 dai or absent a show of excus neglect the right is lost
gener an appeal mai be made onli for error of law to which the defend made time
object at trial or in pretrial proceed the failur to object is said to waiv ani claim
of error the underli rational for thi rule is that a time object permit the trial
judg to correct ani error when it occur elimin the delai and expens of an appeal and
possibl new trial
although the gener rule provid that a defend can onli appeal error he object to
dure trial veri seriou error that ar plain on the record and affect the defend
substanti right mai be rais on an appeal even without a time object
an appel court will revers a convict onli if it find error that deni the defend a
fair trial essenti an appel court will not revers a convict unless it find error that
affect the substanti right of the defend harmless error that doe not affect the
juri decis is toler
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2601
