2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Charging Process


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


The Charging Process 
Once the government has arrested someone for a crime, the person under arrest must be 
brought before a magistrate without “unnecessary delay.” This is known as the “initial 
appearance.” At this time, the arresting officer must swear to a complaint, establishing 
probable cause, if the arrest was without a warrant. The defendant will then be advised of 
the nature of the complaint, of the right to retain counsel or to appointed counsel, and of 
the general circumstances under which pre-trial release may be obtained. 
 
For most offenses, individuals that are in police custody can post bail and be released 
pending trial. Bail is a money bond to ensure that defendants will show up for trial. If a 
defendant fails to show up, the bond is forfeited, and a warrant for the defendant’s arrest is 
issued. 
 
The Eighth Amendment, however, prohibits “excessive bail.” The Supreme Court has held 
that the Eighth Amendment does not absolutely require pre-trial release, only that if bail is 
appropriate, it be set no higher than necessary to assure the defendant’s presence at trial. If, 
under the circumstances, the presiding judge decides that release would pose a serious threat 
to the safety of the community or to a particular individual, or that no amount of bail or 
particular conditions of release would prevent the defendant from fleeing, the judge can 
deny bail to keep the defendant in custody. 
 
At the initial appearance, a defendant who has not yet been indicted also is informed of his 
right to a preliminary examination. This is a formal, adversary hearing before a judge where 
the defendant may be represented by counsel and can cross-examine witnesses. The purpose 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.506  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of the hearing is to determine whether there is probable cause to hold the defendant for 
further proceedings, not to establish guilt or innocence. Because of its limited purpose, 
hearsay and even illegally obtained evidence can be admissible. Motions to suppress must be 
made to the trial court. 
 
If the magistrate determines at the preliminary examination that there is no probable cause, 
the complaint will be dismissed and the defendant released. But the government may 
institute a subsequent prosecution for the same offense, presumably with better evidence. 
Preliminary examinations often are used by defense counsel as an opportunity to get free 
“discovery” of the details of the prosecution’s case.  
 
Because some defendants may use preliminary examinations to obtain information, some 
prosecutors prefer to obtain a grand jury indictment. A grand jury indictment is held to 
satisfy the probable cause requirements of the Fifth Amendment and precludes the need for 
the preliminary examination. (Every state in the U.S. has provisions for a grand jury, but not 
all use the option.) 
 
The Grand Jury 
The grand jury is an investigative body that is empowered to issue subpoenas for testimony 
and documents to determine whether a violation of the law has occurred. The grand jury 
consists of 16 to 23 people sworn as jurors who meet in secret deliberation, usually in 
biweekly or monthly sessions, to hear witnesses and other evidence presented by prosecutors 
and to vote on indictments. An indictment, or true bill, must be agreed upon by at least 12 
jurors voting without the prosecutor present. 
 
The hearing is a non-adversarial proceeding. The accused has no right to be informed of its 
deliberations, to know the evidence against him, or to confront the accusers. The accused 
also has no absolute right to appear, and if he does, may not be accompanied by counsel. 
However, the accused may periodically leave the grand jury to consult with the attorney. 
 
These severe limitations on the rights of the accused are thought by some to be justified on 
the grounds that they are necessary to investigate criminal activity effectively and that the 
grand jury has only the power to accuse, not to convict, the defendant. The defendant, if 
indicted, has full constitutional protections at trial. The grand jury’s power has been severely 
criticized by many legal and public interest groups. Abuse of its processes can do severe 
damage to innocent parties, particularly public figures to whom an indictment alone can be 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.507 
devastating. For this reason, defense counsel in major white-collar cases now often begins its 
defense at the grand jury stage to try to convince prosecutors not to indict — rather than 
waiting, as was traditionally the case, until an indictment is returned. 
 
The grand jury has the right to subpoena witnesses and documents. Refusals to appear or 
produce may be punishable as contempt, with fines or jail terms until the subpoena is 
complied with or the grand jury term expires. A witness or target of the grand jury retains 
the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
 
A grand jury may be used to obtain evidence of possible violations of the criminal law, and 
its process may not be used as a ruse to obtain evidence for parallel civil actions. A common 
example of such parallel proceedings would be investigation of possible antitrust violations. 
The grand jury may, however, with the appropriate court order, make evidence available to 
the proper government authorities for a civil proceeding, as long as the primary purpose of 
its inquiry was to enforce the criminal laws. Access by private parties via court orders to 
grand jury evidence for use in private civil proceedings is unlikely to be granted because of 
secrecy requirements, unless substantial need is demonstrated. 
 
Immunity 
In the course of a grand jury investigation or a criminal trial, the prosecution may apply for a 
court order compelling testimony from a witness under a grant of immunity. Because 
immunized testimony cannot be used against the witness in any criminal proceeding, such an 
order does not violate the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
 
An immunity order  protects the witness only from prosecution from past crimes about which 
testimony is compelled; other, undiscovered crimes are not covered, nor is the witness 
immune from prosecution for perjury based on the immunized testimony. Such testimony 
also may be used against the witness in a civil proceeding.  
 
Although it is legally permissible to prosecute an immunized witness on the basis of other 
testimony and evidence, as a matter of practice this is seldom done because of policy 
considerations and the difficulty of demonstrating — as the law requires — that the 
subsequent prosecution was not in any way based on the compelled testimony. 
 
A decision to immunize a witness is solely within the discretion of the prosecution. If the 
application meets statutory requirements, the court must grant the order. If the immunized 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.508  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
witness refuses to testify — out of fear of reprisal or for any other reason — the witness will be 
found in contempt and jailed until he agrees to testify or the grand jury term expires. The 
witness can then be summoned before a new grand jury and the process repeated indefinitely 
or until a judge decides that there is no possibility that further incarceration will induce 
cooperation. 
 
Indictment and Information 
In the federal system, all offenses punishable by death must be charged by indictment; all 
felonies (generally crimes punishable by imprisonment for a year or more) must be 
prosecuted by indictment, unless the defendant waives the requirement, in which case the 
prosecution may proceed by the filing of an “information.” An information is a charge signed 
only by the prosecutor without the involvement of the grand jury. A misdemeanor may be 
charged by either an indictment or information. 
 
Arraignment 
Once the defendant is formally charged, he is brought before the court to enter a plea. This 
process is called the arraignment. A defendant named in an indictment, if not already in 
custody, may be arrested on a warrant. Alternatively—more often in white-collar crime 
cases — the defendant is summoned to appear before a magistrate at a stated time and place 
to be arraigned.  
 
The arraignment must take place in open court, and it consists of reading the indictment or 
information to the defendant and calling on him to enter a plea. The defendant may plead 
guilty, not guilty, or nolo contendere. If the defendant pleads guilty, the sentencing phase of the 
criminal justice process begins. A plea of not guilty sets in motion the adjudicative process as 
described below. A plea of nolo contendere means the defendant does not contest the charges, 
without formally admitting or denying them. A defendant may plead nolo only with the 
consent of the court. If accepted, a nolo plea is the same as a plea of guilty for purposes of 
punishment, but it cannot be used as a formal admission of guilt. This makes it a favored 
plea for corporate defendants facing subsequent civil litigation. 
 
Before the court will accept a guilty plea, it must follow procedures to ensure that the plea is 
voluntary and accurate; that is, that there is a “factual basis” for the plea. This usually means 
that the defendant must admit to committing acts that satisfy each element of the offense. In 
some circumstances, however, a defendant may be allowed to enter an Alford plea (named 
after the Supreme Court case that upheld the practice) under which he pleads guilty, 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.509 
although continuing to assert innocence. Such a plea may be made to obtain the benefits of a 
plea agreement and to avoid potentially more dire consequences, such as the death penalty, if 
the defendant is convicted after trial. Before the court accepts an Alford  plea, it must 
determine that there is strong evidence of guilt and that the defendant understands the 
consequences.  
 
Prosecutorial Discretion and Plea Bargains 
Whether criminal cases are actually brought to trial might depend on prosecutorial discretion, 
meaning that the decision to prosecute is left to the discretion of the appropriate 
jurisdictional authority. Prosecutors exercising this discretion consider issues like the 
potential for deterrence, the strength of the available evidence, and the resources (time, 
labor, money) incurred by going to trial. In general, the question is about the chances for 
obtaining a guilty verdict, but it is also about the cost and demands of achieving that verdict. 
According to federal statistics, about 84 percent of the people arrested are prosecuted; 62 
percent of these are convicted, and 34 percent are incarcerated. Cases can be handled 
through plea bargains or cooperative agreements, which are discussed below, in exchange for 
assistance, so it is difficult to say, statistically, how “successful” prosecutorial efforts have 
been. However, when public officials take a case to court, they are generally armed and 
ready — of those cases that do go to trial, more than 90 percent end in conviction. 
 
High-level crimes, especially those involving public figures, may require special approval 
from the U.S. Department of Justice before it  may be tried. White-collar crime is sometimes 
prosecuted on the basis of declination guidelines that set out dollar amounts below which cases 
are not accepted. A prosecutor’s office might decide, for example, that securities frauds of 
less than $500,000 will not be brought to trial. Because of the immense effort required to 
prosecute many fraudulent acts, prosecutors have to weigh the cost and exertion of going to 
court versus the amount available for recovery. Accordingly, many businesses are turning to 
civil actions to redress fraud. As the criminal courts become more and more jammed, 
companies can often speed up the process by filing their own civil action. Although the 
perpetrator cannot be given jail time as a result of a purely civil action, he can be ordered to 
pay back the ill-gotten funds.  
 
Prosecuting attorneys also have the power to settle charges with a plea bargain arrangement, 
avoiding the expenditures of time and effort involved at trial. About 90 percent of criminal 
defendants never go to trial, opting instead for a deal. Critics have charged that the plea  
 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.510  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
privilege is abused by cynical prosecutors and leads to dangerous offenders being released 
quickly and without retribution. 
  
The U.S. Supreme Court disagrees. A majority decision in 1971 declared that the plea 
bargain is a “highly desirable” part of the justice system because it “leads to prompt and 
largely final disposition” in most cases; it “a voids much of the corrosive impact of enforced 
idleness” suffered by defendants who aren’t released on bail; it reduces the chances that an 
accused person will commit a crime while free on bail; and it “enhances whatever may be the 
rehabilitative prospects” of the guilty by “shortening the time between charge and 
disposition” ( Santabello v.  New York, 404 U.S. 257, 261 (1971)). 
 
Plea bargains also can be a boon to offenders. A plea bargain is a negotiation between the 
parties that settles a criminal case. After entering a plea bargain, some offenders are released 
from any prosecution whatsoever, and others receive lesser charges. In a study of white-
 collar criminals, more than 42 percent of cooperating defendants were charged with just one 
violation of the law, while only 30 percent of noncooperating defendants were so lucky. 
 
Once charges are filed against them, white-collar defendants are more likely to insist on a 
trial than other offenders are. On average, considering all federal indictments, only about 10 
percent of those accused of committing a crime plead not guilty and proceed to trial. But 
more than 18 percent of defendants in white-collar cases (nearly double the average) insist 
on their trial. People accused of securities fraud are especially likely to demand their day in 
court, with well over half of these defendants pleading not guilty. 
 
Corporate Deferred Prosecution Agreements 
Generally, deferred prosecution agreements occur when prosecutors file criminal charges 
against a company, but then agree not to prosecute the claims as long as the company 
successfully complies with the deferral agreement’s terms. Essentially, deferred prosecution 
agreements help companies avoid indictment, trial, and conviction while providing 
prosecutors with another channel for disposing a corporate case that punishes malfeasance 
and effectuates changes in a company’s culture. 
 
The Burden of Proof in Criminal Trials 
In criminal cases, the verdict must be based on assurance beyond a reasonable doubt. Conversely, 
civil trials requires only a “preponderance of the evidence” to support a decision; therefore, 
criminal trials are tougher. Plainly put, beyond a reasonable doubt requires that jurors and 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.511 
judges hearing criminal cases to be as sure as they possibly can that the defendant committed 
the acts as charged. In purely philosophical terms, there might always be room for doubt 
(“Well, did he really…?”). Fraud charges can be especially hard to prove because the 
evidence is by its nature overwhelmingly circumstantial (i.e., composed of documents and 
their interpretation versus the testimony of eyewitnesses). But arch skepticism is hardly 
practical in making necessary legal decisions. Deciding “beyond a reasonable doubt” entails 
making the most assured judgment possible based on the evidence as presented. The appeals 
process recognizes that more than one examination of the charge(s) might be necessary to 
ensure an accurate, fair-minded verdict.  
 
The prosecution is responsible for proving the charges against the defendant. The 
Constitution guarantees that the accused is presumed innocent until the prosecution shows 
otherwise. The presumption of innocence  means that, until the prosecution proves every element 
of a charge beyond a reasonable doubt, the defendant must be found not guilty, even if he 
offers no evidence in his defense. 
 
Pre-trial Motions in Criminal Court 
Criminal trials, like civil proceedings, often begin with pre-trial motions. Some of these are 
the same regardless of the type of court (civil or criminal). For example, both criminal and 
civil defendants can make motions in limine  to exclude certain evidence, can ask that the charge 
or complaint be made more definite and certain, or can request a postponement of the trial 
date. Other motions are particular  to the criminal process.  
 
Some pre-trial motions typically used in criminal trials are discussed below. 
 
Motion for Severance 
This motion occurs in cases involving multiple defendants that are to tried at the same trial. 
This motion asks that the defendants be tried separately, or at least that this particular 
defendant’s trial be conducted separately. 
 
Motion to Suppress Evidence 
A motion to suppress evidence argues that evidence that was improperly obtained, is 
impertinent or unduly prejudicial, or violates some other right, and it asks the court to issue 
an order that the evidence be excluded from consideration. In many cases motions to 
exclude evidence — decided at a suppression hear ing, where the judge (without a jury) rules 
on the propriety of the government’s conduct — are more important than the trial itself. If 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.512  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the defense is able to exclude certain pieces of evidence (e.g., seized narcotics, a tainted 
confession, or critical books and records), the prosecution might be forced to dismiss the 
charges (at least temporarily) for lack of adequate proof. But an unsuccessful suppression 
motion might be followed by renewed interest by the defendant in a plea bargain. 
 
Motion for a Change of Venue 
This motion asks the judge to move the trial to another court because the defendant cannot 
receive a fair trial due to public prejudice.  
 
Motion to Dismiss  
A motion to dismiss asks a judge to throw out the lawsuit because the opposing party’s 
argument is legally unsound. There are several grounds upon which a defendant may request 
that the indictment be dismissed. The most common reasons supporting motions to dismiss 
are discussed below.  
 
VIOLATING THE DEFENDANT’S RIGHT TO A SPEEDY TRIAL 
The indictment may be dismissed for violations of a defendant’s right to a speedy trial, when 
the trial date exceeds a certain amount of time after the charge (usually 70 days). A related 
basis for the motion is alleging pre-indictment delay, when, for example, the prosecution 
took an excessively long time in bringing the indictment.  
 
SELECTIVE PROSECUTION 
When multiple perpetrators are involved in a criminal act, a defendant may claim “selective 
prosecution,” accusing the authorities of targeting some individuals and exonerating others 
without cause. Defendants also may allege “vindictive prosecution.” If, after being 
exonerated on one charge, a person is charged with another, more serious charge, the 
individual may claim vindictive prosecution. 
 
VIOLATING THE DOUBLE JEOPARDY CLAUSE 
The “Double Jeopardy” clause of the Fifth Amendment — which prevents someone from 
being tried for the same crime twice — may be used to request a dismissal. Dismissal motions 
also may claim that the indictment is invalid because it is based on tainted evidence, 
insufficient evidence, or illegally seized evidence. 
 
A MOTION CHALLENGING THE SUFFICIENCY OF THE INDICTMENT 
Rule 7 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure requires the indictment to contain a plain, 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.513 
concise, and definite statement of the essential facts constituting the charge(s) against the 
defendant. As discussed previously, the indictment must, therefore, allege all of the essential 
elements of the crimes charged, including the requisite criminal intent where required by 
statute. If the indictment is deficient, then the defense can challenge it. The defense may 
challenge the indictment if the prosecution failed to plead an essential element of the fraud 
offense or plead the necessary facts. But even if an indictment is dismissed for insufficiency, 
the prosecution is usually free to re-file the indictment.   
 
EXAMPLE  
If a defendant is charged with mail fraud, the indictment must specifically describe the details of 
the fraudulent scheme perpetrated through the use of the mail and must set forth the false 
representations. (See United States v. Hess, 124 U.S. 483 [1888].) If the indictment fails 
to do this, the court will dismiss the indictment. However, the victory might be short-lived. Even 
though the indictment is dismissed, the prosecution usually is free to re-file the indictment.  
 
DUPLICITY 
Rule 8(a) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure requires that each count of an 
indictment state one and only one offense. A count that charges two or more offenses is 
duplicitous. Unfortunately, what constitutes a single offense often is hard to determine with 
white-collar criminal statutes. Single and continuing offenses, committed for several 
objectives or by multiple means, like mail or wire fraud or conspiracy, may be charged in one 
count, although they alternatively could be charged as separate and distinct counts. 
Generally, however, if the separate violations are all a part of the same criminal scheme, they 
can be alleged in the same count. This is sometimes preferable for the defendant because if 
all of the violations are alleged in one count, it looks to the jury as if the defendant has 
committed one fraud rather than 50 separate frauds.  
 
MULTIPLICITY 
Multiplicity is the opposite of duplicity. Multiplicity occurs when two or more counts charge 
essentially the same offense, thereby exposing the defendant to cumulative punishment for 
one offense. In essence, multiplicity occurs when a defendant is charged twice for the same 
offense, exposing him to double the punishment. 
 
Discovery 
Discovery refers to the formal process whereby the parties to litigation collect evidence and 
learn the details of the opposing side’s case. Both the defendant and prosecution have 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.514  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
statutory rights to certain pre-trial discovery. The defendant may inspect copies of all 
relevant statements made by him (or, if a corporation, by its employees) in the custody of the 
government, a copy of the accused’s prior criminal record, and all documents, items, test 
results, and other evidence the government intends to introduce at a trial or that are 
necessary to the defense. But the defendant does not have an absolute right to see copies of 
prior statements made by a witness against him until such witness testifies at trial. In many 
cases, however, particularly fraud prosecutions where there is less risk of reprisal or 
tampering with witnesses, the government may voluntarily produce these statements before 
trial. 
 
Discovery Under Rule 16 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 16 identifies the information that each side must 
disclose. Generally, the defense is entitled to inspect and copy statements made by the 
defendant. The defense also may inspect the defendant’s prior record, material documents, 
tangible objects, and examination and test reports. 
 
If, and only if, the defendant requests discovery of documents and objects, or of 
examination and test reports, the government may seek similar kinds of materials from the 
defense. Any items that must be disclosed are required to be disclosed “as soon as 
reasonably possible.” The court may regulate the discovery process by entering protective 
orders or punishing the failure to timely provide the proper information.  
 
The rule allows the defense to obtain statements the defendant made to third parties, as well 
as government agents, if the statements were reduced to writing. Therefore, any written 
statements made by the defendant to the CFE investigating the case, if the statements were 
turned over to law enforcement or the government, must be produced. But oral statements 
made to third parties (i.e., nongovernmental agents) generally are protected from discovery. 
 
SUMMARY OF RULE 16 DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 
• Statements of the defendant. Upon the defendant’s request, the government must disclose 
any relevant written or recorded statements made by the defendant. This includes written 
records of any relevant statements made by the defendant to a government agent, either 
before or after arrest, as well as any recorded testimony of the defendant made before a 
grand jury, which relates to the offense charged.  
• The defendant’s prior record. Upon the defendant’s request, the government must furnish a 
copy of the defendant’s prior criminal record, if it exists.  
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.515 
• Documents and tangible objects. Upon the defendant’s request, the government must allow 
the defendant to inspect and copy or photograph any books, papers, documents, 
photographs, tangible objects, buildings, or places which (1) are material to the 
preparation of the defendant’s case; (2) are intended for use as evidence at trial by the 
government; or (3) were obtained from the defendant or belong to the defendant. 
• Reports of examinations and tests.  Upon the defendant’s request, the government must allow 
the defendant to inspect and copy any results or reports of physical or mental 
examinations, scientific tests, or experiments that are material to the preparation of the 
defense or that the government plans to use as evidence at trial.  
• Expert witnesses.  Upon the defendant’s request, the government must provide a written 
summary of the testimony to be given by its expert witnesses. This summary must 
include the expert’s opinions, the basis of those opinions, and the qualifications of the 
expert.  
 
While the state has a broad duty to disclose evidence in criminal cases, there are limits to 
what it must turn over to the defense. The defendant does not have a right to the work 
product of the state, which includes reports, memoranda, and other internal documents 
made by the government attorney in preparing for and prosecuting the case. In addition, the 
defendant does not have a right to inspect statements made by government witnesses prior 
to the time the witness actually testifies.  
 
The Jencks Act (18 U.S.C. § 3500) 
The Jencks Act permits the defendant to obtain, prior to cross-examination, a government 
witness’s prior statements (or portions thereof) that relate to the subject matter of his 
testimony on direct examination. However, the statute also protects statements from 
discovery until after the direct examination has been completed. The statements that must be 
produced include not only the written statements signed by the witness, but also may include 
notes or memoranda of government agents or prosecutors which set forth what the witness 
said during interviews. 
 
Exculpatory Information (Brady Material) 
The prosecutor has an ethical responsibility not to use evidence that is false and must correct 
testimony that he knows is false. In 1963, the Supreme Court (in the case of Brady v. 
Maryland, 373 U.S. 83) expanded the prosecution’s duty further. Under Brady, the 
prosecution must disclose all evidence requested by the defendant that is material to guilt or 
punishment (i.e., evidence that would tend to exculpate  him or reduce his penalty). The 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.516  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
government is expressly forbidden from concealing evidence that would call the charges into 
question. 
 
Disclosures by the Defendant 
Prosecution has similar privileges to learn the substance of the defense’s case and the basis 
for the accused person’s not-guilty plea. If the defendant requests disclosure of the 
prosecution’s documents and tangible objects, reports of examinations and tests, and its 
expert witnesses, then the prosecution is correspondingly entitled to disclosure of these 
items from the defense. The prosecution is not, of course, entitled to disclosure of the 
defendant’s work product, nor is it entitled to statements made by prospective witnesses to 
the defendant or his attorneys.  
 
 



:


the charg process
onc the govern ha arrest someon for a crime the person under arrest must be
brought befor a magistr without unnecessari delai thi is known as the initi
appear at thi time the arrest offic must swear to a complaint establish
probabl caus if the arrest wa without a warrant the defend will then be advis of
the natur of the complaint of the right to retain counsel or to appoint counsel and of
the gener circumst under which pretrial releas mai be obtain
for most offens individu that ar in polic custodi can post bail and be releas
pend trial bail is a monei bond to ensur that defend will show up for trial if a
defend fail to show up the bond is forfeit and a warrant for the defend arrest is
issu
the eighth amend howev prohibit excess bail the suprem court ha held
that the eighth amend doe not absolut requir pretrial releas onli that if bail is
appropri it be set no higher than necessari to assur the defend presenc at trial if
under the circumst the presid judg decid that releas would pose a seriou threat
to the safeti of the commun or to a particular individu or that no amount of bail or
particular condit of releas would prevent the defend from flee the judg can
deni bail to keep the defend in custodi
at the initi appear a defend who ha not yet been indict also is inform of hi
right to a preliminari examin thi is a formal adversari hear befor a judg where
the defend mai be repres by counsel and can crossexamin wit the purpos
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2506 2011 fraud examin manual
of the hear is to determin whether there is probabl caus to hold the defend for
further proceed not to establish guilt or innoc becaus of it limit purpos
hearsai and even illeg obtain evid can be admiss motion to suppress must be
made to the trial court
if the magistr determin at the preliminari examin that there is no probabl caus
the complaint will be dismiss and the defend releas but the govern mai
institut a subsequ prosecut for the same offens presum with better evid
preliminari examin often ar us by defens counsel as an opportun to get free
discoveri of the detail of the prosecut case
becaus some defend mai us preliminari examin to obtain inform some
prosecutor prefer to obtain a grand juri indict a grand juri indict is held to
satisfi the probabl caus requir of the fifth amend and preclud the need for
the preliminari examin everi state in the us ha provis for a grand juri but not
all us the option
the grand juri
the grand juri is an investig bodi that is empow to issu subpoena for testimoni
and document to determin whether a violat of the law ha occur the grand juri
consist of 16 to 23 peopl sworn as juror who meet in secret deliber usual in
biweekli or monthli session to hear wit and other evid present by prosecutor
and to vote on indict an indict or true bill must be agre upon by at least 12
juror vote without the prosecutor present
the hear is a nonadversari proceed the accus ha no right to be inform of it
deliber to know the evid against him or to confront the accus the accus
also ha no absolut right to appear and if he doe mai not be accompani by counsel
howev the accus mai period leav the grand juri to consult with the attornei
these sever limit on the right of the accus ar thought by some to be justifi on
the ground that thei ar necessari to investig crimin activ effect and that the
grand juri ha onli the power to accus not to convict the defend the defend if
indict ha full constitut protect at trial the grand juri power ha been sever
critic by mani legal and public interest group abus of it process can do sever
damag to innoc parti particularli public figur to whom an indict alon can be
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2507
devast for thi reason defens counsel in major whitecollar case now often begin it
defens at the grand juri stage to try to convinc prosecutor not to indict rather than
wait as wa tradition the case until an indict is return
the grand juri ha the right to subpoena wit and document refus to appear or
produc mai be punish as contempt with fine or jail term until the subpoena is
compli with or the grand juri term expir a wit or target of the grand juri retain
the fifth amend right against selfincrimin
a grand juri mai be us to obtain evid of possibl violat of the crimin law and
it process mai not be us as a ruse to obtain evid for parallel civil action a common
exampl of such parallel proceed would be investig of possibl antitrust violat
the grand juri mai howev with the appropri court order make evid avail to
the proper govern author for a civil proceed as long as the primari purpos of
it inquiri wa to enforc the crimin law access by privat parti via court order to
grand juri evid for us in privat civil proceed is unlik to be grant becaus of
secreci requir unless substanti need is demonstr
immun
in the cours of a grand juri investig or a crimin trial the prosecut mai appli for a
court order compel testimoni from a wit under a grant of immun becaus
immun testimoni cannot be us against the wit in ani crimin proceed such an
order doe not violat the fifth amend right against selfincrimin
an immun order protect the wit onli from prosecut from past crime about which
testimoni is compel other undiscov crime ar not cover nor is the wit
immun from prosecut for perjuri base on the immun testimoni such testimoni
also mai be us against the wit in a civil proceed
although it is legal permiss to prosecut an immun wit on the basi of other
testimoni and evid as a matter of practic thi is seldom done becaus of polici
consider and the difficulti of demonstr as the law requir that the
subsequ prosecut wa not in ani wai base on the compel testimoni
a decis to immun a wit is sole within the discret of the prosecut if the
applic meet statutori requir the court must grant the order if the immun
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2508 2011 fraud examin manual
wit refus to testifi out of fear of repris or for ani other reason the wit will be
found in contempt and jail until he agre to testifi or the grand juri term expir the
wit can then be summon befor a new grand juri and the process repeat indefinit
or until a judg decid that there is no possibl that further incarcer will induc
cooper
indict and inform
in the feder system all offens punish by death must be charg by indict all
feloni gener crime punish by imprison for a year or more must be
prosecut by indict unless the defend waiv the requir in which case the
prosecut mai proce by the file of an inform an inform is a charg sign
onli by the prosecutor without the involv of the grand juri a misdemeanor mai be
charg by either an indict or inform
arraign
onc the defend is formal charg he is brought befor the court to enter a plea thi
process is call the arraign a defend name in an indict if not alreadi in
custodi mai be arrest on a warrant alternativelymor often in whitecollar crime
case the defend is summon to appear befor a magistr at a state time and place
to be arraign
the arraign must take place in open court and it consist of read the indict or
inform to the defend and call on him to enter a plea the defend mai plead
guilti not guilti or nolo contender if the defend plead guilti the sentenc phase of the
crimin justic process begin a plea of not guilti set in motion the adjud process as
describ below a plea of nolo contender mean the defend doe not contest the charg
without formal admit or deni them a defend mai plead nolo onli with the
consent of the court if accept a nolo plea is the same as a plea of guilti for purpos of
punish but it cannot be us as a formal admiss of guilt thi make it a favor
plea for corpor defend face subsequ civil litig
befor the court will accept a guilti plea it must follow procedur to ensur that the plea is
voluntari and accur that is that there is a factual basi for the plea thi usual mean
that the defend must admit to commit act that satisfi each element of the offens in
some circumst howev a defend mai be allow to enter an alford plea name
after the suprem court case that upheld the practic under which he plead guilti
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2509
although continu to assert innoc such a plea mai be made to obtain the benefit of a
plea agreement and to avoid potenti more dire consequ such as the death penalti if
the defend is convict after trial befor the court accept an alford plea it must
determin that there is strong evid of guilt and that the defend understand the
consequ
prosecutori discret and plea bargain
whether crimin case ar actual brought to trial might depend on prosecutori discret
mean that the decis to prosecut is left to the discret of the appropri
jurisdict author prosecutor exercis thi discret consid issu like the
potenti for deterr the strength of the avail evid and the resourc time
labor monei incur by go to trial in gener the question is about the chanc for
obtain a guilti verdict but it is also about the cost and demand of achiev that verdict
accord to feder statist about 84 percent of the peopl arrest ar prosecut 62
percent of these ar convict and 34 percent ar incarcer case can be handl
through plea bargain or cooper agreement which ar discuss below in exchang for
assist so it is difficult to sai statist how success prosecutori effort have
been howev when public offici take a case to court thei ar gener arm and
readi of those case that do go to trial more than 90 percent end in convict
highlevel crime especi those involv public figur mai requir special approv
from the us depart of justic befor it mai be tri whitecollar crime is sometim
prosecut on the basi of declin guidelin that set out dollar amount below which case
ar not accept a prosecutor offic might decid for exampl that secur fraud of
less than 500000 will not be brought to trial becaus of the immens effort requir to
prosecut mani fraudul act prosecutor have to weigh the cost and exert of go to
court versu the amount avail for recoveri accordingli mani busi ar turn to
civil action to redress fraud as the crimin court becom more and more jam
compani can often speed up the process by file their own civil action although the
perpetr cannot be given jail time as a result of a pure civil action he can be order to
pai back the illgotten fund
prosecut attornei also have the power to settl charg with a plea bargain arrang
avoid the expenditur of time and effort involv at trial about 90 percent of crimin
defend never go to trial opt instead for a deal critic have charg that the plea
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2510 2011 fraud examin manual
privileg is abus by cynic prosecutor and lead to danger offend be releas
quickli and without retribut
the us suprem court disagre a major decis in 1971 declar that the plea
bargain is a highli desir part of the justic system becaus it lead to prompt and
larg final disposit in most case it a void much of the corros impact of enforc
idl suffer by defend who arent releas on bail it reduc the chanc that an
accus person will commit a crime while free on bail and it enhanc whatev mai be the
rehabilit prospect of the guilti by shorten the time between charg and
disposit santabello v new york 404 us 257 261 1971
plea bargain also can be a boon to offend a plea bargain is a negoti between the
parti that settl a crimin case after enter a plea bargain some offend ar releas
from ani prosecut whatsoev and other receiv lesser charg in a studi of white
collar crimin more than 42 percent of cooper defend were charg with just on
violat of the law while onli 30 percent of noncooper defend were so lucki
onc charg ar file against them whitecollar defend ar more like to insist on a
trial than other offend ar on averag consid all feder indict onli about 10
percent of those accus of commit a crime plead not guilti and proce to trial but
more than 18 percent of defend in whitecollar case nearli doubl the averag insist
on their trial peopl accus of secur fraud ar especi like to demand their dai in
court with well over half of these defend plead not guilti
corpor defer prosecut agreement
gener defer prosecut agreement occur when prosecutor file crimin charg
against a compani but then agre not to prosecut the claim as long as the compani
successfulli compli with the deferr agreement term essenti defer prosecut
agreement help compani avoid indict trial and convict while provid
prosecutor with anoth channel for dispos a corpor case that punish malfeas
and effectu chang in a compani cultur
the burden of proof in crimin trial
in crimin case the verdict must be base on assur beyond a reason doubt convers
civil trial requir onli a preponder of the evid to support a decis therefor
crimin trial ar tougher plainli put beyond a reason doubt requir that juror and
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2511
judg hear crimin case to be as sure as thei possibl can that the defend commit
the act as charg in pure philosoph term there might alwai be room for doubt
well did he realli fraud charg can be especi hard to prove becaus the
evid is by it natur overwhelmingli circumstanti ie compos of document and
their interpret versu the testimoni of eyewit but arch skeptic is hardli
practic in make necessari legal decis decid beyond a reason doubt entail
make the most assur judgment possibl base on the evid as present the appeal
process recogn that more than on examin of the charg might be necessari to
ensur an accur fairmind verdict
the prosecut is respons for prove the charg against the defend the
constitut guarante that the accus is presum innoc until the prosecut show
otherwis the presumpt of innoc mean that until the prosecut prove everi element
of a charg beyond a reason doubt the defend must be found not guilti even if he
offer no evid in hi defens
pretrial motion in crimin court
crimin trial like civil proceed often begin with pretrial motion some of these ar
the same regardless of the type of court civil or crimin for exampl both crimin and
civil defend can make motion in limin to exclud certain evid can ask that the charg
or complaint be made more definit and certain or can request a postpon of the trial
date other motion ar particular to the crimin process
some pretrial motion typic us in crimin trial ar discuss below
motion for sever
thi motion occur in case involv multipl defend that ar to tri at the same trial
thi motion ask that the defend be tri separ or at least that thi particular
defend trial be conduct separ
motion to suppress evid
a motion to suppress evid argu that evid that wa improperli obtain is
impertin or unduli prejudici or violat some other right and it ask the court to issu
an order that the evid be exclud from consider in mani case motion to
exclud evid decid at a suppress hear ing where the judg without a juri rule
on the proprieti of the govern conduct ar more import than the trial itself if
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2512 2011 fraud examin manual
the defens is abl to exclud certain piec of evid eg seiz narcot a taint
confess or critic book and record the prosecut might be forc to dismiss the
charg at least temporarili for lack of adequ proof but an unsuccess suppress
motion might be follow by renew interest by the defend in a plea bargain
motion for a chang of venu
thi motion ask the judg to move the trial to anoth court becaus the defend cannot
receiv a fair trial due to public prejudic
motion to dismiss
a motion to dismiss ask a judg to throw out the lawsuit becaus the oppos parti
argument is legal unsound there ar sever ground upon which a defend mai request
that the indict be dismiss the most common reason support motion to dismiss
ar discuss below
violat the defend right to a speedi trial
the indict mai be dismiss for violat of a defend right to a speedi trial when
the trial date exce a certain amount of time after the charg usual 70 dai a relat
basi for the motion is alleg preindict delai when for exampl the prosecut
took an excess long time in bring the indict
select prosecut
when multipl perpetr ar involv in a crimin act a defend mai claim select
prosecut accus the author of target some individu and exoner other
without caus defend also mai alleg vindict prosecut if after be
exoner on on charg a person is charg with anoth more seriou charg the
individu mai claim vindict prosecut
violat the doubl jeopardi claus
the doubl jeopardi claus of the fifth amend which prevent someon from
be tri for the same crime twice mai be us to request a dismiss dismiss motion
also mai claim that the indict is invalid becaus it is base on taint evid
insuffici evid or illeg seiz evid
a motion challeng the suffici of the indict
rule 7 of the feder rule of crimin procedur requir the indict to contain a plain
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2513
concis and definit statement of the essenti fact constitut the charg against the
defend as discuss previous the indict must therefor alleg all of the essenti
element of the crime charg includ the requisit crimin intent where requir by
statut if the indict is defici then the defens can challeng it the defens mai
challeng the indict if the prosecut fail to plead an essenti element of the fraud
offens or plead the necessari fact but even if an indict is dismiss for insuffici
the prosecut is usual free to refil the indict
exampl
if a defend is charg with mail fraud the indict must specif describ the detail of
the fraudul scheme perpetr through the us of the mail and must set forth the fals
represent see unit state v hess 124 us 483 1888 if the indict fail
to do thi the court will dismiss the indict howev the victori might be shortliv even
though the indict is dismiss the prosecut usual is free to refil the indict
duplic
rule 8a of the feder rule of crimin procedur requir that each count of an
indict state on and onli on offens a count that charg two or more offens is
duplicit unfortun what constitut a singl offens often is hard to determin with
whitecollar crimin statut singl and continu offens commit for sever
object or by multipl mean like mail or wire fraud or conspiraci mai be charg in on
count although thei altern could be charg as separ and distinct count
gener howev if the separ violat ar all a part of the same crimin scheme thei
can be alleg in the same count thi is sometim prefer for the defend becaus if
all of the violat ar alleg in on count it look to the juri as if the defend ha
commit on fraud rather than 50 separ fraud
multipl
multipl is the opposit of duplic multipl occur when two or more count charg
essenti the same offens therebi expos the defend to cumul punish for
on offens in essenc multipl occur when a defend is charg twice for the same
offens expos him to doubl the punish
discoveri
discoveri refer to the formal process wherebi the parti to litig collect evid and
learn the detail of the oppos side case both the defend and prosecut have
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2514 2011 fraud examin manual
statutori right to certain pretrial discoveri the defend mai inspect copi of all
relev statement made by him or if a corpor by it employe in the custodi of the
govern a copi of the accus prior crimin record and all document item test
result and other evid the govern intend to introduc at a trial or that ar
necessari to the defens but the defend doe not have an absolut right to see copi of
prior statement made by a wit against him until such wit testifi at trial in mani
case howev particularli fraud prosecut where there is less risk of repris or
tamper with wit the govern mai voluntarili produc these statement befor
trial
discoveri under rule 16
feder rule of crimin procedur 16 identifi the inform that each side must
disclos gener the defens is entitl to inspect and copi statement made by the
defend the defens also mai inspect the defend prior record materi document
tangibl object and examin and test report
if and onli if the defend request discoveri of document and object or of
examin and test report the govern mai seek similar kind of materi from the
defens ani item that must be disclos ar requir to be disclos as soon as
reason possibl the court mai regul the discoveri process by enter protect
order or punish the failur to time provid the proper inform
the rule allow the defens to obtain statement the defend made to third parti as well
as govern agent if the statement were reduc to write therefor ani written
statement made by the defend to the cfe investig the case if the statement were
turn over to law enforc or the govern must be produc but oral statement
made to third parti ie nongovernment agent gener ar protect from discoveri
summari of rule 16 disclosur requir
statement of the defend upon the defend request the govern must disclos
ani relev written or record statement made by the defend thi includ written
record of ani relev statement made by the defend to a govern agent either
befor or after arrest as well as ani record testimoni of the defend made befor a
grand juri which relat to the offens charg
the defend prior record upon the defend request the govern must furnish a
copi of the defend prior crimin record if it exist
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2515
document and tangibl object upon the defend request the govern must allow
the defend to inspect and copi or photograph ani book paper document
photograph tangibl object build or place which 1 ar materi to the
prepar of the defend case 2 ar intend for us as evid at trial by the
govern or 3 were obtain from the defend or belong to the defend
report of examin and test upon the defend request the govern must allow
the defend to inspect and copi ani result or report of physic or mental
examin scientif test or experi that ar materi to the prepar of the
defens or that the govern plan to us as evid at trial
expert wit upon the defend request the govern must provid a written
summari of the testimoni to be given by it expert wit thi summari must
includ the expert opinion the basi of those opinion and the qualif of the
expert
while the state ha a broad duti to disclos evid in crimin case there ar limit to
what it must turn over to the defens the defend doe not have a right to the work
product of the state which includ report memoranda and other intern document
made by the govern attornei in prepar for and prosecut the case in addit the
defend doe not have a right to inspect statement made by govern wit prior
to the time the wit actual testifi
the jenck act 18 usc 3500
the jenck act permit the defend to obtain prior to crossexamin a govern
witnesss prior statement or portion thereof that relat to the subject matter of hi
testimoni on direct examin howev the statut also protect statement from
discoveri until after the direct examin ha been complet the statement that must be
produc includ not onli the written statement sign by the wit but also mai includ
note or memoranda of govern agent or prosecutor which set forth what the wit
said dure interview
exculpatori inform bradi materi
the prosecutor ha an ethic respons not to us evid that is fals and must correct
testimoni that he know is fals in 1963 the suprem court in the case of bradi v
maryland 373 us 83 expand the prosecut duti further under bradi the
prosecut must disclos all evid request by the defend that is materi to guilt or
punish ie evid that would tend to exculp him or reduc hi penalti the
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2516 2011 fraud examin manual
govern is expressli forbidden from conceal evid that would call the charg into
question
disclosur by the defend
prosecut ha similar privileg to learn the substanc of the defens case and the basi
for the accus person notguilti plea if the defend request disclosur of the
prosecut document and tangibl object report of examin and test and it
expert wit then the prosecut is correspondingli entitl to disclosur of these
item from the defens the prosecut is not of cours entitl to disclosur of the
defend work product nor is it entitl to statement made by prospect wit to
the defend or hi attornei
