2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Charging Process/Prosecutorial Discretion and Plea Bargains


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


Prosecutorial Discretion and Plea Bargains 
Whether criminal cases are actually brought to trial might depend on prosecutorial discretion, 
meaning that the decision to prosecute is left to the discretion of the appropriate 
jurisdictional authority. Prosecutors exercising this discretion consider issues like the 
potential for deterrence, the strength of the available evidence, and the resources (time, 
labor, money) incurred by going to trial. In general, the question is about the chances for 
obtaining a guilty verdict, but it is also about the cost and demands of achieving that verdict. 
According to federal statistics, about 84 percent of the people arrested are prosecuted; 62 
percent of these are convicted, and 34 percent are incarcerated. Cases can be handled 
through plea bargains or cooperative agreements, which are discussed below, in exchange for 
assistance, so it is difficult to say, statistically, how “successful” prosecutorial efforts have 
been. However, when public officials take a case to court, they are generally armed and 
ready — of those cases that do go to trial, more than 90 percent end in conviction. 
 
High-level crimes, especially those involving public figures, may require special approval 
from the U.S. Department of Justice before it  may be tried. White-collar crime is sometimes 
prosecuted on the basis of declination guidelines that set out dollar amounts below which cases 
are not accepted. A prosecutor’s office might decide, for example, that securities frauds of 
less than $500,000 will not be brought to trial. Because of the immense effort required to 
prosecute many fraudulent acts, prosecutors have to weigh the cost and exertion of going to 
court versus the amount available for recovery. Accordingly, many businesses are turning to 
civil actions to redress fraud. As the criminal courts become more and more jammed, 
companies can often speed up the process by filing their own civil action. Although the 
perpetrator cannot be given jail time as a result of a purely civil action, he can be ordered to 
pay back the ill-gotten funds.  
 
Prosecuting attorneys also have the power to settle charges with a plea bargain arrangement, 
avoiding the expenditures of time and effort involved at trial. About 90 percent of criminal 
defendants never go to trial, opting instead for a deal. Critics have charged that the plea  
 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.510  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
privilege is abused by cynical prosecutors and leads to dangerous offenders being released 
quickly and without retribution. 
  
The U.S. Supreme Court disagrees. A majority decision in 1971 declared that the plea 
bargain is a “highly desirable” part of the justice system because it “leads to prompt and 
largely final disposition” in most cases; it “a voids much of the corrosive impact of enforced 
idleness” suffered by defendants who aren’t released on bail; it reduces the chances that an 
accused person will commit a crime while free on bail; and it “enhances whatever may be the 
rehabilitative prospects” of the guilty by “shortening the time between charge and 
disposition” ( Santabello v.  New York, 404 U.S. 257, 261 (1971)). 
 
Plea bargains also can be a boon to offenders. A plea bargain is a negotiation between the 
parties that settles a criminal case. After entering a plea bargain, some offenders are released 
from any prosecution whatsoever, and others receive lesser charges. In a study of white-
 collar criminals, more than 42 percent of cooperating defendants were charged with just one 
violation of the law, while only 30 percent of noncooperating defendants were so lucky. 
 
Once charges are filed against them, white-collar defendants are more likely to insist on a 
trial than other offenders are. On average, considering all federal indictments, only about 10 
percent of those accused of committing a crime plead not guilty and proceed to trial. But 
more than 18 percent of defendants in white-collar cases (nearly double the average) insist 
on their trial. People accused of securities fraud are especially likely to demand their day in 
court, with well over half of these defendants pleading not guilty. 
 



:


prosecutori discret and plea bargain
whether crimin case ar actual brought to trial might depend on prosecutori discret
mean that the decis to prosecut is left to the discret of the appropri
jurisdict author prosecutor exercis thi discret consid issu like the
potenti for deterr the strength of the avail evid and the resourc time
labor monei incur by go to trial in gener the question is about the chanc for
obtain a guilti verdict but it is also about the cost and demand of achiev that verdict
accord to feder statist about 84 percent of the peopl arrest ar prosecut 62
percent of these ar convict and 34 percent ar incarcer case can be handl
through plea bargain or cooper agreement which ar discuss below in exchang for
assist so it is difficult to sai statist how success prosecutori effort have
been howev when public offici take a case to court thei ar gener arm and
readi of those case that do go to trial more than 90 percent end in convict
highlevel crime especi those involv public figur mai requir special approv
from the us depart of justic befor it mai be tri whitecollar crime is sometim
prosecut on the basi of declin guidelin that set out dollar amount below which case
ar not accept a prosecutor offic might decid for exampl that secur fraud of
less than 500000 will not be brought to trial becaus of the immens effort requir to
prosecut mani fraudul act prosecutor have to weigh the cost and exert of go to
court versu the amount avail for recoveri accordingli mani busi ar turn to
civil action to redress fraud as the crimin court becom more and more jam
compani can often speed up the process by file their own civil action although the
perpetr cannot be given jail time as a result of a pure civil action he can be order to
pai back the illgotten fund
prosecut attornei also have the power to settl charg with a plea bargain arrang
avoid the expenditur of time and effort involv at trial about 90 percent of crimin
defend never go to trial opt instead for a deal critic have charg that the plea
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2510 2011 fraud examin manual
privileg is abus by cynic prosecutor and lead to danger offend be releas
quickli and without retribut
the us suprem court disagre a major decis in 1971 declar that the plea
bargain is a highli desir part of the justic system becaus it lead to prompt and
larg final disposit in most case it a void much of the corros impact of enforc
idl suffer by defend who arent releas on bail it reduc the chanc that an
accus person will commit a crime while free on bail and it enhanc whatev mai be the
rehabilit prospect of the guilti by shorten the time between charg and
disposit santabello v new york 404 us 257 261 1971
plea bargain also can be a boon to offend a plea bargain is a negoti between the
parti that settl a crimin case after enter a plea bargain some offend ar releas
from ani prosecut whatsoev and other receiv lesser charg in a studi of white
collar crimin more than 42 percent of cooper defend were charg with just on
violat of the law while onli 30 percent of noncooper defend were so lucki
onc charg ar file against them whitecollar defend ar more like to insist on a
trial than other offend ar on averag consid all feder indict onli about 10
percent of those accus of commit a crime plead not guilti and proce to trial but
more than 18 percent of defend in whitecollar case nearli doubl the averag insist
on their trial peopl accus of secur fraud ar especi like to demand their dai in
court with well over half of these defend plead not guilti
