2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Charging Process/The Burden of Proof in Criminal Trials


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


The Burden of Proof in Criminal Trials 
In criminal cases, the verdict must be based on assurance beyond a reasonable doubt. Conversely, 
civil trials requires only a “preponderance of the evidence” to support a decision; therefore, 
criminal trials are tougher. Plainly put, beyond a reasonable doubt requires that jurors and 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.511 
judges hearing criminal cases to be as sure as they possibly can that the defendant committed 
the acts as charged. In purely philosophical terms, there might always be room for doubt 
(“Well, did he really…?”). Fraud charges can be especially hard to prove because the 
evidence is by its nature overwhelmingly circumstantial (i.e., composed of documents and 
their interpretation versus the testimony of eyewitnesses). But arch skepticism is hardly 
practical in making necessary legal decisions. Deciding “beyond a reasonable doubt” entails 
making the most assured judgment possible based on the evidence as presented. The appeals 
process recognizes that more than one examination of the charge(s) might be necessary to 
ensure an accurate, fair-minded verdict.  
 
The prosecution is responsible for proving the charges against the defendant. The 
Constitution guarantees that the accused is presumed innocent until the prosecution shows 
otherwise. The presumption of innocence  means that, until the prosecution proves every element 
of a charge beyond a reasonable doubt, the defendant must be found not guilty, even if he 
offers no evidence in his defense. 
 



:


the burden of proof in crimin trial
in crimin case the verdict must be base on assur beyond a reason doubt convers
civil trial requir onli a preponder of the evid to support a decis therefor
crimin trial ar tougher plainli put beyond a reason doubt requir that juror and
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2511
judg hear crimin case to be as sure as thei possibl can that the defend commit
the act as charg in pure philosoph term there might alwai be room for doubt
well did he realli fraud charg can be especi hard to prove becaus the
evid is by it natur overwhelmingli circumstanti ie compos of document and
their interpret versu the testimoni of eyewit but arch skeptic is hardli
practic in make necessari legal decis decid beyond a reason doubt entail
make the most assur judgment possibl base on the evid as present the appeal
process recogn that more than on examin of the charg might be necessari to
ensur an accur fairmind verdict
the prosecut is respons for prove the charg against the defend the
constitut guarante that the accus is presum innoc until the prosecut show
otherwis the presumpt of innoc mean that until the prosecut prove everi element
of a charg beyond a reason doubt the defend must be found not guilti even if he
offer no evid in hi defens
