2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Charging Process/Motion to Dismiss


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


Motion to Dismiss  
A motion to dismiss asks a judge to throw out the lawsuit because the opposing party’s 
argument is legally unsound. There are several grounds upon which a defendant may request 
that the indictment be dismissed. The most common reasons supporting motions to dismiss 
are discussed below.  
 
VIOLATING THE DEFENDANT’S RIGHT TO A SPEEDY TRIAL 
The indictment may be dismissed for violations of a defendant’s right to a speedy trial, when 
the trial date exceeds a certain amount of time after the charge (usually 70 days). A related 
basis for the motion is alleging pre-indictment delay, when, for example, the prosecution 
took an excessively long time in bringing the indictment.  
 
SELECTIVE PROSECUTION 
When multiple perpetrators are involved in a criminal act, a defendant may claim “selective 
prosecution,” accusing the authorities of targeting some individuals and exonerating others 
without cause. Defendants also may allege “vindictive prosecution.” If, after being 
exonerated on one charge, a person is charged with another, more serious charge, the 
individual may claim vindictive prosecution. 
 
VIOLATING THE DOUBLE JEOPARDY CLAUSE 
The “Double Jeopardy” clause of the Fifth Amendment — which prevents someone from 
being tried for the same crime twice — may be used to request a dismissal. Dismissal motions 
also may claim that the indictment is invalid because it is based on tainted evidence, 
insufficient evidence, or illegally seized evidence. 
 
A MOTION CHALLENGING THE SUFFICIENCY OF THE INDICTMENT 
Rule 7 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure requires the indictment to contain a plain, 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.513 
concise, and definite statement of the essential facts constituting the charge(s) against the 
defendant. As discussed previously, the indictment must, therefore, allege all of the essential 
elements of the crimes charged, including the requisite criminal intent where required by 
statute. If the indictment is deficient, then the defense can challenge it. The defense may 
challenge the indictment if the prosecution failed to plead an essential element of the fraud 
offense or plead the necessary facts. But even if an indictment is dismissed for insufficiency, 
the prosecution is usually free to re-file the indictment.   
 
EXAMPLE  
If a defendant is charged with mail fraud, the indictment must specifically describe the details of 
the fraudulent scheme perpetrated through the use of the mail and must set forth the false 
representations. (See United States v. Hess, 124 U.S. 483 [1888].) If the indictment fails 
to do this, the court will dismiss the indictment. However, the victory might be short-lived. Even 
though the indictment is dismissed, the prosecution usually is free to re-file the indictment.  
 
DUPLICITY 
Rule 8(a) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure requires that each count of an 
indictment state one and only one offense. A count that charges two or more offenses is 
duplicitous. Unfortunately, what constitutes a single offense often is hard to determine with 
white-collar criminal statutes. Single and continuing offenses, committed for several 
objectives or by multiple means, like mail or wire fraud or conspiracy, may be charged in one 
count, although they alternatively could be charged as separate and distinct counts. 
Generally, however, if the separate violations are all a part of the same criminal scheme, they 
can be alleged in the same count. This is sometimes preferable for the defendant because if 
all of the violations are alleged in one count, it looks to the jury as if the defendant has 
committed one fraud rather than 50 separate frauds.  
 
MULTIPLICITY 
Multiplicity is the opposite of duplicity. Multiplicity occurs when two or more counts charge 
essentially the same offense, thereby exposing the defendant to cumulative punishment for 
one offense. In essence, multiplicity occurs when a defendant is charged twice for the same 
offense, exposing him to double the punishment. 
 



:


motion to dismiss
a motion to dismiss ask a judg to throw out the lawsuit becaus the oppos parti
argument is legal unsound there ar sever ground upon which a defend mai request
that the indict be dismiss the most common reason support motion to dismiss
ar discuss below
violat the defend right to a speedi trial
the indict mai be dismiss for violat of a defend right to a speedi trial when
the trial date exce a certain amount of time after the charg usual 70 dai a relat
basi for the motion is alleg preindict delai when for exampl the prosecut
took an excess long time in bring the indict
select prosecut
when multipl perpetr ar involv in a crimin act a defend mai claim select
prosecut accus the author of target some individu and exoner other
without caus defend also mai alleg vindict prosecut if after be
exoner on on charg a person is charg with anoth more seriou charg the
individu mai claim vindict prosecut
violat the doubl jeopardi claus
the doubl jeopardi claus of the fifth amend which prevent someon from
be tri for the same crime twice mai be us to request a dismiss dismiss motion
also mai claim that the indict is invalid becaus it is base on taint evid
insuffici evid or illeg seiz evid
a motion challeng the suffici of the indict
rule 7 of the feder rule of crimin procedur requir the indict to contain a plain
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2513
concis and definit statement of the essenti fact constitut the charg against the
defend as discuss previous the indict must therefor alleg all of the essenti
element of the crime charg includ the requisit crimin intent where requir by
statut if the indict is defici then the defens can challeng it the defens mai
challeng the indict if the prosecut fail to plead an essenti element of the fraud
offens or plead the necessari fact but even if an indict is dismiss for insuffici
the prosecut is usual free to refil the indict
exampl
if a defend is charg with mail fraud the indict must specif describ the detail of
the fraudul scheme perpetr through the us of the mail and must set forth the fals
represent see unit state v hess 124 us 483 1888 if the indict fail
to do thi the court will dismiss the indict howev the victori might be shortliv even
though the indict is dismiss the prosecut usual is free to refil the indict
duplic
rule 8a of the feder rule of crimin procedur requir that each count of an
indict state on and onli on offens a count that charg two or more offens is
duplicit unfortun what constitut a singl offens often is hard to determin with
whitecollar crimin statut singl and continu offens commit for sever
object or by multipl mean like mail or wire fraud or conspiraci mai be charg in on
count although thei altern could be charg as separ and distinct count
gener howev if the separ violat ar all a part of the same crimin scheme thei
can be alleg in the same count thi is sometim prefer for the defend becaus if
all of the violat ar alleg in on count it look to the juri as if the defend ha
commit on fraud rather than 50 separ fraud
multipl
multipl is the opposit of duplic multipl occur when two or more count charg
essenti the same offens therebi expos the defend to cumul punish for
on offens in essenc multipl occur when a defend is charg twice for the same
offens expos him to doubl the punish
