2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Trial Process


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


The Trial Process 
Under the Sixth Amendment, the accused is entitled to a “speedy and public trial, by an 
impartial jury, in the state and district wherein the crime [was] committed …” In federal 
courts, the Speedy Trial Act mandates that the defendant be indicted within 30 days of arrest 
and tried within 70 days of notice of the charges, excluding delays caused by certain 
enumerated circumstances. If the time limits are not adhered to, the court may dismiss the 
case with or without prejudice, depending on the circumstances. 
 
Jury Selection 
The Constitution requires that “the trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall 
be by Jury …” In the federal system, the defendant may waive the right with the consent of 
the court and prosecution. Petty offenses do not require a trial by jury.  
 
Most criminal cases are tried by a jury of 12 with at least two alternates, but the parties may 
stipulate to a lesser number. The jury is expected to be impartial. For the jury selection 
process, called voir dire, the prospective jurors are brought into the courtroom, and they are 
questioned by the parties or the court to determine their suitability. Jurors are asked about 
their background, employment, general beliefs and principles, knowledge of the actual case 
or cases like it, whether they know any of the parties in the case or their attorneys—virtually 
anything that might elucidate the potential juror’s state of mind is fair game. (Provided, of 
course, the material is relevant to the case; outright character assassination is not part of jury 
selection, though some jurors have felt otherwise, especially in high-publicity trials.) 
 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.517 
There are three ways potential jurors are dismissed. In the first instance, the judge exercises 
discretion and dismisses a juror upon his own initiative. This happens when a juror fails to 
meet the minimum qualifications or is otherwise unable to serve.  
 
The second method dismisses individuals for cause (i.e., a request that a prospective juror be 
dismissed because his predispositions make him unfit to serve as a juror). Each party may 
remove any number of prospective jurors for cause, such as admitted bias or prejudice. 
Challenges for cause are not limited in number. 
 
The third way to dismiss jurors is by exercising a peremptory challenge. A peremptory challenge  
allows a litigant to remove someone from the jury panel without comment or justification. 
Peremptory challenges allow a party to remove a juror for virtually any reason. A party, 
however, cannot use its peremptory challenges in a way that is solely influenced by race, 
ethnicity, or gender. And unlike challenges for cause, peremptory challenges are limited in 
number.  
 
Additionally, the defendant may challenge the entire jury pool — called the venire — if the 
selection procedures systematically exclude certain groups, such as minorities, women, or 
young people.  
 
The jury that hears the case (the petit jury) is not required to reflect a cross-section of the 
community or contain individuals of the same race or age as the defendant. 
 
Opening Statements 
Once the jury is selected and sworn, and after some introductory remarks by the judge, the 
actual trial begins with the opening statements. The opening statements allow each side to 
present their positions to the jury; it lets them outline the evidence they will present and 
what the evidence will prove. In general, the prosecution presents its opening statement first. 
In it, the prosecutor usually explains the charges, outlines the evidence he intends to 
produce, and tells the jury that the prosecution will ask for a verdict of guilty. The 
prosecutor is not permitted to argue the case at this point; that will be done at the end. The 
defense counsel then gives an opening statement, although on occasion it will wait until the 
defense case begins. 
 
Presenting Evidence 
After the opening statements, each side presents its case. That is, each side presents 
witnesses and exhibits to build its case.  
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.518  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In general, the side with the burden of proof presents its case first. Thus, in criminal trial, the 
prosecution presents its case first because it bears the burden of proving every element of 
the offense beyond a reasonable doubt. The defense is under no obligation to produce any 
evidence at any time. 
 
The trial begins by calling witnesses to the stand for direct examination — the initial questioning 
by the side that called the witness. After the direct examination, the opposing party can 
submit these witnesses to cross-examination, referring to questioning of one side’s witness by 
the opposing side, but the opposing party may waive this right and proceed without 
questions. After cross-examination is complete, the party that called the witness can, if it 
chooses, reopen direct (referred to as redirect examination ), which may be followed by re-cross  
questioning by the opposing party. At the end of questioning, each witness is dismissed, 
though the person can be called again later by either side. 
 
Most evidence presented in court comes from di rect testimony. As a general rule, a witness’s 
testimony must be confined to facts within personal knowledge rather than conjecture or 
opinion. A duly qualified expert witness, however, may give an opinion if the court 
determines that it will assist the jury to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in 
issue. Accountants and fraud examiners may be (and often are) called to testify in fraud cases 
as lay witnesses, experts, or both. See the chapter on “Testifying as an Expert Witness” for 
more information. 
 
The Sixth Amendment guarantees a defendant the right to confront and cross-examine 
witnesses. This is a principal reason why hearsay evidence — statements made out of court 
and not based on a witness’ direct knowledge — generally is excluded. Under the Sixth 
Amendment’s confrontation clause, a witness’s out-of-court statements are not admissible at 
trial unless the witness is testifying at trial and is subject to cross-examination. When hearsay 
is used instead of live testimony, the defendant can argue that the hearsay declarant was a 
witness and that the defendant was not afforded the opportunity to confront the witness. If 
a judge unduly restricts a defendant’s right to probe the prosecution’s witnesses’ credibility 
or knowledge of the facts, a conviction may be reversed.  
 
During trial, a party may object to the admission of evidence. The admission of evidence and 
objections thereto are ruled on by the trial judge. The rules of evidence are complex but can 
be summarized as follows: they intend to limit the evidence presented to the jury to only 
matters relevant to the specific charges, and to exclude unreliable or unduly prejudicial 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.519 
evidence. The same piece of evidence, however, may be admissible or inadmissible 
depending on the specific reason for which it is being offered. For example, evidence of 
other similar crimes or wrongful acts by the defendant may not be offered by the 
prosecution merely to show that the defendant is more likely to have committed the crime 
charged. But the same evidence may be introduced to prove intent, if disputed by the 
defendant, to rebut a claim of accident or mistake, or to impeach false testimony by the 
accused. 
 
At the close of the prosecution’s case, the defense usually moves for a judgment of acquittal 
on the ground that the prosecution’s evidence — even if believed—is legally insufficient to 
convict. If the judge grants the motion, the trial ends and the defendant is acquitted. If the 
motion is denied, the defendant may elect to present evidence or may rest. 
 
After the prosecution has presented its case, the defense will make its case. If the defendant 
elects to testify, he is subject to cross-examination, and the prosecution may impeach the 
defendant’s credibility by showing prior convictions. This usually is a deathblow to the 
defense and is the reason many defendants do not testify. The judge, however, may exclude 
such evidence as unduly prejudicial, particularly if the prior crime is remote in time or did 
not involve dishonesty or false statements. 
 
A defendant is entitled to call character witnesses on his behalf who often have no 
knowledge of the charges or facts in issue, but who are prepared to testify to the defendant’s 
character. Such testimony must be given in the form of the witness’s opinion or testimony as 
to the defendant’s general good reputation; testimony as to specific incidents of good 
conduct is not permitted because such would prove too confusing and time-consuming. 
Moreover, because any character evidence is ci rcumstantial at best, it is considered 
permissible to limit the testimony to reputation or opinion. Character witnesses may be 
asked on cross-examination if they have “heard about” alleged wrongful or dishonest acts by 
the accused, including a prior conviction. 
 
Common Legal Issues in Fraud Cases 
Two general types of legal issue — one subst antive, the other procedural — are often 
encountered in fraud examinations. The substantive issue includes the proving of each 
element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt, including the element of intent (if intent, 
in fact, is an element). The procedural issue includes the right to counsel and the manner in 
which fraud examiners employed by law enforcement have conducted arrests, searches and 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.520  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
seizures, and interrogations. Fraud examiners are most likely to encounter legal problems 
over such issues as the condition, organization, and sanctity of their work papers and their 
audit assumptions if the case is based on an accounting hypothesis (net worth method, for 
example). 
 
Often, accounting data used as evidence is challenged as not meeting the hearsay exceptions. 
In general, the issues that arise with such evidence is whether the proffered documentary 
evidence is the “best” evidence, and whether secondary evidence is admissible when the best 
evidence is unavailable.  
 
Similarly, questions about the business records exception to the hearsay rule often arise. That 
is, a party questions whether a record was made in the ordinary course of doing business or 
was made in books of account contemporaneously with a business transaction.  
 
Another issue often encountered is the expertness of a fraud examiner called to provide 
expert testimony (opinion evidence). A party may challenge an expert witness’s credentials, 
and they may call another expert to question the first expert’s opinions. 
 
Legal Defenses 
A defense is an assertion by a defendant in a criminal or civil suit that seeks to explain away 
guilt or civil liability for damages. The more common defenses include:  
• Alibi 
• Consent 
• De minimis  infraction (trivial) 
• Duress 
• Entrapment 
• Ignorance 
• Mistake 
• Infancy 
• Insanity 
• Necessity 
• Protection of property 
• Self-defense 
• Public duty 
• Legal impossibility 
• Protection of others   
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.521 
A defendant might also raise a defense based on statutes of limitations, proper venue, and 
proper jurisdiction. 
 
In criminal fraud cases where intent is an element of the crime, defense attorneys may 
advance a number of “smoke screen” theories to excuse their clients of guilt (i.e., by alleging 
some inhibiting factor to the formulation of intent). For example, while ignorance of the law 
might be no excuse, it can persuade a jury, particularly if the crime is complex and financial 
in nature (e.g., an income tax evasion case where the net worth method of income 
reconstruction has been utilized). Some types of computerized embezzlements fit this 
category, too, as does bank fraud, securities fraud, and price-fixing conspiracies. In short, 
while ignorance of the law might not be an excuse, it sometimes induces pity or sorrow.  
 
Likewise, a defendant might use innocent mistak e, advanced age, sickness, and illiteracy to 
evoke sympathy, and while they may not work as defenses, they may persuade the judge or 
jury to be lenient in sentencing. 
 
Insanity may be used as a defense—and often is—in crimes of violence. But to make an 
insanity defense, the defendant generally must provide notice of the insanity defense before 
trial.  
 
The defenses that cause prosecutors the most headaches are assertions of poor investigative 
work (e.g., improper arrests, searches, seizures, and interrogations, improper handling and 
documentation of evidence, privacy invasions, and libeling, slandering, and defaming the 
defendant during the investigation). In fraud examinations, a defendant might make 
allegations of sloppy auditing and mishandling of work papers. 
 
Also, the increased use of the undercover approach in criminal investigations has led to an 
increase in the use of entrapment defenses. Entrapment occurs when law enforcement 
officers or government agents induce a person to commit a crime that he is not previously 
disposed to commit. To make this defense, the defendant claims that the peace officer or 
undercover agent solicited, encouraged, or incited the criminal act, and without that 
incitement, the defendant claims that he would not have committed the act. 
 
Rebuttal Witnesses 
After the defense rests, the court may permit the prosecution to call rebuttal witnesses and 
permit the defense to put on rebuttal evidence. At the close of all evidence, the defense may 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.522  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
make or renew its motion for a judgment of acquittal. The court may reserve its decision, 
submit the case to the jury, and decide the motion before or after the jury returns with a 
verdict. The motion may be made for the first time and granted even after the jury brings in 
a guilty verdict. 
 
Proposed Jury Instructions  
At the close of the evidence, the jury usually is temporarily discharged and the parties meet 
with the judge to submit proposed jury instructions to the court. Usually, jury instructions 
are read to the jury after closing arguments, and the instructions will include such matters as 
the basic elements of the charges, the definition of reasonable doubt, the prosecution’s 
burden, and, if requested by the defense, the warning that no adverse inference may be 
drawn from the failure of the defendant to testify. Some defense attorneys, however, do not 
request adverse inference instructions because they believe it merely reminds the jury of the 
accused’s failure to explain or defend his conduct. 
 
Each side is entitled to instructions on the law supporting its theory of the case if there is 
any credible evidence in its favor even if there is substantial evidence to the contrary. If a 
request to instruct the jury is denied, a party must object and state the grounds for its 
objection before the jury retires to preserve its right to appeal. This is an extremely 
important point for defense counsel because jury instruction errors provide fertile ground 
for reversals on appeal. 
 
Closing Arguments 
After both sides have presented their evidence, they make their closing arguments. The 
closing arguments provide the jury with a final opportunity to hear each side’s positions. The 
prosecution argues first, the defense follows, and the prosecution has the opportunity for 
final rebuttal.  
 
The remarks in closing arguments are limited to issues pertinent to the case and confined to 
evidence presented during the trial. Improper comments during closing may be objected to 
by the opposing attorney, and the judge may strike them from the record if the objection is 
sustained. In extreme situations, a closing argument deemed improper may result in a 
mistrial; the present proceedings are terminated, and if the plaintiff or prosecutor chooses, a 
new trial date set. 
 
The prosecutor is held to a particularly high standard in closing argument. He may not 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.523 
misstate the evidence, express a personal opinion as to the defendant’s guilt or the credibility 
of witnesses, or otherwise make prejudicial or inflammatory remarks. The prosecutor is 
expected to stick to the facts and to the reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom.  
 
In most cases, the defense’s closing argument focus on attacking the motives and credibility 
of the government’s witnesses and emphasizes the heavy burden of proof the government 
bears. 
 
Instructions to the Jury 
After both parties have presented their closing arguments, the next step is for the judge to 
instruct the jury. In a jury trial, the judge presents a charge, or instructions, to the jury. Again, 
the instructions state the legal issues to be considered in a case, define any unusual terms, 
and tell the jury specifically what it must decide, reviewing the complaint or indictment 
count by count if necessary. A verdict charge form will state the decisive issues in a question-and-answer 
format; the jury uses the questions to focus their deliberation. 
 
Jury Deliberations 
After hearing instructions, the jury retires for its deliberations and selects a foreperson. 
Generally, the verdict must be unanimous. But in some states, such as Oregon and 
Louisiana, a jury can return a conviction with only 10 of 12 votes. If the jury is unable to 
reach a verdict, the judge will declare a mistrial. If there is a mistrial, the defendant can be 
retried if the prosecution elects to do so; double jeopardy does not attach unless the 
defendant is acquitted after the jury is sworn. 
 
Verdict of the Jury 
If the jury reaches a verdict, the foreperson or the bailiff announces the verdict in open 
court. Either party may request that the jury be polled, that is, that each juror be asked 
individually whether he concurred in the verdict. If any juror answers “no,” the jury must 
return for further deliberations or may be discharged. 
 
 



:


the trial process
under the sixth amend the accus is entitl to a speedi and public trial by an
imparti juri in the state and district wherein the crime wa commit in feder
court the speedi trial act mandat that the defend be indict within 30 dai of arrest
and tri within 70 dai of notic of the charg exclud delai caus by certain
enumer circumst if the time limit ar not adher to the court mai dismiss the
case with or without prejudic depend on the circumst
juri select
the constitut requir that the trial of all crime except in case of impeach shall
be by juri in the feder system the defend mai waiv the right with the consent of
the court and prosecut petti offens do not requir a trial by juri
most crimin case ar tri by a juri of 12 with at least two altern but the parti mai
stipul to a lesser number the juri is expect to be imparti for the juri select
process call voir dire the prospect juror ar brought into the courtroom and thei ar
question by the parti or the court to determin their suitabl juror ar ask about
their background employ gener belief and principl knowledg of the actual case
or case like it whether thei know ani of the parti in the case or their attorneysvirtu
anyth that might elucid the potenti juror state of mind is fair game provid of
cours the materi is relev to the case outright charact assassin is not part of juri
select though some juror have felt otherwis especi in highpubl trial
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2517
there ar three wai potenti juror ar dismiss in the first instanc the judg exercis
discret and dismiss a juror upon hi own initi thi happen when a juror fail to
meet the minimum qualif or is otherwis unabl to serv
the second method dismiss individu for caus ie a request that a prospect juror be
dismiss becaus hi predisposit make him unfit to serv as a juror each parti mai
remov ani number of prospect juror for caus such as admit bia or prejudic
challeng for caus ar not limit in number
the third wai to dismiss juror is by exercis a peremptori challeng a peremptori challeng
allow a litig to remov someon from the juri panel without comment or justif
peremptori challeng allow a parti to remov a juror for virtual ani reason a parti
howev cannot us it peremptori challeng in a wai that is sole influenc by race
ethnic or gender and unlik challeng for caus peremptori challeng ar limit in
number
addition the defend mai challeng the entir juri pool call the venir if the
select procedur systemat exclud certain group such as minor women or
young peopl
the juri that hear the case the petit juri is not requir to reflect a crosssect of the
commun or contain individu of the same race or ag as the defend
open statement
onc the juri is select and sworn and after some introductori remark by the judg the
actual trial begin with the open statement the open statement allow each side to
present their posit to the juri it let them outlin the evid thei will present and
what the evid will prove in gener the prosecut present it open statement first
in it the prosecutor usual explain the charg outlin the evid he intend to
produc and tell the juri that the prosecut will ask for a verdict of guilti the
prosecutor is not permit to argu the case at thi point that will be done at the end the
defens counsel then give an open statement although on occas it will wait until the
defens case begin
present evid
after the open statement each side present it case that is each side present
wit and exhibit to build it case
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2518 2011 fraud examin manual
in gener the side with the burden of proof present it case first thu in crimin trial the
prosecut present it case first becaus it bear the burden of prove everi element of
the offens beyond a reason doubt the defens is under no oblig to produc ani
evid at ani time
the trial begin by call wit to the stand for direct examin the initi question
by the side that call the wit after the direct examin the oppos parti can
submit these wit to crossexamin refer to question of on side wit by
the oppos side but the oppos parti mai waiv thi right and proce without
question after crossexamin is complet the parti that call the wit can if it
choos reopen direct refer to as redirect examin which mai be follow by recross
question by the oppos parti at the end of question each wit is dismiss
though the person can be call again later by either side
most evid present in court come from di rect testimoni as a gener rule a witnesss
testimoni must be confin to fact within person knowledg rather than conjectur or
opinion a duli qualifi expert wit howev mai give an opinion if the court
determin that it will assist the juri to understand the evid or to determin a fact in
issu account and fraud examin mai be and often ar call to testifi in fraud case
as lai wit expert or both see the chapter on testifi as an expert wit for
more inform
the sixth amend guarante a defend the right to confront and crossexamin
wit thi is a princip reason why hearsai evid statement made out of court
and not base on a wit direct knowledg gener is exclud under the sixth
amend confront claus a witnesss outofcourt statement ar not admiss at
trial unless the wit is testifi at trial and is subject to crossexamin when hearsai
is us instead of live testimoni the defend can argu that the hearsai declar wa a
wit and that the defend wa not afford the opportun to confront the wit if
a judg unduli restrict a defend right to probe the prosecut wit credibl
or knowledg of the fact a convict mai be revers
dure trial a parti mai object to the admiss of evid the admiss of evid and
object thereto ar rule on by the trial judg the rule of evid ar complex but can
be summar as follow thei intend to limit the evid present to the juri to onli
matter relev to the specif charg and to exclud unreli or unduli prejudici
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2519
evid the same piec of evid howev mai be admiss or inadmiss
depend on the specif reason for which it is be offer for exampl evid of
other similar crime or wrong act by the defend mai not be offer by the
prosecut mere to show that the defend is more like to have commit the crime
charg but the same evid mai be introduc to prove intent if disput by the
defend to rebut a claim of accid or mistak or to impeach fals testimoni by the
accus
at the close of the prosecut case the defens usual move for a judgment of acquitt
on the ground that the prosecut evid even if believedi legal insuffici to
convict if the judg grant the motion the trial end and the defend is acquit if the
motion is deni the defend mai elect to present evid or mai rest
after the prosecut ha present it case the defens will make it case if the defend
elect to testifi he is subject to crossexamin and the prosecut mai impeach the
defend credibl by show prior convict thi usual is a deathblow to the
defens and is the reason mani defend do not testifi the judg howev mai exclud
such evid as unduli prejudici particularli if the prior crime is remot in time or did
not involv dishonesti or fals statement
a defend is entitl to call charact wit on hi behalf who often have no
knowledg of the charg or fact in issu but who ar prepar to testifi to the defend
charact such testimoni must be given in the form of the witnesss opinion or testimoni as
to the defend gener good reput testimoni as to specif incid of good
conduct is not permit becaus such would prove too confus and timeconsum
moreov becaus ani charact evid is ci rcumstanti at best it is consid
permiss to limit the testimoni to reput or opinion charact wit mai be
ask on crossexamin if thei have heard about alleg wrong or dishonest act by
the accus includ a prior convict
common legal issu in fraud case
two gener type of legal issu on subst antiv the other procedur ar often
encount in fraud examin the substant issu includ the prove of each
element of the offens beyond a reason doubt includ the element of intent if intent
in fact is an element the procedur issu includ the right to counsel and the manner in
which fraud examin emploi by law enforc have conduct arrest search and
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2520 2011 fraud examin manual
seizur and interrog fraud examin ar most like to encount legal problem
over such issu as the condit organ and sanctiti of their work paper and their
audit assumpt if the case is base on an account hypothesi net worth method for
exampl
often account data us as evid is challeng as not meet the hearsai except
in gener the issu that aris with such evid is whether the proffer documentari
evid is the best evid and whether secondari evid is admiss when the best
evid is unavail
similarli question about the busi record except to the hearsai rule often aris that
is a parti question whether a record wa made in the ordinari cours of do busi or
wa made in book of account contemporan with a busi transact
anoth issu often encount is the expert of a fraud examin call to provid
expert testimoni opinion evid a parti mai challeng an expert witnesss credenti
and thei mai call anoth expert to question the first expert opinion
legal defens
a defens is an assert by a defend in a crimin or civil suit that seek to explain awai
guilt or civil liabil for damag the more common defens includ
alibi
consent
de minimi infract trivial
duress
entrap
ignor
mistak
infanc
insan
necess
protect of properti
selfdefens
public duti
legal imposs
protect of other
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2521
a defend might also rais a defens base on statut of limit proper venu and
proper jurisdict
in crimin fraud case where intent is an element of the crime defens attornei mai
advanc a number of smoke screen theori to excus their client of guilt ie by alleg
some inhibit factor to the formul of intent for exampl while ignor of the law
might be no excus it can persuad a juri particularli if the crime is complex and financi
in natur eg an incom tax evas case where the net worth method of incom
reconstruct ha been util some type of computer embezzl fit thi
categori too as doe bank fraud secur fraud and pricefix conspiraci in short
while ignor of the law might not be an excus it sometim induc piti or sorrow
likewis a defend might us innoc mistak e advanc ag sick and illiteraci to
evok sympathi and while thei mai not work as defens thei mai persuad the judg or
juri to be lenient in sentenc
insan mai be us as a defenseand often isin crime of violenc but to make an
insan defens the defend gener must provid notic of the insan defens befor
trial
the defens that caus prosecutor the most headach ar assert of poor investig
work eg improp arrest search seizur and interrog improp handl and
document of evid privaci invas and libel slander and defam the
defend dure the investig in fraud examin a defend might make
alleg of sloppi audit and mishandl of work paper
also the increas us of the undercov approach in crimin investig ha led to an
increas in the us of entrap defens entrap occur when law enforc
offic or govern agent induc a person to commit a crime that he is not previous
dispos to commit to make thi defens the defend claim that the peac offic or
undercov agent solicit encourag or incit the crimin act and without that
incit the defend claim that he would not have commit the act
rebutt wit
after the defens rest the court mai permit the prosecut to call rebutt wit and
permit the defens to put on rebutt evid at the close of all evid the defens mai
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2522 2011 fraud examin manual
make or renew it motion for a judgment of acquitt the court mai reserv it decis
submit the case to the juri and decid the motion befor or after the juri return with a
verdict the motion mai be made for the first time and grant even after the juri bring in
a guilti verdict
propos juri instruct
at the close of the evid the juri usual is temporarili discharg and the parti meet
with the judg to submit propos juri instruct to the court usual juri instruct
ar read to the juri after close argument and the instruct will includ such matter as
the basic element of the charg the definit of reason doubt the prosecut
burden and if request by the defens the warn that no advers infer mai be
drawn from the failur of the defend to testifi some defens attornei howev do not
request advers infer instruct becaus thei believ it mere remind the juri of the
accus failur to explain or defend hi conduct
each side is entitl to instruct on the law support it theori of the case if there is
ani credibl evid in it favor even if there is substanti evid to the contrari if a
request to instruct the juri is deni a parti must object and state the ground for it
object befor the juri retir to preserv it right to appeal thi is an extrem
import point for defens counsel becaus juri instruct error provid fertil ground
for revers on appeal
close argument
after both side have present their evid thei make their close argument the
close argument provid the juri with a final opportun to hear each side posit the
prosecut argu first the defens follow and the prosecut ha the opportun for
final rebutt
the remark in close argument ar limit to issu pertin to the case and confin to
evid present dure the trial improp comment dure close mai be object to
by the oppos attornei and the judg mai strike them from the record if the object is
sustain in extrem situat a close argument deem improp mai result in a
mistrial the present proceed ar termin and if the plaintiff or prosecutor choos a
new trial date set
the prosecutor is held to a particularli high standard in close argument he mai not
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2523
misstat the evid express a person opinion as to the defend guilt or the credibl
of wit or otherwis make prejudici or inflammatori remark the prosecutor is
expect to stick to the fact and to the reason infer that can be drawn therefrom
in most case the defens close argument focu on attack the motiv and credibl
of the govern wit and emphas the heavi burden of proof the govern
bear
instruct to the juri
after both parti have present their close argument the next step is for the judg to
instruct the juri in a juri trial the judg present a charg or instruct to the juri again
the instruct state the legal issu to be consid in a case defin ani unusu term
and tell the juri specif what it must decid review the complaint or indict
count by count if necessari a verdict charg form will state the decis issu in a questionandansw
format the juri us the question to focu their deliber
juri deliber
after hear instruct the juri retir for it deliber and select a foreperson
gener the verdict must be unanim but in some state such as oregon and
louisiana a juri can return a convict with onli 10 of 12 vote if the juri is unabl to
reach a verdict the judg will declar a mistrial if there is a mistrial the defend can be
retri if the prosecut elect to do so doubl jeopardi doe not attach unless the
defend is acquit after the juri is sworn
verdict of the juri
if the juri reach a verdict the foreperson or the bailiff announc the verdict in open
court either parti mai request that the juri be poll that is that each juror be ask
individu whether he concur in the verdict if ani juror answer no the juri must
return for further deliber or mai be discharg
