2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Trial Process/Jury Selection


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


Jury Selection 
The Constitution requires that “the trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall 
be by Jury …” In the federal system, the defendant may waive the right with the consent of 
the court and prosecution. Petty offenses do not require a trial by jury.  
 
Most criminal cases are tried by a jury of 12 with at least two alternates, but the parties may 
stipulate to a lesser number. The jury is expected to be impartial. For the jury selection 
process, called voir dire, the prospective jurors are brought into the courtroom, and they are 
questioned by the parties or the court to determine their suitability. Jurors are asked about 
their background, employment, general beliefs and principles, knowledge of the actual case 
or cases like it, whether they know any of the parties in the case or their attorneys—virtually 
anything that might elucidate the potential juror’s state of mind is fair game. (Provided, of 
course, the material is relevant to the case; outright character assassination is not part of jury 
selection, though some jurors have felt otherwise, especially in high-publicity trials.) 
 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.517 
There are three ways potential jurors are dismissed. In the first instance, the judge exercises 
discretion and dismisses a juror upon his own initiative. This happens when a juror fails to 
meet the minimum qualifications or is otherwise unable to serve.  
 
The second method dismisses individuals for cause (i.e., a request that a prospective juror be 
dismissed because his predispositions make him unfit to serve as a juror). Each party may 
remove any number of prospective jurors for cause, such as admitted bias or prejudice. 
Challenges for cause are not limited in number. 
 
The third way to dismiss jurors is by exercising a peremptory challenge. A peremptory challenge  
allows a litigant to remove someone from the jury panel without comment or justification. 
Peremptory challenges allow a party to remove a juror for virtually any reason. A party, 
however, cannot use its peremptory challenges in a way that is solely influenced by race, 
ethnicity, or gender. And unlike challenges for cause, peremptory challenges are limited in 
number.  
 
Additionally, the defendant may challenge the entire jury pool — called the venire — if the 
selection procedures systematically exclude certain groups, such as minorities, women, or 
young people.  
 
The jury that hears the case (the petit jury) is not required to reflect a cross-section of the 
community or contain individuals of the same race or age as the defendant. 
 



:


juri select
the constitut requir that the trial of all crime except in case of impeach shall
be by juri in the feder system the defend mai waiv the right with the consent of
the court and prosecut petti offens do not requir a trial by juri
most crimin case ar tri by a juri of 12 with at least two altern but the parti mai
stipul to a lesser number the juri is expect to be imparti for the juri select
process call voir dire the prospect juror ar brought into the courtroom and thei ar
question by the parti or the court to determin their suitabl juror ar ask about
their background employ gener belief and principl knowledg of the actual case
or case like it whether thei know ani of the parti in the case or their attorneysvirtu
anyth that might elucid the potenti juror state of mind is fair game provid of
cours the materi is relev to the case outright charact assassin is not part of juri
select though some juror have felt otherwis especi in highpubl trial
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2517
there ar three wai potenti juror ar dismiss in the first instanc the judg exercis
discret and dismiss a juror upon hi own initi thi happen when a juror fail to
meet the minimum qualif or is otherwis unabl to serv
the second method dismiss individu for caus ie a request that a prospect juror be
dismiss becaus hi predisposit make him unfit to serv as a juror each parti mai
remov ani number of prospect juror for caus such as admit bia or prejudic
challeng for caus ar not limit in number
the third wai to dismiss juror is by exercis a peremptori challeng a peremptori challeng
allow a litig to remov someon from the juri panel without comment or justif
peremptori challeng allow a parti to remov a juror for virtual ani reason a parti
howev cannot us it peremptori challeng in a wai that is sole influenc by race
ethnic or gender and unlik challeng for caus peremptori challeng ar limit in
number
addition the defend mai challeng the entir juri pool call the venir if the
select procedur systemat exclud certain group such as minor women or
young peopl
the juri that hear the case the petit juri is not requir to reflect a crosssect of the
commun or contain individu of the same race or ag as the defend
