2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Trial Process/Closing Arguments


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


Closing Arguments 
After both sides have presented their evidence, they make their closing arguments. The 
closing arguments provide the jury with a final opportunity to hear each side’s positions. The 
prosecution argues first, the defense follows, and the prosecution has the opportunity for 
final rebuttal.  
 
The remarks in closing arguments are limited to issues pertinent to the case and confined to 
evidence presented during the trial. Improper comments during closing may be objected to 
by the opposing attorney, and the judge may strike them from the record if the objection is 
sustained. In extreme situations, a closing argument deemed improper may result in a 
mistrial; the present proceedings are terminated, and if the plaintiff or prosecutor chooses, a 
new trial date set. 
 
The prosecutor is held to a particularly high standard in closing argument. He may not 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.523 
misstate the evidence, express a personal opinion as to the defendant’s guilt or the credibility 
of witnesses, or otherwise make prejudicial or inflammatory remarks. The prosecutor is 
expected to stick to the facts and to the reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom.  
 
In most cases, the defense’s closing argument focus on attacking the motives and credibility 
of the government’s witnesses and emphasizes the heavy burden of proof the government 
bears. 
 



:


close argument
after both side have present their evid thei make their close argument the
close argument provid the juri with a final opportun to hear each side posit the
prosecut argu first the defens follow and the prosecut ha the opportun for
final rebutt
the remark in close argument ar limit to issu pertin to the case and confin to
evid present dure the trial improp comment dure close mai be object to
by the oppos attornei and the judg mai strike them from the record if the object is
sustain in extrem situat a close argument deem improp mai result in a
mistrial the present proceed ar termin and if the plaintiff or prosecutor choos a
new trial date set
the prosecutor is held to a particularli high standard in close argument he mai not
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2523
misstat the evid express a person opinion as to the defend guilt or the credibl
of wit or otherwis make prejudici or inflammatori remark the prosecutor is
expect to stick to the fact and to the reason infer that can be drawn therefrom
in most case the defens close argument focu on attack the motiv and credibl
of the govern wit and emphas the heavi burden of proof the govern
bear
