2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


SOURCES OF INFORMATION 
 
When external documents are needed, fraud examiners should consider accessing public and 
non-public records, commercial databases, the Internet, and other valuable sources. 
 
There is a surprising amount of information about both individuals and businesses that can 
be accessed without a subpoena or other legal process. For instance, there is an enormous 
amount of information contained in public records.  
 
This chapter explains the difference between public and non-public records and summarizes 
some important rules governing the availability of certain types of information. It also 
explains some of the different types of information available and how each type of 
information can be used in a fraud examination. Moreover, this chapter outlines where to 
find popular types of records kept by local, state, and federal sources.  
 
The fraud examiner must be certain that information obtained is done so legally. Records 
from confidential sources generally cannot be introduced as evidence; in criminal cases, 
illegally obtained documentary evidence falls under the exclusionary rule (see the Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual ). In civil cases, using illegally obtained documentation 
might give rise to tort actions or other sanctions against the fraud examiner. Following is a 
list of information available from city, county, state, and federal agencies. 
 
 
Public Versus Non-Public Records 
 
Public Records 
Public records  are documents that a governmental agency is required to keep by law or that are 
necessary to discharge the duties imposed by law. Each agency or governmental unit is 
responsible for many different functions that may require them to maintain unique 
information.  
 
Public records, which are available to anyone who wishes to use them, can be useful for a 
number of reasons. They can supply invaluable background information on employees, 
suspects, and witnesses. Public records can also be used to corroborate or refute witness 
statements, can help investigators track the flow of stolen cash or other assets, and can be 
extremely important in a company’s efforts to recover losses. 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.402   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Public records can be searched manually or online through governmental agency websites 
and online public databases. There also are many commercial search firms that will search 
public records and otherwise conduct an asset search for a fee. Business and commercial 
indexes, such as D&B (formerly Dun & Bradstreet) and Dow Jones Business Information 
Services, also can be searched for business credit and other information. But accessing 
public records through a third-party service can trigger certain notice requirements under the 
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). The impact of the FCRA is discussed below. 
 
Examiners should be prepared to answer the who, what, where, and how of public record 
research to conduct the investigation. The following items are essential to a records 
investigation of an individual: 
• Name 
• Date of birth 
• Social Security number 
• Last known address 
 
The better informed you are about the subject you are investigating, the easier your search 
will be. For investigating individuals, some of the issues at the outset include: 
• What is the person’s full name? 
• Do you have a last name only? Is that na me so common that your search will return 
thousands of possibilities (14,000 Smiths)? What are some ways of narrowing possible 
first names for the individual? 
• What is the person’s approximate age or date of birth?  
• Does the person have criminal background?  
• Has the person been sued or sued someone?  
• Has the person owned a business?  
• Does the person have tax liens?  
• Does the person have a professional license (contractor, accountant)?  
 
For investigating businesses, some of the issues at the outset include: 
• Is the business incorporated? 
• Where does the company do business?  
• What type of business is it?  
• Has the business sued or been sued?  
• Does the business have real property?  
• Does the company finance equipment?  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.403 
• Does the company charge sales tax?  
• How long has the company been in business?  
 
Non-Public Records 
In addition to public records, non-public records—financial or otherwise—might be needed 
to prove fraud or to provide leads in a fraud examination. Non-public records include 
information about a person or business considered to be private and confidential. Because 
fraud examiners do not have an absolute right to see these personal records, such 
information might be difficult or impossible to obtain unless it is voluntarily turned over or a 
subpoena is issued. 
 
Some of the most valuable personal records include: 
• Banking records 
• Tax returns and related documents 
• Credit records 
• Telephone records 
• Credit card account records 
 
 
Laws Governing Access to Information 
Despite the public’s broad right of access to public records, there are numerous laws that 
limit access to certain types of information, and a number of risks to privacy are raised by 
the collection of information. Therefore, fraud examiners must be certain that any 
information obtained is done so legally. 
 
Freedom of Information Act 
The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) is the primary Act that governs the availability of 
governmental records to the general public. The Act sets very specific guidelines regarding 
what governmental records are and are not open to the public. The records that are available 
are known as “public records,” raw records of information that are compiled and maintained 
by governmental agencies. The various records are maintained at one of the three 
governmental levels: federal, state, or county/ local. Although the FOIA is a federal Act, 
most states have adopted very similar versions of the FOIA to cover the state and local 
jurisdictions. While these versions are similar to the original FOIA, the individually passed 
state acts may differ slightly in specific legal areas from state to state.  
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.404   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The FOIA and its individual state counterparts regulate:  
• The type of records that a governmental agency may maintain about a person 
• The conditions under which such information may be disclosed to another governmental 
agency 
• The circumstances and methods under which an individual may obtain copies of agency 
records that pertain to him 
 
Generally speaking, governmental records about an individual are prohibited from release. 
The disclosure of these records constitutes an invasion of privacy. A person may obtain 
copies of his own records by requesting them in writing from the agency that maintains 
them. Such requests often are denied, in whole or in part, because of numerous exceptions 
to the disclosure requirements. Some of these exceptions include the pendency of an 
ongoing investigation or concerns about national security. A person denied access to records 
may appeal through that agency or through the courts.  
 
Most records are maintained at the county or local level, a fact that can seriously hamper any 
fraud investigation; it can be very difficult for the fraud examiner to catch up with a 
fraudster who understands the county filing procedures and chooses to operate in different 
counties. However, the following records are available at different levels of government. 
 
The FOIA provides for public access to the following information: 
•  Tax rolls 
•  Voter registration 
•  Assumed names  
•  Real property records 
•  Divorce/probate suits 
 
Information NOT deemed to be public under the FOIA includes: 
•  Banking records 
•  Trust records 
•  Telephone records 
•  Passenger lists 
•  Stock ownership 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.405 
Fair Credit Reporting Act 
One of the primary statutes limiting access to  information is the federal Fair Credit 
Reporting Act (FCRA). This statute regulates the dissemination of consumer information to 
third parties by consumer reporting agencies. Historically, the FCRA only applied to 
consumer credit reports, but due to amendments in 1997, the FCRA now applies to the 
gathering of many other types of information about an individual through third parties. 
 
The FCRA applies in the employment context when an employer contracts with a consumer 
reporting agency (CRA) to collect consumer reports on employees or potential employees. A 
CRA is defined as anyone who sells information about people (e.g., a private investigator or 
an online public records service). A consumer report  is defined as any written, oral, or other 
communication by a consumer reporting agency bearing on a customer’s credit worthiness, 
credit standing, character, general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living. 
 
The FCRA, however, does not apply if the person or organization seeking the information 
gathers it directly from the source.  
 
If the FCRA does apply, it generally means that an examiner cannot use a third party to 
obtain certain information about a person unless that person has received certain notices and 
signed a consent form. The failure to do so can mean civil penalties. 
 
Complying with the FCRA 
Before an employer can obtain consumer information about a current or prospective 
employee from a third party, it must comply with all of the following requirements: 
• Provide the individual with a “clear and conspicuous” separate written disclosure that 
the employer might obtain a report 
• Obtain the individual’s written authorization 
• Inform the third party that the employer has complied with the FCRA’s notice 
requirements 
• Inform the third party that the employer will not use the information to violate any equal 
employment law 
 
The disclosure and the authorization can be contained in the same document, as long as the 
document contains nothing else. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.406   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If the employer relies on a consumer report for an “adverse action” (e.g., denying a job 
application, reassigning or terminating an employee, or denying a promotion), then it must 
provide the individual with a pre-adverse action disclosure before taking the adverse action. 
This disclosure must include a copy of the individual’s consumer report and a copy of “A 
Summary of Your Rights Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act,” which is available from  
the FTC. 
 
After adverse action is taken, the employer must notify the individual via an adverse action 
notice that the action has been taken. That notice must include the following: 
• Name, address, and phone number of the consumer reporting agency (CRA) that 
supplied the report; 
• A statement that the CRA did not make the adverse action decision and cannot explain 
why the adverse action was taken; and 
• A notice of the individual’s right to di spute the accuracy or completeness of the 
information furnished, and his right to an additional free consumer report from the 
agency upon request within 60 days. 
 
If, however, the employer is gathering the consumer information in connection with a 
workplace investigation of misconduct, however, it may be excluded from the FCRA (see 
the section “Workplace Investigations of Fraud and Misconduct” below). 
 
Workplace Investigations of Fraud and Misconduct 
The Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 amended the Fair Credit Reporting 
Act (FCRA) to exempt certain reports involving employee misconduct investigations. 
 
As a result of these amendments, an employer who uses a third party to conduct a workplace 
investigation no longer has to obtain the prior consent of an employee if the investigation 
involves suspected misconduct, violation of laws or regulations, or violation of any 
preexisting policy of the employer. 
 
To qualify for this exception, the report from the third party must not be communicated to 
anyone other than the employer, an agent of the employer, or the government. 
 
But if “adverse action” is taken against the employee based on the results of the 
investigation, the FCRA still requires the employer to provide the employee with a summary 
of the report. “Adverse action” is broadly defined as any employment decision that adversely 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.407 
affects the employee. The summary must “contain the nature and substance of the 
communication upon which the adverse action is based.” It does not, however, have to 
identify the individuals interviewed or the sources of the information. 
 
Investigative Consumer Report 
Under the FCRA, an investigative consumer report is a report containing information about 
an individual’s character, general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living, that 
is obtained through personal interviews with neighbors, friends, or associates. If such a 
report is made, then other notices and consents may need to be obtained from the 
individual. For example, a separate disclosure must be used to inform the employee that an 
investigative consumer report is being obtained. The form must also state what sort of 
information will be collected. 
 
Also, the company must disclose to the individual the nature and scope of the investigation 
(if he requests). If any adverse action is to be taken against the person, he can ask to receive 
a copy of the report before such action is taken. Further, the report given to the individual 
must not be redacted, meaning that if the report contains names of the people providing the 
information and what they reported, such information cannot be deleted from the report. 
The person must also be given an opportunity to dispute the findings in the report. 
 
Contact Your Attorney 
Unfortunately for fraud examiners, the FCRA has created several more hoops that 
examiners must jump through before they can obtain certain types of information. The 
FCRA is not clearly written, but the Federal Trade Commission has published several letters 
giving its interpretation of the statute. These letters and the text of the FCRA can be 
obtained through its website at www.ftc.gov.  
 
The most important thing for the fraud examiner to remember is to consult his in-house or 
outside counsel. Your attorney will help you determine what procedures you need to 
institute to comply with the FCRA. 
 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB) was passed in 1999, and rules implementing the Act 
became final in 2001. GLB was originally enac ted to allow banks and other companies to 
offer previously forbidden services, such as insurance and securities brokerage services. 
Congress was worried that these “super banks” would share customers’ financial data with 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.408   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
affiliates and other companies to hawk their products. Therefore, Congress added a 
provision requiring “financial intuitions” to te ll customers about their privacy policies, to 
notify customers of private information they intend to share, and to give customers the 
chance to block such information sharing. 
 
To implement the law, Congress ordered regulators to define “financial institution” in the 
broadest possible terms. Thus, “financial institutions” include not just banks, but also 
insurance companies, accountants, tax preparation and real estate settlement services, and 
investment advisors. The text of the rule can be found at 16 C.F.R. Part 313. Additional 
information about the rule can be found at the Federal Trade Commission’s website: 
www.ftc.gov. 
 
GLB is important for fraud examiners because the privacy rules implemented as part of the 
Act have been interpreted to prevent the selling of credit header information, and under the 
FTC’s interpretation of the rule, credit header information cannot be sold except for the 
very limited purposes allowed under the Fair Credit Reporting Act. The agency reached this 
decision by concluding that such basic personal information, such as names and addresses, is 
financial information, and, therefore, must be protected under the GLB Act. Therefore, the 
GLB prevents credit bureaus from selling credit header information (including names, 
addresses, phone numbers, and Social Security numbers) to private investigators, direct 
marketers, or other information brokers. 
 
As a general rule, financial information can be obtained only by subpoena.  
 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act also made it a criminal offense to engage in “pretexting.” 
Some individuals used pretexting as a means to gather financial information about a subject. 
Pretexters would contact a financial institution and pretend to be the customer or someone 
else authorized to obtain financial information and basically trick the financial institution 
into providing information about the subject. 
 
Section 6821 of Title 15 of the U.S. Code (added by GLB) makes it an offense to: 
• Use false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements or documents to get customer information 
from a financial institution or directly from a customer of a financial institution;  
• Use forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen documents to get customer information from a 
financial institution or directly from a customer of a financial institution; or 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.409 
• Ask another person to get someone else’s custom er information using false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent statements or documents or using forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen 
documents.  
 
Violators can, under certain circumstances, be fined and/or imprisoned up to 10 years. 
 
Pretexting is not always illegal, but it should be used with extreme caution. For example, if a 
fraud examiner is trying to locate a witness or a suspect, he might call the person’s relative 
and pretend to be an old high school friend who is looking for a phone number. This type of 
pretexting generally is not illegal. However, it is illegal to obtain certain types of information, 
such as financial records and phone records. 
 
Fraud examiners should never impersonate a member of law enforcement, and should never 
impersonate an actual person (particularly the individual being investigated). To do so may 
lead to charges of identity theft. In 2006, investigators hired by Hewlett-Packard were 
charged with identity theft, conspiracy, and wire fraud for acquiring the phone records of 
several members of their board of directors who were suspected of leaking confidential 
information. As a result, Congress passed the Telephone Records and Privacy Protection 
Act, which is codified at 18, U.S. Code, section 1039. This law makes it a federal crime to 
obtain confidential phone records without authorization, including posing as another 
individual.  
 
Before engaging in any type of pretexting activity, investigators should consult with an 
attorney to determine whether the information sought is protected by state or federal law as 
well as whether the planned impersonation method is legally acceptable. 
 
Privacy Act of 1974 
The Privacy Act of 1974 restricts information about individuals, including employees and 
non-employees, that might be gathered by governmental agencies. Under the Act, an agency 
may maintain records about a person containing information that is relevant and necessary 
to accomplish a purpose of the agency. This information may include a person’s education, 
finances, medical history, criminal history, employment history, and identifying information 
(fingerprint, voice print, or photograph). The person may have access to his information 
unless it is investigatory material compiled for law enforcement purposes, statistical records, 
or material compiled solely for determining suitability, eligibility, or qualification for federal 
service or promotion.  
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.410   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Right to Financial Privacy Act 
The Right to Financial Privacy Act prohibits financial institutions from disclosing financial 
information about individual customers to governmental agencies without the customer’s 
consent, a court order, a subpoena, a search warrant, or other formal demand. There are, 
however, limited exceptions to this rule. 
 
Although the statute applies only to demands by governmental agencies, most banks and 
other financial institutions also will not release such information to private parties absent 
legal process, such as a subpoena issued in a civil lawsuit. 
 
Driver’s Privacy Protection Act  
In 1999, Congress made significant changes to the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act of 1994 
(18, U.S.C., § 2721). The law bars states from  releasing drivers’ Social Security numbers, 
photographs, or certain other information unless they obtain “the express consent” of each 
person in advance. Before the 1999 amendments, drivers could “opt out” and ask that their 
information not be released. Under the law, however, drivers are under an “opt in” system 
that requires their express authorization of the release of information. Although the law was 
challenged, the U.S. Supreme Court, in January 2000, upheld the constitutionality of the 
amendments. 
 
These amendments make it extremely difficult to obtain up-to-date information from state 
motor vehicle departments. Such information can only be obtained if the driver has 
expressly consented to its release. Therefore, companies may wish to consider having 
employees sign a consent form as early as the employment application stage. For example, 
the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act does not prohibit the use of motor vehicle records 
(MVR) for pre-employment screening, but the state can only release the records with the 
driver’s consent.  
 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) instituted several 
additional privacy rules concerning personal health information. While most of the rules do 
not directly affect fraud investigations, fraud examiners should be aware of the rules because 
they may have an impact on the type of information that can be legally gathered on 
employees. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.411 
The HIPAA privacy rules place restrictions on the availability and use of “protected health 
information.” The definition of this term is extremely broad and covers any information 
relating to an individual’s past, present, or  future physical or mental health, payment for 
services, or health care operations. 
 
If information about the health of an individual or payments for services becomes an issue 
during an investigation, fraud examiners should immediately contact the human resources 
(HR) department. The HR department should have information about whether the entity is 
subject to HIPAA rules and can assist you in compliance with those rules.  
 
The most important thing to note is that if HIPAA rules do apply, you are restricted as to 
the type of health information you can access without specific written authorization. You 
should never contact the health care provider, the health-plan administrator, or a medical-
 billing service for copies of employee’s records without first consulting the employer’s legal 
counsel or the HR department. 
 
 
City Government Records 
The following items are basic types of public records that can be accessed at the city level of 
government: 
• Building inspector records 
• Health and fire department records 
• City personnel department records 
• Public school records 
• Regulatory agency records 
• City tax assessor/collector records 
• Utility company records 
 
Building Inspector Records 
The following information generally is available through a city’s building inspector’s office: 
• Building permits, showing the name of applicant, address of construction, estimated 
cost, and the name of builder or contractor 
• Blueprints and plans showing construction details that often are submitted with 
applications for building permits 
• Building inspectors’ reports, containing information regarding compliance with 
construction specifications 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.412   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Health and Fire Department Records 
Most local health or fire departments conduct routine inspections of businesses for health 
and safety code or fire code violations. These inspectors might have valuable information 
about the business, its operations, the employees, and the owners. 
 
Death certificates usually can be found at city, county, or state health departments. A death 
certificate provides the name of the deceased, address, sex, age, race, birthplace, birth date, 
death place, date and time of death, Social Security number, medical certificate, and 
coroner’s certificate. Additionally, a death certi ficate generally provides information about 
the deceased’s parents and their occupations. 
 
City Personnel Department Records 
The city personnel department maintains personal-history statements from city employees 
and political leaders, as well as employment records, efficiency reports, and records of salary 
liens on city employees. 
 
Public School Records 
City school systems maintain teachers’ bi ographies, showing personal background, 
education, and former employment; and stud ent records, showing biographies (in some 
school districts), grades, and disciplinary actions. 
 
Regulatory Agency Records 
Applications for business licenses, contained in the files of city regulatory agencies, often 
have valuable information on certain types of enterprises. In many cities, the following 
businesses would have to apply for licenses to operate: 
• Businesses seeking liquor licenses 
• Professionals, including certified public accountants, dentists, doctors, plumbers, 
electricians, and optometrists 
• Restaurants, bars, and night clubs (which are frequently inspected by health and fire 
departments) 
• Businesses operating under names other than the owners’ names (such businesses must 
register under assumed names and are included in the city’s DBA [doing business as] 
files) 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.413 
City Tax Assessor/Collector Records 
A city’s tax assessor’s office maintains maps of real property in the city, including a 
property’s dimensions, address, owner, taxable value, and improvements. A tax collector’s 
office maintains the following information: 
• Names and addresses of payers of property taxes, even if the taxes were paid by 
individuals other than the apparent owners 
• Legal descriptions of property 
• Amounts of taxes paid on real and personal property 
• Delinquency status of taxes 
• Names of former property owners 
 
Utility Company Records 
Many utility companies are nonprofit corporations or municipalities. Although the recent 
trend has been to restrict access to utility company records, check with the utility companies 
in the subject’s area to see what, if any, information is available. Utility records might contain 
the phone number of the customer, even if that number is unlisted. In addition, be sure to 
check the names of friends or relatives. 
 
 
County Government Records 
The following items are basic types of public records that can be accessed at the county level 
of government: 
• County court records 
• County coroner’s register 
• County personnel department records 
• Building permit records 
• Public school records 
• Voter registration records 
• County recorder’s office records 
• Sheriff/county prosecutor records 
• County fire marshal records 
• Regulatory agency records 
• Welfare commission records 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.414   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
County Court Records 
The great majority of an individual’s civil records can be found at the county courthouse in 
the jurisdiction where the subject does business or resides. 
 
Courts are generally divided into jurisdictions that encompass a single county in a single 
state. In each single court, there are usually three levels: trial courts, appellate courts, and 
supreme courts.  
 
Most of the papers filed in civil suits are acce ssible as public records; however, criminal and 
juvenile actions may not be as open to review. In addition, criminal conviction records are 
generally available to the public.  
 
A great deal of litigation occurs each year and many people might be subject to judicial 
action, voluntarily or not. Researching civil and criminal suits can provide invaluable 
information assisting in: 
• The location of individuals 
• Identifying pending actions 
• Uncovering closed cases 
• Insight into marital status (family) 
• Tracing sources of funds (probate) 
• Identifying financial conditions (bankruptcy) 
• Litigation history 
• Outstanding judgments 
 
Although a wealth of information is available in court files, civil or criminal actions might 
not be readily known and the researcher must be able to identify the jurisdiction, county, or 
court involved.  
 
A researcher typically will have access to microfiche listings of cases or parties within the 
individual court system through the clerk’s office. Some courts are set up to provide 
computerized access to this information. Normally, one must be able to provide a case 
number in order to access the actual court file. The Party Name Index will provide the  
case number. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.415 
Court clerks maintain files on all active and closed lawsuits in their jurisdictions. Information 
regarding these suits is public record and can be searched by scanning the indexes for 
subject’s name as a plaintiff or defendant. 
 
For example, the subject data fields of court records will contain: 
• The complaint for or against the subject (direct and reverse indexes) 
• The subject’s last known address (either through the lawsuit’s pleadings or the court 
officer’s citation and subpoena returns) 
• Other personal information on the subject, depending on the type of suit 
 
Court levels vary by jurisdiction, as do the names of the levels. Different case types are filed 
at different levels and in different courts.  
 
Different levels of courts are assigned jurisdiction over any given case, based on court issues 
and the nature of the claim. To determine the full extent of the litigation history against a 
company or individual, the examiner must search each of the various types of local court 
records. 
 
Civil Court Records 
The key to locating civil court records is knowing the correct spelling of your subject’s name, 
where the person currently lives, and where he lived in the past.  
 
Depending on the type of suit, civil court records will provide potentially valuable 
information. 
 
PERSONAL INJURY SUIT RECORDS 
Records for a personal injury suit, for example, will often contain an accident report, injury 
history, statements of the involved parties, and the financial settlement of the case.  
 
FINANCIAL SUIT RECORDS 
Financial suit records will disclose an individual’s debtors and creditors, and they will present 
an outside view of a business’s history or ability to perform. 
 
DIVORCE RECORDS 
Divorce record searches will return marriage partner names, addresses, location of marriage, 
divorce filing date, and file number. In addition, divorce records frequently contain the 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.416   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subject’s financial inventory, which is submitted at  the time of the divorce or separation, and 
should also include the partition of assets to each party in the settlement. 
 
Criminal Court Records 
When conducting a criminal records search, certain types of information are critical. Like 
civil courts, criminal courts across the country are divided into jurisdictions that generally 
encompass a single county in a single state. 
 
Although most states have their criminal courts divided by county, some states offer indexes 
with criminal convictions for the entire state.  
 
Criminal convictions should not be confused with criminal filings. When you search for 
criminal records at the county level, you will find all cases filed by the district attorney, even 
if the person was not found guilty of a crime. When searching a statewide convictions 
database, you will find only cases that resulted in conviction.  
The county criminal court clerk maintains criminal court files that might contain a wealth of 
information. These files might provide information describing the offenses and the counts. 
These files also might contain the complainant’s signature (exemplar); a transcript of the 
preliminary hearing; the names of the prosecuting and defense attorneys; the probation 
officer’s report, with a background investigation of the defendant; and the subpoenas issued 
in the case. 
 
Probate Court Records 
Probate court records are documents filed to show the dispersal of assets after a subject’s 
death. The probate court conducts an investigation to verify any debts owed by an individual 
estate and sees to the dispersal of assets according to the deceased’s will (or if there is no 
will, by state law) after all debts are paid. 
 
The debts left in an individual’s estate will give the investigator information on the following: 
• Names of individuals with an interest in the deceased’s estate 
• The subject’s financial position at the time of death 
 
The dispersal of assets will reveal: 
• The names and addresses of heirs to the deceased 
• Some indication of the value of the property willed to them 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.417 
County Coroner’s Register 
A county coroner’s register generally contains the name or a description of the deceased; 
date of inquest, if any; property found on the de ceased and its disposition; and the cause  
of death. 
 
County Personnel Department Records 
A county personnel department maintains information similar to that maintained by a city 
personnel department. 
 
Building Permit Records 
If a business or individual constructs a new building or makes improvements to an existing 
building, there should be a building permit on file with the local building authority. In 
addition, before most businesses can open their doors, the city or county may require that 
they possess certain permits. The local fire department may require permits ensuring that the 
business complies with the fire code. The city health department will require permits for 
restaurants or other businesses that serve food. Planning and zoning departments enforce 
regulations regarding the types of businesses and their locations.  
 
Public Schools 
County public school systems maintain information similar to that found in city public 
school systems. 
 
Voter Registration Records 
To be eligible to vote, U.S. citizens must be registered in their respective precincts. To 
register, citizens must fill out a registration application. The information required to process 
the application includes: name, address, date of birth, signature, and Social Security number. 
 
Voter registration records routinely are verified  by the county and old addresses are deleted 
as new ones appear. 
 
County Recorder’s Office Records 
A county recorder is a government office responsible for maintaining public records and 
documents, especially records relating to real estate ownership. A county recorder’s office 
maintains the following information: 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.418   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Documents pertaining to real estate transactions — including deeds, grants, transfers and 
mortgages of real estate, releases of mortgages, powers of attorney, and leases that have 
been acknowledged or approved 
• Mortgages on personal property 
• Marriage license records and applications, including information on previous marriages, 
maiden names, addresses, and dates of birth 
• Wills admitted to probate 
• Official bonds 
• Notices of mechanic’s liens 
• Transcripts of judgments that are made liens on real estate 
• Notices of attachment on real estate 
• Papers in connection with bankruptcy 
• Certified copies of decrees and judgments of courts of record 
• Other documents permitted by law to be recorded, such as the Department of Defense’s 
DOD 214 Forms, recorded by some veterans as  evidence of veteran status, particularly 
in those states where veterans are granted reduced property tax rates 
 
Real estate transaction records are extremely important. They are relatively easy to access and 
contain a vast amount of information. Real estate records usually are found in the county in 
which the land is located. When an individual purchases real estate, he becomes a taxpayer 
and a registrant in the following county records:  real property records, property tax records, 
and tax assessor records. 
 
Real Property Records 
Each real estate transaction will list a deed verifying the transfer of the property. If an 
individual either buys or sells a house or piece of property, or his real property becomes 
subject to a state or federal lien, the transaction will be reflected in the county real property 
indexes. If improvements are made to the property, such as the addition of a new room or 
the installation of a pool, then a mechanic’s lien or other notice may be on file in the county 
property records. 
 
COMMERCIAL SEARCHES  
Many companies provide access to real property records. A search for a business or 
individual in these databases can return real property ownership information, recent property 
sales and transfers, refinance, construction loans, and seller carry-back transactions.  
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.419 
In addition, you can conduct a single search of all available online states in the same amount 
of time and for the same price as an individual county or state search. Typical responses will 
include the property owner’s name, property address, mailing address, parcel number, lot 
size, land, property value, tax amount, purchase amount, property description, and more. On 
refinance, construction loans, and seller carry-back and sale transactions, the date and 
amount of each transaction usually appear. This is especially useful for determining an 
individual’s equity in a specific property or for identifying individuals that may be receiving 
monthly income as a result of providing financing. 
 
NON-COMMERCIAL SEARCHES 
Although examiners can use commercial services to obtain real property information (e.g., 
identify the ownership of a piece of real property), some jurisdictions are not available, 
depending on how local jurisdictions and states compile property information. Searches may 
be conducted by business or person name(s), address, or name of the putative owner. 
Searches of the real property records may reveal: 
• Residences and addresses of buyer and seller (referred to respectively as grantor and 
grantee) 
• Price of the property (see tax stamps if listed) 
• Mortgage company and amount originally financed 
• Real estate ownership 
• Who financed the transaction, if applicable 
• Title companies involved 
• Improvements to the property, along with the names and addresses of the contractors 
used 
 
Property Tax Records 
In addition to the property records themselves, counties charge new landowners property 
taxes for upkeep of their schools, courthouses, police, and other public buildings. These 
records can provide: 
• An idea of the estimated value, for tax purposes, of the property listed 
• The identity of the owner of a vacant piece of land or a piece of property, if ownership is 
unknown 
• The name of the last person to pay taxes on the property 
 
When searching real property and tax records, the fraud examiner should always look for any 
additional names listed on the documents. Frequently, the name of the attorney or notary 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.420   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
public who verified the documents is listed, providing another potential source of further 
information. 
 
Tax Assessor/Collector Records 
County tax assessor’s and collector’s offices maintain information similar to that held by city 
tax assessor’s offices. 
 
Sheriff/County Prosecutor Records 
The county sheriff or the county prosecutor may maintain general incident files related to 
the businesses within the county. Incident files can provide leads on managers or owners of 
the business or third parties who have made complaints against the business. 
 
County Fire Marshal Records 
The county fire marshal should have a record of any fires that have occurred at specific 
properties. These records may contain information about a property’s insurer, as well as 
information about any previously conducted investigations. 
 
Regulatory Agency Records 
County regulatory agencies maintain information similar to that held by city regulatory 
agencies.  
 
Welfare Commission Records 
Files of a county welfare commission are based on information gathered by social workers, 
psychologists, and physicians. Frequently, the recipient of benefits provides the information, 
which is generally not verified. Files contain such information as the recipient’s address, 
previous employment, how much the recipient earned, property the recipient or the 
recipient’s relatives might own, the state of the family’s health, and criminal records. 
 
 
State Government Records 
The following items are basic types of public records that can be accessed at the state level 
of government: 
• Business flings 
• State court records 
• Uniform Commercial Code filings 
• Employee/labor department records 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.421 
• State tax filings 
• Professional associations and licensing boards 
• State attorneys general records 
• Workers’ compensation records 
• Department of motor vehicles records 
• Bureau of vital statistics 
• Other state regulatory agencies 
 
Business Filings 
If an individual wants to conduct business in a name other than his own, the law requires 
that he file documents to claim ownership of that name. These documents can include: 
• Articles of incorporation 
• Foreign corporation registration 
• DBA/fictitious name registration 
• Tax related filings 
 
Articles of Incorporation 
Corporations are formed by filing articles of incorporation with the secretary of state (or 
state corporation bureau or corporate registry office) in the state of which the company does 
business. These corporate records are public record and will include: 
• Corporate name 
• Ownership information 
• Stock value 
• Initial shareholders 
• Names of the directors and officers 
• Registered agent 
• Location of the principal office 
• Date of incorporation 
• Standing/status 
 
This information will permit the investigator to review a corporate structure, identify the 
registered agent, and trace incorporation dates. The records will often include limited 
partnership information as well. The examiner can also use these records to verify the 
state(s) in which a company is registered as a corporation. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.422   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Foreign Corporation Registration Records 
Some states, but not all, require foreign corporations (i.e., corporations that were 
incorporated in another state) to register with the state corporation office if the foreign 
corporation transacts business in that state. For example, if a corporation chartered in 
Delaware wishes to transact business in Texas, it must file an Application for Certificate of 
Authority. The application is filed with the secretary of state and must include the date of 
incorporation, the principal office, the address of the registered agent, and the names of the 
officers and directors. 
 
Fictitious Business Names/Doing Business As Information 
Doing business as (DBA) information is typically filed at the county level, though many 
states require filing with at the state level as well. Most states also require limited 
partnerships, trusts, and joint ventures to file DBA information at the state or county level. 
This information will provide insight into the true business venture behind the name. DBA 
information is very similar to corporate filings with the secretary of state, and they allow 
examiners to trace the corporation’s roots or  prove ownership in sole proprietorships, 
partnerships, limited partnerships, joint ventures, and trusts. 
 
Tax Related Filings 
Some state revenue departments require certain businesses to obtain licenses or permits, 
such as a sales tax permit. The licenses and the applications are generally public record. If the 
business is delinquent in the payment of its taxes, the local or state tax investigator or 
collector might be able to provide inside information concerning the business. 
 
Law enforcement officials might be able to gain access to corporate, business, and personal 
state tax information. These records might unwittingly reveal hidden assets or investments. 
Loans to or from officers, stockholders, or related entities should be examined closely. Also, 
mortgages, notes, and bonds shown as liabilities on a corporate return should be 
investigated. Tax returns might also disclose the identity of the accountant or attorney 
preparing the return.  
 
State Court Records 
State Civil Court Records 
State civil court records searches are conducted by court, by county, and are divided between 
upper and lower courts (generally a monetary division) where applicable. Searches of state 
civil court records may return the identities of the plaintiff and defendant, case number, 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.423 
filing date, cause of action, and disposition or current status. Depending on the court, 
divorces, domestic, family law, child support, name changes, or probate matters may also be 
included.  
 
State Criminal Court Records 
State criminal court records searches are conducted by court or by county for felonies, 
misdemeanors, or a combination of both. Searches of state civil court records may return the 
identity of the defendant, a physical description of the conduct, the arrest date, arresting 
agency, case number, filing date, charges, and disposition or current status. An index search 
is available for some states and counties, and most states have some type of release 
requirement for obtaining this information.  
 
Uniform Commercial Code Filings 
A search of Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) filings can help you identify personal 
property that an individual or business has financed. This is because a lender must file UCC 
statements with the secretary of state or with the county level unit to perfect its security 
interest in personal property. 
 
Banks, finance companies, and other lenders will generate records or recorded filings of 
financial transactions conducted with individuals and businesses, such as purchases of 
household furniture, appliances, boats and yachts, automobiles, aircraft, and business 
equipment. 
 
These filings produced as the result of the transactions will identify: 
• Name of the debtor or joint debtors 
• Current address of the debtors 
• Name of the financial lender 
• Type of collateral pledged as security 
• Date of filing and continuations 
 
UCC filings can also disclose when and where a person obtains personal loans, the type of 
property pledged to the lender to secure the loan, and the current address of the debtor. 
These documents provide itemized lists of personal property held by the debtor. 
 
Additionally, UCC filings and supporting documents can help examiners uncover hidden 
ownership or relationships between parties by viewing the names of all listed debtors and 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.424   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
their addresses. The examiner may find information linking individuals to the companies 
they own, or discover information about a company’s subsidiaries, branch offices, or parent 
company.  
 
These documents can be readily retrieved from the secretary of state’s office, through service 
companies, or through online public records services. One company that provides access to 
this information is Experian. Experian’s UCC online database provides information from 
state-level UCC-1 financing statements, as well as information on amendments, assignments, 
terminations, and so on. Most online responses will include debtor and secured party 
name(s) and address(es), file date and file number for each original filing, amendment dates, 
and assignment information (when applicable). 
 
Employee/Labor Department Records 
Some states, under their labor departments, require the filing of periodic lists of employees, 
revealing their names, Social Security numbers, and salaries. In addition, by examining 
previous filings, an investigator can locate former employees.  
 
Professional Associations and Licensing Boards 
Many state and local agencies or bodies main tain records identifying individuals holding 
special licenses or memberships. These can include: 
• Medical practitioners, such as doctors, dentists, and nurses 
• Social workers 
• Attorneys 
• Certified Public Accountants 
• Real estate licensees 
• Notaries 
• Law enforcement personnel 
• Firefighters 
• Security guards 
• Stockbrokers 
• Teachers 
• Insurance agents 
• Private investigators 
• Bail bond agents 
• Travel agents 
• Barbers and cosmetologists 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.425 
• Contractors, engineers, electricians, and architects 
 
The licenses and applications granted by the state might be public record. Although some 
applications contain no more than a name and address, other applications contain lengthy 
personal information, such as previous residential addresses, previous employers, education 
and training, and financial statements. Some agencies are required to conduct a background 
investigation before issuance of a license. 
 
Also, the state regulatory or licensing agency might have the authority to suspend or revoke 
the licenses necessary for the business to operate. 
 
Many professional organizations maintain their own listings of members or licensees. They 
might be reluctant to provide information beyond the person’s name and current standing in 
the association. 
 
State Attorneys General Records  
State attorneys general are good sources of information on whether a particular entity or 
individual was the subject of an enforcement action by a particular state. For links to the 
attorney general’s website for any of the 50 states, consult the National Association of 
Attorneys General at http://www.naag.org. 
 
Workers’ Compensation Records 
Records of workers’ compensation claims are av ailable in most states; however, the breadth 
of coverage will vary from state to state. Some states require some type of authorization 
from the target of the search. Workers’ comp ensation searches may return the subject’s 
name, Social Security number, date of birth, employer’s name, date and type of accident, and 
nature and extent of inquiry.  
 
The Americans with Disability Act, however, purports to prevent prospective employers 
from using workers’ compensation records to deny employment to otherwise qualified job 
applicants. 
 
Department of Motor Vehicles Records 
The Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) maintains information on drivers’ licenses, 
vehicle registrations, titling, car dealers, car salespeople, wrecking yards, tow companies, 
smog inspection facilities, and (in some states) auto repair businesses.  
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.426   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
DMV records were once thought to  be good locator tools, but recent restrictions on the use 
of such data has reduced the effectiveness of such searches. Moreover, the update quality of 
individual state records supplied by state authorities may not be adequate to locating people 
in a transient, fast-paced society. Still, searches such as Driver Identification can be useful on 
a spot basis. 
 
Vehicle ownership information will identify ve hicles registered to a specific person or 
business. These records include trailers, motor homes, or motor vessels. Information on 
disability placards may also be available. Current ownership of a particular vehicle can be 
obtained through the use of a plate number or a vehicle identification number (VIN). 
Information returned will include plate number, VIN, expiration date, make, model, model 
year, registered owner’s name/address, and legal owner’s name/address.  
 
In 1999, Congress made significant changes to the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act of 1994 
(18, U.S.C., § 2721). The amended law bars sta tes from releasing drivers’ Social Security 
numbers, photographs, or certain other information unless they obtain “the express 
consent” of each person in advance. Before the 1999 amendments, drivers could “opt out” 
and ask that their information not be released. Under the new law, however, drivers are 
under an “opt in” system that requires their express authorization of the release of 
information. Although the law was challenged, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the 
constitutionality of the new amendments in January 2000. 
 
These amendments make it extremely difficult to obtain almost any up-to-date information 
from state motor vehicle departments. Such information can only be obtained if the driver 
has expressly consented to its release. Therefore, companies may wish to consider having 
employees sign a consent form as early as the employment application stage because even 
though the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act does not prohibit the use of motor vehicle 
records for pre-employment screening, the state can only release the records with the 
driver’s consent.  
 
Bureau of Vital Statistics 
A state’s bureau of vital statistics, where birth certificates are generally filed, is an excellent 
source of information. Birth certificates can provide a child’s name, sex, date of birth, and 
place of birth; the names of the attending phy sician, midwife, and/or other assistants; the 
parents’ names, ages, addresses, races, places of birth, and occupations; the mother’s maiden 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.427 
name; and the number of siblings. (In some states, birth certificates might be found at the 
city or county level.)  
 
Other State Regulatory Agencies 
At the state level, the following additional records can be found: 
• Auto licenses, auto transfers, and sales of vehicles 
• Civil service applications 
• Drivers’ licenses 
• Health department records 
• Inheritance and gift tax returns 
• Name changes 
• Occupancy and business licenses 
• Parole officers’ and probation departments’ files 
• Personal property tax returns 
• School and voter registrations 
• State income tax returns 
• Welfare agency records 
 
The following state departments and agencies might also maintain information valuable to 
fraud examiners: 
• Bureau of Professional and Vocational Standards or Department of Licensing (especially 
professional associations, partnerships, and corporations) 
• Controller/treasurer 
• Department of Agriculture 
• Department of Industrial Relations 
• Department of Natural Resources 
• Horse-Racing Board/Gambling Commission 
• Secretary of State (corporations division) 
• State Board of Equalization 
• State Police or Highway Patrol 
• State Securities Commission 
• State Utility Commission 
 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.428   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Federal Government Records 
A huge amount of information is available to the public through the various federal agencies. 
A list of a number of federal agencies and their website addresses will be provided later in 
this workbook, and information about various federal agencies can be obtained through the 
following reference guides: 
• Congressional Staff Directory and Federal Staff Directory, prepared annually by CQ 
Press 
• Congressional Directory, prepared by the U.S. Government Printing Office 
• The United States Government Manual, prepared by the U.S. Government Printing Office 
 
However, the following records are of particular note. 
 
Federal Court Records 
Civil and Criminal Court Records 
Federal civil and criminal court records can provide valuable information, including the 
plaintiff and defendant’s name, the case number, the filing date, the cause of action, and the 
case disposition of current status.  
 
Bankruptcy Court Records 
Bankruptcy proceedings are conducted in federal bankruptcy courts. In these courts, all 
documents filed with the court are public record and can be examined by anyone without 
charge. These on-site federal court records may include the case number, debtor’s name(s), 
Social Security number, address, filing date, chapter designation, and closure date. The 
search is available for all federal jurisdictions, usually covering a seven-year span that starts 
from the present and moves backward. 
 
Bankruptcy documents are usually located in the federal bankruptcy court for the district 
where the debtor resided or had his principal place of business. When checking bankruptcy 
court records, the examiner should remember to check not only the individual or business 
filing for bankruptcy, but also any related businesses, principals, employees, or relatives. 
 
A bankruptcy is initiated by the filing of a bankruptcy petition. The petition can be either 
voluntary or involuntary. Three or more creditors who have outstanding claims that have not 
been paid can file an involuntary petition. 
 
Specifically, a bankruptcy file typically contains the following documents: 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.429 
• Bankruptcy petition : The bankruptcy petition contains type of bankruptcy 
(voluntary/involuntary, Chapter 7, Chapter 11, etc.); Social Security number or tax ID 
number; street address and primary place of business; location of principal assets of 
business; type of business; name of attorney; estimated amount of assets; estimated 
number of creditors, liabilities, and employees; financial data; and a list of shareholders 
• Proof of claim forms : Proof of claim forms are filed by creditors listing the amounts they are 
owed by the debtor.  
• Trustee’s final report : The final report is filed by a trustee when a case is concluded; it 
shows which claims were paid.  
• Trustee’s final account : Trustee’s must also file a final a ccount of the administration of the 
estate. This account will also show which claims were paid.  
• Schedule A : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the debtor’s real 
property. 
• Schedule B : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the debtor’s personal 
property, including tangible property (e.g., jewelry and vehicles) and intangible property 
(e.g., investments and accounts receivable). 
• Schedule C : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes the property that the debtor 
is claiming as exempt from being used to satisfy claims. 
• Schedule D : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the secured debts the 
debtor owes (e.g., mortgages).  
• Schedule E : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the debtor’s priority 
debts (the Bankruptcy Code gives certain unsecured creditors priority, such as those 
owed wages, contributions to pension plans, taxes owed to governmental entities, etc.) 
• Schedule F : Filed by the debtor, this form describes unsecured, non-priority claims owed 
by the debtor.  
• Schedule G : Filed by the debtor, this form describes any leases and executory contracts 
(i.e., contracts that have not been fully performed) to which the debtor is a party.  
• Schedule H : This form is filed by the debtor, and it  describes all co-debtors that might be 
affected by the debtor’s bankruptcy.  
• Schedule I : Filed by the debtor, this form describes the debtor’s current income. 
• Schedule J : Filed by the debtor, this form describes the debtor’s current monthly 
expenditures. 
• Statement of financial affairs : This form is filed by the debt or, and it describes the debtor’s 
legal, economic, and business transactions prior to filing. It is a listing of all recent 
sources of income; payments to creditors;  lawsuits; repossessions or foreclosures; 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.430   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
assignments; gifts; losses; financial accounts; safe deposit box es; prior addresses; financial 
statements; inventories; and current and former officers, directors, and shareholders 
• Bankruptcy plan : The bankruptcy plan is a detailed account of how the creditor’s claims 
will be resolved. 
 
The bankruptcy file may also contain transcripts of depositions or interviews. If fraud was 
suspected, the trustee may have conducted a fraud investigation. Check with the trustee to 
find out if any investigations were conducted. 
 
Inspectors General 
Inspectors general can provide valuable information, especially to official law enforcement 
personnel, about businesses they have investigated or audited, and they are good guides to 
other information sources in their departments or agencies. Most offices of inspectors 
general maintain centralized index and case file systems. Congress established inspectors 
general to combat governmental fraud, waste, and abuse in federal departments, agencies, 
and designated the entities listed below. 
 
Federal Entity Website Address 
Agency for International Development www.usaid.gov 
Agriculture, Department of www.usda.gov 
Amtrak www.amtrakoig.com 
Appalachian Regional Commission www.arc.gov 
Central Intelligence Agency www.cia.gov 
Commerce, Department of www.commerce.gov 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission www.cftc.gov 
Consumer Product Safety Commission www.cpsc.gov 
Corporation for National and Community Service www.nationalservice.org 
Corporation for Public Broadcasting www.cpb.org 
Council of the Inspectors General www.ignet.gov 
Defense, Department of  www.defense.gov 
Education, Department of  www.ed.gov 
Energy, Department of www.doe.gov 
Environmental Protection Agency www.epa.gov 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission www.eeoc.gov 
Farm Credit Administration www.fca.gov 
Federal Communications Commission www.fcc.gov 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.431 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation www.fdicoig.gov 
Federal Election Commission www.fec.gov 
Federal Emergency Management Agency www.fema.gov 
Federal Housing Finance Board www.fhfa.gov 
Federal Labor Relations Authority www.flra.gov 
Federal Maritime Commission www.fmc.gov 
Federal Reserve Board www.federalreserve.gov 
Federal Trade Commission www.ftc.gov 
General Services Administration oig.gsa.gov 
Government Printing Office www.gpo.gov 
Health and Human Services, Department of www.hhs.gov 
Homeland Security, Department of www.dhs.gov 
Housing and Urban Development, Department of www.hud.gov 
Interior, Department of the www.doi.gov 
International Trade Commission, U.S. www.usitc.gov 
Justice, Department of www.usdoj.gov 
Labor, Department of www.dol.gov 
Legal Services Corporation www.lsc.gov 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration www.nasa.gov 
National Archives and Records Administration www.archives.gov 
National Credit Union Administration www.ncua.gov 
National Endowment for the Arts www.nea.gov 
National Endowment for the Humanities www.neh.gov 
National Labor Relations Board www.nlrb.gov 
National Science Foundation www.nsf.gov 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission www.nrc.gov 
Office of Personnel Management www.opm.gov 
Peace Corps. www.peacecorps.gov 
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation www.pbgc.gov 
Postal Service, U.S. www.usps.com 
Railroad Retirement Board www.rrb.gov 
Securities and Exchange Commission www.sec.gov 
Small Business Administration www.sba.gov 
Social Security Administration www.ssa.gov 
State, Department of www.state.gov 
Tennessee Valley Authority www.tva.gov 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.432   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Transportation, Department of www.dot.gov 
Treasury, Department of the www.ustreas.gov 
Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration www.ustreas.gov/tigta 
Veterans Affairs, Department of www.va.gov 
 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission Act of 1974 created the Commodity Futures 
Trading Commission (CFTC), and it empowered the CFTC to regulate all futures trading in 
the United States. The CFTC imposes speculative position limits on futures contracts as 
needed to eliminate, decrease, or deter the burdens on interstate commerce that may result 
from excessive speculation. Moreover, the CFTC, through its affiliation with the National 
Futures Association (NFA), provides a dispute-resolution program for customers and 
members.  
 
This CFTC maintains the following information: 
• Registration information concerning firms and individuals 
• Administrative and injunctive actions filed by the CFTC against firms and individuals 
• Financial reports filed by CFTC registrants 
• Customer complaints filed against CFTC registrants 
 
National Futures Association 
The National Futures Association is an industry-wide, self-regulatory organization 
authorized by the Commodity Exchange Act; it  operates under the supervision of the CFTC. 
The NFA is a one-stop information source for all types of registration and disciplinary 
information regarding firms and individuals in the futures industry. This information 
includes registration status and employment history; disciplinary actions filed by the NFA, 
the CFTC, and the commodity exchanges; and c ustomer complaints filed under the CFTC’s 
Reparations Program.  
 
The NFA’s Information Center can be contacted at (800) 621-3570 or within Illinois at (312) 
781-1410, or accessed on their website at www.cftc.gov. 
 
Department of Agriculture 
Some U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) agencies maintain or have access to financial 
records concerning contracts with the agency; recipients of various benefits, such as food 
stamps and free or reduced-price school lunches; farmland improvements; and federal crop 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.433 
insurance coverage. Various USDA agencies maintain information about gaining access to 
records concerning the following: 
• Meat or poultry companies 
• Feedlot owners or operators, livestock brokers, meat packers, or canneries 
• Ownership, management, or the operations of—or certain financial data concerning—
 farms or ranches participating in USDA programs 
• Retail grocery stores authorized to accept food stamps 
• Rural electric or telephone cooperatives 
• Applications for and receipt of loans, loan guarantees, grants, or contracts with or from 
USDA agencies 
• Applications for and indemnities paid by federal crop insurance 
• Logging (tree harvesting) companies that remove timber from national forests 
• Certain improvements to farm land 
• The import or export of agricultural commodities, animals, or plants 
• Personnel data on current or former USDA employees 
 
The USDA headquarters are at 1400 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, D.C. 20250 
and can be called at (202) 720-6858. The USDA’s website is www.usda.gov. 
 
Department of Commerce 
The Department of Commerce is focused on promoting economic growth, and it maintains 
information on international trade, social and economic conditions, trends, patents, 
trademarks, ocean studies, domestic economic development, and minority businesses. It has 
foreign country experts who can direct examiners to sources of business information on any 
country in the world 
 
The Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), a division of the Department of Commerce, 
maintains lists of persons and entities who have been denied the right to export or import 
goods. The BIS’s website is www.bis.doc.gov. 
 
The Department of Commerce is located at 1401 Constitution Avenue NW, Washington, 
D.C. 20230 and can be called at (202) 482-2000. Their website is www.commerce.gov. 
 
Social Security Administration Records 
The Social Security Administration retains original applications for Social Security numbers. 
Applications list an applicant’s name (maiden and married names for women), date of birth, 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.434   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
place of birth, sex, race, parents’ names, and address at time of application. If a Social 
Security number is known, it might lead to helpful information regarding the location where 
the card was issued. Because many people apply for a Social Security number at a young age, 
these records can help to locate an individual’s place of birth.  
 
There are nine digits in the Social Security number. With the exception of the 700 series, the 
first three digits reflect the state of issue. Some states and Puerto Rico have more than one 
series of numbers. The last six digits are individual identifiers. Here is a listing of the states 
of issue of the first three digits: 
 
Social Security Number Chart 
Initial Numbers  State of Issuance  
001–003 New Hampshire 
004–007 Maine 
008–009 Vermont 
010–034 Massachusetts 
035–039 Rhode Island 
040–049 Connecticut 
050–134 New York 
135–158 New Jersey 
159–211 Pennsylvania 
212–220 Maryland 
221–222 Delaware 
223–231, 691–699* Virginia 
232–236 West Virginia 
237–246, 232, 681–690* North Carolina 
247–251, 654–658* South Carolina 
252–260, 667–675* Georgia 
261–267, 589–595, 766–772 Florida 
268–302 Ohio 
303–317 Indiana 
318–361 Illinois 
362–386 Michigan 
387–399 Wisconsin 
400–407 Kentucky 
408–415, 756–763* Tennessee 
416–424 Alabama 
425–428, 587, 588*, 752–755*   Mississippi 
429–432, 676–679* Arkansas 
433–439, 659–665* Louisiana 
440–448 Oklahoma 
449–467, 627–645 Texas 
468–477 Minnesota 
478–485 Iowa 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.435 
486–500 Missouri 
501–502 North Dakota 
503–504 South Dakota 
505–508 Nebraska 
509–515 Kansas 
516–517 Montana 
518–519 Idaho 
520 Wyoming 
521–524, 650–653* Colorado 
525, 585, 648, 649* New Mexico 
526–527, 600–601 Arizona 
525–529, 646–647 Utah 
530, 680* Nevada 
531–539 Washington 
540–544 Oregon 
545–573, 602–626 California 
574 Alaska 
575–576, 750–751* Hawaii 
577–579 District of Columbia 
580 groups 01–18 (groups 20 above PR) Virgin Islands 
580–584, 596–599 Puerto Rico 
586 Guam, American Samoa, Northern  
  Mariana Islands, Philippine Islands 
700–728 Railroad employees under the   
  special retirement act** 
729–733 Enumeration at Entry 
 
*    New areas allocated but not yet issued 
**  Issuance of these numbers to railroad em ployees was discontinued July 1, 1963. 
 
Department of Defense  
The Department of Defense (DOD) maintains information concerning military pay, 
dependents, allotments, deposits, and other financial information is maintained by the 
entities listed below. 
 
Army 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Indianapolis Center 
Indianapolis, IN 46249-0001 
(888) 332-7366 
www.dfas.mil/about/Contacts/ArmyContacts.html 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.436   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Air Force 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Denver Center, Lowry Air Force Base 
Denver, CO 80279-5000 
(888) 332-7411 
www.dfas.mil/about/Contacts/airforcecontacts.htm 
 
Navy 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Cleveland Center 
1240 East Ninth Street 
Cleveland, OH 44199-2055 
(888) 332-7411 or (216) 522-5096 
www.dfas.mil/about/Contacts/navycontacts.html 
 
Marine Corps 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Kansas City Center 
Kansas City, MO 64197-0001 
(800) 756-4571 or (614) 693-8507 
www.dfas.mil/about/Contacts/marinecorps.html 
 
Department of Education 
The Department of Education’s Inspector Ge neral maintains financial and earnings 
statements from parents of students applying for Pell Grants (formerly called Basic 
Educational Opportunity Grants). 
 
Department of Housing and Urban Development 
The Department of Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD) Compliance Division 
conducts investigations of alleged HUD violations. This division handles investigations of 
false statements on credit applications for Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans, 
mortgagers’ certification of no outstanding obligations, cost certificates, and other areas of 
fraud. HUD maintains central index files in Washington, D.C., containing information 
regarding HUD programs and participants, including such individuals and businesses as 
mortgage companies, developers, and borrowers. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.437 
Department of Justice 
The Department of Justice’s U.S. National Central Bureau of the International Criminal 
Police Organization (USNCB-INTERPOL) has direct contact with law enforcement 
authorities in more than 185 INTERPOL memb er countries. The USNCB, therefore, can 
request information regarding ownership, previous investigations, and any other material  
legally releasable. The information available is determined by the laws of the countries from 
which the material is requested. 
 
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) is a principal law 
enforcement agency within the United States Department of Justice that is dedicated to 
preventing terrorism, reducing violent crime, and protecting the United States. The  
ATF retains: 
• Data on distilleries; wineries; breweries; ma nufacturers of tobacco products; wholesale 
and retail dealers of alcoholic beverages; and certain other manufacturers, dealers, and 
users of alcohol 
• Investigative reports of alleged violations under its jurisdiction 
• A list of federally licensed firearms manufacturers, importers, and dealers 
• A complete list of all federally licensed explosive manufacturers, importers, and dealers 
• Data on firearms licenses given; also conducts firearms licensee qualification and 
compliance inspections 
 
Department of Labor 
The Department of Labor (DOL) has information about the Federal Employees 
Compensation Act, the Job Partnership Training  Act, the Occupational Safety Health Act, 
and the Mine Safety Health Act. The Department  retains substantial data on businesses that 
have special work programs affiliated with it. 
 
Under the Employment Standards Administration of the DOL, the Office of Labor-Management 
Standards (OLMS) administers and enforces most of the provisions of the 
Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (LMRDA). The LMRDA has 
reporting requirements for certain labor organizations, union officers and employees, 
employers, labor relations consultants, and surety companies. The LMRDA requires covered 
labor organizations to annually file reports with the OLMS. The information required 
includes names and titles of officers; rates  of dues and fees; loans receivable; other 
investments; other assets; other liabilities; fixed assets; loans payable; sales of investments 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.438   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
and fixed assets; disbursement to officers;  disbursement to employees; purchase of 
investments and fixed assets; benefits; and contributions, gifts, and grants.  
 
In addition, surety companies that issue bonds required by LMRDA or the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) are required to report premiums received 
and claims paid. 
 
Department of State 
The Department of State maintains data on import and export licenses. The State 
Department’s Bureau of Diplomatic Security has information relating to previous 
investigations conducted by that office. The Bureau of Diplomatic Security is a world leader 
in international investigations; threat analysis; cyber security; counterterrorism; security 
technology; and protection of people, property, and information. 
 
Department of the Treasury 
The Department of the Treasury includes several statutory inspector general law 
enforcement agencies.  
 
Within the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), the Criminal Investigation (CI) Division 
conducts investigations of tax fraud relating to income tax, excise tax, occupational tax, and 
violations of currency-transaction reports. Enforcement efforts include tax violation, money 
laundering, currency crimes, and asset forfeiture. The release of taxpayer information to 
other than IRS personnel requires special procedures. The IRS Inspection Service maintains 
information on subjects of investigation and their relationships to IRS employees (e.g., 
threats made against, collusion with, and bribery of IRS employees). 
 
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) safeguards the financial system from 
the abuses of financial crime, including terrorist financing, money laundering, and other illicit 
activities. FinCEN works to maximize information sharing among law enforcement agencies 
and its other partners in the regulatory and financial communities. Through cooperation and 
partnerships, FinCEN’s network approach encourages cost-effective and efficient measures 
to combat money laundering domestically and internationally. The USA PATRIOT Act 
section 314(b) permits financial institutions, upon providing notice to the United States 
Department of the Treasury, to share information with one another in order to identify and 
report to the federal governmental activities that may involve money laundering or terrorist 
activity. However, access to these records by outside parties is extremely limited. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.439 
Department of Homeland Security 
Under the Border and Transportation Directorate of the Department of Homeland Security, 
the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Service retains data on businesses that are involved 
in imports and exports, including lists and records of importers, exporters, custom house 
brokers, and truckers. The Office of Investigations looks into alleged violations of import 
and export practices. The Customs and Border Protection Service is also involved in the 
National Narcotics Border Interdiction System, and special agents from the Office of 
Investigations have been participating in the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task 
Force. Customs might provide information relative to businesses that violate the statutes  
it enforces. 
 
The U.S. Secret Service maintains records on forgers, counterfeiters, and businesses that 
have contacted the Service concerning forged or counterfeit obligations of the United States, 
such as Treasury notes. In addition, the Treasurer of the United States can provide copies of 
canceled checks paid by the U.S. Treasury. The Secret Service also investigates counterfeiting 
and other financial crimes, including financial institution fraud; identity theft; computer 
fraud; and computer-based attacks on our nation’s financial, banking, and 
telecommunications infrastructure.  
 
Department of Veterans Affairs 
Records of loans, tuition payments, insurance payments, and nonrestrictive medical data 
related to disability pensions are maintained at VA regional offices  located in several 
metropolitan areas throughout the country.  
 
Drug Enforcement Administration 
The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) maintains information on licensed handlers 
of narcotics and the criminal records of users, pushers, and suppliers of narcotics. 
 
Federal Aviation Administration 
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) maintains records reflecting the chain of 
ownership of all civil aircraft in the United States. These records include documents about 
the manufacture, sale, transfer, inspection, and modification of an aircraft, including the bill 
of sale, sales contract, mortgage, and liens. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.440   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The FAA also maintains records on pilots, aircraft mechanics, flight engineers, and other 
individuals whom it certifies for flight safety positions. These records include information on 
certificates held, medicals, and law enforcement history. 
 
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
An agency within the Department of Justice,  the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
provides information on criminal records and fingerprints, as well as nonrestricted 
information pertaining to criminal offenses and subversive activities. It also provides 
information about wanted, missing, and unidentified people and foreign fugitives. The FBI 
currently investigates cases involving counterterrorism, counterintelligence, cyber crime, 
public corruption, civil rights, white-collar crime, organized crime, major thefts, and  
violent crimes.  
 
The Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System, more commonly known as 
IAFIS, is a national fingerprint and criminal-history system maintained by the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services (CJIS) Division. The IAFIS 
provides automated fingerprint search capabilities, latent searching capability, electronic 
image storage, and electronic exchange of fingerprints and responses 24 hours a day, 365 
days a year. As a result of submitting fingerprints electronically, agencies receive electronic 
responses to criminal 10-print fingerprint submissions within two hours, and within 24 
hours for civil fingerprint submissions.  
 
The IAFIS maintains the largest biometric database in the world, containing the fingerprints 
and corresponding criminal history information for more than 55 million subjects in the 
Criminal Master File. The fingerprints and corresponding criminal history information are 
submitted voluntarily by state, local, and federal law enforcement agencies. 
 
Federal Communications Commission 
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) licenses all radio operators in the United 
States. Individuals or corporate bodies applying for authority to construct new broadcast 
stations or to change existing stations also must file with the FCC. Information contained in 
the filings includes details on programming, technical aspects of the proposed facilities, 
ownership, and financial status. 
 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
Electric utility and natural gas companies are required to file annual reports with the Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission. The reports provide excellent financial pictures of the 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.441 
companies and provide information about officers, directors, and stockholders who own 
more than 10 percent of the company. 
 
Federal Highway Administration 
The Federal Highway Administration licenses, regulates, inspects, and registers all motor 
carriers operating in interstate commerce. It keeps records of its inspections of motor 
carriers and a history of violations of each carrier. 
 
Federal Maritime Commission 
The Federal Maritime Commission investigates applicants for licenses to engage in 
oceangoing freight-forwarding activities. Applicants provide information to the Commission 
covering most aspects of their history, including name, residence, date and place of birth, 
and citizenship of all corporate officers and directors; names of partnership members of 
individual proprietors; and names of direct holders of 5 percent or more of company stock. 
 
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority  
In 2007, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) was created through the 
consolidation of NASD and the member regulation, enforcement, and arbitration functions 
of the New York Stock Exchange. FINRA is dedicated to investor protection and market 
integrity through effective and efficient regulation and complementary compliance and 
technology-based services.  
 
FINRA touches virtually every aspect of the securities business—from registering and 
educating industry participants to examining securities firms; writing rules; enforcing those 
rules and the federal securities laws; informing and educating the investing public; providing 
trade reporting and other industry utilities; and administering the largest dispute resolution 
forum for investors and registered firms. It also performs market regulation under contract 
for the NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Exchange, the International Securities 
Exchange, and the Chicago Climate Exchange.  
 
Securities broker-dealers must register with the SEC and in those states where they plan to 
do business. If they plan to do business with the public they must also become FINRA 
members. Typical registration requirements for the SEC, states, and NASD include business, 
financial, disciplinary information, and disclosure of criminal convictions. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.442   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
General Services Administration 
The General Services Administration (GSA) has considerable information on architects, 
engineers, personal property auctioneers, real estate appraisers, construction contractors, 
sales brokers, and businesses that contract with the GSA. The agency also maintains the 
“GSA Consolidated List,” a computerized roster of suspended and debarred bidders. 
 
The GSA is also responsible for the Excluded Parties List System (EPLS), which is an 
electronic, Web-based system that identifies parties that excluded from receiving federal 
contracts, certain subcontracts, and certain types of federal financial and nonfinancial 
assistance and benefits. The EPLS keeps its user community aware of suspected terrorists, 
individuals barred from entering the United States, and those subject to administrative and 
statutory exclusions. The user is able to search, view, and download both current and 
archived exclusions. 
 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) is responsible for the nation’s 
public space program and long-term aerospace research. More than 90 percent of NASA’s 
multibillion-dollar budget goes to NASA contractors. Files maintained by its Office of 
Procurement contain information about a contractor and its employees. NASA requires that 
contracting firms submit the following data with their proposals: name and qualifications of 
the contractor and resumes of the personnel who will be directly assigned to the project. The 
resumes should include educational background, work experience, length of service with the 
firm, and projects on which these individuals have worked. 
 
National Archives and Records Administration 
The National Archives and Records Administration operates federal records centers 
throughout the country, including the National Personnel Records Center in St. Louis, MO, 
and the Federal Register and the National Archives Building in Washington, D.C. It also is 
responsible for regional archives and the presidential libraries. The National Personnel 
Records Center in St. Louis stores the personnel records of former members of the armed 
forces and former federal civilian employees. Procedures for investigative inquiries into these 
records are available from the Center. For information, call +1 (314) 801-0800. 
 
The Federal Register is the medium for notifying the public of official agency actions; all 
federal regulations must be published in it. The Office of the Federal Register provides a 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.443 
periodic workshop on the use of the Federal Register as an information source. A handbook 
on the uses of the Federal Register  is also available. For information, call +1 (202) 741-6000. 
 
National Railroad Passenger Corporation 
The National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak) maintains information on 
passengers, including reservation histories, methods of payment, and dates of travel; the 
railroad industry; railroad contractors; subcontractors; vendors; and train routes and 
schedules. 
 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) maintains applications and licenses of people 
and companies that export nuclear material and equipment from the United States. The 
NRC determines whether proposed exports would be inimical to our defense and security 
and, for certain exports, whether they come under the terms of an agreement that establishes 
the ground rules for nuclear cooperation and trade between the United States and the 
country of destination. 
 
Office of Foreign Assets Control 
The Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is an office within the Department of the 
Treasury charged with administering and enforcing U.S. sanction policies against targeted 
foreign organizations and individuals who sponsor terrorism and international narcotics 
traffickers. OFAC maintains a list of individu als, governmental entities, companies, and 
merchant vessels around the world that are known or suspected to engage in illegal activities. 
Persons or entities on the list, known as Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons 
(SDNs), include foreign agents, front organizations, terrorists and terrorist organizations, 
and drug traffickers. The list contains thousands of variations on names of individuals, 
governmental entities, companies, and merchant vessels and is updated on a regular basis. 
Current information on licenses issued with regard to SDNs and other blocked persons may 
be obtained or verified by calling OFAC Licensing at (202) 622-2480. 
 
Securities and Exchange Commission Records 
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) maintains public records of corporations 
with stocks and securities sold to the public. These records include the following 
information: 
• Financial statements 
• Identification of officers and directors 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.444   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Identification of owners of more than 10 percent of a business’s stock 
• A description of the registrant’s properties and businesses 
• A description of the significant provisions of the security to be offered for sale and its 
relationship to the registrant’s other capital securities 
• Identification of events of interest to investors 
• Identification of accountants and attorneys 
• A history of the business 
 
The SEC also maintains files on individuals and firms reported to it for violating federal or 
state securities laws. The information in these files pertains to official actions taken against 
such people and firms, including denials, refusals, suspensions, and revocations of 
registrations; injunctions, fraud orders, stop orders, and cease-and-desist orders; and arrests, 
indictments, convictions, sentences, and other official actions. 
 
Moreover, changes in beneficial ownership by officers, directors, and principal stockholders 
of securities listed and registered on a national securities exchange or of securities of public 
utility companies and certain closed-end investment companies can be accessed through the 
SEC’s EDGAR system, on the SEC’s website. Also, as of September 2008, this information 
can also be accessed on the SEC’s new IDEA (Interactive Data Electronic Applications) 
system. IDEA will at first supplement and then eventually replace the EDGAR system, 
which will become an archive of SEC filings made prior to the introduction of the IDEA 
system. 
 
Most of a company’s information filed with EDGAR and IDEA can be obtained in 
electronic form by using the online SEC search feature at www.sec.gov. To obtain paper 
copies of SEC records and documents, historic SEC filings, special reports and studies, 
speeches, and testimony, contact the Office of Investor Education and Advocacy at (202) 
551-8090 or through e-mail at PublicInfo@sec.gov. 
 
Some important corporate filings with the SEC are discussed below.  
 
Annual Report of Publicly Traded Company (Form 10-K) 
Form 10-K is an annual reports required by the SEC; it contains the company’s income 
statement and balance sheet, information on its debt structure, foreign ownership, properties 
owned, subsidiaries, industry descriptions, depreciation, dilution, and other key business 
information. If the filing company has filed for bankruptcy, been the target of a shareholder 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.445 
lawsuit, or been sued for patent infringement, such information may also show up in the 10-
 K. Excerpts or complete reports are available via LexisNexis or Dialog databases. 
 
Quarterly Report of Publicly Traded Company (Form 10-Q) 
Form 10-Q is same as the Form 10-K, but it  must filed quarterly instead of annually 
 
Special Events in Publicly Traded Company (Form 8-K) 
Form 8-k, which is one of the most common types of forms filed with the SEC, is filed to 
notify investors of any unscheduled material corporate event.  
 
Registration of Security (Form 8-A) 
Form 8-A is one of the forms used to register securities for offering to the public; it contains 
information regarding the type of security, details of the issuance, and information about the 
issuer.  
 
Registration of Security by Successor (Form 8-B) 
Form 8-B is a filing with the SEC that concerns the registration of securities of certain 
successor issuers; it contains the name of issuer and the relationship to the primary 
registrant/issuer. 
 
Special Events in Foreign Security (Form 6-K) 
Foreign private issuers must submit a Form 6-K. The information contained in a Form 6-K 
is similar to that contained in a Form 10-K and a Form 8-K. 
 
Report of Acquisition of Beneficial Ownership of 5 percent or More of Capital Stock of Public Company (Form 13-D) 
Form 13-D must be filed when an investor acquires five percent of any public company. 
This form contains a description of the security, any agreements or other undertakings by 
the reporting entity, the sources of funds for the acquisition, the purpose of the acquisition, 
and the relationship of the parties. Also, if acquisition results in change of control, it 
contains background information on each person reporting. 
 
Federal Trade Commission Filings 
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC), which is the federal agency responsible for 
enforcement of the Fair Credit Reporting Act, archives information on actions taken against 
companies and individuals, as well as consent decrees  (i.e., judicial recognition of an agreement 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.446   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
between parties to a suit) and judgments against companies and individuals. Detailed 
information on particular companies or actions is available through a request under the 
Freedom of Information Act. 
 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration Records 
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is charged with the 
enforcement of legislation designed to protect employees who raise complaints about the 
health and safety of their workplace. OSHA information includes the name, address, 
county/country, number of employees, and SIC code of any business subject to a health and 
safety inspection; purpose and scope of the in spection; office and officer conducting the 
inspection; hours spent; and total number of vi olations and penalties assessed as a result of 
the inspection. A search of OSHA information also encompasses all parallel state agencies. 
 
Interstate Commerce Commission 
The Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) identifies liability and car insurance carriers for 
all surface transportation companies engaged in interstate and foreign commerce. 
Information kept by the ICC includes the identification and address of the insurance carrier, 
the limits of the insurance policy, the policy number, and the status.  
 
U.S. Small Business Administration 
The U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) is a federal agency that provides support to 
small businesses. The SBA guarantees loans made by private lenders and makes direct loans 
for business construction, expansion, or conversion; for purchase of machinery, equipment, 
facilities, supplies, or materials; and for work ing capital. A loan applicant (sole owner, 
partnership, corporation, or other) must complete SBA forms, providing information about 
the business and its principals (owners, officers, and directors). 
 
Additionally, the SBA arranges contracts and guarantees loans for qualified, small, minority-
 owned businesses. For some of these businesses, the SBA might be the only source for 
financial and other information about the businesses, their principals, their assets, and other 
data. Because their stock is not publicly held, these businesses are not subject to public 
disclosure laws.  
 
The SBA also connects small firms owned by socially and economically disadvantaged 
Americans with contracts set aside by other federal agencies for the purposes of increasing 
opportunities for small businesses generally.  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.447 
United States State Department 
The United States State Department (known as the State Department) is responsible for the 
country’s international relations. It maintains the International Traffic in Arms Regulations 
(ITAR) Debarred List, which contains a list of  parties barred from participating in the 
exportation of defense articles (e.g., technical data, or in the furnishing of defense services 
for which a license or approval is required) under the International Traffic in Arms 
Regulation (22 CFR Sec. 127.7).  
 
Treasury Direct 
Treasury Direct is a financial services website that allows individuals to buy and redeem 
securities from the Department of the Treasury in electronic form. It maintains information 
on purchased and redeemed U.S. saving bonds (registered bonds), marketable securities, and 
special securities. Specifically, the information includes the series of bonds involved and the 
surname, given name, middle name or initial, and address of each person in whose name 
bonds were purchased.  
 
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services 
Formerly the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Services (USCIS) is a bureau of the Department of Homeland Security. The USCIS is 
charged with overseeing lawful immigration in the United States, and it retains a number of 
records, including alien registration records issued after August 27, 1940 (from July 1, 1920, 
to August 27, 1940, each immigrant was given an Immigrant’s Identification Card); lists of 
passengers and crews on vessels from foreign ports; passenger manifests and declarations 
(ship, date, and point of entry); naturalization records (names of witnesses to naturalization 
proceedings and acquaintances of the individual); deportation proceedings; and financial 
statements of aliens and people sponsoring an immigrant entry. 
 
U.S. Coast Guard 
The Coast Guard is a branch of the armed forces that carries out three basic roles: maritime 
safety, maritime security, and maritime stewardship. It maintains names of merchant 
mariners on U.S. vessels and investigative records pertaining to them, records relating to 
maritime drug smuggling, records on criminal investigations, and records on documented 
U.S. vessels.  
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.448   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
U.S. Government Accountability Office 
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) is  the audit, evaluation, and investigative 
agency of the United States Congress. GAO’s Internet home page provides access to recent 
GAO audit products and comptroller general decisions, as well as information on how to 
order paper copies of both recent and older GAO products. In addition, GAO audit 
products from fiscal year 1995 forward and recent decisions are available in electronic form 
at the Government Printing Office’s website. GAO products, including those not available 
on the Internet, may also be ordered by calling (202) 512-6000 or TDD (301) 413-0006. 
 
U.S. Postal Service 
The Postal Service, which is responsible for providing postal service in the United States, 
maintains valuable information, including the names and addresses of post office box 
holders. Check with the local post office to learn the identity of the inspector who can 
furnish the information. Photocopies of postal money orders and requests for copies of 
postal money orders are made through the local U.S. Postal Inspection Service office, usually 
by subpoena. 
 
Federal Procurement Data System 
The Federal Procurement Data System (FPDS) collects, develops, and disseminates federal 
contracting information. Many federal agencies report their contracts and purchases to the 
FPDS, which catalogs the information for government and public use. Contracts agreed 
upon as long ago as 1978 are searchable. The FPDS is best source for federal procurement 
information, and its website (www.fpds.gov) is also fairly explanatory and easy to navigate. 
 
FedWorld Information Network  
Established by The National Technical Information Service, FedWorld provides access to a 
comprehensive inventory of information disseminated by the Federal Government. 
Essentially, it is a one-stop shopping spot for federal governmental information, including a 
government locator database, U.S. Customs rulings, Supreme Court decisions, and a foreign 
news alert service. Its website is www.fedworld.gov. 
 
National Motor Vehicle Title Information System 
Established by the Anti-Car Theft Act of 1992, the National Motor Vehicle Title 
Information System (NMVTIS) is an electronic database used to authenticate and exchange 
key vehicle history data, such as titling information and certain theft data. The primary 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.449 
reason for creating the NMVTIS was to address the lack of conformity among state vehicle 
documentation laws, which is one of the key factors contributing to title fraud.  
 
The new database, effected on January 1, 2010, is designed to prevent title washing, which 
occurs when a vehicle’s brand (i.e., a permanent designation indicating that the vehicle has 
incurred damage through collusion, flood, fire, or other incident requiring repair) is removed 
by re-titling the vehicle in a state that doesn’t carry forward any brands on the new title.  
 
 
Non-Public Records 
 
Types of Non-Public Records 
As previously stated, non-public records—information about a person or business that is 
considered to be private and confidential—mig ht be needed in some fraud examinations. 
Some of the most valuable personal records include: 
• Banking records 
• Tax returns and related documents 
• Credit records 
• Telephone records 
• Credit card account records 
 
Banking Records 
Bank records are perhaps the single most important external financial source available to a 
fraud examiner. In addition to their use as evidence for fraud, banking records might provide 
leads on sources of funds, expenditures and personal affairs. These records help the 
examiner construct a paper trail to prove the fraud.  
 
Some of the records that should be reviewed, if available, are: 
• Account opening documentation 
• Monthly account statements 
• Checks written on the account 
• Loan files 
• Safe deposit box records 
• Currency transaction reports 
• Bank collection department records 
• Mortgage loan files 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.450   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Tax Returns and Related Documents 
Personal tax returns, if available, may provide indirect evidence of illicit payments, such as 
profits or losses from previously undisclosed business ventures, or interest and dividends on 
hidden certificates of deposit and bank accounts. The returns may also show deductions and 
expenses, such as real estate taxes, which may lead to previously unknown funds or assets. 
 
Credit Records 
Practically all lines of business have specialized credit-reporting associations that can provide 
credit information on individuals and businesses, including trade information, designation of 
lenders and creditors, types of businesses, date accounts were opened, terms of payment 
agreed upon, highest credit, balance owing, and paying habits. Some credit reports also give 
the name of the bank the subject does business with and the size of the subject’s accounts.  
 
In the United States, most consumer credit information is collected and maintained by the 
three national credit-reporting agencies: Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion. Generally, a 
subscription is required to obtain information from these sources, and their dissemination is 
governed by the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). The FCRA places restrictions on when a 
consumer credit report can be obtained and used. In many cases, the consumer must be 
notified or must consent to the use of the report for employment purposes. Please consult 
the information on the FCRA presented previously in this chapter for more information 
about the legality of obtaining and using consumer credit reports.  
 
Credit reports are provided by credit reporting agencies, also known as credit bureaus. Credit 
reporting agencies are local or national institutions that collect data from various sources on 
individual consumer creditworthiness and report that data to their members or subscribers.  
 
There are essentially two types of credit reporting agencies. The first is known as a file-based 
credit reporting agency, which develops its information from credit files and public records. The 
other type is known as an investigative credit reporting agency, which gathers most of its 
information through interviews.  
 
Credit reporting agencies typically maintain the following information: 
• Consumer information, such as address, age, family members, employers, income levels, 
length of employment, the extent of other obligations, and the like 
• Account information, such as payment schedules, items purchased, defaults (if any), and 
buying habits 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.451 
• Marketing information, such as customers brok en down by age, sex, income levels, and 
other classifications 
• Information on current and former employers 
 
Information on the creditworthiness of a business organization may also be obtained from 
credit reporting agencies. The responses for such searches may include payment trends from 
creditors, public records (such as UCC filings and tax liens), banking information, and key 
facts as to the type of business and ownership. But unlike consumer credit information, 
business credit information is not restricted by the Fair Credit Reporting Act. 
 
Generally, credit reporting agencies obtain their information from the following sources: 
• Consumers, primarily from filling out application forms for credit. 
• Public records, which provide information on bankruptcies, court judgments, 
foreclosures, divorces, criminal convictions, registered chattel mortgages, and registered 
agreements.  
• The major credit grantors and collection agencies, which, as subscribers, regularly send 
their credit files electronically to the credit bureaus, resulting in files that include the 
account number, outstanding balance, and a nine-point scale indicating whether a 
payment was made on time.  
• Many credit grantors and collection agencies  only report payment information to one of 
the three national credit-reporting agencies, but larger creditors may report to more than 
one bureau. Some creditors, like utility companies, only report delinquent activity. Since 
the big three agencies do not share data among themselves, there will be differences 
between the credit reports from each credit bureau. 
 
In a typical credit information request, the potential creditor calls the credit bureau (or 
makes an online request) for information, and the creditor receives details regarding other 
credit histories of the individual, such as payment schedules and delinquencies.  
 
Information maintained by credit reporting agencies is regularly updated at the request of the 
consumer or by request of the credit grantor.  
 
Telephone Records 
Like other types of non-public information, telephone records can provide valuable insight 
into fraud examinations. For example, telephone records  may provide contacts with real 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.452   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
estate brokers or sellers, identify charge calls from vacation spots or contacts with co-
 conspirators, or provide other leads to assets and expenditures. 
 
Credit Card Account Records 
Credit card account records can be helpful when conducting a fraud examination. Credit 
card receipts will track the travels of the defendant, and, of course, record expenditures. An 
extremely high balance on a credit card may indicate a motive for the crime or provide 
circumstantial evidence of hidden income. Even modest credit card charges may provide 
leads to identifying hidden assets (e.g., charges for boating supplies purchased at a marina 
might indicate a need for further investigation to determine whether the subject owns an 
expensive boat). 
 
Gaining Access to Non-Public Records 
Non-public records are not available to the public and therefore, may be difficult to obtain. 
Despite the limitations on obtaining personal records, fraud examiner may be able to obtain 
non-public records by using one or more of the methods discussed below.  
 
Requesting the Records 
The simplest way to obtain relevant documents is to request them. This usually works for 
examiners representing large organizations that are important customers to the party with 
the information. Vendors and other customers of the company conducting the investigation 
may cooperate voluntarily if they have nothing to hide (or think that incriminating evidence 
cannot be found) and are anxious to maintain good relations with the company. 
 
Subpoenas 
Subpoenas and other legal processes, such as depositions, interrogations, and document 
requests, are available if a civil action is filed. For example, a wronged organization may file a 
civil or administrative action or make a criminal referral so that records can be subpoenaed. 
In a civil case, records such as bank accounts, brokerage accounts, travel, credit card, credit 
agencies, and telephone toll records may be obtained by subpoena. 
 
Conversely, records subpoenaed in a criminal case usually are available only to the 
government during the investigation and perhaps thereafter if not disclosed at trial. In 
addition, law enforcement agencies may also subpoena records, of course, but usually will 
not disclose them to the victim or third parties. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.453 
Demand as a Condition of Continued Business 
Similarly, an organization may demand that a supplier, vendor, or agent turn over relevant 
documents as a condition of continued business. Taking this action is legal, in appropriate 
circumstances. Of course, management and counsel should be consulted before such 
demands are made, particularly if the other party has a contractual relationship with the 
company. 
 
Exercise Audit Clause Rights 
An audit clause allows the parties to access the books of the other party. Thus, absent 
subpoena power, examiners may need to use audit clause rights to access contractor and 
subcontractor records and financial accounts.  
 
Unfortunately, most audit clauses are too narrow to provide useful information. However, if 
properly constructed, an audit clause can be a powerful method by which on-book 
information can be obtained. 
 
Negotiating 
Another method to obtain relevant documents is to negotiate with a party to the 
investigation as part of a deal to cooperate in exchange for leniency. In some cases, third-
 party facilitators, or others marginally involved in the wrongdoing, may agree to produce 
records and cooperate in exchange for a release of liability, indemnity, or commitment to 
continue the business relationship. Counsel and management must, of course, be involved in 
such decisions, as well as the fidelity bond carrier, if a claim is to be made under the bond. 
 
Consent  
Although unlikely, a target executive may voluntarily produce certain records (if he is 
blameless, thinks he is blameless, or thinks the investigators will not find the “smoking 
gun”), or execute a consent to obtain such records from banks, credit agencies, or the IRS. 
 
 
Commercial Sources of Information 
 
Associations and Lobby Groups 
Associations and lobby groups have information about their member firms. Two of the best 
sources are the Better Business Bureau and a city’s Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.454   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Better Business Bureau 
A number of Better Business Bureaus are located throughout the country. They are 
sponsored by local businesses and offer a variety of services, including background 
information on local businesses and organizations. The bureaus generally keep information 
about criminal rackets and cons and their operators and can provide information about the 
business reputations of local groups. 
 
Chamber of Commerce 
Chambers of Commerce generally have city directories and often keep back issues of the 
directories. They also have information regarding reputations of businesses and operators in 
the area. 
 
Abstract and Title Companies 
In addition to records of individual transactions, abstract and title companies often publish 
and distribute papers to attorneys, real estate brokers, insurance companies, and financial 
institutions. These papers contain information about transfers of property, locations, 
mortgage amounts, and release of mortgages. 
 
Bonding Companies 
Bonding companies provide bonding services, including surety bonds, license bonds, permit 
bonds, bid bonds, and so on. To get bonded, an entity will have to submit an application for 
a bond at a bonding company. The application for a bond contains the applicant’s (person or 
firm) financial statement and data. The information contained in a bond application is 
essentially the same information that is required in loan applications (though in greater 
detail). 
 
Credit Card Records 
Credit card records often contain valuable information concerning the individual debtor, but 
laws and regulations must be checked before obtaining these records. Information on 
expenditures can be obtained from firms such as MasterCard, American Express, Diners 
Club, Discover, and Visa. This information usually requires a subpoena. 
 
Stockbrokers 
Stockbrokers maintain information, which is similar to that which is maintained by financial 
institutions, on many of their clients, especially those who have margin accounts. And they 
maintain records of transactions for all clients. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.455 
Western Union 
Western Union is a non-bank money transfer provider, and it stores records for paid money 
orders. These records contain the original telegram, by purchaser or sender, and bank drafts 
by Western Union. Western Union retains orders for less than $1,000 for two years and 
orders of $1,000 or more for six years. 
 
Carfax 
Carfax is a private service that provides vehicle history information. It determines whether 
there is an odometer discrepancy or evidence of prior salvage or title washing. Carfax’s 
unique database contains more than five billion records. They receive information from 
thousands of sources, including all Departments of Motor Vehicles (DMVs) in the United 
States and Canada, as well as many vehicle inspection stations, auto auctions, fleet 
management and rental agencies, automobile manufacturers, and fire and  
police departments.  
 
International Air Transport Association 
The International Air Transport Association is an international industry trade group of the 
leading airlines, and it has information on all international matters dealing with aviation 
security, including counterterrorism efforts worldwide. It also monitors and attempts to 
prevent fraud against airlines, such as ticket fraud. 
 
International Foundation for Art Research 
The International Foundation for Art Research (IFAR) is a nonprofit organization 
established in 1969 to help prevent the circulation of forged and misattributed works of art. 
IFAR offers an Authentication Service to help resolve controversies concerning the 
authenticity of works of art. IFAR also publishes quarterly journals on authentication 
research, art law, theft and recovery, and an extensive listing of recently reported stolen and 
missing art and antiques. The IFAR’s website is www.ifar.org. 
 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners’ (NAIC) is an organization of 
insurance regulators from the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and the U.S. territories. It 
provides a forum for the development of policy when uniformity is appropriate. A state 
regulator’s primary responsibility is to protect the interests of insurance consumers and the 
association helps regulators fulfill that obligation. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.456   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The NAIC’s website is a particularly effecti ve resource for consumer protection because 
potential investors can visit their site to verify if an insurance promoter is licensed to sell the 
investment. The NAIC’s website can be accessed at www.naic.org. 
 
 
Public Record Database Vendors 
 
Types of Public Record Database Vendors 
Although there are many categories of public record professionals, this section focuses on 
three: commercial database vendors, search firms, and document retrievers.  
 
Commercial Database Vendors 
Commercial database vendors provide users access to very powerful archives of data that 
compile various public records in one searchable database. Unlike public databases, 
commercial databases generally contain a broad range of information and allow the user to 
search millions of records simultaneously. Because these databases contain diverse types of 
information, fraud examiners can use them for many different types of jobs. 
 
Although generally, commercial database vendors do not provide any more information than 
can be accessed from other sources, they have two distinct advantages—search speed and 
constant access. 
 
Generally, commercial database vendors are available online and allow users to retrieve 
requested information through a computer that is connected to the Internet. For such 
databases, there may be an initial access fee, monthly membership fees, or a one-time access 
fee. 
 
Search Firms 
Search firms specialize in locating assets and retrieving public documents. They use a variety 
of resources, including online services, databases, public records, private information 
sources, and private investigators.  
 
Document Retrievers 
Document retrievers are researches for hire; they obtain information by visiting government 
agencies in person. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.457 
Types of Information Available 
The types of information available from public record services include: 
• Credit reports 
• Driving records 
• County and state criminal convictions 
• Workers’ compensation records 
• Education records 
• Professional license records 
• Social Security records 
• Addresses 
• Telephone numbers 
• County and state real property records 
• Federal criminal and civil records 
• Consumer public filings 
• Military records 
• Names and addresses of neighbors 
• State and county civil records 
• Business public filings 
• Business credit reports 
• Corporate records (by state) 
• FAA registrations 
• Pleasure craft registrations 
• Vehicle registrations (by license number or name of person or company) 
• Federal bankruptcy court records 
• Grantor and grantee records 
• Abstracts of judgments 
• Tax liens 
 
Uses for Public Record Professionals 
Fraud examiners can use public record professionals to: 
• Obtain useful background information on subjects and witnesses, contractors and 
vendors, such as criminal and civil litigation, bankruptcies, management or sales 
information 
• Assist in the compilation of “financial profile s” and “net worth” analyses, to show that 
the subject is living beyond his or her means, or has financial problems, through real 
property, motor vehicle, UCC and other records of assets and expenditures 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.458   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Identify undisclosed outside businesses or income by subject employees 
• Show that shell companies or phantom vendors do not exist 
• Identify assets that might be seized or recovered 
• Help locate witnesses 
 
Public Record Database Vendors 
There are a number of companies that offer wide access to public records, credit reports, 
and newspapers and periodicals. Some of the more commonly used sources are: 
• Asset Locator and Business Background Check by KnowX 
• US Datalink 
• infoUSA 
• CSC Diligenz 
• Dialog 
• LexisNexis 
• DCS Information Systems 
• G.A. Public Records Services 
 
A complete description of these services and other information available through the 
computer is discussed in the next chapter, “Accessing Information Online.” 
 
 
Directories 
Directories provide data on national, trade, business, and commercial associations. Some of 
the more frequently used directories are discussed below. 
 
D&B Directories 
D&B is a business and financial information services company, and it is the leader in 
business credit reports. D&B provides access to  a variety of resources and is renowned for 
products like America’s Corporate Families and the Million Dollar Database. 
 
America’s Corporate Families  
This three-volume print directory, published by D&B, provides complete detailed 
information on U.S. family members of foreign parent companies and foreign subsidiaries of 
U.S. corporations. It includes data on more than 13,000 U.S. subsidiaries, 1,900 U.S. 
ultimates, and 31,000 foreign subsidiaries.   
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.459 
D&B’s Million Dollar Database 
D&B’s Million Dollar Database provides access to information on approximately 23 million 
businesses in over 200 countries worldwide. Information available includes annual sales, 
corporate officers, locations, phone numbers, type of business, and number of employees. 
 
American Medical Association Directory of Physicians 
Available in four hardbound volumes, this directory, which is published by the American 
Medical Association, lists physicians alphabetica lly and geographically. Each physician listing 
contains information on state and city of practice, year of birth, medical school and year of 
graduation, year of license, residence and office address, specialty, and membership in 
associated medical organizations. The Directory also contains a name index of all doctors in 
the United States. 
 
Best’s Insurance Reports 
Best’s Insurance Reports presents comprehensive statistical reports of the financial position, 
history, and operating results of thousands of property/casualty or life/health insurance 
companies operating in the United States and Canada. The individual report on each 
institution includes a review of its history, management and operations, investments, 
operating results, and other statistical compilations. The Reports are available online, in print, 
or in CD.  
 
City Directories 
City directories usually contain the name, residence, occupation, and sometimes the place of 
employment of a city’s influential people. Such  directories can usually be found at public 
libraries, chambers of commerce, and secondhand bookstores. 
 
Congressional Directory 
The Congressional Directory is the official directory of the U.S. Congress. It presents short 
biographies on each member of the Senate and House, listed by state or district, and 
additional data, such as committee memberships, terms of service, administrative assistants 
and/or secretaries, and room and telephone numbers. It also lists officials of the courts, 
military establishments, and other federal departments and agencies, including Washington, 
D.C., governmental officials, governors of states and territories, foreign diplomats, and 
members of the press, radio, and television galleries. The directory is compiled by the Joint 
Committee on Printing, Washington, D.C., and is available through the Government 
Printing Office. 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.460   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Gale 
Gale, part of Cengage Learning, is an educational publishing company. It is known for its 
online databases and multi-volume reference works. Some of its resources include: Gale Gale 
Directory Library, Gale Directory of Databases, Directories in Print, Gale Directory of Publications and 
Broadcast Media, Encyclopedia of Associations, and Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources.  
 
Gale Directory Library 
The Gale Directory Library provides online access to some of Gale’s most popular 
directories on companies, publishers, associations, and so on. It includes online access to  
Gale Directory of Databases, Gale Directories in Print, Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast 
Media, Encyclopedia of Associations, Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources.  
 
With Gale Directory Library, users can use state-of-the-art functionality to perform a range 
of data sorting, filtering, and exporting. Users can use the library to find contacts, 
companies, individuals, or publications by searching with a name or keyword; generate lists 
and analyze trends by exporting data to Word or Excel; and search across a growing number 
of directory titles. Each directory can be searched individually by its own unique data fields, 
or the entire directory collection can be searched. 
 
Gale Directory of Databases 
This two-volume directory provides detailed descriptions of nearly 20,000 publicly available 
databases, database products, online services, and database vendors and distributors 
worldwide in a variety of formats. Entries include producer name and contact information, 
description, cost, and more.  
 
Detailed listings provide complete information on databases, producers, and vendors. 
Database listings include content and subject coverage, type, language, time span, update 
frequency, geographic coverage, producer contact information, and vendor availability. 
Producer and vendor entries feature full contact information, including address, phone, fax, 
website addresses, e-mail addresses, former names, branch office locations, and a list of 
available databases and products. For online vendors (or hosts), entries cover conditions of 
access, networks used, and gateway access. For portable vendors, entries include a list of 
distributors. The Directory of Databases is also available on the Gale Directory Library. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.461 
Directories in Print 
This publication, published by Gale, thoroughly describes and indexes about 16,000 
directories of all kinds, including business and industrial directories, professional and 
scientific rosters, foreign directories, and other lists and guides. Directories in Print  covers a 
wide range of subjects, including general business; manufacturing industries and commercial 
services; banking, insurance, and financial services; advertising, marketing, and public 
relations; health care services; law, military,  and government; and associations, philanthropy, 
ethnic groups, and religion. Directories in Print is available online on Gale Directory Library.  
 
Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast Media  
This three-volume directory contains information on 57,000 radio and television stations, 
cable companies, and print-media publishers. Entries provide addresses, phone and fax 
numbers, e-mail addresses, website addresses, key personnel, owner information, hours of 
operation, and much more. Providing access to information on U.S., Canadian, and 
international media outlets, Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast Media  also includes ad 
rates, circulation statistics, local programming information, and other essential data. The 
Directory of Publications and Broadcast Media  is available online on the Gale Directory Library. 
 
Encyclopedia of Associations 
Gale publishes a series of Encyclopedia of Associations in regional, national, and 
international editions. It publishes the Encyclopedia of Associations: National Organizations of the 
U.S., which lists each chartered public and private association in the United States and 
provides valuable information about each association’s officers and purpose. In addition, 
publishes the Encyclopedia of Associations:  International Organizations  and the Ency clopedia of 
Associations: Regional, State, and Local. These Encyclopedias can be found online on Gale 
Directory Library. 
 
Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources 
Published by Gale, this comprehensive directory is a bibliographic guide to more than 
35,000 live, print, and electronic sources of information covering more than 1,100 subjects 
of particular interest to business professionals. Citations cover abstracts and indexes, 
almanacs and yearbooks, bibliographies, CD-ROM and online databases, directories, 
encyclopedias and dictionaries, periodicals and newspapers, research centers and institutes, 
statistic sources, trade and professional societies, and many other sources of business 
information. The Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources  is available online on Gale 
Directory Library. 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.462   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SEC Filings 
EDGAR 
EDGAR (Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval) is a system that collects 
documents submitted by companies and others who are required by law to file with the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). EDGAR performs automated collection, 
validation, indexing, acceptance, and forwarding of SEC filings. Its primary purpose is to 
increase the efficiency and fairness of the securities market to benefit investors, 
corporations, and the economy by accelerating the receipt, acceptance, dissemination, and 
analysis of time-sensitive corporate information filed with the SEC.  
 
Not all documents that public companies file with the SEC, however, will be available on 
EDGAR. Even so, several important documents, such as Form 10-K or 10-KSB, are 
required to be filed on the EDGAR system. For more information, visit 
www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml. 
 
Interactive Data Electronic Applications  
In August 2008, the SEC unveiled the successor to the agency’s EDGAR database, which 
will give investors far faster and easier access to key financial information about public 
companies and mutual funds. The new system is called IDEA, short for Interactive Data 
Electronic Applications. Based on a completely new architecture being built from the 
ground up, it will at first supplement and then eventually replace the EDGAR system.  
 
Currently, most SEC filings are available only in government-prescribed forms through 
EDGAR. Investors looking for information must sift through one form at a time, and then 
re-keyboard the information — a painstaking task. With IDEA, investors will be able to 
instantly collate information from thousands of companies and forms, and create reports 
and analysis on the fly, in any way they choose.  
 
In 2009, however, CaseWare International, the developer of IDEA — Data Analysis 
Software, filed suit against the SEC over the use of the IDEA name. That same year, the 
SEC agreed to discontinue its use of the mark IDEA. At this point, it is not clear what the 
SEC will call its new system.  
 
e-Government and Web Directory: U.S. Federal Government Online 
The e-Government and Web Directory is a guidebook for anyone looking for official U.S. 
governmental resources on the Internet. The directory contains more than 2,000 website 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.463 
records that provide descriptions and URLs for each site. U.S. government organization 
charts are supplemented with URLs for the 16  cabinet-level departments and agencies, the 
House of Representatives and the Senate, and the federal judicial branch. It also provides 
great detail on the House and Senate in two appendices. Appendix A provides a roster of 
congressional members with their websites, and Appendix B provides a listing of House and 
Senate committees with committee URLs and the names of chairpersons and ranking 
minority members. This print publication can be purchased at www.bernan.com. 
 
Factiva 
Factiva, from Dow Jones, is a business information and research tool. It is tailored for 
business and financial news searches, maintaining a catalog of more than 28,000 of the 
world’s leading news and business sources from  157 countries, 350 geographic regions, and 
in 23 languages. Factiva allows users to pay for only the articles downloaded and does not 
require an annual subscription. 
 
Carroll Publishing  
Carroll Publishing is a government information resource. It provides access to government 
information for all levels of government, and it offers a line of information products, 
including the Federal Directory and the Federal Organization Charts.  
 
Federal Directory 
Carroll Publishing’s Federal Directory combines all three branches of the government into 
one volume. It contains nearly 38,000 names, titles, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses 
of senior- and mid-level governmental officials in the executive office of the president, all 15 
cabinet-level federal departments, independent agencies, U.S. Congress, and the federal court 
system. This directory features a keyword index to help users quickly find program and 
regulatory offices, and it is updated four times a year. 
 
Federal Organization Charts 
This loose-leaf chart produced by Carroll Publishing provides names, addresses, and 
telephone numbers of staff members in the White House, executive departments, 
independent agencies, quasi-governmental organizations, and congressional support offices. 
It has name and key word indexes and is updated monthly. Due to the high cost of 
maintaining this directory, it generally available at selected federal governmental libraries. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.464   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Foreign Representatives in the U.S. Yellow Book 
This directory has names and titles of more than 19,000 international business and 
governmental leaders and sections on corporations, financial institutions, foreign nations, 
intergovernmental organizations, foreign press, and law firms. It includes officials’ titles, 
addresses, and telephone and fax numbers. This yellow book is broken down into  
six sections: 
• Corporations: Lists more than 1,000 leading foreign-based corporations with more than 
2,000 U.S. offices and subsidiaries. 
• Financial institutions: Lists more than 230 leading foreign-based financial institutions 
and more than 600 U.S. representative offices. 
• Foreign nations: Lists embassies and consulates in 191 countries with permanent 
missions to the United Nations. 
• Intergovernmental organizations: Lists the U.S. offices in entities such as the United 
Nations, European Union, and the World Bank Group. 
• Foreign press: Lists more than 210 international media outlets with bureaus in the U.S. 
• Law firms: Lists foreign law firms with a U.S. presence. 
 
Index to Legal Periodicals 
Published by H. W. Wilson, the Index to Legal Periodicals offers international coverage and 
access to scholarly articles, symposia, jurisdictional surveys, court decisions, legislation, 
books, book reviews, and more. This source indexes more than 1,025 legal journals, law 
reviews, yearbooks, institutes, statutes, bar association publications, university publications, 
and governmental publications, with the full text of nearly 325 select periodicals available. 
 
Inmate Locator 
Inmate Locator is a Federal Bureau of Prisons on line database. It contains information on all 
federal prisoners incarcerated since 1982. The information includes physical description, 
inmate profile, inmate location or release location, numerical identifiers, personal history, 
security designation, past and present institution assignments, custody classification, and 
sentencing information. To locate an inmate, visit the Federal Bureau of Prison’s inmate 
locator at www.bop.gov. 
 
IHS Fairplay  
IHS Fairplay, formerly Lloyd’s Register—Fairplay, supplies a range of comprehensive 
shipping databases, registers, online information, and a tailored research and system-development 
service for customers’ specific needs.  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.465 
Magazines for Libraries 
Published by Bowker, Magazines for Libraries lists almost every magazine (general, technical, 
and scholarly) that a library might wish to stock and describes the formats in which the 
magazines are available. 
 
Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory 
The Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory contains biographical information on most lawyers 
and law firms practicing in the United States and Canada. 
 
Mergent  
Mergent’s publications are similar to D&B’s. Mergent’s reports can provide information 
about firms listed on the New York and American stock exchanges as well as companies 
listed on regional American exchanges. Mergent also provides Mergent Online, which 
provides online access to Mergent’s comprehensive global company database. 
 
Mergent’s Bank and Finance Manual and News Reports 
Mergent’s Bank and Finance Manual and News Reports is a business and financial information 
resource containing information on nearly 2,000 corporations. It covers the field of finance 
represented by banks, insurance companies, investment companies, unit investment trusts, 
and miscellaneous financial enterprises. It also includes information on real estate companies 
and real estate investment trust. Additionally, it provides other relevant facts and figures, 
including information on corporations’ auditors, general counsel, exchange and symbol, 
number of employees, number of shareholders, address, telephone and fax numbers, 
shareholder-relations contact, stock-price ranges, dividends, report of independent auditors, 
transfer agents, stock splits, and annual meeting date.  
 
Mergent’s Bank and Finance News Reports  are published each month in print and each week 
online and contain material that updates Mergent’s Bank and Finance Manual. The reports 
include news items, interim financial statements, personnel changes, new company 
descriptions, merger proposals, details about new debts and stock issues, security offerings, 
announcements of new financing, and call notices.  
 
National Insurance Crime Bureau 
The National Insurance Crime Bureau (NICB) is a leading not-for-profit organization 
dedicated to preventing, detecting, and defeating insurance fraud and vehicle theft through 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.466   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
information analysis, investigations, training, and public awareness. The NICB combats auto 
theft by investigating cases referred to it by insurers and through its online databases.  
 
The NICB publishes the Passenger Vehicle Identification Manual  annually. This manual contains 
the structure and decoding of vehicle identification numbers (VINs) from the last three 
model years for most U.S. and Canadian passenger vehicles, including light-duty trucks  
and motorcycles.  
 
The NICB publishes the Commercial Vehicle and Off-Road Equipment Identification Manual  every 
five years. This manual contains the structure of vehicle identification numbers for 
commercial vehicles and the structure of product identification numbers (PIN) for off-road 
equipment from the last five model years.  
 
These manuals also include: 
• Summary of the Federal Motor Vehicle Theft Prevention Standard, which requires VIN 
markings on major parts of passenger vehicles that are part of high-theft lines 
• General information on VIN structure and decoding of trucks, tractors, and trailers 
along with PIN structure and decoding for off-road equipment 
• Glossary of vehicle-related terminology 
 
VINCheck is another service available from  the National Insurance Crime Bureau. NICB’s 
VINCheck is a service provided to the public to  assist in determining if a vehicle has been 
reported as stolen. NICB’s VINCheck database contains vehicles that have been reported 
stolen by cooperating NICB members, but not recovered. A Vehicle Identification Number 
(VIN) is required to perform a search. This information is made available, free of charge, as 
a public service to help consumers determine whether a specific vehicle has been reported as 
stolen and to assist NICB and law enforcement in locating stolen vehicles. A maximum of 
five VINCheck searches can be conducted within a 24-hour period. 
 
In the 1980s, states and regions experiencing high levels of auto thefts began to form Anti-
 Car Theft (ACT) groups, funded by voluntary grants from coalitions of law enforcement 
groups, state funds, insurers, and consumers, to promote public awareness of vehicle theft 
and lobby for the passage of state legislation aimed at combating thefts. A few states have 
enacted Automobile Theft Prevention Authorities (ATPAs), which are nonprofit 
organizations dedicated to preventing motor vehicle thefts. States that have active ATPAs 
include Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Louisian a, Maryland, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.467 
Texas, and Washington. State ATPAs are mostly funded by a small surcharge on drivers’ 
licenses or registration fees, or on auto insurance policies sold in the state. 
 
National Motor Vehicle Title Information System 
Established by the Anti-Car Theft Act of 1992, the National Motor Vehicle Title 
Information System (NMVTIS) is an electronic database used to authenticate and exchange 
key vehicle history data, such as titling information and certain theft data. The primary 
reason for creating the NMVTIS was to address the lack of conformity among state vehicle 
documentation laws, which is one of the key factors contributing to title fraud.  
 
The new database, which went into full effect on January 1, 2010, is designed in part to 
prevent title washing, which occurs when a vehicle’s brand (i.e., a permanent designation 
indicating that the vehicle has incurred damage through collusion, flood, fire, or other 
incident that requires repair) is removed by re-titling the vehicle in another state that does 
not carry forward any brands on the new title. 
 
The National Directory of Law Enforcement Administrators 
This annually updated database contains information on more than 40,000 listings, which 
include the names, addresses, telephone numbers, and fax numbers of highway patrol 
offices; prosecuting attorneys; municipal, county,  campus, state correctional, federal, military, 
airport, and harbor law enforcement agencies. 
 
National Trade and Professional Associations Directory 
The National Trade and Professional Associations lists more than 7,800 active national trade 
associations, professional associations, technical organizations, and labor unions, and the 
20,363 executives who run them. Each listing in this directory contains an address, telephone 
and fax number, e-mail address, name/title of top executives, purpose of the organization, 
history, membership size and composition, annual budget, staff size, publications, and 
annual meetings. It also provides a listing of firms that provide administration and 
management services to associations on a contract basis, including a list of their full-time 
client associations. Other features include cont act information, serial publications, upcoming 
convention schedule, membership and staff size, budget figures, and background 
information. The 2010 edition of the National Trade and Professional Associations directory 
can be purchased online through Columbia Books and Information Services, and it is 
available online at www.AssociationExecs.com. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.468   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The New York Times Article Archive 
The New York Times Article Archive contains the complete back file of the New York Times. 
It contains more than 13-million articles in all, and it can be searched at 
www.NYTimes.com. The archive is divided in to two sections: 1851 to 1980 and 1981 to 
present.  
 
PubMed 
PubMed is a database service that provides free access to more than 20 million citations 
from MEDLINE and other life science journals for biomedical articles dating back to the 
1950s. PubMed includes links to full-te xt articles and other related resources. 
 
Reader’s Guide to Periodical Literature 
The Reader’s Guide  is a reference guide to articles published in periodicals and scholarly 
journals. The guide contains a full dictionary catalog of all articles by author, subject, and 
title, where possible. The entries refer to the volume, number of the periodical, starting and 
inclusive pages of the article, date of publication, and graphic material in the article, such as 
portraits. There is an electronic retrospective version of the guide available for 1890 to 1982.  
 
Standard & Poor’s NetAdvantage  
NetAdvantage is a subscription-based service provided by Standard & Poor’s. It is a 
comprehensive source of business and investment information, offering online access to 
Standard & Poor’s independent research, da ta, and commentary on stocks, bonds, funds, 
and industries. This service also includes export tools to enable researches to download data 
into spreadsheet programs for further analysis. Some of NetAdvantage’s premium 
publications are discussed below. 
 
Corporation Records  
This directory has information on more than 10,000 public companies. Each description 
includes company background, stock and bond descriptions, balance sheet and earnings 
information, officers and directors, capital expenditures, subsidiaries, and more. 
 
Company Profile 
NetAdvantage also publishes a comprehensive company profile for more than 10,500 
publicly traded companies. Each profile includes  a business description, an interactive 
charting tool, statistics, analyst ratings, valuation and financial information, as well as the 
latest stock price quote, company news, and information on competitors.  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.469 
Register of Corporations, Directors, and Executives 
The Register of Corporations, Directors, and Executives gives short summaries about 
corporate executives and directors, including their titles, the name of the company they work 
for, their academic credentials, membership in fraternal organizations, and available business 
and residential contact information. 
 
Register of Public Companies 
This Register provides brief descriptions of publicly traded companies, including stock 
symbol, total annual sales, number of employees, officer names, and North American 
Industry Classification System (NAICS) assignments. 
 
Register of Private Companies 
The Register of Private Companies provides hard to find information on approximately 
85,000 private companies, including (when available) their address, telephone number, 
officers and directors, total annual sales, number of employees, line of business, primary and 
secondary NAICS classifications, principal bank, law firm, accounting firm, and more. 
 
Security Dealers of North America 
The Security Dealers of North America is a listing of North American securities dealers, 
providing a brief description of each dealer’s business; a listing of the states in which it is 
registered to do business; the location of its ma in office; the names of its officers, clearing 
firm, associations, and memberships; and the number of employees and registered 
representatives it employs. 
 
The Global Banking Resource 
The Global Banking Resource (TGBR) is a comprehensive database of financial institutions, 
and it provides data on financial institutions’ contacts, correspondents, subsidiaries, affiliates, 
financial information, payment information, and much more. 
 
Yellow Book Series 
Associations Yellow Book 
The Associations Yellow Book, which is published by Leadership Directories, provides access to 
information on major trade and professional associations. Semiannual editions provide 
current information on chief staff executive turnovers, changes in staff and governing 
boards, mergers, and name changes. It features (1) more than 32,000 officers, executives, and 
staff, with the titles, affiliations, education, and telephone and fax numbers of more than 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.470   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
1,000 associations with budgets exceeding $2 million; (2) the addresses, e-mail addresses, 
Internet address, telephone numbers, and fax numbers of the associations’ headquarters and 
branches; (3) the associations’ board members and outside affiliations; (4) the associations’ 
committees and chairpeople, Washington representatives, political action committees, and 
foundations; (5) the associations’ publications, including editors; and (6) the associations’ 
annual budget, tax status, number of employees, and number of members. 
 
Corporate Yellow Book 
The Corporate Yellow Book is a directory of the people who manage, direct, and shape the 
largest public and privately held companies in the United States. Published quarterly, it 
enables subscribers to access corporate leaders, including board members who are taking 
increased responsibility for corporate decision-making and administrative-services 
professionals. The directory features (1) the names and titles of more than 26,000 executives, 
including more than 7,000 corporate board members and their outside affiliations; (2) the 
direct-dial telephone numbers of executives and more than 10,000 e-mail addresses for 
officers, management, and administrative-services professionals; (3) the addresses, telephone 
and fax numbers, and Internet addresses of each entity’s corporate headquarters, foreign 
subsidiaries, and divisions; (5) the contacts for each entity’s administrative services, such as 
benefits, corporate contributions, foundations, governmental affairs, information systems, 
libraries and information centers, purchasing, real estate and facilities, recruitment, and 
shareholder relations; and (6) four indexes:  organization, industry, geographical, and 
individual’s name. 
 
Judicial Yellow Book 
The Judicial Yellow Book provides detailed biographical information for state and federal 
judges and gives information on each judge’s staff, including law clerks. It features 
information on more than 2,200 federal judges and more than 1,300 state judges, providing 
depth and detail on each judge’s chambers. 
 
Law Firms Yellow Book 
The Law Firms Yellow Book has information on more than 700 of the largest law firms in the 
United States. It provides up-to-date information on changes in firm management and 
structure. It is also the only personnel directory that clearly identifies the partners who make 
a firm’s business decisions and supervise its practice areas, and the administration that 
manage its operations. It focuses on the administrators and attorneys in these firms, and it is 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.471 
indexed by practice area, law schools, geography, name, and organization (including affiliates 
and subsidiaries). It is published semi-annually. 
 
Municipal Yellow Book 
The Municipal Yellow Book  provides information on city and county governments and local 
authorities in the United States. It contains data on more than 38,000 elected and 
administrative officials, including their names, addresses, and telephone and fax numbers. It 
also contains sections on cities and counties, which feature complex hierarchies of municipal 
officials. This directory also has listings for local departments, agencies, subdivisions, and 
branches. 
 
News Media Yellow Book 
The News Media Yellow Book is a directory containing information on the leading news media 
organizations in the United States. It contains listings of more than 38,000 reporters, writers, 
editors, and producers. It features 10 sections — on newspapers, news services, networks, 
television stations, radio stations, programs, periodicals, non-U.S. media, publishers, and 
biographical index. This directory is fully updated on a quarterly basis. 
 
State Yellow Book 
The State Yellow Book provides information on members of the executive and legislative 
branches of the 50 state governments, as well as American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, and 
the Virgin Islands. It has a subject and a personnel index, and it includes information on 
government officials, departments, agencies, and legislative committees. Informational 
profiles of all states and territories are also provided. This directory is fully updated on a 
quarterly basis. 
 
Federal Regional Yellow Book 
The Federal Regional Yellow Book is released semi-annually, and it describes federal regional 
offices located outside Washington, D.C. It contains information on more than 40,000 
regional directors and administrative staff members at federal departments and agencies. It 
also has information on administrators and professional staff at federal laboratories, research 
centers, military installations, and service academies. 
 
Financial Yellow Book 
The Financial Yellow Book is a semi-annual directory that lists the names and titles of more 
than 26,000 executives, including more than 4,000 board members, at more than 560 leading 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.472   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
financial institutions. The directory also has complete contact information, including address, 
telephone and fax numbers, and e-mail for executives and outside board members. The 
directory has four indexes — on organization, geographical location, individual name, and 
industry.  
 
Government Affairs Yellow Book 
The Government Affairs Yellow Book contains information on corporations; financial 
institutions; trade and professional associations; labor unions; interest groups including 
coalitions, public interest groups, governmental agencies; and governmental affairs 
organizations. It contains a section on federal, state, and municipal government that includes 
the governmental-affairs staff for federal agencies; state governments; and leading cities, 
counties, and authorities. Its “Government Affairs Representatives” section lists more than 
1,200 lobbying firms, law firms, and public relations firms. It details the issues that lobbyists 
contest, as well as the coalitions they form to advance their legislative agenda. Four indexes 
are included—on subject, geographical location, personnel, and master. 
 
 
Banks and Financial Institutions 
The relationship between banks and their customers is confidential, and there are numerous 
laws and regulations that protect consumers’ personal financial information held by financial 
institutions. 
 
Laws Limiting Access to Banking Records 
The primary law protecting the privacy of consumer information held by financial 
institutions is the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, which was signed into law in 1999. The Act 
required the federal government to adopt regulations requiring financial institutions to 
ensure the security and confidentiality of customer records and information.  
 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act also made it a crime for certain institutions—banks, stock 
brokerage firms, insurance companies, loan companies, credit card issuers, and credit 
bureaus—to obtain, disclose, or provide documents under false pretenses pertaining to a 
customer’s financial information.  
 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act applies not only to people who use false pretenses, but also to 
any third party requesting the information when it is known or should be known that false 
pretenses will be used. But certain parties are exempted from this rule. Exempted parties 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.473 
include law enforcement agencies and insurance companies conducting related claims 
investigations. It also exempts state-licensed private investigators who are attempting to 
collect delinquent child support. 
 
Under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, fraud examiners should be extremely careful about 
obtaining financial information from financial institutions.  
 
In addition to the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, the Right to Financial Privacy Act (12, U.S.C., 
§§ 3401-3422) also limit access to consumer in formation held by financial institutions. In 
general, the Right to Financial Privacy Act prohibits financial institutions from releasing a 
customer’s financial information to governmental agencies without the customer’s consent, a 
court order, a subpoena, a search warrant, or other formal demand. Thus, if the government 
is requesting information, it must also comply with the Right to Financial Privacy Act. And 
even though the law applies only to demands by governmental agencies, most banks and 
other financial institutions will not release such information to private parties absent legal 
process, such as a subpoena issued in a civil lawsuit. 
 
Types of Financial Records 
As a general rule of thumb, financial information can be obtained only by subpoena. If you 
are able to obtain a subpoena, the following financial information should be requested. 
 
Master Files of Customers  
The master files of customers (e.g., depositors, debtors, and safe deposit box holders) that 
are maintained by the bank should detail where all of its important records are stored.  
 
Safe-Deposit Box Records 
Valuable information can be obtained from a safe-deposit box record. These records usually 
provide the name(s) of the person(s) renting the box, how often a person visited it, the dates 
he visited it, and the times he visited it. The times and frequency of visits can be valuable if 
they correspond to times and dates of deposits or withdrawals from other accounts.  
 
The contents of a safe-deposit box, however, are not known by bank officials, and they are 
never recorded on the box holder’s file. More over, banks usually require the customer’s 
consent, a search warrant, or a court order before an authorized bank official can open a safe 
deposit box. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.474   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Account Opening Records 
Records required to open accounts at financial institutions can also be valuable. Savings 
account applications can provide handwriting samples and certain personal information 
about customers, varying from one bank to another. Likewise, applications for checking 
accounts should provide handwriting samples and certain personal information, varying 
from one bank to another. 
 
Records of Deposits 
Records of account deposits reflect the date of deposit, amounts of currency and checks, 
and the drawee banks of checks. Also, checking account deposit slips might identify the 
account holder’s financial associates. 
 
Records of Withdrawals 
Withdrawal records should reflect the date of withdrawal, the amounts of currency and 
checks, and the drawee banks of checks.  
 
Additionally, for large withdrawals, some banks will request that the customer give a reason 
for withdrawing the money. The customer is not required to give such information, and the 
bank cannot refuse to honor the withdrawal. Similarly, some savings and loan associations 
might demand notice on large withdrawals. 
 
Federal Regulatory Agencies 
Export-Import Bank of the United States 
The Export-Import Bank is the official export credit agency of the United States federal 
government. It loans funds to foreign countries and businesses to buy goods from U.S. 
companies. Borrowers can obtain up to 50 percent of the purchase price of the goods being 
acquired. Selling companies must submit a supplier certificate to the bank. This certificate 
must include a statement regarding commissions paid, especially in a foreign country, to 
foreign sales “represent atives” or “agents.” 
 
Farm Credit Administration 
The Farm Credit Administration oversees and regulates entities within the farm credit 
system, which is a network of borrower-owned lending institutions and related service 
organizations serving all 50 states and Puerto Rico. Some of the entities regulated are the 
Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation (which markets the securities the banks sell 
to raise loan funds), the Farm Credit System Financial Assistance Corporation (which 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.475 
provides capital through the purchase of preferred stock issued by institutions that received 
financial assistance from the Farm Credit System Assistance Board), and the Federal 
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation (which provides a secondary market for agricultural real 
estate and rural housing mortgages).  
 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) is an independent agency of the federal 
government that insures deposits in banks and savings associations.  
 
Federal or state banks or savings associations that apply to be insured by the FDIC must 
submit an application that covers financial history, financial condition, capital structure, 
management, future earnings prospects, convenience to and needs of the community, and 
consistency of corporate powers.  
 
FDIC insured banks are examined annually by FDIC insured examiners; FDIC savings 
associations are examined periodically by FDIC examiners. Each examination includes an 
appraisal of management, directors, officers, and staff.  
 
The examination reports contain white and pink sheets. The white sheets provide 
examination findings; a copy is given to the bank’s board of directors. The examiner, 
however, retains the pink sheets, which contain confidential information, including an 
alphabetical list of all directors, officers, and principal employees; their titles; and comments 
on every individual to the fullest extent possible. The examiner also comments on the 
capabilities of each individual, gives his approximate age, and cites other business affiliations. 
Additionally, the examiner completes a form for each individual, setting forth his estimated 
net worth, par value of stock owned, and salary. 
 
Inquiries regarding types of FDIC records available to the public (including records available 
under the Freedom of Information Act) should be directed to the appropriate FDIC 
regional office or to the Office of the Executive Secretary. 
 
Federal Housing Finance Board 
The Federal Housing Finance Board (Finance Board) is an independent regulatory agency in 
the executive branch. It succeeded the Federal Home Loan Bank Board and is responsible 
for administering and enforcing the Federal Home Loan Bank Act.  
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.476   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Finance Board supervises the 12 federal home loan banks (FHLBs), which were created 
by the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, and issues regulations and orders for carrying out the 
Act’s purposes. Savings associations that make  long-term home mortgage loans are eligible 
to become members of an FHLB.  
 
In addition, the Finance Board implements community-oriented mortgage lending and 
affordable housing programs; prescribes rules and conditions under which banks are 
authorized to borrow; issues consolidated FH LB bonds, notes, or debentures that are the 
obligation of all FHLBs; and ensures that the FHLBs remain adequately capitalized and 
operate in a sound manner. 
 
The FHLB system provides a flexible credit re serve for member savings institutions engaged 
in home mortgage lending and includes 12 regional FHLBs that are federally chartered, 
privately capitalized, and independently managed. The 12 FHLBs help their member 
financial institutions meet their communities’ diverse housing-finance and economic-
 development needs. 
 
Each FHLB is capitalized by the capital-stock investments of its member financial 
institutions and its retained earnings. The proceeds of these stock investments are used to 
issue and sell consolidated obligations, which are sold to investors (e.g., commercial banks, 
foreign central banks, mutual funds, corporations, government agencies, and individuals).  
 
In addition, the FHLBs provide loans to their member financial institutions.  
 
Federal Reserve System 
The Federal Reserve System, which serves as the nation’s central bank, is a valuable source 
of information on banks that it has chartered.  
 
The Federal Reserve System’s Board of Gover nors regulates state-chartered banks that are 
members of the Federal Reserve System, their subsidiaries, and holding companies, as well as 
the activities of foreign banks that operate within the United States 
 
On an annual basis, reserve system examin ers visit and report on chartered banks. Their 
examination reports contain two parts: the open part, a copy of which is given to the bank, 
and the confidential part, which is kept by the reserve system and contains qualifications of 
management, lists of officers and directors, and background data on the officers. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.477 
A bank must file a registration statement for its securities. The registration statement must 
be followed by an annual report that provides considerable data on the securities issued as 
well as employment information on all directors and those who own more than 10 percent 
of any class of the bank’s securities. The Federal Reserve System maintains these statements. 
 
National Credit Union Administration 
The National Credit Union Administration regulates, insures, and supervises all federal credit 
unions as well as state-chartered credit unions that apply for its insurance. 
 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), which is within the U.S. Department 
of the Treasury, regulates national banks and maintains information concerning them. The 
OCC conducts examinations of the national banks to determine their financial positions and 
to evaluate their assets. The bank examiners’ reports contain information about bank 
records, loans, and operations. In view of their purpose and the basis on which they are 
obtained, reports of national bank examinations, as well as related correspondence and 
papers, are considered confidential. Requests for these documents should include the 
subject’s name and address, the information desired, the reason it is needed, and the 
intended use. 
 
 
Investigative and Law Enforcement Information Centers and Databases 
 
National Law Enforcement Telecommunications System 
The National Law Enforcement Telecommunications System (NLETS) is the International 
Justice and Public Safety Information Sharing Network, which is a sophisticated 
communication network that links all law enforcement and criminal justice agencies in the 
United States, Puerto Rico, and, through a computerized link to INTERPOL, Canada.  
 
NLETS provides two basic capabilities to its users. First, it is an international, computer-based 
message-switching system that links together state, local, and federal law enforcement 
and justice agencies for the purpose of information exchange. Second, it provides 
information-services support for a growing number of justice-related applications. To 
accomplish this, NLETS supports data-communi cations links to state networks using a 
commercial frame-relay service. All agencies within each state are serviced through this state 
interface. Federal and international systems operate in much the same manner. The primary 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.478   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
NLETS operational site is located in the Arizona Department of Public Safety’s facility, and 
a disaster-recovery site that enables full resumption of operations in fewer than 30 minutes 
was developed with the Idaho State Police. 
 
The user population is composed of federal agencies with a justice component, selected 
international agencies, and all states and territories, all of which are cooperatively exchanging 
data. Agencies include state and local law enforcement groups, motor vehicle and licensing 
departments, and a variety of federal enforcement offices, such as the U.S. Customs Service, 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Department of Justice, U.S. Secret Service, U.S. Marshals 
Service, Naval Investigative Service, Air Force Office of Special Investigations, Department 
of State, Department of the Army, and Department of the Interior. The National Auto 
Theft Bureau also is linked to NLETS. NLETS users can send free-form messages to other 
users either individually or via a broadcast message. 
 
A great deal of information is available to law enforcement through the network, including: 
• Vehicle registrations by license plate or vehicle identification number 
• Driver’s license and history by name and date of birth, or driver’s license number (some 
states support driver’s license queries by name only) 
• Criminal records by name and date of birth, state identification number, or FBI number 
• Boat registrations by hull number, registration number, or name 
• Snowmobile registrations by registration number, vehicle identification number, or 
owner’s name and date of birth 
• Hazardous material file by UN number, which is an internationally recognized code for 
hazardous material 
• Private aircraft tracking data by registration number or date range 
• Aircraft registrations by registration number, serial number, or name of registrant 
• Directory of participating agencies by originating agency identifier 
• Registration information on diplomatic license plates 
• Index to parole/probation and corrections information 
• Sex offenders registration information 
 
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police’s Canadian  Police Information Centre provides many 
additional files, including: 
• Wanted people by name and date of birth 
• Criminal history by name or FPS (Canadian national identification number) 
• Stolen vehicles by license number or vehicle identification number 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.479 
• Stolen articles by serial number 
• Stolen guns by serial number 
• Stolen securities by serial number, corporation name, issuer, or name of owner 
• Stolen boats and motors by license number, hull number, registration number, or name 
of owner 
 
Defense Clearance and Investigation Index 
The Defense Clearance and Investigations Index (DCII) is part of the Defense Security 
Service (DSS) that is overseen by the Department of Defense (DOD). 
 
The DCII is an automated index of DOD investigations and security decisions regarding 
personnel that have been made by DOD adju dicators. Normally, the DSS limits the DCII’s 
access to the Department of Defense and other federal agencies. 
 
El Paso Intelligence Center 
The El Paso Intelligence Center’s (EPIC) mission is to provide timely and expeditious 
support to federal, state, local, tribal, and international law enforcement agencies. Prior to 
2001, EPIC provided entities a complete and accurate intelligence picture of worldwide 
movements of transportable drugs, weapons, and illegal aliens into the United States. It 
analyzed raw data and provided tactical and operational intelligence to agencies involved in 
the antidrug effort. EPIC also provided strategic assessments of drug movement and 
concealment techniques. After September 11th, 2001, EPIC was called upon to support 
investigations to find those responsible for the terrorist attacks, and its mission expanded to 
include counterterrorism efforts. 
 
EPIC member agencies include the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; 
Coast Guard; Department of Defense; Department of Homeland Security’s Customs and 
Border Protection; Department of Homeland Security’s Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement; Department of the Interior; Drug Enforcement Administration; Federal 
Bureau of Investigation; Internal Revenue Service; Marshals Service; National Drug 
Intelligence Center; Secret Service; and Tr ansportation Security Administration.  
 
Initially EPIC focused on the United States-Mexico border with an emphasis on Mexico’s 
heroin traffickers and illegal alien smugglers, but with the increased use of aircraft, seagoing 
vessels, and global networks to facilitate drug trafficking, EPIC’s focus broadened and 
became international in scope. EPIC serves federal agencies, all 50 states, the District of 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.480   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Columbia, Canada, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virg in Islands, and Guam, and it supports law 
enforcement efforts conducted by its foreign counterparts throughout the world. It currently 
has Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with  Canada, Australia, and the Netherlands. 
 
Member agencies have direct access to all EPIC  information, with appropriate safeguards to 
provide for the protection and the secure communication of highly sensitive or classified 
information. State and local law enforcement entities have access to EPIC data through a 
designated group within the respective organization or through a member agency. 
 
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN)—an organization established by the 
U.S. Department of the Treasury—collects, analyzes, and disseminates intelligence on 
financial crimes. Its mission is to provide a government-wide, multisource intelligence and 
analytical network to support law enforcement agencies in the detection, investigation, and 
prosecution of financial crimes. The participating agencies are the Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; U.S. Customs Service and Border Protection; Drug 
Enforcement Administration; Federal Bureau of  Investigation; Internal Revenue Service; 
U.S. Marshals Service; Postal Inspecti on Service; and U.S. Secret Service.  
 
FinCEN’s financial database c ontains information from reports required under the Bank 
Secrecy Act, including the Currency Transaction Report; Report of International 
Transportation of Currency or Monetary In struments; Currency Transaction Report by 
Casinos and Card Clubs and by Depository Institutions; Reports of Foreign Bank and 
Financial Accounts; Registrations of Money Services Businesses; Designation of Exempt 
Person; and Suspicious Activity Reports by Depository Institutions, Securities and Futures 
Industries, Insurance Industries, Casinos and Card Clubs, and Money Services Businesses. 
Furthermore, FinCEN has access to data from IRS Form 8300 (Reports of Cash Payments 
Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business). 
 
FinCEN produces two types of products: tactical support documents and strategic analyses. 
The tactical support products either provide information and leads on criminal organizations 
and activities that are under investigation by law enforcement or proactively identify 
previously undetected criminal organizations and activities so that investigations can be 
initiated. The FinCEN’s work product can also assist in identifying assets for seizure and 
forfeiture purposes and supporting ongoing investigations. Its strategic analyses look at 
financial crimes and money laundering with an emphasis on the future. FinCEN collects, 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.481 
processes, analyzes, and develops intelligence on emerging trends, patterns, and issues 
related to the proceeds of illicit activities. 
 
FinCEN uses the majority of its resources to assist agencies in investigations of the financial 
aspects of the illegal narcotics trade. FinCEN then prioritizes investigations of such non-
 narcotic crimes as money laundering, Bank Secrecy Act violations, corruption, treason, 
bankruptcy fraud, financial institution fraud, and government contract fraud. In both the 
narcotic and non-narcotic areas, FinCEN concentrates on investigations of national or 
international criminal organizations. 
 
Interagency Border Inspection System 
The Interagency Border Inspection System (IBIS) was initiated in 1989 by U.S. Customs and 
Border Protection to improve border enforcement and to facilitate inspection of individuals 
applying for admission to the United States at ports of entry and pre-inspection facilities. 
IBIS is considered a presidential priority and receives White House guidance regarding 
policy, coordination, and control. U.S. Customs and Border Protection, law enforcement, 
and regulatory personnel from 20 other federal agencies or bureaus use IBIS. Some of these 
agencies are the Federal Bureau of Investigation; Interpol; the Drug Enforcement 
Administration; the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; the Internal 
Revenue Service; the Coast Guard; the Federal Aviation Administration; and the Secret 
Service. Information from IBIS is also shared with the Department of State for use by 
consular offices at U.S. embassies and consulates. IBIS strives to provide travelers with 
expeditious clearance at ports of entry while allowing border enforcement agencies to focus 
their limited resources on potentially non-compliant travelers. IBIS provides the law 
enforcement community with access to computer-based enforcement files on suspect 
individuals, businesses, vehicles, aircraft, and vessels. It also provides access to National 
Crime Information Center (NCIC) records on wanted persons; stolen vehicles, vessels, or 
firearms; license information; criminal histories; and previous federal inspections. IBIS  
users can also interface with all 50 states via the National Law Enforcement 
Telecommunications Systems.  
 
International Chamber of Commerce Commercial Crime Bureau 
The International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) established the Commercial Crime Bureau 
(CCB) in January 1992 to act as a focal point for fraud prevention and to encourage 
cooperation between commerce and law enforcement agencies. The CCB maintains an 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.482   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
extensive database on all aspects of commercial fraud. The CCS also operates Fraudnet, a 
unique global network of law firms that specialize in tackling business crime.  
 
International Criminal Police Organization 
The International Criminal Police Organizati on, better known by its radio designation 
INTERPOL, is a network of National Central Bureaus in more than 186 member countries 
that share information with each other to assist law enforcement agencies in the detection 
and deterrence of international crime. Each Bureau is an agency of the member country’s 
government and serves as the liaison between that country’s law enforcement agencies and 
the INTERPOL network. In the United Sta tes, the National Central Bureau (USNCB) is 
under the direction and control of the Department of Justice and co-managed by the 
Department of Homeland Security. 
 
To support ongoing investigations that require international assistance, INTERPOL 
provides information regarding: 
• Location of suspects/fugitives/witnesses 
• International wanted circulars 
• Criminal history check 
• Terrorism prevention 
• Stolen art 
• Tracing of weapons and motor vehicles abroad 
• License plate, driver license check, and vehicle registration data 
 
International Criminal Police Organization Case Tracking System 
The International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) Case Tracking Systems 
(ICTS), located at the U.S. National Central Bureau (USNCB) in Washington, D.C., contains 
information about people, property, and organizations involved in international criminal 
activity. The USNCB can determine the history of an international connection in an 
investigation or the existence of any previous international criminal activity. The USNCB 
operates to provide international support for U.S. law enforcement. 
 
Sixteen federal and state law enforcement agencies are represented at the USNCB, and all 50 
states have established INTERPOL liaison offices. Agencies represented at the USNCB 
include the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; Environmental 
Protection Agency; Drug Enforcement Administ ration; Federal Bureau of Investigation; 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement; Transportation Security Administration; U.S. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.483 
Coast Guard; Bureau of Customs and Border Protection; U.S. Marshals Service; U.S. 
Department of Defense; U.S. Department of State; U.S. F ood and Drug Administration; 
U.S. Postal Inspection Service;  and U.S. Secret Service. 
 
Interstate Identification Index 
The Interstate Identification Index (III) is an “index-pointer” system for the interstate 
exchange of criminal records. Under the III, the FBI maintains an index of people arrested 
for felonies or serious misdemeanors under state or federal law. The index includes 
identification data (name, birth date, race, sex, etc.) and the FBI and state identification 
numbers (SIDs) from all states that have information about an individual. 
 
Search queries from justice agencies nationwide are transmitted via state telecommunications 
networks and the FBI’s National Crime Information Center (NCIC) lines. Searches are made 
by name and other identifiers. The III held the criminal histories of more than 64.9 million 
individuals as of September 2008. Forty-eight states participated in the III as of that date. 
Ten also participated in the National Fingerprint File (NFF). The NFF states have assumed 
responsibility for criminal and non-criminal requests.  
 
Joint Maritime Information Element 
The Joint Maritime Information Element (JMIE) — a consortium of 15 U.S. government 
agencies in the law enforcement and intelligence communities — provides access to 
repositories of formatted data at the secret level on worldwide merchant vessel locations, 
characteristics, registries/ownership, commercial cargo imports and exports through U.S. 
ports, and commercial cargo imports and exports in selected foreign countries and 
worldwide ports. Consortium members are the Office of Naval Intelligence, Military Sealift 
Command, Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of State, Executive Office of 
the President’s Office of National Drug Control Policy, U.S. Customs Service, Central 
Intelligence Agency, U.S. Coast Guard, Maritime Administration, Department of Energy, 
Defense Intelligence Agency, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, INTERPOL, 
Bureau of Census, and National Security Agency. 
 
The system provides information on maritime-related law enforcement and national foreign 
intelligence data to aid members’ operational targeting, such as narcotics interdiction, 
smuggling, sea and defense-zone surveillance, border control, petroleum-traffic monitoring, 
and emergency sealift management. Thirty-five sites are operational, allowing access to data 
sources that provide at-sea and in-port location information and characteristics on 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.484   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
commercial and private vessels and vessel registration files for Florida, California, Delaware, 
Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. 
 
Law Enforcement Support Center 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s Law Enforcement Su pport Center (LESC) 
serves as a national operations center by providing timely immigration status and identity 
information to local, state, and federal law enforcement agencies on aliens suspected, 
arrested, or convicted of criminal activities. The LESC operates 24 hours a day, seven days a 
week, responding to requests from federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies with 
information gathered from eight DHS databases, the National Crime Information Center 
(NCIC), the Interstate Identification Index (III), and other state criminal history indices.  
 
In addition to providing real-time assistance to law enforcement agencies that are 
investigating, or have arrested, foreign-born individuals involved in criminal activity, the 
LESC also performs the following investigative functions: administers and controls 
immigration-related cases for Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE); provides 
support to a host of ongoing multiagency investigative initiatives; acts as the central point of 
contact for the FBI’s National Instant Criminal  Background Check System (NICS) program; 
handles queries and field responses relating to national security employment issues; provides 
the law enforcement community with NCIC hit confirmation information; and offers ICE 
special agents and deportation officers after-hours support via digitally recorded duty lines 
confirmed with personal identification numbers. 
 
Excluded Parties Listing System 
The Excluded Parties Listing System (EPLS) is a Web-based database maintained by the 
General Services Administration that identifies those parties excluded throughout the U.S. 
government (unless otherwise noted) from receiving federal contracts or certain 
subcontracts and from certain types of federal financial and nonfinancial assistance and 
benefits. 
 
National Tracing Center 
The National Tracing Center (NTC), a branch of the Firearms Enforcement Division of the 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF), is the country’s only crime 
gun tracing facility. It provides 24-hour assistance to duly authorized law enforcement 
agencies in the United States and those in many foreign countries. Using the ATF’s Firearms 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.485 
Tracing System, the NTC systematically tracks firearms used to commit crimes from their 
place of manufacture to the place of sale. 
 
National White-Collar Crime Center 
The National White-Collar Crime Center (NW3C) seeks to provide a nationwide support 
system for agencies involved in the prevention, investigation, and prosecution of economic 
and high-tech crimes and to support and partner with other appropriate entities in 
addressing homeland security initiatives as they relate to economic and high-tech crimes. The 
NW3C has a database system that contains information on individuals and businesses 
suspected of economic criminal activity, including advance-fee loan schemes, credit card 
fraud, computer fraud, and securities and investment fraud.  
 
Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Information System 
The Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Information System (NADDIS) is a centralized 
automated file of summaries of reports on subjects of interest to the Drug Enforcement 
Administration (DEA), consisting of more than 5.9 million records on individuals, 
businesses, vessels, aircraft, and selected airfields identified through the DEA investigative 
reporting system and related investigative records. Inquiries should be limited to narcotics-
 related cases or files and/or smugglers of funds, other contraband, and aliens. NADDIS is 
accessible through the El Paso Intelligence Center (EPIC) and the DEA. 
 
National Automated Immigration Lookout System 
The National Automated Immigration Lookout System (NAILS) is a Bureau of Immigration 
and Custom Enforcement system. The system provides an index of the names of all 
individuals who might be denied entry into the United States. Names in NAILS are passed 
to the Treasury Enforcement Communications System (TECS); therefore, a search of 
NAILS is not necessary if TECS has been searched. 
 
National Crime Information Center 
The National Crime Information Center (NCIC), located at the FBI headquarters in 
Washington, is a widely used law enforcement computer system. Most major law 
enforcement agencies have NCIC connections. 
 
An NCIC file often contains information about: 
• Stolen, missing, or recovered guns 
• Stolen articles (that have a serial number) 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.486   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Wanted people (for questioning or arrest) 
• Stolen/wanted vehicles (autos, aircraft, motorcycles) 
• Stolen license plates 
• Stolen, embezzled, or missing securities, stocks, bonds, and currency 
• Stolen/wanted boats 
• Missing people 
• Index to state and federal criminal history records 
• Unidentified people 
• Foreign fugitives 
• ATF violent felon file 
• U.S. Secret Service protection file 
• Gang and terrorist organizations file 
• Deported felon file 
• Originating agency identifier file 
• Protective order file 
 
NCIC is a computerized index of criminal justice information (e.g., criminal record history 
information, fugitives, stolen properties, and missing persons). It is available to federal, state, 
and local law enforcement and other criminal justice agencies and is operational 24 hours a 
day, 365 days a year.  
 
The purpose of maintaining the NCIC system is to provide a computerized database for 
ready access by a criminal justice agency making an inquiry and for prompt disclosure of 
information in the system from other criminal justice agencies. This information assists 
authorized agencies in criminal justice and related law enforcement objectives, such as 
apprehending fugitives, locating missing persons, locating and returning stolen property, as 
well as in the protection of the law enforcement officers encountering the individuals 
described in the system. 
 
Regional Information Sharing System 
The Regional Information Sharing System (RISS) program consists of six multistate projects 
that facilitate regional criminal information exchange and provide other related support 
service to federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies throughout all 50 states, Canada, 
the District of Columbia, Australia, U.S. Territories, and England. 
• Middle Atlantic-Great Lakes Organized Crime Law Enforcement Network (MAGLOCLEN). 
MAGLOCLEN includes law enforcement agencies in Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.487 
Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey, Delawa re, Maryland, and Washington, D.C. The 
center also has member agencies in Canada, England, and Australia. MAGLOCLEN is 
located at 140 Terry Drive, Suite 100, Newtown, Pennsylvania 18940, or can be reached 
at (215) 504-4910 or (800) 345-1322. 
• Mid-States Organized Crime In formation Center (MOCIC). MOCIC includes law enforcement 
agencies in North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, 
Wisconsin, and Illinois. The center also has member agencies in Canada. MOCIC is 
located 1610 East Sunshine Street, #110, Springfield, Missouri 65804, or can be reached 
at (800) 846-6242 or (417) 883-4383. 
• New England State Police In formation Network (NESPIN).  NESPIN incorporates law 
enforcement agencies in Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, 
and Rhode Island. The center also has member agencies in Canada. NESPIN is located 
at 124 Grove Street, Suite 105, Franklin, MA 02038, or can be reached at (800) 343-5682 
or (508) 528-8200. 
• Regional Organized Crime Information Center (ROCIC).  ROCIC serves 800 law enforcement 
agencies in Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana,  Arkansas, Mississippi, Alabama, Tennessee, 
Kentucky, West Virginia, Virginia, North Caro lina, South Carolina, Georgia and Florida, 
as well as Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  Islands. ROCIC is located at 545 Marriott 
Drive, Suite 850, Nashville, Tennessee 37214, or can be reached at (800) 238-7985. 
• Rocky Mountain Information Network (RMIN). The RMIN has 13,000 members in more 
than 1,000 agencies in Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Utah, Nevada, Idaho, Wyoming, 
and Montana. The center also has member agencies in Canada. The RMIN is located at 
2828 North Central Avenue, Suite 1000, Phoenix, Arizona 85004, or can be reached at 
(602) 351-2320. 
• Western States Information Network (WSIN).  The WSIN provides narcotics intelligence and 
related services to its member law enforcement agencies in California, Oregon, 
Washington, Alaska, and Hawaii. The center also has members in Canada, Australia, and 
Guam. The WSIN’s address is P.O. Box 90 3198, Sacramento, California 94203-1980, 
and it can be called at (800) 824-7902 (outside of California) and (800) 952- 5258  
(in California). 
 
Treasury Enforcement Communications Systems 
The Treasury Enforcement Communications Systems (TECS) is a Department of the 
Treasury system managed by the Internal Revenue Service. TECS is a computerized 
information system designed to identify individuals and businesses suspected of, or involved 
in, a violation of federal law. TECS is also a communication system that transmits messages 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.488   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
among Treasury law enforcement offices and other federal, national, state, and local law 
enforcement agencies. 
 
TECS provides access to the FBI’s National Crime Information Center (NCIC) and the 
National Law Enforcement Telecommunication Systems (NLETS) with the capability of 
communicating directly with state and local enforcement agencies. The NLETS provides 
direct access to state motor vehicle departments.  
 
Participants include the U.S. Customs Service; Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and 
Explosives; Drug Enforcement Administration; U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services; 
Department of State; U.S. Coast Guard; Fe deral Bureau of Investigation (NCIC Section); 
U.S. Marshals Service; Internal Revenue Service; EPIC; INTERPOL (National Central 
Bureau); and Department of Agriculture. 
 
TECS works on a soundex-type system. If an inquiry is made regarding a certain name, then 
all similar sounding names on record are provided to the inquirer. Inquiries on TECS might 
be made by name alone, even if no identifying number—such as date of birth, FBI number, 
or Social Security number—is available. 
 
When TECS provides a list of similar sounding names, the subjects’ sex, race, and date of 
birth also are included. The inquirer then can determine which subject, if any, is of interest. 
If a name is selected, TECS can provide additional information, including special 
instructions (such as “armed and dangerous”), full  name, race, sex, height, weight, hair color, 
eye color, date of birth, fugitive (which agency), background information, miscellaneous 
number (such as FBI), where and by whom a warrant is held, date of offense, alias, case 
number, and NCIC number. 
 
United Nations Crime and Justice Information Network 
The United Nations Crime and Justice Information Network (UNCJIN) is funded in part by 
the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics. The goal of the UNCJIN is to establish a worldwide 
network to enhance the dissemination and exchange of information concerning criminal 
justice and crime prevention issues. 
 
World Criminal Justice Library Network 
The World Criminal Justice Library Network (WCJLN) is a network that is used to share 
services and information concerning criminal justice. The group has developed an 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.489 
international network to disseminate national and international crime statistics and criminal 
justice profiles. 
  
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.501 



:


sourc of inform
when extern document ar need fraud examin should consid access public and
nonpubl record commerci databas the internet and other valuabl sourc
there is a surpris amount of inform about both individu and busi that can
be access without a subpoena or other legal process for instanc there is an enorm
amount of inform contain in public record
thi chapter explain the differ between public and nonpubl record and summar
some import rule govern the avail of certain type of inform it also
explain some of the differ type of inform avail and how each type of
inform can be us in a fraud examin moreov thi chapter outlin where to
find popular type of record kept by local state and feder sourc
the fraud examin must be certain that inform obtain is done so legal record
from confidenti sourc gener cannot be introduc as evid in crimin case
illeg obtain documentari evid fall under the exclusionari rule see the law
section of the fraud examin manual in civil case us illeg obtain document
might give rise to tort action or other sanction against the fraud examin follow is a
list of inform avail from citi counti state and feder agenc
public versu nonpubl record
public record
public record ar document that a government agenc is requir to keep by law or that ar
necessari to discharg the duti impos by law each agenc or government unit is
respons for mani differ function that mai requir them to maintain uniqu
inform
public record which ar avail to anyon who wish to us them can be us for a
number of reason thei can suppli invalu background inform on employe
suspect and wit public record can also be us to corrobor or refut wit
statement can help investig track the flow of stolen cash or other asset and can be
extrem import in a compani effort to recov loss
sourc of inform investig
3402 2011 fraud examin manual
public record can be search manual or onlin through government agenc websit
and onlin public databas there also ar mani commerci search firm that will search
public record and otherwis conduct an asset search for a fee busi and commerci
index such as db formerli dun bradstreet and dow jone busi inform
servic also can be search for busi credit and other inform but access
public record through a thirdparti servic can trigger certain notic requir under the
fair credit report act fcra the impact of the fcra is discuss below
examin should be prepar to answer the who what where and how of public record
research to conduct the investig the follow item ar essenti to a record
investig of an individu
name
date of birth
social secur number
last known address
the better inform you ar about the subject you ar investig the easier your search
will be for investig individu some of the issu at the outset includ
what is the person full name
do you have a last name onli is that na me so common that your search will return
thousand of possibl 14000 smith what ar some wai of narrow possibl
first name for the individu
what is the person approxim ag or date of birth
doe the person have crimin background
ha the person been su or su someon
ha the person own a busi
doe the person have tax lien
doe the person have a profession licens contractor account
for investig busi some of the issu at the outset includ
is the busi incorpor
where doe the compani do busi
what type of busi is it
ha the busi su or been su
doe the busi have real properti
doe the compani financ equip
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3403
doe the compani charg sale tax
how long ha the compani been in busi
nonpubl record
in addit to public record nonpubl recordsfinanci or otherwisemight be need
to prove fraud or to provid lead in a fraud examin nonpubl record includ
inform about a person or busi consid to be privat and confidenti becaus
fraud examin do not have an absolut right to see these person record such
inform might be difficult or imposs to obtain unless it is voluntarili turn over or a
subpoena is issu
some of the most valuabl person record includ
bank record
tax return and relat document
credit record
telephon record
credit card account record
law govern access to inform
despit the public broad right of access to public record there ar numer law that
limit access to certain type of inform and a number of risk to privaci ar rais by
the collect of inform therefor fraud examin must be certain that ani
inform obtain is done so legal
freedom of inform act
the freedom of inform act foia is the primari act that govern the avail of
government record to the gener public the act set veri specif guidelin regard
what government record ar and ar not open to the public the record that ar avail
ar known as public record raw record of inform that ar compil and maintain
by government agenc the variou record ar maintain at on of the three
government level feder state or counti local although the foia is a feder act
most state have adopt veri similar version of the foia to cover the state and local
jurisdict while these version ar similar to the origin foia the individu pass
state act mai differ slightli in specif legal area from state to state
sourc of inform investig
3404 2011 fraud examin manual
the foia and it individu state counterpart regul
the type of record that a government agenc mai maintain about a person
the condit under which such inform mai be disclos to anoth government
agenc
the circumst and method under which an individu mai obtain copi of agenc
record that pertain to him
gener speak government record about an individu ar prohibit from releas
the disclosur of these record constitut an invas of privaci a person mai obtain
copi of hi own record by request them in write from the agenc that maintain
them such request often ar deni in whole or in part becaus of numer except
to the disclosur requir some of these except includ the pendenc of an
ongo investig or concern about nation secur a person deni access to record
mai appeal through that agenc or through the court
most record ar maintain at the counti or local level a fact that can serious hamper ani
fraud investig it can be veri difficult for the fraud examin to catch up with a
fraudster who understand the counti file procedur and choos to oper in differ
counti howev the follow record ar avail at differ level of govern
the foia provid for public access to the follow inform
tax roll
voter registr
assum name
real properti record
divorceprob suit
inform not deem to be public under the foia includ
bank record
trust record
telephon record
passeng list
stock ownership
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3405
fair credit report act
on of the primari statut limit access to inform is the feder fair credit
report act fcra thi statut regul the dissemin of consum inform to
third parti by consum report agenc histor the fcra onli appli to
consum credit report but due to amend in 1997 the fcra now appli to the
gather of mani other type of inform about an individu through third parti
the fcra appli in the employ context when an employ contract with a consum
report agenc cra to collect consum report on employe or potenti employe a
cra is defin as anyon who sell inform about peopl eg a privat investig or
an onlin public record servic a consum report is defin as ani written oral or other
commun by a consum report agenc bear on a custom credit worthi
credit stand charact gener reput person characterist or mode of live
the fcra howev doe not appli if the person or organ seek the inform
gather it directli from the sourc
if the fcra doe appli it gener mean that an examin cannot us a third parti to
obtain certain inform about a person unless that person ha receiv certain notic and
sign a consent form the failur to do so can mean civil penalti
compli with the fcra
befor an employ can obtain consum inform about a current or prospect
employe from a third parti it must compli with all of the follow requir
provid the individu with a clear and conspicu separ written disclosur that
the employ might obtain a report
obtain the individu written author
inform the third parti that the employ ha compli with the fcra notic
requir
inform the third parti that the employ will not us the inform to violat ani equal
employ law
the disclosur and the author can be contain in the same document as long as the
document contain noth els
sourc of inform investig
3406 2011 fraud examin manual
if the employ reli on a consum report for an advers action eg deni a job
applic reassign or termin an employe or deni a promot then it must
provid the individu with a preadvers action disclosur befor take the advers action
thi disclosur must includ a copi of the individu consum report and a copi of a
summari of your right under the fair credit report act which is avail from
the ftc
after advers action is taken the employ must notifi the individu via an advers action
notic that the action ha been taken that notic must includ the follow
name address and phone number of the consum report agenc cra that
suppli the report
a statement that the cra did not make the advers action decis and cannot explain
why the advers action wa taken and
a notic of the individu right to di spute the accuraci or complet of the
inform furnish and hi right to an addit free consum report from the
agenc upon request within 60 dai
if howev the employ is gather the consum inform in connect with a
workplac investig of misconduct howev it mai be exclud from the fcra see
the section workplac investig of fraud and misconduct below
workplac investig of fraud and misconduct
the fair and accur credit transact act of 2003 amend the fair credit report
act fcra to exempt certain report involv employe misconduct investig
as a result of these amend an employ who us a third parti to conduct a workplac
investig no longer ha to obtain the prior consent of an employe if the investig
involv suspect misconduct violat of law or regul or violat of ani
preexist polici of the employ
to qualifi for thi except the report from the third parti must not be commun to
anyon other than the employ an agent of the employ or the govern
but if advers action is taken against the employe base on the result of the
investig the fcra still requir the employ to provid the employe with a summari
of the report advers action is broadli defin as ani employ decis that advers
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3407
affect the employe the summari must contain the natur and substanc of the
commun upon which the advers action is base it doe not howev have to
identifi the individu interview or the sourc of the inform
investig consum report
under the fcra an investig consum report is a report contain inform about
an individu charact gener reput person characterist or mode of live that
is obtain through person interview with neighbor friend or associ if such a
report is made then other notic and consent mai need to be obtain from the
individu for exampl a separ disclosur must be us to inform the employe that an
investig consum report is be obtain the form must also state what sort of
inform will be collect
also the compani must disclos to the individu the natur and scope of the investig
if he request if ani advers action is to be taken against the person he can ask to receiv
a copi of the report befor such action is taken further the report given to the individu
must not be redact mean that if the report contain name of the peopl provid the
inform and what thei report such inform cannot be delet from the report
the person must also be given an opportun to disput the find in the report
contact your attornei
unfortun for fraud examin the fcra ha creat sever more hoop that
examin must jump through befor thei can obtain certain type of inform the
fcra is not clearli written but the feder trade commiss ha publish sever letter
give it interpret of the statut these letter and the text of the fcra can be
obtain through it websit at wwwftcgov
the most import thing for the fraud examin to rememb is to consult hi inhous or
outsid counsel your attornei will help you determin what procedur you need to
institut to compli with the fcra
grammleachblilei act
the grammleachblilei act glb wa pass in 1999 and rule implement the act
becam final in 2001 glb wa origin enac ted to allow bank and other compani to
offer previous forbidden servic such as insur and secur brokerag servic
congress wa worri that these super bank would share custom financi data with
sourc of inform investig
3408 2011 fraud examin manual
affili and other compani to hawk their product therefor congress ad a
provis requir financi intuit to te ll custom about their privaci polici to
notifi custom of privat inform thei intend to share and to give custom the
chanc to block such inform share
to implement the law congress order regul to defin financi institut in the
broadest possibl term thu financi institut includ not just bank but also
insur compani account tax prepar and real estat settlement servic and
invest advisor the text of the rule can be found at 16 cfr part 313 addit
inform about the rule can be found at the feder trade commiss websit
wwwftcgov
glb is import for fraud examin becaus the privaci rule implement as part of the
act have been interpret to prevent the sell of credit header inform and under the
ftc interpret of the rule credit header inform cannot be sold except for the
veri limit purpos allow under the fair credit report act the agenc reach thi
decis by conclud that such basic person inform such as name and address is
financi inform and therefor must be protect under the glb act therefor the
glb prevent credit bureau from sell credit header inform includ name
address phone number and social secur number to privat investig direct
market or other inform broker
as a gener rule financi inform can be obtain onli by subpoena
the grammleachblilei act also made it a crimin offens to engag in pretext
some individu us pretext as a mean to gather financi inform about a subject
pretext would contact a financi institut and pretend to be the custom or someon
els author to obtain financi inform and basic trick the financi institut
into provid inform about the subject
section 6821 of titl 15 of the us code ad by glb make it an offens to
us fals fictiti or fraudul statement or document to get custom inform
from a financi institut or directli from a custom of a financi institut
us forg counterfeit lost or stolen document to get custom inform from a
financi institut or directli from a custom of a financi institut or
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3409
ask anoth person to get someon els custom er inform us fals fictiti or
fraudul statement or document or us forg counterfeit lost or stolen
document
violat can under certain circumst be fine andor imprison up to 10 year
pretext is not alwai illeg but it should be us with extrem caution for exampl if a
fraud examin is try to locat a wit or a suspect he might call the person rel
and pretend to be an old high school friend who is look for a phone number thi type of
pretext gener is not illeg howev it is illeg to obtain certain type of inform
such as financi record and phone record
fraud examin should never imperson a member of law enforc and should never
imperson an actual person particularli the individu be investig to do so mai
lead to charg of ident theft in 2006 investig hire by hewlettpackard were
charg with ident theft conspiraci and wire fraud for acquir the phone record of
sever member of their board of director who were suspect of leak confidenti
inform as a result congress pass the telephon record and privaci protect
act which is codifi at 18 us code section 1039 thi law make it a feder crime to
obtain confidenti phone record without author includ pose as anoth
individu
befor engag in ani type of pretext activ investig should consult with an
attornei to determin whether the inform sought is protect by state or feder law as
well as whether the plan imperson method is legal accept
privaci act of 1974
the privaci act of 1974 restrict inform about individu includ employe and
nonemploye that might be gather by government agenc under the act an agenc
mai maintain record about a person contain inform that is relev and necessari
to accomplish a purpos of the agenc thi inform mai includ a person educ
financ medic histori crimin histori employ histori and identifi inform
fingerprint voic print or photograph the person mai have access to hi inform
unless it is investigatori materi compil for law enforc purpos statist record
or materi compil sole for determin suitabl elig or qualif for feder
servic or promot
sourc of inform investig
3410 2011 fraud examin manual
right to financi privaci act
the right to financi privaci act prohibit financi institut from disclos financi
inform about individu custom to government agenc without the custom
consent a court order a subpoena a search warrant or other formal demand there ar
howev limit except to thi rule
although the statut appli onli to demand by government agenc most bank and
other financi institut also will not releas such inform to privat parti absent
legal process such as a subpoena issu in a civil lawsuit
driver privaci protect act
in 1999 congress made signific chang to the driver privaci protect act of 1994
18 usc 2721 the law bar state from releas driver social secur number
photograph or certain other inform unless thei obtain the express consent of each
person in advanc befor the 1999 amend driver could opt out and ask that their
inform not be releas under the law howev driver ar under an opt in system
that requir their express author of the releas of inform although the law wa
challeng the us suprem court in januari 2000 upheld the constitution of the
amend
these amend make it extrem difficult to obtain uptod inform from state
motor vehicl depart such inform can onli be obtain if the driver ha
expressli consent to it releas therefor compani mai wish to consid have
employe sign a consent form as earli as the employ applic stage for exampl
the driver privaci protect act doe not prohibit the us of motor vehicl record
mvr for preemploy screen but the state can onli releas the record with the
driver consent
health insur portabl and account act
the health insur portabl and account act hipaa institut sever
addit privaci rule concern person health inform while most of the rule do
not directli affect fraud investig fraud examin should be awar of the rule becaus
thei mai have an impact on the type of inform that can be legal gather on
employe
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3411
the hipaa privaci rule place restrict on the avail and us of protect health
inform the definit of thi term is extrem broad and cover ani inform
relat to an individu past present or futur physic or mental health payment for
servic or health care oper
if inform about the health of an individu or payment for servic becom an issu
dure an investig fraud examin should immedi contact the human resourc
hr depart the hr depart should have inform about whether the entiti is
subject to hipaa rule and can assist you in complianc with those rule
the most import thing to note is that if hipaa rule do appli you ar restrict as to
the type of health inform you can access without specif written author you
should never contact the health care provid the healthplan administr or a medic
bill servic for copi of employe record without first consult the employ legal
counsel or the hr depart
citi govern record
the follow item ar basic type of public record that can be access at the citi level of
govern
build inspector record
health and fire depart record
citi personnel depart record
public school record
regulatori agenc record
citi tax assessorcollector record
util compani record
build inspector record
the follow inform gener is avail through a citi build inspector offic
build permit show the name of applic address of construct estim
cost and the name of builder or contractor
blueprint and plan show construct detail that often ar submit with
applic for build permit
build inspector report contain inform regard complianc with
construct specif
sourc of inform investig
3412 2011 fraud examin manual
health and fire depart record
most local health or fire depart conduct routin inspect of busi for health
and safeti code or fire code violat these inspector might have valuabl inform
about the busi it oper the employe and the owner
death certif usual can be found at citi counti or state health depart a death
certif provid the name of the deceas address sex ag race birthplac birth date
death place date and time of death social secur number medic certif and
coron certif addition a death certi ficat gener provid inform about
the deceas parent and their occup
citi personnel depart record
the citi personnel depart maintain personalhistori statement from citi employe
and polit leader as well as employ record effici report and record of salari
lien on citi employe
public school record
citi school system maintain teacher bi ographi show person background
educ and former employ and stud ent record show biographi in some
school district grade and disciplinari action
regulatori agenc record
applic for busi licens contain in the file of citi regulatori agenc often
have valuabl inform on certain type of enterpris in mani citi the follow
busi would have to appli for licens to oper
busi seek liquor licens
profession includ certifi public account dentist doctor plumber
electrician and optometrist
restaur bar and night club which ar frequent inspect by health and fire
depart
busi oper under name other than the owner name such busi must
regist under assum name and ar includ in the citi dba do busi as
file
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3413
citi tax assessorcollector record
a citi tax assessor offic maintain map of real properti in the citi includ a
properti dimens address owner taxabl valu and improv a tax collector
offic maintain the follow inform
name and address of payer of properti tax even if the tax were paid by
individu other than the appar owner
legal descript of properti
amount of tax paid on real and person properti
delinqu statu of tax
name of former properti owner
util compani record
mani util compani ar nonprofit corpor or municip although the recent
trend ha been to restrict access to util compani record check with the util compani
in the subject area to see what if ani inform is avail util record might contain
the phone number of the custom even if that number is unlist in addit be sure to
check the name of friend or rel
counti govern record
the follow item ar basic type of public record that can be access at the counti level
of govern
counti court record
counti coron regist
counti personnel depart record
build permit record
public school record
voter registr record
counti record offic record
sheriffcounti prosecutor record
counti fire marshal record
regulatori agenc record
welfar commiss record
sourc of inform investig
3414 2011 fraud examin manual
counti court record
the great major of an individu civil record can be found at the counti courthous in
the jurisdict where the subject doe busi or resid
court ar gener divid into jurisdict that encompass a singl counti in a singl
state in each singl court there ar usual three level trial court appel court and
suprem court
most of the paper file in civil suit ar acc ssibl as public record howev crimin and
juvenil action mai not be as open to review in addit crimin convict record ar
gener avail to the public
a great deal of litig occur each year and mani peopl might be subject to judici
action voluntarili or not research civil and crimin suit can provid invalu
inform assist in
the locat of individu
identifi pend action
uncov close case
insight into marit statu famili
trace sourc of fund probat
identifi financi condit bankruptci
litig histori
outstand judgment
although a wealth of inform is avail in court file civil or crimin action might
not be readili known and the research must be abl to identifi the jurisdict counti or
court involv
a research typic will have access to microfich list of case or parti within the
individu court system through the clerk offic some court ar set up to provid
computer access to thi inform normal on must be abl to provid a case
number in order to access the actual court file the parti name index will provid the
case number
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3415
court clerk maintain file on all activ and close lawsuit in their jurisdict inform
regard these suit is public record and can be search by scan the index for
subject name as a plaintiff or defend
for exampl the subject data field of court record will contain
the complaint for or against the subject direct and revers index
the subject last known address either through the lawsuit plead or the court
offic citat and subpoena return
other person inform on the subject depend on the type of suit
court level vari by jurisdict as do the name of the level differ case type ar file
at differ level and in differ court
differ level of court ar assign jurisdict over ani given case base on court issu
and the natur of the claim to determin the full extent of the litig histori against a
compani or individu the examin must search each of the variou type of local court
record
civil court record
the kei to locat civil court record is know the correct spell of your subject name
where the person current live and where he live in the past
depend on the type of suit civil court record will provid potenti valuabl
inform
person injuri suit record
record for a person injuri suit for exampl will often contain an accid report injuri
histori statement of the involv parti and the financi settlement of the case
financi suit record
financi suit record will disclos an individu debtor and creditor and thei will present
an outsid view of a businesss histori or abil to perform
divorc record
divorc record search will return marriag partner name address locat of marriag
divorc file date and file number in addit divorc record frequent contain the
sourc of inform investig
3416 2011 fraud examin manual
subject financi inventori which is submit at the time of the divorc or separ and
should also includ the partit of asset to each parti in the settlement
crimin court record
when conduct a crimin record search certain type of inform ar critic like
civil court crimin court across the countri ar divid into jurisdict that gener
encompass a singl counti in a singl state
although most state have their crimin court divid by counti some state offer index
with crimin convict for the entir state
crimin convict should not be confus with crimin file when you search for
crimin record at the counti level you will find all case file by the district attornei even
if the person wa not found guilti of a crime when search a statewid convict
databas you will find onli case that result in convict
the counti crimin court clerk maintain crimin court file that might contain a wealth of
inform these file might provid inform describ the offens and the count
these file also might contain the complain signatur exemplar a transcript of the
preliminari hear the name of the prosecut and defens attornei the probat
offic report with a background investig of the defend and the subpoena issu
in the case
probat court record
probat court record ar document file to show the dispers of asset after a subject
death the probat court conduct an investig to verifi ani debt ow by an individu
estat and see to the dispers of asset accord to the deceas will or if there is no
will by state law after all debt ar paid
the debt left in an individu estat will give the investig inform on the follow
name of individu with an interest in the deceas estat
the subject financi posit at the time of death
the dispers of asset will reveal
the name and address of heir to the deceas
some indic of the valu of the properti will to them
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3417
counti coron regist
a counti coron regist gener contain the name or a descript of the deceas
date of inquest if ani properti found on the de ceas and it disposit and the caus
of death
counti personnel depart record
a counti personnel depart maintain inform similar to that maintain by a citi
personnel depart
build permit record
if a busi or individu construct a new build or make improv to an exist
build there should be a build permit on file with the local build author in
addit befor most busi can open their door the citi or counti mai requir that
thei possess certain permit the local fire depart mai requir permit ensur that the
busi compli with the fire code the citi health depart will requir permit for
restaur or other busi that serv food plan and zone depart enforc
regul regard the type of busi and their locat
public school
counti public school system maintain inform similar to that found in citi public
school system
voter registr record
to be elig to vote us citizen must be regist in their respect precinct to
regist citizen must fill out a registr applic the inform requir to process
the applic includ name address date of birth signatur and social secur number
voter registr record routin ar verifi by the counti and old address ar delet
as new on appear
counti record offic record
a counti record is a govern offic respons for maintain public record and
document especi record relat to real estat ownership a counti record offic
maintain the follow inform
sourc of inform investig
3418 2011 fraud examin manual
document pertain to real estat transact includ deed grant transfer and
mortgag of real estat releas of mortgag power of attornei and leas that have
been acknowledg or approv
mortgag on person properti
marriag licens record and applic includ inform on previou marriag
maiden name address and date of birth
will admit to probat
offici bond
notic of mechan lien
transcript of judgment that ar made lien on real estat
notic of attach on real estat
paper in connect with bankruptci
certifi copi of decre and judgment of court of record
other document permit by law to be record such as the depart of defens
dod 214 form record by some veteran as evid of veteran statu particularli
in those state where veteran ar grant reduc properti tax rate
real estat transact record ar extrem import thei ar rel easi to access and
contain a vast amount of inform real estat record usual ar found in the counti in
which the land is locat when an individu purchas real estat he becom a taxpay
and a registr in the follow counti record real properti record properti tax record
and tax assessor record
real properti record
each real estat transact will list a deed verifi the transfer of the properti if an
individu either bui or sell a hous or piec of properti or hi real properti becom
subject to a state or feder lien the transact will be reflect in the counti real properti
index if improv ar made to the properti such as the addit of a new room or
the instal of a pool then a mechan lien or other notic mai be on file in the counti
properti record
commerci search
mani compani provid access to real properti record a search for a busi or
individu in these databas can return real properti ownership inform recent properti
sale and transfer refin construct loan and seller carryback transact
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3419
in addit you can conduct a singl search of all avail onlin state in the same amount
of time and for the same price as an individu counti or state search typic respons will
includ the properti owner name properti address mail address parcel number lot
size land properti valu tax amount purchas amount properti descript and more on
refin construct loan and seller carryback and sale transact the date and
amount of each transact usual appear thi is especi us for determin an
individu equiti in a specif properti or for identifi individu that mai be receiv
monthli incom as a result of provid financ
noncommerci search
although examin can us commerci servic to obtain real properti inform eg
identifi the ownership of a piec of real properti some jurisdict ar not avail
depend on how local jurisdict and state compil properti inform search mai
be conduct by busi or person name address or name of the put owner
search of the real properti record mai reveal
resid and address of buyer and seller refer to respect as grantor and
grante
price of the properti see tax stamp if list
mortgag compani and amount origin financ
real estat ownership
who financ the transact if applic
titl compani involv
improv to the properti along with the name and address of the contractor
us
properti tax record
in addit to the properti record themselv counti charg new landown properti
tax for upkeep of their school courthous polic and other public build these
record can provid
an idea of the estim valu for tax purpos of the properti list
the ident of the owner of a vacant piec of land or a piec of properti if ownership is
unknown
the name of the last person to pai tax on the properti
when search real properti and tax record the fraud examin should alwai look for ani
addit name list on the document frequent the name of the attornei or notari
sourc of inform investig
3420 2011 fraud examin manual
public who verifi the document is list provid anoth potenti sourc of further
inform
tax assessorcollector record
counti tax assessor and collector offic maintain inform similar to that held by citi
tax assessor offic
sheriffcounti prosecutor record
the counti sheriff or the counti prosecutor mai maintain gener incid file relat to
the busi within the counti incid file can provid lead on manag or owner of
the busi or third parti who have made complaint against the busi
counti fire marshal record
the counti fire marshal should have a record of ani fire that have occur at specif
properti these record mai contain inform about a properti insur as well as
inform about ani previous conduct investig
regulatori agenc record
counti regulatori agenc maintain inform similar to that held by citi regulatori
agenc
welfar commiss record
file of a counti welfar commiss ar base on inform gather by social worker
psychologist and physician frequent the recipi of benefit provid the inform
which is gener not verifi file contain such inform as the recipi address
previou employ how much the recipi earn properti the recipi or the
recipi rel might own the state of the famili health and crimin record
state govern record
the follow item ar basic type of public record that can be access at the state level
of govern
busi fling
state court record
uniform commerci code file
employeelabor depart record
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3421
state tax file
profession associ and licens board
state attornei gener record
worker compens record
depart of motor vehicl record
bureau of vital statist
other state regulatori agenc
busi file
if an individu want to conduct busi in a name other than hi own the law requir
that he file document to claim ownership of that name these document can includ
articl of incorpor
foreign corpor registr
dbafictiti name registr
tax relat file
articl of incorpor
corpor ar form by file articl of incorpor with the secretari of state or
state corpor bureau or corpor registri offic in the state of which the compani doe
busi these corpor record ar public record and will includ
corpor name
ownership inform
stock valu
initi sharehold
name of the director and offic
regist agent
locat of the princip offic
date of incorpor
standingstatu
thi inform will permit the investig to review a corpor structur identifi the
regist agent and trace incorpor date the record will often includ limit
partnership inform as well the examin can also us these record to verifi the
state in which a compani is regist as a corpor
sourc of inform investig
3422 2011 fraud examin manual
foreign corpor registr record
some state but not all requir foreign corpor ie corpor that were
incorpor in anoth state to regist with the state corpor offic if the foreign
corpor transact busi in that state for exampl if a corpor charter in
delawar wish to transact busi in texa it must file an applic for certif of
author the applic is file with the secretari of state and must includ the date of
incorpor the princip offic the address of the regist agent and the name of the
offic and director
fictiti busi namesdo busi as inform
do busi as dba inform is typic file at the counti level though mani
state requir file with at the state level as well most state also requir limit
partnership trust and joint ventur to file dba inform at the state or counti level
thi inform will provid insight into the true busi ventur behind the name dba
inform is veri similar to corpor file with the secretari of state and thei allow
examin to trace the corpor root or prove ownership in sole proprietorship
partnership limit partnership joint ventur and trust
tax relat file
some state revenu depart requir certain busi to obtain licens or permit
such as a sale tax permit the licens and the applic ar gener public record if the
busi is delinqu in the payment of it tax the local or state tax investig or
collector might be abl to provid insid inform concern the busi
law enforc offici might be abl to gain access to corpor busi and person
state tax inform these record might unwittingli reveal hidden asset or invest
loan to or from offic stockhold or relat entiti should be examin close also
mortgag note and bond shown as liabil on a corpor return should be
investig tax return might also disclos the ident of the account or attornei
prepar the return
state court record
state civil court record
state civil court record search ar conduct by court by counti and ar divid between
upper and lower court gener a monetari divis where applic search of state
civil court record mai return the ident of the plaintiff and defend case number
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3423
file date caus of action and disposit or current statu depend on the court
divorc domest famili law child support name chang or probat matter mai also be
includ
state crimin court record
state crimin court record search ar conduct by court or by counti for feloni
misdemeanor or a combin of both search of state civil court record mai return the
ident of the defend a physic descript of the conduct the arrest date arrest
agenc case number file date charg and disposit or current statu an index search
is avail for some state and counti and most state have some type of releas
requir for obtain thi inform
uniform commerci code file
a search of uniform commerci code ucc file can help you identifi person
properti that an individu or busi ha financ thi is becaus a lender must file ucc
statement with the secretari of state or with the counti level unit to perfect it secur
interest in person properti
bank financ compani and other lender will gener record or record file of
financi transact conduct with individu and busi such as purchas of
household furnitur applianc boat and yacht automobil aircraft and busi
equip
these file produc as the result of the transact will identifi
name of the debtor or joint debtor
current address of the debtor
name of the financi lender
type of collater pledg as secur
date of file and continu
ucc file can also disclos when and where a person obtain person loan the type of
properti pledg to the lender to secur the loan and the current address of the debtor
these document provid item list of person properti held by the debtor
addition ucc file and support document can help examin uncov hidden
ownership or relationship between parti by view the name of all list debtor and
sourc of inform investig
3424 2011 fraud examin manual
their address the examin mai find inform link individu to the compani
thei own or discov inform about a compani subsidiari branch offic or parent
compani
these document can be readili retriev from the secretari of state offic through servic
compani or through onlin public record servic on compani that provid access to
thi inform is experian experian ucc onlin databas provid inform from
statelevel ucc1 financ statement as well as inform on amend assign
termin and so on most onlin respons will includ debtor and secur parti
name and address file date and file number for each origin file amend date
and assign inform when applic
employeelabor depart record
some state under their labor depart requir the file of period list of employe
reveal their name social secur number and salari in addit by examin
previou file an investig can locat former employe
profession associ and licens board
mani state and local agenc or bodi main tain record identifi individu hold
special licens or membership these can includ
medic practition such as doctor dentist and nurs
social worker
attornei
certifi public account
real estat license
notari
law enforc personnel
firefight
secur guard
stockbrok
teacher
insur agent
privat investig
bail bond agent
travel agent
barber and cosmetologist
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3425
contractor engin electrician and architect
the licens and applic grant by the state might be public record although some
applic contain no more than a name and address other applic contain lengthi
person inform such as previou residenti address previou employ educ
and train and financi statement some agenc ar requir to conduct a background
investig befor issuanc of a licens
also the state regulatori or licens agenc might have the author to suspend or revok
the licens necessari for the busi to oper
mani profession organ maintain their own list of member or license thei
might be reluct to provid inform beyond the person name and current stand in
the associ
state attornei gener record
state attornei gener ar good sourc of inform on whether a particular entiti or
individu wa the subject of an enforc action by a particular state for link to the
attornei gener websit for ani of the 50 state consult the nation associ of
attornei gener at httpwwwnaagorg
worker compens record
record of worker compens claim ar av ailabl in most state howev the breadth
of coverag will vari from state to state some state requir some type of author
from the target of the search worker comp ensat search mai return the subject
name social secur number date of birth employ name date and type of accid and
natur and extent of inquiri
the american with disabl act howev purport to prevent prospect employ
from us worker compens record to deni employ to otherwis qualifi job
applic
depart of motor vehicl record
the depart of motor vehicl dmv maintain inform on driver licens
vehicl registr titl car dealer car salespeopl wreck yard tow compani
smog inspect facil and in some state auto repair busi
sourc of inform investig
3426 2011 fraud examin manual
dmv record were onc thought to be good locat tool but recent restrict on the us
of such data ha reduc the effect of such search moreov the updat qualiti of
individu state record suppli by state author mai not be adequ to locat peopl
in a transient fastpac societi still search such as driver identif can be us on
a spot basi
vehicl ownership inform will identifi ve hicl regist to a specif person or
busi these record includ trailer motor home or motor vessel inform on
disabl placard mai also be avail current ownership of a particular vehicl can be
obtain through the us of a plate number or a vehicl identif number vin
inform return will includ plate number vin expir date make model model
year regist owner nameaddress and legal owner nameaddress
in 1999 congress made signific chang to the driver privaci protect act of 1994
18 usc 2721 the amend law bar sta te from releas driver social secur
number photograph or certain other inform unless thei obtain the express
consent of each person in advanc befor the 1999 amend driver could opt out
and ask that their inform not be releas under the new law howev driver ar
under an opt in system that requir their express author of the releas of
inform although the law wa challeng the us suprem court upheld the
constitution of the new amend in januari 2000
these amend make it extrem difficult to obtain almost ani uptod inform
from state motor vehicl depart such inform can onli be obtain if the driver
ha expressli consent to it releas therefor compani mai wish to consid have
employe sign a consent form as earli as the employ applic stage becaus even
though the driver privaci protect act doe not prohibit the us of motor vehicl
record for preemploy screen the state can onli releas the record with the
driver consent
bureau of vital statist
a state bureau of vital statist where birth certif ar gener file is an excel
sourc of inform birth certif can provid a child name sex date of birth and
place of birth the name of the attend phy sician midwif andor other assist the
parent name ag address race place of birth and occup the mother maiden
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3427
name and the number of sibl in some state birth certif might be found at the
citi or counti level
other state regulatori agenc
at the state level the follow addit record can be found
auto licens auto transfer and sale of vehicl
civil servic applic
driver licens
health depart record
inherit and gift tax return
name chang
occup and busi licens
parol offic and probat depart file
person properti tax return
school and voter registr
state incom tax return
welfar agenc record
the follow state depart and agenc might also maintain inform valuabl to
fraud examin
bureau of profession and vocat standard or depart of licens especi
profession associ partnership and corpor
controllertreasur
depart of agricultur
depart of industri relat
depart of natur resourc
horserac boardgambl commiss
secretari of state corpor divis
state board of equal
state polic or highwai patrol
state secur commiss
state util commiss
sourc of inform investig
3428 2011 fraud examin manual
feder govern record
a huge amount of inform is avail to the public through the variou feder agenc
a list of a number of feder agenc and their websit address will be provid later in
thi workbook and inform about variou feder agenc can be obtain through the
follow refer guid
congression staff directori and feder staff directori prepar annual by cq
press
congression directori prepar by the us govern print offic
the unit state govern manual prepar by the us govern print offic
howev the follow record ar of particular note
feder court record
civil and crimin court record
feder civil and crimin court record can provid valuabl inform includ the
plaintiff and defend name the case number the file date the caus of action and the
case disposit of current statu
bankruptci court record
bankruptci proceed ar conduct in feder bankruptci court in these court all
document file with the court ar public record and can be examin by anyon without
charg these onsit feder court record mai includ the case number debtor name
social secur number address file date chapter design and closur date the
search is avail for all feder jurisdict usual cover a sevenyear span that start
from the present and move backward
bankruptci document ar usual locat in the feder bankruptci court for the district
where the debtor resid or had hi princip place of busi when check bankruptci
court record the examin should rememb to check not onli the individu or busi
file for bankruptci but also ani relat busi princip employe or rel
a bankruptci is initi by the file of a bankruptci petit the petit can be either
voluntari or involuntari three or more creditor who have outstand claim that have not
been paid can file an involuntari petit
specif a bankruptci file typic contain the follow document
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3429
bankruptci petit the bankruptci petit contain type of bankruptci
voluntaryinvoluntari chapter 7 chapter 11 etc social secur number or tax id
number street address and primari place of busi locat of princip asset of
busi type of busi name of attornei estim amount of asset estim
number of creditor liabil and employe financi data and a list of sharehold
proof of claim form proof of claim form ar file by creditor list the amount thei ar
ow by the debtor
truste final report the final report is file by a truste when a case is conclud it
show which claim were paid
truste final account truste must also file a final a ccount of the administr of the
estat thi account will also show which claim were paid
schedul a thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the debtor real
properti
schedul b thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the debtor person
properti includ tangibl properti eg jewelri and vehicl and intang properti
eg invest and account receiv
schedul c thi form is file by the debtor and it describ the properti that the debtor
is claim as exempt from be us to satisfi claim
schedul d thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the secur debt the
debtor ow eg mortgag
schedul e thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the debtor prioriti
debt the bankruptci code give certain unsecur creditor prioriti such as those
ow wage contribut to pension plan tax ow to government entiti etc
schedul f file by the debtor thi form describ unsecur nonprior claim ow
by the debtor
schedul g file by the debtor thi form describ ani leas and executori contract
ie contract that have not been fulli perform to which the debtor is a parti
schedul h thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all codebtor that might be
affect by the debtor bankruptci
schedul i file by the debtor thi form describ the debtor current incom
schedul j file by the debtor thi form describ the debtor current monthli
expenditur
statement of financi affair thi form is file by the debt or and it describ the debtor
legal econom and busi transact prior to file it is a list of all recent
sourc of incom payment to creditor lawsuit repossess or foreclosur
sourc of inform investig
3430 2011 fraud examin manual
assign gift loss financi account safe deposit box es prior address financi
statement inventori and current and former offic director and sharehold
bankruptci plan the bankruptci plan is a detail account of how the creditor claim
will be resolv
the bankruptci file mai also contain transcript of deposit or interview if fraud wa
suspect the truste mai have conduct a fraud investig check with the truste to
find out if ani investig were conduct
inspector gener
inspector gener can provid valuabl inform especi to offici law enforc
personnel about busi thei have investig or audit and thei ar good guid to
other inform sourc in their depart or agenc most offic of inspector
gener maintain central index and case file system congress establish inspector
gener to combat government fraud wast and abus in feder depart agenc
and design the entiti list below
feder entiti websit address
agenc for intern develop wwwusaidgov
agricultur depart of wwwusdagov
amtrak wwwamtrakoigcom
appalachian region commiss wwwarcgov
central intellig agenc wwwciagov
commerc depart of wwwcommercegov
commod futur trade commiss wwwcftcgov
consum product safeti commiss wwwcpscgov
corpor for nation and commun servic wwwnationalserviceorg
corpor for public broadcast wwwcpborg
council of the inspector gener wwwignetgov
defens depart of wwwdefensegov
educ depart of wwwedgov
energi depart of wwwdoegov
environment protect agenc wwwepagov
equal employ opportun commiss wwweeocgov
farm credit administr wwwfcagov
feder commun commiss wwwfccgov
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3431
feder deposit insur corpor wwwfdicoiggov
feder elect commiss wwwfecgov
feder emerg manag agenc wwwfemagov
feder hous financ board wwwfhfagov
feder labor relat author wwwflragov
feder maritim commiss wwwfmcgov
feder reserv board wwwfederalreservegov
feder trade commiss wwwftcgov
gener servic administr oiggsagov
govern print offic wwwgpogov
health and human servic depart of wwwhhsgov
homeland secur depart of wwwdhsgov
hous and urban develop depart of wwwhudgov
interior depart of the wwwdoigov
intern trade commiss us wwwusitcgov
justic depart of wwwusdojgov
labor depart of wwwdolgov
legal servic corpor wwwlscgov
nation aeronaut and space administr wwwnasagov
nation archiv and record administr wwwarchivesgov
nation credit union administr wwwncuagov
nation endow for the art wwwneagov
nation endow for the human wwwnehgov
nation labor relat board wwwnlrbgov
nation scienc foundat wwwnsfgov
nuclear regulatori commiss wwwnrcgov
offic of personnel manag wwwopmgov
peac corp wwwpeacecorpsgov
pension benefit guaranti corpor wwwpbgcgov
postal servic us wwwuspscom
railroad retir board wwwrrbgov
secur and exchang commiss wwwsecgov
small busi administr wwwsbagov
social secur administr wwwssagov
state depart of wwwstategov
tennesse vallei author wwwtvagov
sourc of inform investig
3432 2011 fraud examin manual
transport depart of wwwdotgov
treasuri depart of the wwwustreasgov
treasuri inspector gener for tax administr wwwustreasgovtigta
veteran affair depart of wwwvagov
commod futur trade commiss
the commod futur trade commiss act of 1974 creat the commod futur
trade commiss cftc and it empow the cftc to regul all futur trade in
the unit state the cftc impos specul posit limit on futur contract as
need to elimin decreas or deter the burden on interst commerc that mai result
from excess specul moreov the cftc through it affili with the nation
futur associ nfa provid a disputeresolut program for custom and
member
thi cftc maintain the follow inform
registr inform concern firm and individu
administr and injunct action file by the cftc against firm and individu
financi report file by cftc registr
custom complaint file against cftc registr
nation futur associ
the nation futur associ is an industrywid selfregulatori organ
author by the commod exchang act it oper under the supervis of the cftc
the nfa is a onestop inform sourc for all type of registr and disciplinari
inform regard firm and individu in the futur industri thi inform
includ registr statu and employ histori disciplinari action file by the nfa
the cftc and the commod exchang and c ustom complaint file under the cftc
repar program
the nfa inform center can be contact at 800 6213570 or within illinoi at 312
7811410 or access on their websit at wwwcftcgov
depart of agricultur
some us depart of agricultur usda agenc maintain or have access to financi
record concern contract with the agenc recipi of variou benefit such as food
stamp and free or reducedpric school lunch farmland improv and feder crop
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3433
insur coverag variou usda agenc maintain inform about gain access to
record concern the follow
meat or poultri compani
feedlot owner or oper livestock broker meat packer or canneri
ownership manag or the oper ofor certain financi data concern
farm or ranch particip in usda program
retail groceri store author to accept food stamp
rural electr or telephon cooper
applic for and receipt of loan loan guarante grant or contract with or from
usda agenc
applic for and indemn paid by feder crop insur
log tree harvest compani that remov timber from nation forest
certain improv to farm land
the import or export of agricultur commod anim or plant
personnel data on current or former usda employe
the usda headquart ar at 1400 independ avenu sw washington dc 20250
and can be call at 202 7206858 the usda websit is wwwusdagov
depart of commerc
the depart of commerc is focus on promot econom growth and it maintain
inform on intern trade social and econom condit trend patent
trademark ocean studi domest econom develop and minor busi it ha
foreign countri expert who can direct examin to sourc of busi inform on ani
countri in the world
the bureau of industri and secur bi a divis of the depart of commerc
maintain list of person and entiti who have been deni the right to export or import
good the biss websit is wwwbisdocgov
the depart of commerc is locat at 1401 constitut avenu nw washington
dc 20230 and can be call at 202 4822000 their websit is wwwcommercegov
social secur administr record
the social secur administr retain origin applic for social secur number
applic list an applic name maiden and marri name for women date of birth
sourc of inform investig
3434 2011 fraud examin manual
place of birth sex race parent name and address at time of applic if a social
secur number is known it might lead to help inform regard the locat where
the card wa issu becaus mani peopl appli for a social secur number at a young ag
these record can help to locat an individu place of birth
there ar nine digit in the social secur number with the except of the 700 seri the
first three digit reflect the state of issu some state and puerto rico have more than on
seri of number the last six digit ar individu identifi here is a list of the state
of issu of the first three digit
social secur number chart
initi number state of issuanc
001003 new hampshir
004007 main
008009 vermont
010034 massachusett
035039 rhode island
040049 connecticut
050134 new york
135158 new jersei
159211 pennsylvania
212220 maryland
221222 delawar
223231 691699 virginia
232236 west virginia
237246 232 681690 north carolina
247251 654658 south carolina
252260 667675 georgia
261267 589595 766772 florida
268302 ohio
303317 indiana
318361 illinoi
362386 michigan
387399 wisconsin
400407 kentucki
408415 756763 tennesse
416424 alabama
425428 587 588 752755 mississippi
429432 676679 arkansa
433439 659665 louisiana
440448 oklahoma
449467 627645 texa
468477 minnesota
478485 iowa
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3435
486500 missouri
501502 north dakota
503504 south dakota
505508 nebraska
509515 kansa
516517 montana
518519 idaho
520 wyom
521524 650653 colorado
525 585 648 649 new mexico
526527 600601 arizona
525529 646647 utah
530 680 nevada
531539 washington
540544 oregon
545573 602626 california
574 alaska
575576 750751 hawaii
577579 district of columbia
580 group 0118 group 20 abov pr virgin island
580584 596599 puerto rico
586 guam american samoa northern
mariana island philippin island
700728 railroad employe under the
special retir act
729733 enumer at entri
new area alloc but not yet issu
issuanc of these number to railroad em ploye wa discontinu juli 1 1963
depart of defens
the depart of defens dod maintain inform concern militari pai
depend allot deposit and other financi inform is maintain by the
entiti list below
armi
defens financ and account servic
indianapoli center
indianapoli in 462490001
888 3327366
wwwdfasmilaboutcontactsarmycontactshtml
sourc of inform investig
3436 2011 fraud examin manual
air forc
defens financ and account servic
denver center lowri air forc base
denver co 802795000
888 3327411
wwwdfasmilaboutcontactsairforcecontactshtm
navi
defens financ and account servic
cleveland center
1240 east ninth street
cleveland oh 441992055
888 3327411 or 216 5225096
wwwdfasmilaboutcontactsnavycontactshtml
marin corp
defens financ and account servic
kansa citi center
kansa citi mo 641970001
800 7564571 or 614 6938507
wwwdfasmilaboutcontactsmarinecorpshtml
depart of educ
the depart of educ inspector ge neral maintain financi and earn
statement from parent of student appli for pell grant formerli call basic
educ opportun grant
depart of hous and urban develop
the depart of hous and urban develop hud complianc divis
conduct investig of alleg hud violat thi divis handl investig of
fals statement on credit applic for feder hous administr fha loan
mortgag certif of no outstand oblig cost certif and other area of
fraud hud maintain central index file in washington dc contain inform
regard hud program and particip includ such individu and busi as
mortgag compani develop and borrow
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3437
depart of justic
the depart of justic us nation central bureau of the intern crimin
polic organ usncbinterpol ha direct contact with law enforc
author in more than 185 interpol memb er countri the usncb therefor can
request inform regard ownership previou investig and ani other materi
legal releas the inform avail is determin by the law of the countri from
which the materi is request
the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos atf is a princip law
enforc agenc within the unit state depart of justic that is dedic to
prevent terror reduc violent crime and protect the unit state the
atf retain
data on distilleri wineri breweri ma nufactur of tobacco product wholesal
and retail dealer of alcohol beverag and certain other manufactur dealer and
user of alcohol
investig report of alleg violat under it jurisdict
a list of feder licens firearm manufactur import and dealer
a complet list of all feder licens explos manufactur import and dealer
data on firearm licens given also conduct firearm license qualif and
complianc inspect
depart of labor
the depart of labor dol ha inform about the feder employe
compens act the job partnership train act the occup safeti health act
and the mine safeti health act the depart retain substanti data on busi that
have special work program affili with it
under the employ standard administr of the dol the offic of labormanag
standard olm administ and enforc most of the provis of the
labormanag report and disclosur act of 1959 lmrda the lmrda ha
report requir for certain labor organ union offic and employe
employ labor relat consult and sureti compani the lmrda requir cover
labor organ to annual file report with the olm the inform requir
includ name and titl of offic rate of due and fee loan receiv other
invest other asset other liabil fix asset loan payabl sale of invest
sourc of inform investig
3438 2011 fraud examin manual
and fix asset disburs to offic disburs to employe purchas of
invest and fix asset benefit and contribut gift and grant
in addit sureti compani that issu bond requir by lmrda or the employe
retir incom secur act of 1974 erisa ar requir to report premium receiv
and claim paid
depart of state
the depart of state maintain data on import and export licens the state
depart bureau of diplomat secur ha inform relat to previou
investig conduct by that offic the bureau of diplomat secur is a world leader
in intern investig threat analysi cyber secur counterterror secur
technolog and protect of peopl properti and inform
depart of the treasuri
the depart of the treasuri includ sever statutori inspector gener law
enforc agenc
within the intern revenu servic ir the crimin investig ci divis
conduct investig of tax fraud relat to incom tax excis tax occup tax and
violat of currencytransact report enforc effort includ tax violat monei
launder currenc crime and asset forfeitur the releas of taxpay inform to
other than ir personnel requir special procedur the ir inspect servic maintain
inform on subject of investig and their relationship to ir employe eg
threat made against collus with and briberi of ir employe
the financi crime enforc network fincen safeguard the financi system from
the abus of financi crime includ terrorist financ monei launder and other illicit
activ fincen work to maxim inform share among law enforc agenc
and it other partner in the regulatori and financi commun through cooper and
partnership fincen network approach encourag costeffect and effici measur
to combat monei launder domest and internation the usa patriot act
section 314b permit financi institut upon provid notic to the unit state
depart of the treasuri to share inform with on anoth in order to identifi and
report to the feder government activ that mai involv monei launder or terrorist
activ howev access to these record by outsid parti is extrem limit
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3439
depart of homeland secur
under the border and transport director of the depart of homeland secur
the us custom and border protect servic retain data on busi that ar involv
in import and export includ list and record of import export custom hous
broker and trucker the offic of investig look into alleg violat of import
and export practic the custom and border protect servic is also involv in the
nation narcot border interdict system and special agent from the offic of
investig have been particip in the organ crime drug enforc task
forc custom might provid inform rel to busi that violat the statut
it enforc
the us secret servic maintain record on forger counterfeit and busi that
have contact the servic concern forg or counterfeit oblig of the unit state
such as treasuri note in addit the treasur of the unit state can provid copi of
cancel check paid by the us treasuri the secret servic also investig counterfeit
and other financi crime includ financi institut fraud ident theft comput
fraud and computerbas attack on our nation financi bank and
telecommun infrastructur
depart of veteran affair
record of loan tuition payment insur payment and nonrestrict medic data
relat to disabl pension ar maintain at va region offic locat in sever
metropolitan area throughout the countri
drug enforc administr
the drug enforc administr dea maintain inform on licens handler
of narcot and the crimin record of user pusher and supplier of narcot
feder aviat administr
the feder aviat administr faa maintain record reflect the chain of
ownership of all civil aircraft in the unit state these record includ document about
the manufactur sale transfer inspect and modif of an aircraft includ the bill
of sale sale contract mortgag and lien
sourc of inform investig
3440 2011 fraud examin manual
the faa also maintain record on pilot aircraft mechan flight engin and other
individu whom it certifi for flight safeti posit these record includ inform on
certif held medic and law enforc histori
feder bureau of investig
an agenc within the depart of justic the feder bureau of investig fbi
provid inform on crimin record and fingerprint as well as nonrestrict
inform pertain to crimin offens and subvers activ it also provid
inform about want miss and unidentifi peopl and foreign fugit the fbi
current investig case involv counterterror counterintellig cyber crime
public corrupt civil right whitecollar crime organ crime major theft and
violent crime
the integr autom fingerprint identif system more commonli known as
iafi is a nation fingerprint and criminalhistori system maintain by the feder
bureau of investig crimin justic inform servic cji divis the iafi
provid autom fingerprint search capabl latent search capabl electron
imag storag and electron exchang of fingerprint and respons 24 hour a dai 365
dai a year as a result of submit fingerprint electron agenc receiv electron
respons to crimin 10print fingerprint submiss within two hour and within 24
hour for civil fingerprint submiss
the iafi maintain the largest biometr databas in the world contain the fingerprint
and correspond crimin histori inform for more than 55 million subject in the
crimin master file the fingerprint and correspond crimin histori inform ar
submit voluntarili by state local and feder law enforc agenc
feder commun commiss
the feder commun commiss fcc licens all radio oper in the unit
state individu or corpor bodi appli for author to construct new broadcast
station or to chang exist station also must file with the fcc inform contain in
the file includ detail on program technic aspect of the propos facil
ownership and financi statu
feder energi regulatori commiss
electr util and natur ga compani ar requir to file annual report with the feder
energi regulatori commiss the report provid excel financi pictur of the
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3441
compani and provid inform about offic director and stockhold who own
more than 10 percent of the compani
feder highwai administr
the feder highwai administr licens regul inspect and regist all motor
carrier oper in interst commerc it keep record of it inspect of motor
carrier and a histori of violat of each carrier
feder maritim commiss
the feder maritim commiss investig applic for licens to engag in
oceango freightforward activ applic provid inform to the commiss
cover most aspect of their histori includ name resid date and place of birth
and citizenship of all corpor offic and director name of partnership member of
individu proprietor and name of direct holder of 5 percent or more of compani stock
financi industri regulatori author
in 2007 the financi industri regulatori author finra wa creat through the
consolid of nasd and the member regul enforc and arbitr function
of the new york stock exchang finra is dedic to investor protect and market
integr through effect and effici regul and complementari complianc and
technologybas servic
finra touch virtual everi aspect of the secur businessfrom regist and
educ industri particip to examin secur firm write rule enforc those
rule and the feder secur law inform and educ the invest public provid
trade report and other industri util and administ the largest disput resolut
forum for investor and regist firm it also perform market regul under contract
for the nasdaq stock market the american stock exchang the intern secur
exchang and the chicago climat exchang
secur brokerdeal must regist with the sec and in those state where thei plan to
do busi if thei plan to do busi with the public thei must also becom finra
member typic registr requir for the sec state and nasd includ busi
financi disciplinari inform and disclosur of crimin convict
sourc of inform investig
3442 2011 fraud examin manual
gener servic administr
the gener servic administr gsa ha consider inform on architect
engin person properti auction real estat apprais construct contractor
sale broker and busi that contract with the gsa the agenc also maintain the
gsa consolid list a computer roster of suspend and debar bidder
the gsa is also respons for the exclud parti list system epl which is an
electron webbas system that identifi parti that exclud from receiv feder
contract certain subcontract and certain type of feder financi and nonfinanci
assist and benefit the epl keep it user commun awar of suspect terrorist
individu bar from enter the unit state and those subject to administr and
statutori exclus the user is abl to search view and download both current and
archiv exclus
nation aeronaut and space administr
the nation aeronaut and space administr nasa is respons for the nation
public space program and longterm aerospac research more than 90 percent of nasa
multibilliondollar budget goe to nasa contractor file maintain by it offic of
procur contain inform about a contractor and it employe nasa requir that
contract firm submit the follow data with their propos name and qualif of
the contractor and resum of the personnel who will be directli assign to the project the
resum should includ educ background work experi length of servic with the
firm and project on which these individu have work
nation archiv and record administr
the nation archiv and record administr oper feder record center
throughout the countri includ the nation personnel record center in st loui mo
and the feder regist and the nation archiv build in washington dc it also is
respons for region archiv and the presidenti librari the nation personnel
record center in st loui store the personnel record of former member of the arm
forc and former feder civilian employe procedur for investig inquiri into these
record ar avail from the center for inform call 1 314 8010800
the feder regist is the medium for notifi the public of offici agenc action all
feder regul must be publish in it the offic of the feder regist provid a
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3443
period workshop on the us of the feder regist as an inform sourc a handbook
on the us of the feder regist is also avail for inform call 1 202 7416000
nation railroad passeng corpor
the nation railroad passeng corpor amtrak maintain inform on
passeng includ reserv histori method of payment and date of travel the
railroad industri railroad contractor subcontractor vendor and train rout and
schedul
nuclear regulatori commiss
the nuclear regulatori commiss nrc maintain applic and licens of peopl
and compani that export nuclear materi and equip from the unit state the
nrc determin whether propos export would be inim to our defens and secur
and for certain export whether thei come under the term of an agreement that establish
the ground rule for nuclear cooper and trade between the unit state and the
countri of destin
offic of foreign asset control
the offic of foreign asset control ofac is an offic within the depart of the
treasuri charg with administ and enforc us sanction polici against target
foreign organ and individu who sponsor terror and intern narcot
traffick ofac maintain a list of individu al government entiti compani and
merchant vessel around the world that ar known or suspect to engag in illeg activ
person or entiti on the list known as special design nation and block person
sdn includ foreign agent front organ terrorist and terrorist organ
and drug traffick the list contain thousand of variat on name of individu
government entiti compani and merchant vessel and is updat on a regular basi
current inform on licens issu with regard to sdn and other block person mai
be obtain or verifi by call ofac licens at 202 6222480
secur and exchang commiss record
the secur and exchang commiss sec maintain public record of corpor
with stock and secur sold to the public these record includ the follow
inform
financi statement
identif of offic and director
sourc of inform investig
3444 2011 fraud examin manual
identif of owner of more than 10 percent of a businesss stock
a descript of the registr properti and busi
a descript of the signific provis of the secur to be offer for sale and it
relationship to the registr other capit secur
identif of event of interest to investor
identif of account and attornei
a histori of the busi
the sec also maintain file on individu and firm report to it for violat feder or
state secur law the inform in these file pertain to offici action taken against
such peopl and firm includ denial refus suspens and revoc of
registr injunct fraud order stop order and ceaseanddesist order and arrest
indict convict sentenc and other offici action
moreov chang in benefici ownership by offic director and princip stockhold
of secur list and regist on a nation secur exchang or of secur of public
util compani and certain closedend invest compani can be access through the
sec edgar system on the sec websit also as of septemb 2008 thi inform
can also be access on the sec new idea interact data electron applic
system idea will at first supplement and then eventu replac the edgar system
which will becom an archiv of sec file made prior to the introduct of the idea
system
most of a compani inform file with edgar and idea can be obtain in
electron form by us the onlin sec search featur at wwwsecgov to obtain paper
copi of sec record and document histor sec file special report and studi
speech and testimoni contact the offic of investor educ and advocaci at 202
5518090 or through email at publicinfosecgov
some import corpor file with the sec ar discuss below
annual report of publicli trade compani form 10k
form 10k is an annual report requir by the sec it contain the compani incom
statement and balanc sheet inform on it debt structur foreign ownership properti
own subsidiari industri descript depreci dilut and other kei busi
inform if the file compani ha file for bankruptci been the target of a sharehold
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3445
lawsuit or been su for patent infring such inform mai also show up in the 10
k excerpt or complet report ar avail via lexisnexi or dialog databas
quarterli report of publicli trade compani form 10q
form 10q is same as the form 10k but it must file quarterli instead of annual
special event in publicli trade compani form 8k
form 8k which is on of the most common type of form file with the sec is file to
notifi investor of ani unschedul materi corpor event
registr of secur form 8a
form 8a is on of the form us to regist secur for offer to the public it contain
inform regard the type of secur detail of the issuanc and inform about the
issuer
registr of secur by successor form 8b
form 8b is a file with the sec that concern the registr of secur of certain
successor issuer it contain the name of issuer and the relationship to the primari
registrantissu
special event in foreign secur form 6k
foreign privat issuer must submit a form 6k the inform contain in a form 6k
is similar to that contain in a form 10k and a form 8k
report of acquisit of benefici ownership of 5 percent or more of capit stock of public compani form 13d
form 13d must be file when an investor acquir five percent of ani public compani
thi form contain a descript of the secur ani agreement or other undertak by
the report entiti the sourc of fund for the acquisit the purpos of the acquisit
and the relationship of the parti also if acquisit result in chang of control it
contain background inform on each person report
feder trade commiss file
the feder trade commiss ftc which is the feder agenc respons for
enforc of the fair credit report act archiv inform on action taken against
compani and individu as well as consent decre ie judici recognit of an agreement
sourc of inform investig
3446 2011 fraud examin manual
between parti to a suit and judgment against compani and individu detail
inform on particular compani or action is avail through a request under the
freedom of inform act
occup safeti and health administr record
the occup safeti and health administr osha is charg with the
enforc of legisl design to protect employe who rais complaint about the
health and safeti of their workplac osha inform includ the name address
countycountri number of employe and sic code of ani busi subject to a health and
safeti inspect purpos and scope of the in spection offic and offic conduct the
inspect hour spent and total number of vi olat and penalti assess as a result of
the inspect a search of osha inform also encompass all parallel state agenc
interst commerc commiss
the interst commerc commiss icc identifi liabil and car insur carrier for
all surfac transport compani engag in interst and foreign commerc
inform kept by the icc includ the identif and address of the insur carrier
the limit of the insur polici the polici number and the statu
us small busi administr
the us small busi administr sba is a feder agenc that provid support to
small busi the sba guarante loan made by privat lender and make direct loan
for busi construct expans or convers for purchas of machineri equip
facil suppli or materi and for work ing capit a loan applic sole owner
partnership corpor or other must complet sba form provid inform about
the busi and it princip owner offic and director
addition the sba arrang contract and guarante loan for qualifi small minor
own busi for some of these busi the sba might be the onli sourc for
financi and other inform about the busi their princip their asset and other
data becaus their stock is not publicli held these busi ar not subject to public
disclosur law
the sba also connect small firm own by social and econom disadvantag
american with contract set asid by other feder agenc for the purpos of increas
opportun for small busi gener
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3447
unit state state depart
the unit state state depart known as the state depart is respons for the
countri intern relat it maintain the intern traffic in arm regul
itar debar list which contain a list of parti bar from particip in the
export of defens articl eg technic data or in the furnish of defens servic
for which a licens or approv is requir under the intern traffic in arm
regul 22 cfr sec 1277
treasuri direct
treasuri direct is a financi servic websit that allow individu to bui and redeem
secur from the depart of the treasuri in electron form it maintain inform
on purchas and redeem us save bond regist bond market secur and
special secur specif the inform includ the seri of bond involv and the
surnam given name middl name or initi and address of each person in whose name
bond were purchas
us citizenship and immigr servic
formerli the immigr and natur servic the us citizenship and immigr
servic usci is a bureau of the depart of homeland secur the usci is
charg with overse law immigr in the unit state and it retain a number of
record includ alien registr record issu after august 27 1940 from juli 1 1920
to august 27 1940 each immigr wa given an immigr identif card list of
passeng and crew on vessel from foreign port passeng manifest and declar
ship date and point of entri natur record name of wit to natur
proceed and acquaint of the individu deport proceed and financi
statement of alien and peopl sponsor an immigr entri
us coast guard
the coast guard is a branch of the arm forc that carri out three basic role maritim
safeti maritim secur and maritim stewardship it maintain name of merchant
marin on us vessel and investig record pertain to them record relat to
maritim drug smuggl record on crimin investig and record on document
us vessel
sourc of inform investig
3448 2011 fraud examin manual
us govern account offic
the govern account offic gao is the audit evalu and investig
agenc of the unit state congress gao internet home page provid access to recent
gao audit product and comptrol gener decis as well as inform on how to
order paper copi of both recent and older gao product in addit gao audit
product from fiscal year 1995 forward and recent decis ar avail in electron form
at the govern print offic websit gao product includ those not avail
on the internet mai also be order by call 202 5126000 or tdd 301 4130006
us postal servic
the postal servic which is respons for provid postal servic in the unit state
maintain valuabl inform includ the name and address of post offic box
holder check with the local post offic to learn the ident of the inspector who can
furnish the inform photocopi of postal monei order and request for copi of
postal monei order ar made through the local us postal inspect servic offic usual
by subpoena
feder procur data system
the feder procur data system fpd collect develop and dissemin feder
contract inform mani feder agenc report their contract and purchas to the
fpd which catalog the inform for govern and public us contract agre
upon as long ago as 1978 ar searchabl the fpd is best sourc for feder procur
inform and it websit wwwfpdsgov is also fairli explanatori and easi to navig
fedworld inform network
establish by the nation technic inform servic fedworld provid access to a
comprehens inventori of inform dissemin by the feder govern
essenti it is a onestop shop spot for feder government inform includ a
govern locat databas us custom rule suprem court decis and a foreign
new alert servic it websit is wwwfedworldgov
nation motor vehicl titl inform system
establish by the anticar theft act of 1992 the nation motor vehicl titl
inform system nmvti is an electron databas us to authent and exchang
kei vehicl histori data such as titl inform and certain theft data the primari
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3449
reason for creat the nmvti wa to address the lack of conform among state vehicl
document law which is on of the kei factor contribut to titl fraud
the new databas effect on januari 1 2010 is design to prevent titl wash which
occur when a vehicl brand ie a perman design indic that the vehicl ha
incur damag through collus flood fire or other incid requir repair is remov
by retitl the vehicl in a state that doesnt carri forward ani brand on the new titl
nonpubl record
type of nonpubl record
as previous state nonpubl recordsinform about a person or busi that is
consid to be privat and confidentialmig ht be need in some fraud examin
some of the most valuabl person record includ
bank record
tax return and relat document
credit record
telephon record
credit card account record
bank record
bank record ar perhap the singl most import extern financi sourc avail to a
fraud examin in addit to their us as evid for fraud bank record might provid
lead on sourc of fund expenditur and person affair these record help the
examin construct a paper trail to prove the fraud
some of the record that should be review if avail ar
account open document
monthli account statement
check written on the account
loan file
safe deposit box record
currenc transact report
bank collect depart record
mortgag loan file
sourc of inform investig
3450 2011 fraud examin manual
tax return and relat document
person tax return if avail mai provid indirect evid of illicit payment such as
profit or loss from previous undisclos busi ventur or interest and dividend on
hidden certif of deposit and bank account the return mai also show deduct and
expens such as real estat tax which mai lead to previous unknown fund or asset
credit record
practic all line of busi have special creditreport associ that can provid
credit inform on individu and busi includ trade inform design of
lender and creditor type of busi date account were open term of payment
agre upon highest credit balanc ow and pai habit some credit report also give
the name of the bank the subject doe busi with and the size of the subject account
in the unit state most consum credit inform is collect and maintain by the
three nation creditreport agenc equifax experian and transunion gener a
subscript is requir to obtain inform from these sourc and their dissemin is
govern by the fair credit report act fcra the fcra place restrict on when a
consum credit report can be obtain and us in mani case the consum must be
notifi or must consent to the us of the report for employ purpos pleas consult
the inform on the fcra present previous in thi chapter for more inform
about the legal of obtain and us consum credit report
credit report ar provid by credit report agenc also known as credit bureau credit
report agenc ar local or nation institut that collect data from variou sourc on
individu consum creditworthi and report that data to their member or subscrib
there ar essenti two type of credit report agenc the first is known as a filebas
credit report agenc which develop it inform from credit file and public record the
other type is known as an investig credit report agenc which gather most of it
inform through interview
credit report agenc typic maintain the follow inform
consum inform such as address ag famili member employ incom level
length of employ the extent of other oblig and the like
account inform such as payment schedul item purchas default if ani and
bui habit
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3451
market inform such as custom brok en down by ag sex incom level and
other classif
inform on current and former employ
inform on the creditworthi of a busi organ mai also be obtain from
credit report agenc the respons for such search mai includ payment trend from
creditor public record such as ucc file and tax lien bank inform and kei
fact as to the type of busi and ownership but unlik consum credit inform
busi credit inform is not restrict by the fair credit report act
gener credit report agenc obtain their inform from the follow sourc
consum primarili from fill out applic form for credit
public record which provid inform on bankruptci court judgment
foreclosur divorc crimin convict regist chattel mortgag and regist
agreement
the major credit grantor and collect agenc which as subscrib regularli send
their credit file electron to the credit bureau result in file that includ the
account number outstand balanc and a ninepoint scale indic whether a
payment wa made on time
mani credit grantor and collect agenc onli report payment inform to on of
the three nation creditreport agenc but larger creditor mai report to more than
on bureau some creditor like util compani onli report delinqu activ sinc
the big three agenc do not share data among themselv there will be differ
between the credit report from each credit bureau
in a typic credit inform request the potenti creditor call the credit bureau or
make an onlin request for inform and the creditor receiv detail regard other
credit histori of the individu such as payment schedul and delinqu
inform maintain by credit report agenc is regularli updat at the request of the
consum or by request of the credit grantor
telephon record
like other type of nonpubl inform telephon record can provid valuabl insight
into fraud examin for exampl telephon record mai provid contact with real
sourc of inform investig
3452 2011 fraud examin manual
estat broker or seller identifi charg call from vacat spot or contact with co
conspir or provid other lead to asset and expenditur
credit card account record
credit card account record can be help when conduct a fraud examin credit
card receipt will track the travel of the defend and of cours record expenditur an
extrem high balanc on a credit card mai indic a motiv for the crime or provid
circumstanti evid of hidden incom even modest credit card charg mai provid
lead to identifi hidden asset eg charg for boat suppli purchas at a marina
might indic a need for further investig to determin whether the subject own an
expens boat
gain access to nonpubl record
nonpubl record ar not avail to the public and therefor mai be difficult to obtain
despit the limit on obtain person record fraud examin mai be abl to obtain
nonpubl record by us on or more of the method discuss below
request the record
the simplest wai to obtain relev document is to request them thi usual work for
examin repres larg organ that ar import custom to the parti with
the inform vendor and other custom of the compani conduct the investig
mai cooper voluntarili if thei have noth to hide or think that incrimin evid
cannot be found and ar anxiou to maintain good relat with the compani
subpoena
subpoena and other legal process such as deposit interrog and document
request ar avail if a civil action is file for exampl a wrong organ mai file a
civil or administr action or make a crimin referr so that record can be subpoena
in a civil case record such as bank account brokerag account travel credit card credit
agenc and telephon toll record mai be obtain by subpoena
convers record subpoena in a crimin case usual ar avail onli to the
govern dure the investig and perhap thereaft if not disclos at trial in
addit law enforc agenc mai also subpoena record of cours but usual will
not disclos them to the victim or third parti
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3453
demand as a condit of continu busi
similarli an organ mai demand that a supplier vendor or agent turn over relev
document as a condit of continu busi take thi action is legal in appropri
circumst of cours manag and counsel should be consult befor such
demand ar made particularli if the other parti ha a contractu relationship with the
compani
exercis audit claus right
an audit claus allow the parti to access the book of the other parti thu absent
subpoena power examin mai need to us audit claus right to access contractor and
subcontractor record and financi account
unfortun most audit claus ar too narrow to provid us inform howev if
properli construct an audit claus can be a power method by which onbook
inform can be obtain
negoti
anoth method to obtain relev document is to negoti with a parti to the
investig as part of a deal to cooper in exchang for lenienc in some case third
parti facilit or other margin involv in the wrongdo mai agre to produc
record and cooper in exchang for a releas of liabil indemn or commit to
continu the busi relationship counsel and manag must of cours be involv in
such decis as well as the fidel bond carrier if a claim is to be made under the bond
consent
although unlik a target execut mai voluntarili produc certain record if he is
blameless think he is blameless or think the investig will not find the smoke
gun or execut a consent to obtain such record from bank credit agenc or the ir
commerci sourc of inform
associ and lobbi group
associ and lobbi group have inform about their member firm two of the best
sourc ar the better busi bureau and a citi chamber of commerc
sourc of inform investig
3454 2011 fraud examin manual
better busi bureau
a number of better busi bureau ar locat throughout the countri thei ar
sponsor by local busi and offer a varieti of servic includ background
inform on local busi and organ the bureau gener keep inform
about crimin racket and con and their oper and can provid inform about the
busi reput of local group
chamber of commerc
chamber of commerc gener have citi directori and often keep back issu of the
directori thei also have inform regard reput of busi and oper in
the area
abstract and titl compani
in addit to record of individu transact abstract and titl compani often publish
and distribut paper to attornei real estat broker insur compani and financi
institut these paper contain inform about transfer of properti locat
mortgag amount and releas of mortgag
bond compani
bond compani provid bond servic includ sureti bond licens bond permit
bond bid bond and so on to get bond an entiti will have to submit an applic for
a bond at a bond compani the applic for a bond contain the applic person or
firm financi statement and data the inform contain in a bond applic is
essenti the same inform that is requir in loan applic though in greater
detail
credit card record
credit card record often contain valuabl inform concern the individu debtor but
law and regul must be check befor obtain these record inform on
expenditur can be obtain from firm such as mastercard american express diner
club discov and visa thi inform usual requir a subpoena
stockbrok
stockbrok maintain inform which is similar to that which is maintain by financi
institut on mani of their client especi those who have margin account and thei
maintain record of transact for all client
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3455
western union
western union is a nonbank monei transfer provid and it store record for paid monei
order these record contain the origin telegram by purchas or sender and bank draft
by western union western union retain order for less than 1000 for two year and
order of 1000 or more for six year
carfax
carfax is a privat servic that provid vehicl histori inform it determin whether
there is an odomet discrep or evid of prior salvag or titl wash carfax
uniqu databas contain more than five billion record thei receiv inform from
thousand of sourc includ all depart of motor vehicl dmv in the unit
state and canada as well as mani vehicl inspect station auto auction fleet
manag and rental agenc automobil manufactur and fire and
polic depart
intern air transport associ
the intern air transport associ is an intern industri trade group of the
lead airlin and it ha inform on all intern matter deal with aviat
secur includ counterterror effort worldwid it also monitor and attempt to
prevent fraud against airlin such as ticket fraud
intern foundat for art research
the intern foundat for art research ifar is a nonprofit organ
establish in 1969 to help prevent the circul of forg and misattribut work of art
ifar offer an authent servic to help resolv controversi concern the
authent of work of art ifar also publish quarterli journal on authent
research art law theft and recoveri and an extens list of recent report stolen and
miss art and antiqu the ifar websit is wwwifarorg
nation associ of insur commission
the nation associ of insur commission naic is an organ of
insur regul from the 50 state the district of columbia and the us territori it
provid a forum for the develop of polici when uniform is appropri a state
regul primari respons is to protect the interest of insur consum and the
associ help regul fulfil that oblig
sourc of inform investig
3456 2011 fraud examin manual
the naic websit is a particularli effecti ve resourc for consum protect becaus
potenti investor can visit their site to verifi if an insur promot is licens to sell the
invest the naic websit can be access at wwwnaicorg
public record databas vendor
type of public record databas vendor
although there ar mani categori of public record profession thi section focus on
three commerci databas vendor search firm and document retriev
commerci databas vendor
commerci databas vendor provid user access to veri power archiv of data that
compil variou public record in on searchabl databas unlik public databas
commerci databas gener contain a broad rang of inform and allow the user to
search million of record simultan becaus these databas contain divers type of
inform fraud examin can us them for mani differ type of job
although gener commerci databas vendor do not provid ani more inform than
can be access from other sourc thei have two distinct advantagessearch speed and
constant access
gener commerci databas vendor ar avail onlin and allow user to retriev
request inform through a comput that is connect to the internet for such
databas there mai be an initi access fee monthli membership fee or a onetim access
fee
search firm
search firm special in locat asset and retriev public document thei us a varieti
of resourc includ onlin servic databas public record privat inform
sourc and privat investig
document retriev
document retriev ar research for hire thei obtain inform by visit govern
agenc in person
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3457
type of inform avail
the type of inform avail from public record servic includ
credit report
drive record
counti and state crimin convict
worker compens record
educ record
profession licens record
social secur record
address
telephon number
counti and state real properti record
feder crimin and civil record
consum public file
militari record
name and address of neighbor
state and counti civil record
busi public file
busi credit report
corpor record by state
faa registr
pleasur craft registr
vehicl registr by licens number or name of person or compani
feder bankruptci court record
grantor and grante record
abstract of judgment
tax lien
us for public record profession
fraud examin can us public record profession to
obtain us background inform on subject and wit contractor and
vendor such as crimin and civil litig bankruptci manag or sale
inform
assist in the compil of financi profil s and net worth analys to show that
the subject is live beyond hi or her mean or ha financi problem through real
properti motor vehicl ucc and other record of asset and expenditur
sourc of inform investig
3458 2011 fraud examin manual
identifi undisclos outsid busi or incom by subject employe
show that shell compani or phantom vendor do not exist
identifi asset that might be seiz or recov
help locat wit
public record databas vendor
there ar a number of compani that offer wide access to public record credit report
and newspap and period some of the more commonli us sourc ar
asset locat and busi background check by knowx
us datalink
infousa
csc diligenz
dialog
lexisnexi
dc inform system
ga public record servic
a complet descript of these servic and other inform avail through the
comput is discuss in the next chapter access inform onlin
directori
directori provid data on nation trade busi and commerci associ some of
the more frequent us directori ar discuss below
db directori
db is a busi and financi inform servic compani and it is the leader in
busi credit report db provid access to a varieti of resourc and is renown for
product like america corpor famili and the million dollar databas
america corpor famili
thi threevolum print directori publish by db provid complet detail
inform on us famili member of foreign parent compani and foreign subsidiari of
us corpor it includ data on more than 13000 us subsidiari 1900 us
ultim and 31000 foreign subsidiari
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3459
db million dollar databas
db million dollar databas provid access to inform on approxim 23 million
busi in over 200 countri worldwid inform avail includ annual sale
corpor offic locat phone number type of busi and number of employe
american medic associ directori of physician
avail in four hardbound volum thi directori which is publish by the american
medic associ list physician alphabetica lly and geograph each physician list
contain inform on state and citi of practic year of birth medic school and year of
graduat year of licens resid and offic address specialti and membership in
associ medic organ the directori also contain a name index of all doctor in
the unit state
best insur report
best insur report present comprehens statist report of the financi posit
histori and oper result of thousand of propertycasualti or lifehealth insur
compani oper in the unit state and canada the individu report on each
institut includ a review of it histori manag and oper invest
oper result and other statist compil the report ar avail onlin in print
or in cd
citi directori
citi directori usual contain the name resid occup and sometim the place of
employ of a citi influenti peopl such directori can usual be found at public
librari chamber of commerc and secondhand bookstor
congression directori
the congression directori is the offici directori of the us congress it present short
biographi on each member of the senat and hous list by state or district and
addit data such as committe membership term of servic administr assist
andor secretari and room and telephon number it also list offici of the court
militari establish and other feder depart and agenc includ washington
dc government offici governor of state and territori foreign diplomat and
member of the press radio and televis galleri the directori is compil by the joint
committe on print washington dc and is avail through the govern
print offic
sourc of inform investig
3460 2011 fraud examin manual
gale
gale part of cengag learn is an educ publish compani it is known for it
onlin databas and multivolum refer work some of it resourc includ gale gale
directori librari gale directori of databas directori in print gale directori of public and
broadcast media encyclopedia of associ and encyclopedia of busi inform sourc
gale directori librari
the gale directori librari provid onlin access to some of gale most popular
directori on compani publish associ and so on it includ onlin access to
gale directori of databas gale directori in print gale directori of public and broadcast
media encyclopedia of associ encyclopedia of busi inform sourc
with gale directori librari user can us stateoftheart function to perform a rang
of data sort filter and export user can us the librari to find contact
compani individu or public by search with a name or keyword gener list
and analyz trend by export data to word or excel and search across a grow number
of directori titl each directori can be search individu by it own uniqu data field
or the entir directori collect can be search
gale directori of databas
thi twovolum directori provid detail descript of nearli 20000 publicli avail
databas databas product onlin servic and databas vendor and distributor
worldwid in a varieti of format entri includ produc name and contact inform
descript cost and more
detail list provid complet inform on databas produc and vendor
databas list includ content and subject coverag type languag time span updat
frequenc geograph coverag produc contact inform and vendor avail
produc and vendor entri featur full contact inform includ address phone fax
websit address email address former name branch offic locat and a list of
avail databas and product for onlin vendor or host entri cover condit of
access network us and gatewai access for portabl vendor entri includ a list of
distributor the directori of databas is also avail on the gale directori librari
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3461
directori in print
thi public publish by gale thoroughli describ and index about 16000
directori of all kind includ busi and industri directori profession and
scientif roster foreign directori and other list and guid directori in print cover a
wide rang of subject includ gener busi manufactur industri and commerci
servic bank insur and financi servic advertis market and public
relat health care servic law militari and govern and associ philanthropi
ethnic group and religion directori in print is avail onlin on gale directori librari
gale directori of public and broadcast media
thi threevolum directori contain inform on 57000 radio and televis station
cabl compani and printmedia publish entri provid address phone and fax
number email address websit address kei personnel owner inform hour of
oper and much more provid access to inform on us canadian and
intern media outlet gale directori of public and broadcast media also includ ad
rate circul statist local program inform and other essenti data the
directori of public and broadcast media is avail onlin on the gale directori librari
encyclopedia of associ
gale publish a seri of encyclopedia of associ in region nation and
intern edit it publish the encyclopedia of associ nation organ of the
us which list each charter public and privat associ in the unit state and
provid valuabl inform about each associ offic and purpos in addit
publish the encyclopedia of associ intern organ and the enci clopedia of
associ region state and local these encyclopedia can be found onlin on gale
directori librari
encyclopedia of busi inform sourc
publish by gale thi comprehens directori is a bibliograph guid to more than
35000 live print and electron sourc of inform cover more than 1100 subject
of particular interest to busi profession citat cover abstract and index
almanac and yearbook bibliographi cdrom and onlin databas directori
encyclopedia and dictionari period and newspap research center and institut
statist sourc trade and profession societi and mani other sourc of busi
inform the encyclopedia of busi inform sourc is avail onlin on gale
directori librari
sourc of inform investig
3462 2011 fraud examin manual
sec file
edgar
edgar electron data gather analysi and retriev is a system that collect
document submit by compani and other who ar requir by law to file with the
secur and exchang commiss sec edgar perform autom collect
valid index accept and forward of sec file it primari purpos is to
increas the effici and fair of the secur market to benefit investor
corpor and the economi by acceler the receipt accept dissemin and
analysi of timesensit corpor inform file with the sec
not all document that public compani file with the sec howev will be avail on
edgar even so sever import document such as form 10k or 10ksb ar
requir to be file on the edgar system for more inform visit
wwwsecgovedgarshtml
interact data electron applic
in august 2008 the sec unveil the successor to the agenc edgar databas which
will give investor far faster and easier access to kei financi inform about public
compani and mutual fund the new system is call idea short for interact data
electron applic base on a complet new architectur be built from the
ground up it will at first supplement and then eventu replac the edgar system
current most sec file ar avail onli in governmentprescrib form through
edgar investor look for inform must sift through on form at a time and then
rekeyboard the inform a painstak task with idea investor will be abl to
instantli collat inform from thousand of compani and form and creat report
and analysi on the fly in ani wai thei choos
in 2009 howev casewar intern the develop of idea data analysi
softwar file suit against the sec over the us of the idea name that same year the
sec agre to discontinu it us of the mark idea at thi point it is not clear what the
sec will call it new system
egovern and web directori us feder govern onlin
the egovern and web directori is a guidebook for anyon look for offici us
government resourc on the internet the directori contain more than 2000 websit
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3463
record that provid descript and url for each site us govern organ
chart ar supplement with url for the 16 cabinetlevel depart and agenc the
hous of repres and the senat and the feder judici branch it also provid
great detail on the hous and senat in two appendic appendix a provid a roster of
congression member with their websit and appendix b provid a list of hous and
senat committe with committe url and the name of chairperson and rank
minor member thi print public can be purchas at wwwbernancom
factiva
factiva from dow jone is a busi inform and research tool it is tailor for
busi and financi new search maintain a catalog of more than 28000 of the
world lead new and busi sourc from 157 countri 350 geograph region and
in 23 languag factiva allow user to pai for onli the articl download and doe not
requir an annual subscript
carrol publish
carrol publish is a govern inform resourc it provid access to govern
inform for all level of govern and it offer a line of inform product
includ the feder directori and the feder organ chart
feder directori
carrol publish feder directori combin all three branch of the govern into
on volum it contain nearli 38000 name titl telephon number and email address
of senior and midlevel government offici in the execut offic of the presid all 15
cabinetlevel feder depart independ agenc us congress and the feder court
system thi directori featur a keyword index to help user quickli find program and
regulatori offic and it is updat four time a year
feder organ chart
thi looseleaf chart produc by carrol publish provid name address and
telephon number of staff member in the white hous execut depart
independ agenc quasigovernment organ and congression support offic
it ha name and kei word index and is updat monthli due to the high cost of
maintain thi directori it gener avail at select feder government librari
sourc of inform investig
3464 2011 fraud examin manual
foreign repres in the us yellow book
thi directori ha name and titl of more than 19000 intern busi and
government leader and section on corpor financi institut foreign nation
intergovernment organ foreign press and law firm it includ offici titl
address and telephon and fax number thi yellow book is broken down into
six section
corpor list more than 1000 lead foreignbas corpor with more than
2000 us offic and subsidiari
financi institut list more than 230 lead foreignbas financi institut
and more than 600 us repres offic
foreign nation list embassi and consul in 191 countri with perman
mission to the unit nation
intergovernment organ list the us offic in entiti such as the unit
nation european union and the world bank group
foreign press list more than 210 intern media outlet with bureau in the us
law firm list foreign law firm with a us presenc
index to legal period
publish by h w wilson the index to legal period offer intern coverag and
access to scholarli articl symposia jurisdict survei court decis legisl
book book review and more thi sourc index more than 1025 legal journal law
review yearbook institut statut bar associ public univers public
and government public with the full text of nearli 325 select period avail
inmat locat
inmat locat is a feder bureau of prison on line databas it contain inform on all
feder prison incarcer sinc 1982 the inform includ physic descript
inmat profil inmat locat or releas locat numer identifi person histori
secur design past and present institut assign custodi classif and
sentenc inform to locat an inmat visit the feder bureau of prison inmat
locat at wwwbopgov
ih fairplai
ih fairplai formerli lloyd registerfairplai suppli a rang of comprehens
ship databas regist onlin inform and a tailor research and systemdevelop
servic for custom specif need
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3465
magazin for librari
publish by bowker magazin for librari list almost everi magazin gener technic
and scholarli that a librari might wish to stock and describ the format in which the
magazin ar avail
martindalehubbel law directori
the martindalehubbel law directori contain biograph inform on most lawyer
and law firm practic in the unit state and canada
mergent
mergent public ar similar to db mergent report can provid inform
about firm list on the new york and american stock exchang as well as compani
list on region american exchang mergent also provid mergent onlin which
provid onlin access to mergent comprehens global compani databas
mergent bank and financ manual and new report
mergent bank and financ manual and new report is a busi and financi inform
resourc contain inform on nearli 2000 corpor it cover the field of financ
repres by bank insur compani invest compani unit invest trust
and miscellan financi enterpris it also includ inform on real estat compani
and real estat invest trust addition it provid other relev fact and figur
includ inform on corpor auditor gener counsel exchang and symbol
number of employe number of sharehold address telephon and fax number
shareholderrel contact stockpric rang dividend report of independ auditor
transfer agent stock split and annual meet date
mergent bank and financ new report ar publish each month in print and each week
onlin and contain materi that updat mergent bank and financ manual the report
includ new item interim financi statement personnel chang new compani
descript merger propos detail about new debt and stock issu secur offer
announc of new financ and call notic
nation insur crime bureau
the nation insur crime bureau nicb is a lead notforprofit organ
dedic to prevent detect and defeat insur fraud and vehicl theft through
sourc of inform investig
3466 2011 fraud examin manual
inform analysi investig train and public awar the nicb combat auto
theft by investig case refer to it by insur and through it onlin databas
the nicb publish the passeng vehicl identif manual annual thi manual contain
the structur and decod of vehicl identif number vin from the last three
model year for most us and canadian passeng vehicl includ lightduti truck
and motorcycl
the nicb publish the commerci vehicl and offroad equip identif manual everi
five year thi manual contain the structur of vehicl identif number for
commerci vehicl and the structur of product identif number pin for offroad
equip from the last five model year
these manual also includ
summari of the feder motor vehicl theft prevent standard which requir vin
mark on major part of passeng vehicl that ar part of hightheft line
gener inform on vin structur and decod of truck tractor and trailer
along with pin structur and decod for offroad equip
glossari of vehiclerel terminolog
vincheck is anoth servic avail from the nation insur crime bureau nicb
vincheck is a servic provid to the public to assist in determin if a vehicl ha been
report as stolen nicb vincheck databas contain vehicl that have been report
stolen by cooper nicb member but not recov a vehicl identif number
vin is requir to perform a search thi inform is made avail free of charg as
a public servic to help consum determin whether a specif vehicl ha been report as
stolen and to assist nicb and law enforc in locat stolen vehicl a maximum of
five vincheck search can be conduct within a 24hour period
in the 1980 state and region experienc high level of auto theft began to form anti
car theft act group fund by voluntari grant from coalit of law enforc
group state fund insur and consum to promot public awar of vehicl theft
and lobbi for the passag of state legisl aim at combat theft a few state have
enact automobil theft prevent author atpa which ar nonprofit
organ dedic to prevent motor vehicl theft state that have activ atpa
includ arizona colorado florida louisian a maryland michigan ohio pennsylvania
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3467
texa and washington state atpa ar mostli fund by a small surcharg on driver
licens or registr fee or on auto insur polici sold in the state
nation motor vehicl titl inform system
establish by the anticar theft act of 1992 the nation motor vehicl titl
inform system nmvti is an electron databas us to authent and exchang
kei vehicl histori data such as titl inform and certain theft data the primari
reason for creat the nmvti wa to address the lack of conform among state vehicl
document law which is on of the kei factor contribut to titl fraud
the new databas which went into full effect on januari 1 2010 is design in part to
prevent titl wash which occur when a vehicl brand ie a perman design
indic that the vehicl ha incur damag through collus flood fire or other
incid that requir repair is remov by retitl the vehicl in anoth state that doe
not carri forward ani brand on the new titl
the nation directori of law enforc administr
thi annual updat databas contain inform on more than 40000 list which
includ the name address telephon number and fax number of highwai patrol
offic prosecut attornei municip counti campu state correct feder militari
airport and harbor law enforc agenc
nation trade and profession associ directori
the nation trade and profession associ list more than 7800 activ nation trade
associ profession associ technic organ and labor union and the
20363 execut who run them each list in thi directori contain an address telephon
and fax number email address nametitl of top execut purpos of the organ
histori membership size and composit annual budget staff size public and
annual meet it also provid a list of firm that provid administr and
manag servic to associ on a contract basi includ a list of their fulltim
client associ other featur includ cont act inform serial public upcom
convent schedul membership and staff size budget figur and background
inform the 2010 edit of the nation trade and profession associ directori
can be purchas onlin through columbia book and inform servic and it is
avail onlin at wwwassociationexecscom
sourc of inform investig
3468 2011 fraud examin manual
the new york time articl archiv
the new york time articl archiv contain the complet back file of the new york time
it contain more than 13million articl in all and it can be search at
wwwnytimescom the archiv is divid in to two section 1851 to 1980 and 1981 to
present
pubm
pubm is a databas servic that provid free access to more than 20 million citat
from medlin and other life scienc journal for biomed articl date back to the
1950 pubm includ link to fullt xt articl and other relat resourc
reader guid to period literatur
the reader guid is a refer guid to articl publish in period and scholarli
journal the guid contain a full dictionari catalog of all articl by author subject and
titl where possibl the entri refer to the volum number of the period start and
inclus page of the articl date of public and graphic materi in the articl such as
portrait there is an electron retrospect version of the guid avail for 1890 to 1982
standard poor netadvantag
netadvantag is a subscriptionbas servic provid by standard poor it is a
comprehens sourc of busi and invest inform offer onlin access to
standard poor independ research da ta and commentari on stock bond fund
and industri thi servic also includ export tool to enabl research to download data
into spreadsheet program for further analysi some of netadvantag premium
public ar discuss below
corpor record
thi directori ha inform on more than 10000 public compani each descript
includ compani background stock and bond descript balanc sheet and earn
inform offic and director capit expenditur subsidiari and more
compani profil
netadvantag also publish a comprehens compani profil for more than 10500
publicli trade compani each profil includ a busi descript an interact
chart tool statist analyst rate valuat and financi inform as well as the
latest stock price quot compani new and inform on competitor
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3469
regist of corpor director and execut
the regist of corpor director and execut give short summari about
corpor execut and director includ their titl the name of the compani thei work
for their academ credenti membership in fratern organ and avail busi
and residenti contact inform
regist of public compani
thi regist provid brief descript of publicli trade compani includ stock
symbol total annual sale number of employe offic name and north american
industri classif system naic assign
regist of privat compani
the regist of privat compani provid hard to find inform on approxim
85000 privat compani includ when avail their address telephon number
offic and director total annual sale number of employe line of busi primari and
secondari naic classif princip bank law firm account firm and more
secur dealer of north america
the secur dealer of north america is a list of north american secur dealer
provid a brief descript of each dealer busi a list of the state in which it is
regist to do busi the locat of it ma in offic the name of it offic clear
firm associ and membership and the number of employe and regist
repres it emploi
the global bank resourc
the global bank resourc tgbr is a comprehens databas of financi institut
and it provid data on financi institut contact correspond subsidiari affili
financi inform payment inform and much more
yellow book seri
associ yellow book
the associ yellow book which is publish by leadership directori provid access to
inform on major trade and profession associ semiannu edit provid
current inform on chief staff execut turnov chang in staff and govern
board merger and name chang it featur 1 more than 32000 offic execut and
staff with the titl affili educ and telephon and fax number of more than
sourc of inform investig
3470 2011 fraud examin manual
1000 associ with budget exceed 2 million 2 the address email address
internet address telephon number and fax number of the associ headquart and
branch 3 the associ board member and outsid affili 4 the associ
committe and chairpeopl washington repres polit action committe and
foundat 5 the associ public includ editor and 6 the associ
annual budget tax statu number of employe and number of member
corpor yellow book
the corpor yellow book is a directori of the peopl who manag direct and shape the
largest public and privat held compani in the unit state publish quarterli it
enabl subscrib to access corpor leader includ board member who ar take
increas respons for corpor decisionmak and administrativeservic
profession the directori featur 1 the name and titl of more than 26000 execut
includ more than 7000 corpor board member and their outsid affili 2 the
directdi telephon number of execut and more than 10000 email address for
offic manag and administrativeservic profession 3 the address telephon
and fax number and internet address of each entiti corpor headquart foreign
subsidiari and divis 5 the contact for each entiti administr servic such as
benefit corpor contribut foundat government affair inform system
librari and inform center purchas real estat and facil recruit and
sharehold relat and 6 four index organ industri geograph and
individu name
judici yellow book
the judici yellow book provid detail biograph inform for state and feder
judg and give inform on each judg staff includ law clerk it featur
inform on more than 2200 feder judg and more than 1300 state judg provid
depth and detail on each judg chamber
law firm yellow book
the law firm yellow book ha inform on more than 700 of the largest law firm in the
unit state it provid uptod inform on chang in firm manag and
structur it is also the onli personnel directori that clearli identifi the partner who make
a firm busi decis and supervis it practic area and the administr that
manag it oper it focus on the administr and attornei in these firm and it is
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3471
index by practic area law school geographi name and organ includ affili
and subsidiari it is publish semiannu
municip yellow book
the municip yellow book provid inform on citi and counti govern and local
author in the unit state it contain data on more than 38000 elect and
administr offici includ their name address and telephon and fax number it
also contain section on citi and counti which featur complex hierarchi of municip
offici thi directori also ha list for local depart agenc subdivis and
branch
new media yellow book
the new media yellow book is a directori contain inform on the lead new media
organ in the unit state it contain list of more than 38000 report writer
editor and produc it featur 10 section on newspap new servic network
televis station radio station program period nonu media publish and
biograph index thi directori is fulli updat on a quarterli basi
state yellow book
the state yellow book provid inform on member of the execut and legisl
branch of the 50 state govern as well as american samoa guam puerto rico and
the virgin island it ha a subject and a personnel index and it includ inform on
govern offici depart agenc and legisl committe inform
profil of all state and territori ar also provid thi directori is fulli updat on a
quarterli basi
feder region yellow book
the feder region yellow book is releas semiannu and it describ feder region
offic locat outsid washington dc it contain inform on more than 40000
region director and administr staff member at feder depart and agenc it
also ha inform on administr and profession staff at feder laboratori research
center militari instal and servic academi
financi yellow book
the financi yellow book is a semiannu directori that list the name and titl of more
than 26000 execut includ more than 4000 board member at more than 560 lead
sourc of inform investig
3472 2011 fraud examin manual
financi institut the directori also ha complet contact inform includ address
telephon and fax number and email for execut and outsid board member the
directori ha four index on organ geograph locat individu name and
industri
govern affair yellow book
the govern affair yellow book contain inform on corpor financi
institut trade and profession associ labor union interest group includ
coalit public interest group government agenc and government affair
organ it contain a section on feder state and municip govern that includ
the governmentalaffair staff for feder agenc state govern and lead citi
counti and author it govern affair repres section list more than
1200 lobbi firm law firm and public relat firm it detail the issu that lobbyist
contest as well as the coalit thei form to advanc their legisl agenda four index
ar includedon subject geograph locat personnel and master
bank and financi institut
the relationship between bank and their custom is confidenti and there ar numer
law and regul that protect consum person financi inform held by financi
institut
law limit access to bank record
the primari law protect the privaci of consum inform held by financi
institut is the grammleachblilei act which wa sign into law in 1999 the act
requir the feder govern to adopt regul requir financi institut to
ensur the secur and confidenti of custom record and inform
the grammleachblilei act also made it a crime for certain institutionsbank stock
brokerag firm insur compani loan compani credit card issuer and credit
bureausto obtain disclos or provid document under fals pretens pertain to a
custom financi inform
the grammleachblilei act appli not onli to peopl who us fals pretens but also to
ani third parti request the inform when it is known or should be known that fals
pretens will be us but certain parti ar exempt from thi rule exempt parti
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3473
includ law enforc agenc and insur compani conduct relat claim
investig it also exempt statelicens privat investig who ar attempt to
collect delinqu child support
under the grammleachblilei act fraud examin should be extrem care about
obtain financi inform from financi institut
in addit to the grammleachblilei act the right to financi privaci act 12 usc
34013422 also limit access to consum in format held by financi institut in
gener the right to financi privaci act prohibit financi institut from releas a
custom financi inform to government agenc without the custom consent a
court order a subpoena a search warrant or other formal demand thu if the govern
is request inform it must also compli with the right to financi privaci act and
even though the law appli onli to demand by government agenc most bank and
other financi institut will not releas such inform to privat parti absent legal
process such as a subpoena issu in a civil lawsuit
type of financi record
as a gener rule of thumb financi inform can be obtain onli by subpoena if you
ar abl to obtain a subpoena the follow financi inform should be request
master file of custom
the master file of custom eg depositor debtor and safe deposit box holder that
ar maintain by the bank should detail where all of it import record ar store
safedeposit box record
valuabl inform can be obtain from a safedeposit box record these record usual
provid the name of the person rent the box how often a person visit it the date
he visit it and the time he visit it the time and frequenc of visit can be valuabl if
thei correspond to time and date of deposit or withdraw from other account
the content of a safedeposit box howev ar not known by bank offici and thei ar
never record on the box holder file more over bank usual requir the custom
consent a search warrant or a court order befor an author bank offici can open a safe
deposit box
sourc of inform investig
3474 2011 fraud examin manual
account open record
record requir to open account at financi institut can also be valuabl save
account applic can provid handwrit sampl and certain person inform
about custom vari from on bank to anoth likewis applic for check
account should provid handwrit sampl and certain person inform vari
from on bank to anoth
record of deposit
record of account deposit reflect the date of deposit amount of currenc and check
and the drawe bank of check also check account deposit slip might identifi the
account holder financi associ
record of withdraw
withdraw record should reflect the date of withdraw the amount of currenc and
check and the drawe bank of check
addition for larg withdraw some bank will request that the custom give a reason
for withdraw the monei the custom is not requir to give such inform and the
bank cannot refus to honor the withdraw similarli some save and loan associ
might demand notic on larg withdraw
feder regulatori agenc
exportimport bank of the unit state
the exportimport bank is the offici export credit agenc of the unit state feder
govern it loan fund to foreign countri and busi to bui good from us
compani borrow can obtain up to 50 percent of the purchas price of the good be
acquir sell compani must submit a supplier certif to the bank thi certif
must includ a statement regard commiss paid especi in a foreign countri to
foreign sale repres ativ or agent
farm credit administr
the farm credit administr overse and regul entiti within the farm credit
system which is a network of borrowerown lend institut and relat servic
organ serv all 50 state and puerto rico some of the entiti regul ar the
feder farm credit bank fund corpor which market the secur the bank sell
to rais loan fund the farm credit system financi assist corpor which
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3475
provid capit through the purchas of prefer stock issu by institut that receiv
financi assist from the farm credit system assist board and the feder
agricultur mortgag corpor which provid a secondari market for agricultur real
estat and rural hous mortgag
feder deposit insur corpor
the feder deposit insur corpor fdic is an independ agenc of the feder
govern that insur deposit in bank and save associ
feder or state bank or save associ that appli to be insur by the fdic must
submit an applic that cover financi histori financi condit capit structur
manag futur earn prospect conveni to and need of the commun and
consist of corpor power
fdic insur bank ar examin annual by fdic insur examin fdic save
associ ar examin period by fdic examin each examin includ an
apprais of manag director offic and staff
the examin report contain white and pink sheet the white sheet provid
examin find a copi is given to the bank board of director the examin
howev retain the pink sheet which contain confidenti inform includ an
alphabet list of all director offic and princip employe their titl and comment
on everi individu to the fullest extent possibl the examin also comment on the
capabl of each individu give hi approxim ag and cite other busi affili
addition the examin complet a form for each individu set forth hi estim
net worth par valu of stock own and salari
inquiri regard type of fdic record avail to the public includ record avail
under the freedom of inform act should be direct to the appropri fdic
region offic or to the offic of the execut secretari
feder hous financ board
the feder hous financ board financ board is an independ regulatori agenc in
the execut branch it succeed the feder home loan bank board and is respons
for administ and enforc the feder home loan bank act
sourc of inform investig
3476 2011 fraud examin manual
the financ board supervis the 12 feder home loan bank fhlb which were creat
by the feder home loan bank act and issu regul and order for carri out the
act purpos save associ that make longterm home mortgag loan ar elig
to becom member of an fhlb
in addit the financ board implement communityori mortgag lend and
afford hous program prescrib rule and condit under which bank ar
author to borrow issu consolid fh lb bond note or debentur that ar the
oblig of all fhlb and ensur that the fhlb remain adequ capit and
oper in a sound manner
the fhlb system provid a flexibl credit re serv for member save institut engag
in home mortgag lend and includ 12 region fhlb that ar feder charter
privat capit and independ manag the 12 fhlb help their member
financi institut meet their commun divers housingfin and econom
develop need
each fhlb is capit by the capitalstock invest of it member financi
institut and it retain earn the proce of these stock invest ar us to
issu and sell consolid oblig which ar sold to investor eg commerci bank
foreign central bank mutual fund corpor govern agenc and individu
in addit the fhlb provid loan to their member financi institut
feder reserv system
the feder reserv system which serv as the nation central bank is a valuabl sourc
of inform on bank that it ha charter
the feder reserv system board of gover nor regul statechart bank that ar
member of the feder reserv system their subsidiari and hold compani as well as
the activ of foreign bank that oper within the unit state
on an annual basi reserv system examin er visit and report on charter bank their
examin report contain two part the open part a copi of which is given to the bank
and the confidenti part which is kept by the reserv system and contain qualif of
manag list of offic and director and background data on the offic
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3477
a bank must file a registr statement for it secur the registr statement must
be follow by an annual report that provid consider data on the secur issu as
well as employ inform on all director and those who own more than 10 percent
of ani class of the bank secur the feder reserv system maintain these statement
nation credit union administr
the nation credit union administr regul insur and supervis all feder credit
union as well as statechart credit union that appli for it insur
offic of the comptrol of the currenc
the offic of the comptrol of the currenc occ which is within the us depart
of the treasuri regul nation bank and maintain inform concern them the
occ conduct examin of the nation bank to determin their financi posit and
to evalu their asset the bank examin report contain inform about bank
record loan and oper in view of their purpos and the basi on which thei ar
obtain report of nation bank examin as well as relat correspond and
paper ar consid confidenti request for these document should includ the
subject name and address the inform desir the reason it is need and the
intend us
investig and law enforc inform center and databas
nation law enforc telecommun system
the nation law enforc telecommun system nlet is the intern
justic and public safeti inform share network which is a sophist
commun network that link all law enforc and crimin justic agenc in the
unit state puerto rico and through a computer link to interpol canada
nlet provid two basic capabl to it user first it is an intern computerbas
messageswitch system that link togeth state local and feder law enforc
and justic agenc for the purpos of inform exchang second it provid
informationservic support for a grow number of justicerel applic to
accomplish thi nlet support datacommuni cation link to state network us a
commerci framerelai servic all agenc within each state ar servic through thi state
interfac feder and intern system oper in much the same manner the primari
sourc of inform investig
3478 2011 fraud examin manual
nlet oper site is locat in the arizona depart of public safeti facil and
a disasterrecoveri site that enabl full resumpt of oper in fewer than 30 minut
wa develop with the idaho state polic
the user popul is compos of feder agenc with a justic compon select
intern agenc and all state and territori all of which ar cooper exchang
data agenc includ state and local law enforc group motor vehicl and licens
depart and a varieti of feder enforc offic such as the us custom servic
feder bureau of investig depart of justic us secret servic us marshal
servic naval investig servic air forc offic of special investig depart
of state depart of the armi and depart of the interior the nation auto
theft bureau also is link to nlet nlet user can send freeform messag to other
user either individu or via a broadcast messag
a great deal of inform is avail to law enforc through the network includ
vehicl registr by licens plate or vehicl identif number
driver licens and histori by name and date of birth or driver licens number some
state support driver licens queri by name onli
crimin record by name and date of birth state identif number or fbi number
boat registr by hull number registr number or name
snowmobil registr by registr number vehicl identif number or
owner name and date of birth
hazard materi file by un number which is an internation recogn code for
hazard materi
privat aircraft track data by registr number or date rang
aircraft registr by registr number serial number or name of registr
directori of particip agenc by origin agenc identifi
registr inform on diplomat licens plate
index to paroleprob and correct inform
sex offend registr inform
the royal canadian mount polic canadian polic inform centr provid mani
addit file includ
want peopl by name and date of birth
crimin histori by name or fp canadian nation identif number
stolen vehicl by licens number or vehicl identif number
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3479
stolen articl by serial number
stolen gun by serial number
stolen secur by serial number corpor name issuer or name of owner
stolen boat and motor by licens number hull number registr number or name
of owner
defens clearanc and investig index
the defens clearanc and investig index dcii is part of the defens secur
servic dss that is overseen by the depart of defens dod
the dcii is an autom index of dod investig and secur decis regard
personnel that have been made by dod adju dicat normal the dss limit the dcii
access to the depart of defens and other feder agenc
el paso intellig center
the el paso intellig center epic mission is to provid time and expediti
support to feder state local tribal and intern law enforc agenc prior to
2001 epic provid entiti a complet and accur intellig pictur of worldwid
movement of transport drug weapon and illeg alien into the unit state it
analyz raw data and provid tactic and oper intellig to agenc involv in
the antidrug effort epic also provid strateg assess of drug movement and
conceal techniqu after septemb 11th 2001 epic wa call upon to support
investig to find those respons for the terrorist attack and it mission expand to
includ counterterror effort
epic member agenc includ the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos
coast guard depart of defens depart of homeland secur custom and
border protect depart of homeland secur immigr and custom
enforc depart of the interior drug enforc administr feder
bureau of investig intern revenu servic marshal servic nation drug
intellig center secret servic and tr ansport secur administr
initi epic focus on the unit statesmexico border with an emphasi on mexico
heroin traffick and illeg alien smuggler but with the increas us of aircraft seago
vessel and global network to facilit drug traffick epic focu broaden and
becam intern in scope epic serv feder agenc all 50 state the district of
sourc of inform investig
3480 2011 fraud examin manual
columbia canada puerto rico the us virg in island and guam and it support law
enforc effort conduct by it foreign counterpart throughout the world it current
ha memoranda of understand mou with canada australia and the netherland
member agenc have direct access to all epic inform with appropri safeguard to
provid for the protect and the secur commun of highli sensit or classifi
inform state and local law enforc entiti have access to epic data through a
design group within the respect organ or through a member agenc
financi crime enforc network
the financi crime enforc network fincenan organ establish by the
us depart of the treasurycollect analyz and dissemin intellig on
financi crime it mission is to provid a governmentwid multisourc intellig and
analyt network to support law enforc agenc in the detect investig and
prosecut of financi crime the particip agenc ar the bureau of alcohol
tobacco firearm and explos us custom servic and border protect drug
enforc administr feder bureau of investig intern revenu servic
us marshal servic postal inspecti on servic and us secret servic
fincen financi databas c ontain inform from report requir under the bank
secreci act includ the currenc transact report report of intern
transport of currenc or monetari in strument currenc transact report by
casino and card club and by depositori institut report of foreign bank and
financi account registr of monei servic busi design of exempt
person and suspici activ report by depositori institut secur and futur
industri insur industri casino and card club and monei servic busi
furthermor fincen ha access to data from ir form 8300 report of cash payment
over 10000 receiv in a trade or busi
fincen produc two type of product tactic support document and strateg analys
the tactic support product either provid inform and lead on crimin organ
and activ that ar under investig by law enforc or proactiv identifi
previous undetect crimin organ and activ so that investig can be
initi the fincen work product can also assist in identifi asset for seizur and
forfeitur purpos and support ongo investig it strateg analys look at
financi crime and monei launder with an emphasi on the futur fincen collect
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3481
process analyz and develop intellig on emerg trend pattern and issu
relat to the proce of illicit activ
fincen us the major of it resourc to assist agenc in investig of the financi
aspect of the illeg narcot trade fincen then priorit investig of such non
narcot crime as monei launder bank secreci act violat corrupt treason
bankruptci fraud financi institut fraud and govern contract fraud in both the
narcot and nonnarcot area fincen concentr on investig of nation or
intern crimin organ
interag border inspect system
the interag border inspect system ibi wa initi in 1989 by us custom and
border protect to improv border enforc and to facilit inspect of individu
appli for admiss to the unit state at port of entri and preinspect facil
ibi is consid a presidenti prioriti and receiv white hous guidanc regard
polici coordin and control us custom and border protect law enforc
and regulatori personnel from 20 other feder agenc or bureau us ibi some of these
agenc ar the feder bureau of investig interpol the drug enforc
administr the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos the intern
revenu servic the coast guard the feder aviat administr and the secret
servic inform from ibi is also share with the depart of state for us by
consular offic at us embassi and consul ibi strive to provid travel with
expediti clearanc at port of entri while allow border enforc agenc to focu
their limit resourc on potenti noncompli travel ibi provid the law
enforc commun with access to computerbas enforc file on suspect
individu busi vehicl aircraft and vessel it also provid access to nation
crime inform center ncic record on want person stolen vehicl vessel or
firearm licens inform crimin histori and previou feder inspect ibi
user can also interfac with all 50 state via the nation law enforc
telecommun system
intern chamber of commerc commerci crime bureau
the intern chamber of commerc icc establish the commerci crime bureau
ccb in januari 1992 to act as a focal point for fraud prevent and to encourag
cooper between commerc and law enforc agenc the ccb maintain an
sourc of inform investig
3482 2011 fraud examin manual
extens databas on all aspect of commerci fraud the cc also oper fraudnet a
uniqu global network of law firm that special in tackl busi crime
intern crimin polic organ
the intern crimin polic organizati on better known by it radio design
interpol is a network of nation central bureau in more than 186 member countri
that share inform with each other to assist law enforc agenc in the detect
and deterr of intern crime each bureau is an agenc of the member countri
govern and serv as the liaison between that countri law enforc agenc and
the interpol network in the unit sta te the nation central bureau usncb is
under the direct and control of the depart of justic and comanag by the
depart of homeland secur
to support ongo investig that requir intern assist interpol
provid inform regard
locat of suspectsfugitiveswit
intern want circular
crimin histori check
terror prevent
stolen art
trace of weapon and motor vehicl abroad
licens plate driver licens check and vehicl registr data
intern crimin polic organ case track system
the intern crimin polic organ interpol case track system
ict locat at the us nation central bureau usncb in washington dc contain
inform about peopl properti and organ involv in intern crimin
activ the usncb can determin the histori of an intern connect in an
investig or the exist of ani previou intern crimin activ the usncb
oper to provid intern support for us law enforc
sixteen feder and state law enforc agenc ar repres at the usncb and all 50
state have establish interpol liaison offic agenc repres at the usncb
includ the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos environment
protect agenc drug enforc administ ration feder bureau of investig
us immigr and custom enforc transport secur administr us
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3483
coast guard bureau of custom and border protect us marshal servic us
depart of defens us depart of state us f ood and drug administr
us postal inspect servic and us secret servic
interst identif index
the interst identif index iii is an indexpoint system for the interst
exchang of crimin record under the iii the fbi maintain an index of peopl arrest
for feloni or seriou misdemeanor under state or feder law the index includ
identif data name birth date race sex etc and the fbi and state identif
number sid from all state that have inform about an individu
search queri from justic agenc nationwid ar transmit via state telecommun
network and the fbi nation crime inform center ncic line search ar made
by name and other identifi the iii held the crimin histori of more than 649 million
individu as of septemb 2008 fortyeight state particip in the iii as of that date
ten also particip in the nation fingerprint file nff the nff state have assum
respons for crimin and noncrimin request
joint maritim inform element
the joint maritim inform element jmie a consortium of 15 us govern
agenc in the law enforc and intellig commun provid access to
repositori of format data at the secret level on worldwid merchant vessel locat
characterist registriesownership commerci cargo import and export through us
port and commerci cargo import and export in select foreign countri and
worldwid port consortium member ar the offic of naval intellig militari sealift
command drug enforc administr depart of state execut offic of
the presid offic of nation drug control polici us custom servic central
intellig agenc us coast guard maritim administr depart of energi
defens intellig agenc us citizenship and immigr servic interpol
bureau of censu and nation secur agenc
the system provid inform on maritimerel law enforc and nation foreign
intellig data to aid member oper target such as narcot interdict
smuggl sea and defensezon surveil border control petroleumtraff monitor
and emerg sealift manag thirtyf site ar oper allow access to data
sourc that provid atsea and inport locat inform and characterist on
sourc of inform investig
3484 2011 fraud examin manual
commerci and privat vessel and vessel registr file for florida california delawar
puerto rico and the virgin island
law enforc support center
us immigr and custom enforc law enforc su pport center lesc
serv as a nation oper center by provid time immigr statu and ident
inform to local state and feder law enforc agenc on alien suspect
arrest or convict of crimin activ the lesc oper 24 hour a dai seven dai a
week respond to request from feder state and local law enforc agenc with
inform gather from eight dh databas the nation crime inform center
ncic the interst identif index iii and other state crimin histori indic
in addit to provid realtim assist to law enforc agenc that ar
investig or have arrest foreignborn individu involv in crimin activ the
lesc also perform the follow investig function administ and control
immigrationrel case for immigr and custom enforc ic provid
support to a host of ongo multiag investig initi act as the central point of
contact for the fbi nation instant crimin background check system nic program
handl queri and field respons relat to nation secur employ issu provid
the law enforc commun with ncic hit confirm inform and offer ic
special agent and deport offic afterhour support via digit record duti line
confirm with person identif number
exclud parti list system
the exclud parti list system epl is a webbas databas maintain by the
gener servic administr that identifi those parti exclud throughout the us
govern unless otherwis note from receiv feder contract or certain
subcontract and from certain type of feder financi and nonfinanci assist and
benefit
nation trace center
the nation trace center ntc a branch of the firearm enforc divis of the
bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos atf is the countri onli crime
gun trace facil it provid 24hour assist to duli author law enforc
agenc in the unit state and those in mani foreign countri us the atf firearm
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3485
trace system the ntc systemat track firearm us to commit crime from their
place of manufactur to the place of sale
nation whitecollar crime center
the nation whitecollar crime center nw3c seek to provid a nationwid support
system for agenc involv in the prevent investig and prosecut of econom
and hightech crime and to support and partner with other appropri entiti in
address homeland secur initi as thei relat to econom and hightech crime the
nw3c ha a databas system that contain inform on individu and busi
suspect of econom crimin activ includ advancefe loan scheme credit card
fraud comput fraud and secur and invest fraud
narcot and danger drug inform system
the narcot and danger drug inform system naddi is a central
autom file of summari of report on subject of interest to the drug enforc
administr dea consist of more than 59 million record on individu
busi vessel aircraft and select airfield identifi through the dea investig
report system and relat investig record inquiri should be limit to narcot
relat case or file andor smuggler of fund other contraband and alien naddi is
access through the el paso intellig center epic and the dea
nation autom immigr lookout system
the nation autom immigr lookout system nail is a bureau of immigr
and custom enforc system the system provid an index of the name of all
individu who might be deni entri into the unit state name in nail ar pass
to the treasuri enforc commun system tec therefor a search of
nail is not necessari if tec ha been search
nation crime inform center
the nation crime inform center ncic locat at the fbi headquart in
washington is a wide us law enforc comput system most major law
enforc agenc have ncic connect
an ncic file often contain inform about
stolen miss or recov gun
stolen articl that have a serial number
sourc of inform investig
3486 2011 fraud examin manual
want peopl for question or arrest
stolenw vehicl auto aircraft motorcycl
stolen licens plate
stolen embezzl or miss secur stock bond and currenc
stolenw boat
miss peopl
index to state and feder crimin histori record
unidentifi peopl
foreign fugit
atf violent felon file
us secret servic protect file
gang and terrorist organ file
deport felon file
origin agenc identifi file
protect order file
ncic is a computer index of crimin justic inform eg crimin record histori
inform fugit stolen properti and miss person it is avail to feder state
and local law enforc and other crimin justic agenc and is oper 24 hour a
dai 365 dai a year
the purpos of maintain the ncic system is to provid a computer databas for
readi access by a crimin justic agenc make an inquiri and for prompt disclosur of
inform in the system from other crimin justic agenc thi inform assist
author agenc in crimin justic and relat law enforc object such as
apprehend fugit locat miss person locat and return stolen properti as
well as in the protect of the law enforc offic encount the individu
describ in the system
region inform share system
the region inform share system riss program consist of six multist project
that facilit region crimin inform exchang and provid other relat support
servic to feder state and local law enforc agenc throughout all 50 state canada
the district of columbia australia us territori and england
middl atlanticgreat lake organ crime law enforc network magloclen
magloclen includ law enforc agenc in indiana michigan ohio
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3487
pennsylvania new york new jersei delawa re maryland and washington dc the
center also ha member agenc in canada england and australia magloclen is
locat at 140 terri drive suit 100 newtown pennsylvania 18940 or can be reach
at 215 5044910 or 800 3451322
midstat organ crime in format center mocic mocic includ law enforc
agenc in north dakota south dakota nebraska kansa minnesota iowa missouri
wisconsin and illinoi the center also ha member agenc in canada mocic is
locat 1610 east sunshin street 110 springfield missouri 65804 or can be reach
at 800 8466242 or 417 8834383
new england state polic in format network nespin nespin incorpor law
enforc agenc in main new hampshir vermont massachusett connecticut
and rhode island the center also ha member agenc in canada nespin is locat
at 124 grove street suit 105 franklin ma 02038 or can be reach at 800 3435682
or 508 5288200
region organ crime inform center rocic rocic serv 800 law enforc
agenc in texa oklahoma louisiana arkansa mississippi alabama tennesse
kentucki west virginia virginia north caro lina south carolina georgia and florida
as well as puerto rico and the us virgin island rocic is locat at 545 marriott
drive suit 850 nashvil tennesse 37214 or can be reach at 800 2387985
rocki mountain inform network rmin the rmin ha 13000 member in more
than 1000 agenc in arizona new mexico colorado utah nevada idaho wyom
and montana the center also ha member agenc in canada the rmin is locat at
2828 north central avenu suit 1000 phoenix arizona 85004 or can be reach at
602 3512320
western state inform network wsin the wsin provid narcot intellig and
relat servic to it member law enforc agenc in california oregon
washington alaska and hawaii the center also ha member in canada australia and
guam the wsin address is po box 90 3198 sacramento california 942031980
and it can be call at 800 8247902 outsid of california and 800 952 5258
in california
treasuri enforc commun system
the treasuri enforc commun system tec is a depart of the
treasuri system manag by the intern revenu servic tec is a computer
inform system design to identifi individu and busi suspect of or involv
in a violat of feder law tec is also a commun system that transmit messag
sourc of inform investig
3488 2011 fraud examin manual
among treasuri law enforc offic and other feder nation state and local law
enforc agenc
tec provid access to the fbi nation crime inform center ncic and the
nation law enforc telecommun system nlet with the capabl of
commun directli with state and local enforc agenc the nlet provid
direct access to state motor vehicl depart
particip includ the us custom servic bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and
explos drug enforc administr us citizenship and immigr servic
depart of state us coast guard fe deral bureau of investig ncic section
us marshal servic intern revenu servic epic interpol nation central
bureau and depart of agricultur
tec work on a soundextyp system if an inquiri is made regard a certain name then
all similar sound name on record ar provid to the inquir inquiri on tec might
be made by name alon even if no identifi numbersuch as date of birth fbi number
or social secur numberi avail
when tec provid a list of similar sound name the subject sex race and date of
birth also ar includ the inquir then can determin which subject if ani is of interest
if a name is select tec can provid addit inform includ special
instruct such as arm and danger full name race sex height weight hair color
ey color date of birth fugit which agenc background inform miscellan
number such as fbi where and by whom a warrant is held date of offens alia case
number and ncic number
unit nation crime and justic inform network
the unit nation crime and justic inform network uncjin is fund in part by
the us bureau of justic statist the goal of the uncjin is to establish a worldwid
network to enhanc the dissemin and exchang of inform concern crimin
justic and crime prevent issu
world crimin justic librari network
the world crimin justic librari network wcjln is a network that is us to share
servic and inform concern crimin justic the group ha develop an
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3489
intern network to dissemin nation and intern crime statist and crimin
justic profil
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3501
