2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/County Government Records/County Court Records


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


County Court Records 
The great majority of an individual’s civil records can be found at the county courthouse in 
the jurisdiction where the subject does business or resides. 
 
Courts are generally divided into jurisdictions that encompass a single county in a single 
state. In each single court, there are usually three levels: trial courts, appellate courts, and 
supreme courts.  
 
Most of the papers filed in civil suits are acce ssible as public records; however, criminal and 
juvenile actions may not be as open to review. In addition, criminal conviction records are 
generally available to the public.  
 
A great deal of litigation occurs each year and many people might be subject to judicial 
action, voluntarily or not. Researching civil and criminal suits can provide invaluable 
information assisting in: 
• The location of individuals 
• Identifying pending actions 
• Uncovering closed cases 
• Insight into marital status (family) 
• Tracing sources of funds (probate) 
• Identifying financial conditions (bankruptcy) 
• Litigation history 
• Outstanding judgments 
 
Although a wealth of information is available in court files, civil or criminal actions might 
not be readily known and the researcher must be able to identify the jurisdiction, county, or 
court involved.  
 
A researcher typically will have access to microfiche listings of cases or parties within the 
individual court system through the clerk’s office. Some courts are set up to provide 
computerized access to this information. Normally, one must be able to provide a case 
number in order to access the actual court file. The Party Name Index will provide the  
case number. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.415 
Court clerks maintain files on all active and closed lawsuits in their jurisdictions. Information 
regarding these suits is public record and can be searched by scanning the indexes for 
subject’s name as a plaintiff or defendant. 
 
For example, the subject data fields of court records will contain: 
• The complaint for or against the subject (direct and reverse indexes) 
• The subject’s last known address (either through the lawsuit’s pleadings or the court 
officer’s citation and subpoena returns) 
• Other personal information on the subject, depending on the type of suit 
 
Court levels vary by jurisdiction, as do the names of the levels. Different case types are filed 
at different levels and in different courts.  
 
Different levels of courts are assigned jurisdiction over any given case, based on court issues 
and the nature of the claim. To determine the full extent of the litigation history against a 
company or individual, the examiner must search each of the various types of local court 
records. 
 



:


counti court record
the great major of an individu civil record can be found at the counti courthous in
the jurisdict where the subject doe busi or resid
court ar gener divid into jurisdict that encompass a singl counti in a singl
state in each singl court there ar usual three level trial court appel court and
suprem court
most of the paper file in civil suit ar acc ssibl as public record howev crimin and
juvenil action mai not be as open to review in addit crimin convict record ar
gener avail to the public
a great deal of litig occur each year and mani peopl might be subject to judici
action voluntarili or not research civil and crimin suit can provid invalu
inform assist in
the locat of individu
identifi pend action
uncov close case
insight into marit statu famili
trace sourc of fund probat
identifi financi condit bankruptci
litig histori
outstand judgment
although a wealth of inform is avail in court file civil or crimin action might
not be readili known and the research must be abl to identifi the jurisdict counti or
court involv
a research typic will have access to microfich list of case or parti within the
individu court system through the clerk offic some court ar set up to provid
computer access to thi inform normal on must be abl to provid a case
number in order to access the actual court file the parti name index will provid the
case number
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3415
court clerk maintain file on all activ and close lawsuit in their jurisdict inform
regard these suit is public record and can be search by scan the index for
subject name as a plaintiff or defend
for exampl the subject data field of court record will contain
the complaint for or against the subject direct and revers index
the subject last known address either through the lawsuit plead or the court
offic citat and subpoena return
other person inform on the subject depend on the type of suit
court level vari by jurisdict as do the name of the level differ case type ar file
at differ level and in differ court
differ level of court ar assign jurisdict over ani given case base on court issu
and the natur of the claim to determin the full extent of the litig histori against a
compani or individu the examin must search each of the variou type of local court
record
