2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Federal Government Records


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Federal Government Records 
A huge amount of information is available to the public through the various federal agencies. 
A list of a number of federal agencies and their website addresses will be provided later in 
this workbook, and information about various federal agencies can be obtained through the 
following reference guides: 
• Congressional Staff Directory and Federal Staff Directory, prepared annually by CQ 
Press 
• Congressional Directory, prepared by the U.S. Government Printing Office 
• The United States Government Manual, prepared by the U.S. Government Printing Office 
 
However, the following records are of particular note. 
 
Federal Court Records 
Civil and Criminal Court Records 
Federal civil and criminal court records can provide valuable information, including the 
plaintiff and defendant’s name, the case number, the filing date, the cause of action, and the 
case disposition of current status.  
 
Bankruptcy Court Records 
Bankruptcy proceedings are conducted in federal bankruptcy courts. In these courts, all 
documents filed with the court are public record and can be examined by anyone without 
charge. These on-site federal court records may include the case number, debtor’s name(s), 
Social Security number, address, filing date, chapter designation, and closure date. The 
search is available for all federal jurisdictions, usually covering a seven-year span that starts 
from the present and moves backward. 
 
Bankruptcy documents are usually located in the federal bankruptcy court for the district 
where the debtor resided or had his principal place of business. When checking bankruptcy 
court records, the examiner should remember to check not only the individual or business 
filing for bankruptcy, but also any related businesses, principals, employees, or relatives. 
 
A bankruptcy is initiated by the filing of a bankruptcy petition. The petition can be either 
voluntary or involuntary. Three or more creditors who have outstanding claims that have not 
been paid can file an involuntary petition. 
 
Specifically, a bankruptcy file typically contains the following documents: 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.429 
• Bankruptcy petition : The bankruptcy petition contains type of bankruptcy 
(voluntary/involuntary, Chapter 7, Chapter 11, etc.); Social Security number or tax ID 
number; street address and primary place of business; location of principal assets of 
business; type of business; name of attorney; estimated amount of assets; estimated 
number of creditors, liabilities, and employees; financial data; and a list of shareholders 
• Proof of claim forms : Proof of claim forms are filed by creditors listing the amounts they are 
owed by the debtor.  
• Trustee’s final report : The final report is filed by a trustee when a case is concluded; it 
shows which claims were paid.  
• Trustee’s final account : Trustee’s must also file a final a ccount of the administration of the 
estate. This account will also show which claims were paid.  
• Schedule A : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the debtor’s real 
property. 
• Schedule B : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the debtor’s personal 
property, including tangible property (e.g., jewelry and vehicles) and intangible property 
(e.g., investments and accounts receivable). 
• Schedule C : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes the property that the debtor 
is claiming as exempt from being used to satisfy claims. 
• Schedule D : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the secured debts the 
debtor owes (e.g., mortgages).  
• Schedule E : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the debtor’s priority 
debts (the Bankruptcy Code gives certain unsecured creditors priority, such as those 
owed wages, contributions to pension plans, taxes owed to governmental entities, etc.) 
• Schedule F : Filed by the debtor, this form describes unsecured, non-priority claims owed 
by the debtor.  
• Schedule G : Filed by the debtor, this form describes any leases and executory contracts 
(i.e., contracts that have not been fully performed) to which the debtor is a party.  
• Schedule H : This form is filed by the debtor, and it  describes all co-debtors that might be 
affected by the debtor’s bankruptcy.  
• Schedule I : Filed by the debtor, this form describes the debtor’s current income. 
• Schedule J : Filed by the debtor, this form describes the debtor’s current monthly 
expenditures. 
• Statement of financial affairs : This form is filed by the debt or, and it describes the debtor’s 
legal, economic, and business transactions prior to filing. It is a listing of all recent 
sources of income; payments to creditors;  lawsuits; repossessions or foreclosures; 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.430   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
assignments; gifts; losses; financial accounts; safe deposit box es; prior addresses; financial 
statements; inventories; and current and former officers, directors, and shareholders 
• Bankruptcy plan : The bankruptcy plan is a detailed account of how the creditor’s claims 
will be resolved. 
 
The bankruptcy file may also contain transcripts of depositions or interviews. If fraud was 
suspected, the trustee may have conducted a fraud investigation. Check with the trustee to 
find out if any investigations were conducted. 
 
Inspectors General 
Inspectors general can provide valuable information, especially to official law enforcement 
personnel, about businesses they have investigated or audited, and they are good guides to 
other information sources in their departments or agencies. Most offices of inspectors 
general maintain centralized index and case file systems. Congress established inspectors 
general to combat governmental fraud, waste, and abuse in federal departments, agencies, 
and designated the entities listed below. 
 
Federal Entity Website Address 
Agency for International Development www.usaid.gov 
Agriculture, Department of www.usda.gov 
Amtrak www.amtrakoig.com 
Appalachian Regional Commission www.arc.gov 
Central Intelligence Agency www.cia.gov 
Commerce, Department of www.commerce.gov 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission www.cftc.gov 
Consumer Product Safety Commission www.cpsc.gov 
Corporation for National and Community Service www.nationalservice.org 
Corporation for Public Broadcasting www.cpb.org 
Council of the Inspectors General www.ignet.gov 
Defense, Department of  www.defense.gov 
Education, Department of  www.ed.gov 
Energy, Department of www.doe.gov 
Environmental Protection Agency www.epa.gov 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission www.eeoc.gov 
Farm Credit Administration www.fca.gov 
Federal Communications Commission www.fcc.gov 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.431 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation www.fdicoig.gov 
Federal Election Commission www.fec.gov 
Federal Emergency Management Agency www.fema.gov 
Federal Housing Finance Board www.fhfa.gov 
Federal Labor Relations Authority www.flra.gov 
Federal Maritime Commission www.fmc.gov 
Federal Reserve Board www.federalreserve.gov 
Federal Trade Commission www.ftc.gov 
General Services Administration oig.gsa.gov 
Government Printing Office www.gpo.gov 
Health and Human Services, Department of www.hhs.gov 
Homeland Security, Department of www.dhs.gov 
Housing and Urban Development, Department of www.hud.gov 
Interior, Department of the www.doi.gov 
International Trade Commission, U.S. www.usitc.gov 
Justice, Department of www.usdoj.gov 
Labor, Department of www.dol.gov 
Legal Services Corporation www.lsc.gov 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration www.nasa.gov 
National Archives and Records Administration www.archives.gov 
National Credit Union Administration www.ncua.gov 
National Endowment for the Arts www.nea.gov 
National Endowment for the Humanities www.neh.gov 
National Labor Relations Board www.nlrb.gov 
National Science Foundation www.nsf.gov 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission www.nrc.gov 
Office of Personnel Management www.opm.gov 
Peace Corps. www.peacecorps.gov 
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation www.pbgc.gov 
Postal Service, U.S. www.usps.com 
Railroad Retirement Board www.rrb.gov 
Securities and Exchange Commission www.sec.gov 
Small Business Administration www.sba.gov 
Social Security Administration www.ssa.gov 
State, Department of www.state.gov 
Tennessee Valley Authority www.tva.gov 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.432   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Transportation, Department of www.dot.gov 
Treasury, Department of the www.ustreas.gov 
Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration www.ustreas.gov/tigta 
Veterans Affairs, Department of www.va.gov 
 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission Act of 1974 created the Commodity Futures 
Trading Commission (CFTC), and it empowered the CFTC to regulate all futures trading in 
the United States. The CFTC imposes speculative position limits on futures contracts as 
needed to eliminate, decrease, or deter the burdens on interstate commerce that may result 
from excessive speculation. Moreover, the CFTC, through its affiliation with the National 
Futures Association (NFA), provides a dispute-resolution program for customers and 
members.  
 
This CFTC maintains the following information: 
• Registration information concerning firms and individuals 
• Administrative and injunctive actions filed by the CFTC against firms and individuals 
• Financial reports filed by CFTC registrants 
• Customer complaints filed against CFTC registrants 
 
National Futures Association 
The National Futures Association is an industry-wide, self-regulatory organization 
authorized by the Commodity Exchange Act; it  operates under the supervision of the CFTC. 
The NFA is a one-stop information source for all types of registration and disciplinary 
information regarding firms and individuals in the futures industry. This information 
includes registration status and employment history; disciplinary actions filed by the NFA, 
the CFTC, and the commodity exchanges; and c ustomer complaints filed under the CFTC’s 
Reparations Program.  
 
The NFA’s Information Center can be contacted at (800) 621-3570 or within Illinois at (312) 
781-1410, or accessed on their website at www.cftc.gov. 
 
Department of Agriculture 
Some U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) agencies maintain or have access to financial 
records concerning contracts with the agency; recipients of various benefits, such as food 
stamps and free or reduced-price school lunches; farmland improvements; and federal crop 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.433 
insurance coverage. Various USDA agencies maintain information about gaining access to 
records concerning the following: 
• Meat or poultry companies 
• Feedlot owners or operators, livestock brokers, meat packers, or canneries 
• Ownership, management, or the operations of—or certain financial data concerning—
 farms or ranches participating in USDA programs 
• Retail grocery stores authorized to accept food stamps 
• Rural electric or telephone cooperatives 
• Applications for and receipt of loans, loan guarantees, grants, or contracts with or from 
USDA agencies 
• Applications for and indemnities paid by federal crop insurance 
• Logging (tree harvesting) companies that remove timber from national forests 
• Certain improvements to farm land 
• The import or export of agricultural commodities, animals, or plants 
• Personnel data on current or former USDA employees 
 
The USDA headquarters are at 1400 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, D.C. 20250 
and can be called at (202) 720-6858. The USDA’s website is www.usda.gov. 
 
Department of Commerce 
The Department of Commerce is focused on promoting economic growth, and it maintains 
information on international trade, social and economic conditions, trends, patents, 
trademarks, ocean studies, domestic economic development, and minority businesses. It has 
foreign country experts who can direct examiners to sources of business information on any 
country in the world 
 
The Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), a division of the Department of Commerce, 
maintains lists of persons and entities who have been denied the right to export or import 
goods. The BIS’s website is www.bis.doc.gov. 
 
The Department of Commerce is located at 1401 Constitution Avenue NW, Washington, 
D.C. 20230 and can be called at (202) 482-2000. Their website is www.commerce.gov. 
 
Social Security Administration Records 
The Social Security Administration retains original applications for Social Security numbers. 
Applications list an applicant’s name (maiden and married names for women), date of birth, 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.434   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
place of birth, sex, race, parents’ names, and address at time of application. If a Social 
Security number is known, it might lead to helpful information regarding the location where 
the card was issued. Because many people apply for a Social Security number at a young age, 
these records can help to locate an individual’s place of birth.  
 
There are nine digits in the Social Security number. With the exception of the 700 series, the 
first three digits reflect the state of issue. Some states and Puerto Rico have more than one 
series of numbers. The last six digits are individual identifiers. Here is a listing of the states 
of issue of the first three digits: 
 
Social Security Number Chart 
Initial Numbers  State of Issuance  
001–003 New Hampshire 
004–007 Maine 
008–009 Vermont 
010–034 Massachusetts 
035–039 Rhode Island 
040–049 Connecticut 
050–134 New York 
135–158 New Jersey 
159–211 Pennsylvania 
212–220 Maryland 
221–222 Delaware 
223–231, 691–699* Virginia 
232–236 West Virginia 
237–246, 232, 681–690* North Carolina 
247–251, 654–658* South Carolina 
252–260, 667–675* Georgia 
261–267, 589–595, 766–772 Florida 
268–302 Ohio 
303–317 Indiana 
318–361 Illinois 
362–386 Michigan 
387–399 Wisconsin 
400–407 Kentucky 
408–415, 756–763* Tennessee 
416–424 Alabama 
425–428, 587, 588*, 752–755*   Mississippi 
429–432, 676–679* Arkansas 
433–439, 659–665* Louisiana 
440–448 Oklahoma 
449–467, 627–645 Texas 
468–477 Minnesota 
478–485 Iowa 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.435 
486–500 Missouri 
501–502 North Dakota 
503–504 South Dakota 
505–508 Nebraska 
509–515 Kansas 
516–517 Montana 
518–519 Idaho 
520 Wyoming 
521–524, 650–653* Colorado 
525, 585, 648, 649* New Mexico 
526–527, 600–601 Arizona 
525–529, 646–647 Utah 
530, 680* Nevada 
531–539 Washington 
540–544 Oregon 
545–573, 602–626 California 
574 Alaska 
575–576, 750–751* Hawaii 
577–579 District of Columbia 
580 groups 01–18 (groups 20 above PR) Virgin Islands 
580–584, 596–599 Puerto Rico 
586 Guam, American Samoa, Northern  
  Mariana Islands, Philippine Islands 
700–728 Railroad employees under the   
  special retirement act** 
729–733 Enumeration at Entry 
 
*    New areas allocated but not yet issued 
**  Issuance of these numbers to railroad em ployees was discontinued July 1, 1963. 
 
Department of Defense  
The Department of Defense (DOD) maintains information concerning military pay, 
dependents, allotments, deposits, and other financial information is maintained by the 
entities listed below. 
 
Army 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Indianapolis Center 
Indianapolis, IN 46249-0001 
(888) 332-7366 
www.dfas.mil/about/Contacts/ArmyContacts.html 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.436   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Air Force 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Denver Center, Lowry Air Force Base 
Denver, CO 80279-5000 
(888) 332-7411 
www.dfas.mil/about/Contacts/airforcecontacts.htm 
 
Navy 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Cleveland Center 
1240 East Ninth Street 
Cleveland, OH 44199-2055 
(888) 332-7411 or (216) 522-5096 
www.dfas.mil/about/Contacts/navycontacts.html 
 
Marine Corps 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Kansas City Center 
Kansas City, MO 64197-0001 
(800) 756-4571 or (614) 693-8507 
www.dfas.mil/about/Contacts/marinecorps.html 
 
Department of Education 
The Department of Education’s Inspector Ge neral maintains financial and earnings 
statements from parents of students applying for Pell Grants (formerly called Basic 
Educational Opportunity Grants). 
 
Department of Housing and Urban Development 
The Department of Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD) Compliance Division 
conducts investigations of alleged HUD violations. This division handles investigations of 
false statements on credit applications for Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans, 
mortgagers’ certification of no outstanding obligations, cost certificates, and other areas of 
fraud. HUD maintains central index files in Washington, D.C., containing information 
regarding HUD programs and participants, including such individuals and businesses as 
mortgage companies, developers, and borrowers. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.437 
Department of Justice 
The Department of Justice’s U.S. National Central Bureau of the International Criminal 
Police Organization (USNCB-INTERPOL) has direct contact with law enforcement 
authorities in more than 185 INTERPOL memb er countries. The USNCB, therefore, can 
request information regarding ownership, previous investigations, and any other material  
legally releasable. The information available is determined by the laws of the countries from 
which the material is requested. 
 
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) is a principal law 
enforcement agency within the United States Department of Justice that is dedicated to 
preventing terrorism, reducing violent crime, and protecting the United States. The  
ATF retains: 
• Data on distilleries; wineries; breweries; ma nufacturers of tobacco products; wholesale 
and retail dealers of alcoholic beverages; and certain other manufacturers, dealers, and 
users of alcohol 
• Investigative reports of alleged violations under its jurisdiction 
• A list of federally licensed firearms manufacturers, importers, and dealers 
• A complete list of all federally licensed explosive manufacturers, importers, and dealers 
• Data on firearms licenses given; also conducts firearms licensee qualification and 
compliance inspections 
 
Department of Labor 
The Department of Labor (DOL) has information about the Federal Employees 
Compensation Act, the Job Partnership Training  Act, the Occupational Safety Health Act, 
and the Mine Safety Health Act. The Department  retains substantial data on businesses that 
have special work programs affiliated with it. 
 
Under the Employment Standards Administration of the DOL, the Office of Labor-Management 
Standards (OLMS) administers and enforces most of the provisions of the 
Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (LMRDA). The LMRDA has 
reporting requirements for certain labor organizations, union officers and employees, 
employers, labor relations consultants, and surety companies. The LMRDA requires covered 
labor organizations to annually file reports with the OLMS. The information required 
includes names and titles of officers; rates  of dues and fees; loans receivable; other 
investments; other assets; other liabilities; fixed assets; loans payable; sales of investments 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.438   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
and fixed assets; disbursement to officers;  disbursement to employees; purchase of 
investments and fixed assets; benefits; and contributions, gifts, and grants.  
 
In addition, surety companies that issue bonds required by LMRDA or the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) are required to report premiums received 
and claims paid. 
 
Department of State 
The Department of State maintains data on import and export licenses. The State 
Department’s Bureau of Diplomatic Security has information relating to previous 
investigations conducted by that office. The Bureau of Diplomatic Security is a world leader 
in international investigations; threat analysis; cyber security; counterterrorism; security 
technology; and protection of people, property, and information. 
 
Department of the Treasury 
The Department of the Treasury includes several statutory inspector general law 
enforcement agencies.  
 
Within the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), the Criminal Investigation (CI) Division 
conducts investigations of tax fraud relating to income tax, excise tax, occupational tax, and 
violations of currency-transaction reports. Enforcement efforts include tax violation, money 
laundering, currency crimes, and asset forfeiture. The release of taxpayer information to 
other than IRS personnel requires special procedures. The IRS Inspection Service maintains 
information on subjects of investigation and their relationships to IRS employees (e.g., 
threats made against, collusion with, and bribery of IRS employees). 
 
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) safeguards the financial system from 
the abuses of financial crime, including terrorist financing, money laundering, and other illicit 
activities. FinCEN works to maximize information sharing among law enforcement agencies 
and its other partners in the regulatory and financial communities. Through cooperation and 
partnerships, FinCEN’s network approach encourages cost-effective and efficient measures 
to combat money laundering domestically and internationally. The USA PATRIOT Act 
section 314(b) permits financial institutions, upon providing notice to the United States 
Department of the Treasury, to share information with one another in order to identify and 
report to the federal governmental activities that may involve money laundering or terrorist 
activity. However, access to these records by outside parties is extremely limited. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.439 
Department of Homeland Security 
Under the Border and Transportation Directorate of the Department of Homeland Security, 
the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Service retains data on businesses that are involved 
in imports and exports, including lists and records of importers, exporters, custom house 
brokers, and truckers. The Office of Investigations looks into alleged violations of import 
and export practices. The Customs and Border Protection Service is also involved in the 
National Narcotics Border Interdiction System, and special agents from the Office of 
Investigations have been participating in the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task 
Force. Customs might provide information relative to businesses that violate the statutes  
it enforces. 
 
The U.S. Secret Service maintains records on forgers, counterfeiters, and businesses that 
have contacted the Service concerning forged or counterfeit obligations of the United States, 
such as Treasury notes. In addition, the Treasurer of the United States can provide copies of 
canceled checks paid by the U.S. Treasury. The Secret Service also investigates counterfeiting 
and other financial crimes, including financial institution fraud; identity theft; computer 
fraud; and computer-based attacks on our nation’s financial, banking, and 
telecommunications infrastructure.  
 
Department of Veterans Affairs 
Records of loans, tuition payments, insurance payments, and nonrestrictive medical data 
related to disability pensions are maintained at VA regional offices  located in several 
metropolitan areas throughout the country.  
 
Drug Enforcement Administration 
The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) maintains information on licensed handlers 
of narcotics and the criminal records of users, pushers, and suppliers of narcotics. 
 
Federal Aviation Administration 
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) maintains records reflecting the chain of 
ownership of all civil aircraft in the United States. These records include documents about 
the manufacture, sale, transfer, inspection, and modification of an aircraft, including the bill 
of sale, sales contract, mortgage, and liens. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.440   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The FAA also maintains records on pilots, aircraft mechanics, flight engineers, and other 
individuals whom it certifies for flight safety positions. These records include information on 
certificates held, medicals, and law enforcement history. 
 
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
An agency within the Department of Justice,  the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
provides information on criminal records and fingerprints, as well as nonrestricted 
information pertaining to criminal offenses and subversive activities. It also provides 
information about wanted, missing, and unidentified people and foreign fugitives. The FBI 
currently investigates cases involving counterterrorism, counterintelligence, cyber crime, 
public corruption, civil rights, white-collar crime, organized crime, major thefts, and  
violent crimes.  
 
The Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System, more commonly known as 
IAFIS, is a national fingerprint and criminal-history system maintained by the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services (CJIS) Division. The IAFIS 
provides automated fingerprint search capabilities, latent searching capability, electronic 
image storage, and electronic exchange of fingerprints and responses 24 hours a day, 365 
days a year. As a result of submitting fingerprints electronically, agencies receive electronic 
responses to criminal 10-print fingerprint submissions within two hours, and within 24 
hours for civil fingerprint submissions.  
 
The IAFIS maintains the largest biometric database in the world, containing the fingerprints 
and corresponding criminal history information for more than 55 million subjects in the 
Criminal Master File. The fingerprints and corresponding criminal history information are 
submitted voluntarily by state, local, and federal law enforcement agencies. 
 
Federal Communications Commission 
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) licenses all radio operators in the United 
States. Individuals or corporate bodies applying for authority to construct new broadcast 
stations or to change existing stations also must file with the FCC. Information contained in 
the filings includes details on programming, technical aspects of the proposed facilities, 
ownership, and financial status. 
 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
Electric utility and natural gas companies are required to file annual reports with the Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission. The reports provide excellent financial pictures of the 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.441 
companies and provide information about officers, directors, and stockholders who own 
more than 10 percent of the company. 
 
Federal Highway Administration 
The Federal Highway Administration licenses, regulates, inspects, and registers all motor 
carriers operating in interstate commerce. It keeps records of its inspections of motor 
carriers and a history of violations of each carrier. 
 
Federal Maritime Commission 
The Federal Maritime Commission investigates applicants for licenses to engage in 
oceangoing freight-forwarding activities. Applicants provide information to the Commission 
covering most aspects of their history, including name, residence, date and place of birth, 
and citizenship of all corporate officers and directors; names of partnership members of 
individual proprietors; and names of direct holders of 5 percent or more of company stock. 
 
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority  
In 2007, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) was created through the 
consolidation of NASD and the member regulation, enforcement, and arbitration functions 
of the New York Stock Exchange. FINRA is dedicated to investor protection and market 
integrity through effective and efficient regulation and complementary compliance and 
technology-based services.  
 
FINRA touches virtually every aspect of the securities business—from registering and 
educating industry participants to examining securities firms; writing rules; enforcing those 
rules and the federal securities laws; informing and educating the investing public; providing 
trade reporting and other industry utilities; and administering the largest dispute resolution 
forum for investors and registered firms. It also performs market regulation under contract 
for the NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Exchange, the International Securities 
Exchange, and the Chicago Climate Exchange.  
 
Securities broker-dealers must register with the SEC and in those states where they plan to 
do business. If they plan to do business with the public they must also become FINRA 
members. Typical registration requirements for the SEC, states, and NASD include business, 
financial, disciplinary information, and disclosure of criminal convictions. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.442   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
General Services Administration 
The General Services Administration (GSA) has considerable information on architects, 
engineers, personal property auctioneers, real estate appraisers, construction contractors, 
sales brokers, and businesses that contract with the GSA. The agency also maintains the 
“GSA Consolidated List,” a computerized roster of suspended and debarred bidders. 
 
The GSA is also responsible for the Excluded Parties List System (EPLS), which is an 
electronic, Web-based system that identifies parties that excluded from receiving federal 
contracts, certain subcontracts, and certain types of federal financial and nonfinancial 
assistance and benefits. The EPLS keeps its user community aware of suspected terrorists, 
individuals barred from entering the United States, and those subject to administrative and 
statutory exclusions. The user is able to search, view, and download both current and 
archived exclusions. 
 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) is responsible for the nation’s 
public space program and long-term aerospace research. More than 90 percent of NASA’s 
multibillion-dollar budget goes to NASA contractors. Files maintained by its Office of 
Procurement contain information about a contractor and its employees. NASA requires that 
contracting firms submit the following data with their proposals: name and qualifications of 
the contractor and resumes of the personnel who will be directly assigned to the project. The 
resumes should include educational background, work experience, length of service with the 
firm, and projects on which these individuals have worked. 
 
National Archives and Records Administration 
The National Archives and Records Administration operates federal records centers 
throughout the country, including the National Personnel Records Center in St. Louis, MO, 
and the Federal Register and the National Archives Building in Washington, D.C. It also is 
responsible for regional archives and the presidential libraries. The National Personnel 
Records Center in St. Louis stores the personnel records of former members of the armed 
forces and former federal civilian employees. Procedures for investigative inquiries into these 
records are available from the Center. For information, call +1 (314) 801-0800. 
 
The Federal Register is the medium for notifying the public of official agency actions; all 
federal regulations must be published in it. The Office of the Federal Register provides a 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.443 
periodic workshop on the use of the Federal Register as an information source. A handbook 
on the uses of the Federal Register  is also available. For information, call +1 (202) 741-6000. 
 
National Railroad Passenger Corporation 
The National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak) maintains information on 
passengers, including reservation histories, methods of payment, and dates of travel; the 
railroad industry; railroad contractors; subcontractors; vendors; and train routes and 
schedules. 
 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) maintains applications and licenses of people 
and companies that export nuclear material and equipment from the United States. The 
NRC determines whether proposed exports would be inimical to our defense and security 
and, for certain exports, whether they come under the terms of an agreement that establishes 
the ground rules for nuclear cooperation and trade between the United States and the 
country of destination. 
 
Office of Foreign Assets Control 
The Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is an office within the Department of the 
Treasury charged with administering and enforcing U.S. sanction policies against targeted 
foreign organizations and individuals who sponsor terrorism and international narcotics 
traffickers. OFAC maintains a list of individu als, governmental entities, companies, and 
merchant vessels around the world that are known or suspected to engage in illegal activities. 
Persons or entities on the list, known as Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons 
(SDNs), include foreign agents, front organizations, terrorists and terrorist organizations, 
and drug traffickers. The list contains thousands of variations on names of individuals, 
governmental entities, companies, and merchant vessels and is updated on a regular basis. 
Current information on licenses issued with regard to SDNs and other blocked persons may 
be obtained or verified by calling OFAC Licensing at (202) 622-2480. 
 
Securities and Exchange Commission Records 
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) maintains public records of corporations 
with stocks and securities sold to the public. These records include the following 
information: 
• Financial statements 
• Identification of officers and directors 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.444   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Identification of owners of more than 10 percent of a business’s stock 
• A description of the registrant’s properties and businesses 
• A description of the significant provisions of the security to be offered for sale and its 
relationship to the registrant’s other capital securities 
• Identification of events of interest to investors 
• Identification of accountants and attorneys 
• A history of the business 
 
The SEC also maintains files on individuals and firms reported to it for violating federal or 
state securities laws. The information in these files pertains to official actions taken against 
such people and firms, including denials, refusals, suspensions, and revocations of 
registrations; injunctions, fraud orders, stop orders, and cease-and-desist orders; and arrests, 
indictments, convictions, sentences, and other official actions. 
 
Moreover, changes in beneficial ownership by officers, directors, and principal stockholders 
of securities listed and registered on a national securities exchange or of securities of public 
utility companies and certain closed-end investment companies can be accessed through the 
SEC’s EDGAR system, on the SEC’s website. Also, as of September 2008, this information 
can also be accessed on the SEC’s new IDEA (Interactive Data Electronic Applications) 
system. IDEA will at first supplement and then eventually replace the EDGAR system, 
which will become an archive of SEC filings made prior to the introduction of the IDEA 
system. 
 
Most of a company’s information filed with EDGAR and IDEA can be obtained in 
electronic form by using the online SEC search feature at www.sec.gov. To obtain paper 
copies of SEC records and documents, historic SEC filings, special reports and studies, 
speeches, and testimony, contact the Office of Investor Education and Advocacy at (202) 
551-8090 or through e-mail at PublicInfo@sec.gov. 
 
Some important corporate filings with the SEC are discussed below.  
 
Annual Report of Publicly Traded Company (Form 10-K) 
Form 10-K is an annual reports required by the SEC; it contains the company’s income 
statement and balance sheet, information on its debt structure, foreign ownership, properties 
owned, subsidiaries, industry descriptions, depreciation, dilution, and other key business 
information. If the filing company has filed for bankruptcy, been the target of a shareholder 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.445 
lawsuit, or been sued for patent infringement, such information may also show up in the 10-
 K. Excerpts or complete reports are available via LexisNexis or Dialog databases. 
 
Quarterly Report of Publicly Traded Company (Form 10-Q) 
Form 10-Q is same as the Form 10-K, but it  must filed quarterly instead of annually 
 
Special Events in Publicly Traded Company (Form 8-K) 
Form 8-k, which is one of the most common types of forms filed with the SEC, is filed to 
notify investors of any unscheduled material corporate event.  
 
Registration of Security (Form 8-A) 
Form 8-A is one of the forms used to register securities for offering to the public; it contains 
information regarding the type of security, details of the issuance, and information about the 
issuer.  
 
Registration of Security by Successor (Form 8-B) 
Form 8-B is a filing with the SEC that concerns the registration of securities of certain 
successor issuers; it contains the name of issuer and the relationship to the primary 
registrant/issuer. 
 
Special Events in Foreign Security (Form 6-K) 
Foreign private issuers must submit a Form 6-K. The information contained in a Form 6-K 
is similar to that contained in a Form 10-K and a Form 8-K. 
 
Report of Acquisition of Beneficial Ownership of 5 percent or More of Capital Stock of Public Company (Form 13-D) 
Form 13-D must be filed when an investor acquires five percent of any public company. 
This form contains a description of the security, any agreements or other undertakings by 
the reporting entity, the sources of funds for the acquisition, the purpose of the acquisition, 
and the relationship of the parties. Also, if acquisition results in change of control, it 
contains background information on each person reporting. 
 
Federal Trade Commission Filings 
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC), which is the federal agency responsible for 
enforcement of the Fair Credit Reporting Act, archives information on actions taken against 
companies and individuals, as well as consent decrees  (i.e., judicial recognition of an agreement 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.446   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
between parties to a suit) and judgments against companies and individuals. Detailed 
information on particular companies or actions is available through a request under the 
Freedom of Information Act. 
 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration Records 
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is charged with the 
enforcement of legislation designed to protect employees who raise complaints about the 
health and safety of their workplace. OSHA information includes the name, address, 
county/country, number of employees, and SIC code of any business subject to a health and 
safety inspection; purpose and scope of the in spection; office and officer conducting the 
inspection; hours spent; and total number of vi olations and penalties assessed as a result of 
the inspection. A search of OSHA information also encompasses all parallel state agencies. 
 
Interstate Commerce Commission 
The Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) identifies liability and car insurance carriers for 
all surface transportation companies engaged in interstate and foreign commerce. 
Information kept by the ICC includes the identification and address of the insurance carrier, 
the limits of the insurance policy, the policy number, and the status.  
 
U.S. Small Business Administration 
The U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) is a federal agency that provides support to 
small businesses. The SBA guarantees loans made by private lenders and makes direct loans 
for business construction, expansion, or conversion; for purchase of machinery, equipment, 
facilities, supplies, or materials; and for work ing capital. A loan applicant (sole owner, 
partnership, corporation, or other) must complete SBA forms, providing information about 
the business and its principals (owners, officers, and directors). 
 
Additionally, the SBA arranges contracts and guarantees loans for qualified, small, minority-
 owned businesses. For some of these businesses, the SBA might be the only source for 
financial and other information about the businesses, their principals, their assets, and other 
data. Because their stock is not publicly held, these businesses are not subject to public 
disclosure laws.  
 
The SBA also connects small firms owned by socially and economically disadvantaged 
Americans with contracts set aside by other federal agencies for the purposes of increasing 
opportunities for small businesses generally.  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.447 
United States State Department 
The United States State Department (known as the State Department) is responsible for the 
country’s international relations. It maintains the International Traffic in Arms Regulations 
(ITAR) Debarred List, which contains a list of  parties barred from participating in the 
exportation of defense articles (e.g., technical data, or in the furnishing of defense services 
for which a license or approval is required) under the International Traffic in Arms 
Regulation (22 CFR Sec. 127.7).  
 
Treasury Direct 
Treasury Direct is a financial services website that allows individuals to buy and redeem 
securities from the Department of the Treasury in electronic form. It maintains information 
on purchased and redeemed U.S. saving bonds (registered bonds), marketable securities, and 
special securities. Specifically, the information includes the series of bonds involved and the 
surname, given name, middle name or initial, and address of each person in whose name 
bonds were purchased.  
 
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services 
Formerly the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Services (USCIS) is a bureau of the Department of Homeland Security. The USCIS is 
charged with overseeing lawful immigration in the United States, and it retains a number of 
records, including alien registration records issued after August 27, 1940 (from July 1, 1920, 
to August 27, 1940, each immigrant was given an Immigrant’s Identification Card); lists of 
passengers and crews on vessels from foreign ports; passenger manifests and declarations 
(ship, date, and point of entry); naturalization records (names of witnesses to naturalization 
proceedings and acquaintances of the individual); deportation proceedings; and financial 
statements of aliens and people sponsoring an immigrant entry. 
 
U.S. Coast Guard 
The Coast Guard is a branch of the armed forces that carries out three basic roles: maritime 
safety, maritime security, and maritime stewardship. It maintains names of merchant 
mariners on U.S. vessels and investigative records pertaining to them, records relating to 
maritime drug smuggling, records on criminal investigations, and records on documented 
U.S. vessels.  
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.448   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
U.S. Government Accountability Office 
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) is  the audit, evaluation, and investigative 
agency of the United States Congress. GAO’s Internet home page provides access to recent 
GAO audit products and comptroller general decisions, as well as information on how to 
order paper copies of both recent and older GAO products. In addition, GAO audit 
products from fiscal year 1995 forward and recent decisions are available in electronic form 
at the Government Printing Office’s website. GAO products, including those not available 
on the Internet, may also be ordered by calling (202) 512-6000 or TDD (301) 413-0006. 
 
U.S. Postal Service 
The Postal Service, which is responsible for providing postal service in the United States, 
maintains valuable information, including the names and addresses of post office box 
holders. Check with the local post office to learn the identity of the inspector who can 
furnish the information. Photocopies of postal money orders and requests for copies of 
postal money orders are made through the local U.S. Postal Inspection Service office, usually 
by subpoena. 
 
Federal Procurement Data System 
The Federal Procurement Data System (FPDS) collects, develops, and disseminates federal 
contracting information. Many federal agencies report their contracts and purchases to the 
FPDS, which catalogs the information for government and public use. Contracts agreed 
upon as long ago as 1978 are searchable. The FPDS is best source for federal procurement 
information, and its website (www.fpds.gov) is also fairly explanatory and easy to navigate. 
 
FedWorld Information Network  
Established by The National Technical Information Service, FedWorld provides access to a 
comprehensive inventory of information disseminated by the Federal Government. 
Essentially, it is a one-stop shopping spot for federal governmental information, including a 
government locator database, U.S. Customs rulings, Supreme Court decisions, and a foreign 
news alert service. Its website is www.fedworld.gov. 
 
National Motor Vehicle Title Information System 
Established by the Anti-Car Theft Act of 1992, the National Motor Vehicle Title 
Information System (NMVTIS) is an electronic database used to authenticate and exchange 
key vehicle history data, such as titling information and certain theft data. The primary 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.449 
reason for creating the NMVTIS was to address the lack of conformity among state vehicle 
documentation laws, which is one of the key factors contributing to title fraud.  
 
The new database, effected on January 1, 2010, is designed to prevent title washing, which 
occurs when a vehicle’s brand (i.e., a permanent designation indicating that the vehicle has 
incurred damage through collusion, flood, fire, or other incident requiring repair) is removed 
by re-titling the vehicle in a state that doesn’t carry forward any brands on the new title.  
 
 



:


feder govern record
a huge amount of inform is avail to the public through the variou feder agenc
a list of a number of feder agenc and their websit address will be provid later in
thi workbook and inform about variou feder agenc can be obtain through the
follow refer guid
congression staff directori and feder staff directori prepar annual by cq
press
congression directori prepar by the us govern print offic
the unit state govern manual prepar by the us govern print offic
howev the follow record ar of particular note
feder court record
civil and crimin court record
feder civil and crimin court record can provid valuabl inform includ the
plaintiff and defend name the case number the file date the caus of action and the
case disposit of current statu
bankruptci court record
bankruptci proceed ar conduct in feder bankruptci court in these court all
document file with the court ar public record and can be examin by anyon without
charg these onsit feder court record mai includ the case number debtor name
social secur number address file date chapter design and closur date the
search is avail for all feder jurisdict usual cover a sevenyear span that start
from the present and move backward
bankruptci document ar usual locat in the feder bankruptci court for the district
where the debtor resid or had hi princip place of busi when check bankruptci
court record the examin should rememb to check not onli the individu or busi
file for bankruptci but also ani relat busi princip employe or rel
a bankruptci is initi by the file of a bankruptci petit the petit can be either
voluntari or involuntari three or more creditor who have outstand claim that have not
been paid can file an involuntari petit
specif a bankruptci file typic contain the follow document
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3429
bankruptci petit the bankruptci petit contain type of bankruptci
voluntaryinvoluntari chapter 7 chapter 11 etc social secur number or tax id
number street address and primari place of busi locat of princip asset of
busi type of busi name of attornei estim amount of asset estim
number of creditor liabil and employe financi data and a list of sharehold
proof of claim form proof of claim form ar file by creditor list the amount thei ar
ow by the debtor
truste final report the final report is file by a truste when a case is conclud it
show which claim were paid
truste final account truste must also file a final a ccount of the administr of the
estat thi account will also show which claim were paid
schedul a thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the debtor real
properti
schedul b thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the debtor person
properti includ tangibl properti eg jewelri and vehicl and intang properti
eg invest and account receiv
schedul c thi form is file by the debtor and it describ the properti that the debtor
is claim as exempt from be us to satisfi claim
schedul d thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the secur debt the
debtor ow eg mortgag
schedul e thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the debtor prioriti
debt the bankruptci code give certain unsecur creditor prioriti such as those
ow wage contribut to pension plan tax ow to government entiti etc
schedul f file by the debtor thi form describ unsecur nonprior claim ow
by the debtor
schedul g file by the debtor thi form describ ani leas and executori contract
ie contract that have not been fulli perform to which the debtor is a parti
schedul h thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all codebtor that might be
affect by the debtor bankruptci
schedul i file by the debtor thi form describ the debtor current incom
schedul j file by the debtor thi form describ the debtor current monthli
expenditur
statement of financi affair thi form is file by the debt or and it describ the debtor
legal econom and busi transact prior to file it is a list of all recent
sourc of incom payment to creditor lawsuit repossess or foreclosur
sourc of inform investig
3430 2011 fraud examin manual
assign gift loss financi account safe deposit box es prior address financi
statement inventori and current and former offic director and sharehold
bankruptci plan the bankruptci plan is a detail account of how the creditor claim
will be resolv
the bankruptci file mai also contain transcript of deposit or interview if fraud wa
suspect the truste mai have conduct a fraud investig check with the truste to
find out if ani investig were conduct
inspector gener
inspector gener can provid valuabl inform especi to offici law enforc
personnel about busi thei have investig or audit and thei ar good guid to
other inform sourc in their depart or agenc most offic of inspector
gener maintain central index and case file system congress establish inspector
gener to combat government fraud wast and abus in feder depart agenc
and design the entiti list below
feder entiti websit address
agenc for intern develop wwwusaidgov
agricultur depart of wwwusdagov
amtrak wwwamtrakoigcom
appalachian region commiss wwwarcgov
central intellig agenc wwwciagov
commerc depart of wwwcommercegov
commod futur trade commiss wwwcftcgov
consum product safeti commiss wwwcpscgov
corpor for nation and commun servic wwwnationalserviceorg
corpor for public broadcast wwwcpborg
council of the inspector gener wwwignetgov
defens depart of wwwdefensegov
educ depart of wwwedgov
energi depart of wwwdoegov
environment protect agenc wwwepagov
equal employ opportun commiss wwweeocgov
farm credit administr wwwfcagov
feder commun commiss wwwfccgov
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3431
feder deposit insur corpor wwwfdicoiggov
feder elect commiss wwwfecgov
feder emerg manag agenc wwwfemagov
feder hous financ board wwwfhfagov
feder labor relat author wwwflragov
feder maritim commiss wwwfmcgov
feder reserv board wwwfederalreservegov
feder trade commiss wwwftcgov
gener servic administr oiggsagov
govern print offic wwwgpogov
health and human servic depart of wwwhhsgov
homeland secur depart of wwwdhsgov
hous and urban develop depart of wwwhudgov
interior depart of the wwwdoigov
intern trade commiss us wwwusitcgov
justic depart of wwwusdojgov
labor depart of wwwdolgov
legal servic corpor wwwlscgov
nation aeronaut and space administr wwwnasagov
nation archiv and record administr wwwarchivesgov
nation credit union administr wwwncuagov
nation endow for the art wwwneagov
nation endow for the human wwwnehgov
nation labor relat board wwwnlrbgov
nation scienc foundat wwwnsfgov
nuclear regulatori commiss wwwnrcgov
offic of personnel manag wwwopmgov
peac corp wwwpeacecorpsgov
pension benefit guaranti corpor wwwpbgcgov
postal servic us wwwuspscom
railroad retir board wwwrrbgov
secur and exchang commiss wwwsecgov
small busi administr wwwsbagov
social secur administr wwwssagov
state depart of wwwstategov
tennesse vallei author wwwtvagov
sourc of inform investig
3432 2011 fraud examin manual
transport depart of wwwdotgov
treasuri depart of the wwwustreasgov
treasuri inspector gener for tax administr wwwustreasgovtigta
veteran affair depart of wwwvagov
commod futur trade commiss
the commod futur trade commiss act of 1974 creat the commod futur
trade commiss cftc and it empow the cftc to regul all futur trade in
the unit state the cftc impos specul posit limit on futur contract as
need to elimin decreas or deter the burden on interst commerc that mai result
from excess specul moreov the cftc through it affili with the nation
futur associ nfa provid a disputeresolut program for custom and
member
thi cftc maintain the follow inform
registr inform concern firm and individu
administr and injunct action file by the cftc against firm and individu
financi report file by cftc registr
custom complaint file against cftc registr
nation futur associ
the nation futur associ is an industrywid selfregulatori organ
author by the commod exchang act it oper under the supervis of the cftc
the nfa is a onestop inform sourc for all type of registr and disciplinari
inform regard firm and individu in the futur industri thi inform
includ registr statu and employ histori disciplinari action file by the nfa
the cftc and the commod exchang and c ustom complaint file under the cftc
repar program
the nfa inform center can be contact at 800 6213570 or within illinoi at 312
7811410 or access on their websit at wwwcftcgov
depart of agricultur
some us depart of agricultur usda agenc maintain or have access to financi
record concern contract with the agenc recipi of variou benefit such as food
stamp and free or reducedpric school lunch farmland improv and feder crop
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3433
insur coverag variou usda agenc maintain inform about gain access to
record concern the follow
meat or poultri compani
feedlot owner or oper livestock broker meat packer or canneri
ownership manag or the oper ofor certain financi data concern
farm or ranch particip in usda program
retail groceri store author to accept food stamp
rural electr or telephon cooper
applic for and receipt of loan loan guarante grant or contract with or from
usda agenc
applic for and indemn paid by feder crop insur
log tree harvest compani that remov timber from nation forest
certain improv to farm land
the import or export of agricultur commod anim or plant
personnel data on current or former usda employe
the usda headquart ar at 1400 independ avenu sw washington dc 20250
and can be call at 202 7206858 the usda websit is wwwusdagov
depart of commerc
the depart of commerc is focus on promot econom growth and it maintain
inform on intern trade social and econom condit trend patent
trademark ocean studi domest econom develop and minor busi it ha
foreign countri expert who can direct examin to sourc of busi inform on ani
countri in the world
the bureau of industri and secur bi a divis of the depart of commerc
maintain list of person and entiti who have been deni the right to export or import
good the biss websit is wwwbisdocgov
the depart of commerc is locat at 1401 constitut avenu nw washington
dc 20230 and can be call at 202 4822000 their websit is wwwcommercegov
social secur administr record
the social secur administr retain origin applic for social secur number
applic list an applic name maiden and marri name for women date of birth
sourc of inform investig
3434 2011 fraud examin manual
place of birth sex race parent name and address at time of applic if a social
secur number is known it might lead to help inform regard the locat where
the card wa issu becaus mani peopl appli for a social secur number at a young ag
these record can help to locat an individu place of birth
there ar nine digit in the social secur number with the except of the 700 seri the
first three digit reflect the state of issu some state and puerto rico have more than on
seri of number the last six digit ar individu identifi here is a list of the state
of issu of the first three digit
social secur number chart
initi number state of issuanc
001003 new hampshir
004007 main
008009 vermont
010034 massachusett
035039 rhode island
040049 connecticut
050134 new york
135158 new jersei
159211 pennsylvania
212220 maryland
221222 delawar
223231 691699 virginia
232236 west virginia
237246 232 681690 north carolina
247251 654658 south carolina
252260 667675 georgia
261267 589595 766772 florida
268302 ohio
303317 indiana
318361 illinoi
362386 michigan
387399 wisconsin
400407 kentucki
408415 756763 tennesse
416424 alabama
425428 587 588 752755 mississippi
429432 676679 arkansa
433439 659665 louisiana
440448 oklahoma
449467 627645 texa
468477 minnesota
478485 iowa
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3435
486500 missouri
501502 north dakota
503504 south dakota
505508 nebraska
509515 kansa
516517 montana
518519 idaho
520 wyom
521524 650653 colorado
525 585 648 649 new mexico
526527 600601 arizona
525529 646647 utah
530 680 nevada
531539 washington
540544 oregon
545573 602626 california
574 alaska
575576 750751 hawaii
577579 district of columbia
580 group 0118 group 20 abov pr virgin island
580584 596599 puerto rico
586 guam american samoa northern
mariana island philippin island
700728 railroad employe under the
special retir act
729733 enumer at entri
new area alloc but not yet issu
issuanc of these number to railroad em ploye wa discontinu juli 1 1963
depart of defens
the depart of defens dod maintain inform concern militari pai
depend allot deposit and other financi inform is maintain by the
entiti list below
armi
defens financ and account servic
indianapoli center
indianapoli in 462490001
888 3327366
wwwdfasmilaboutcontactsarmycontactshtml
sourc of inform investig
3436 2011 fraud examin manual
air forc
defens financ and account servic
denver center lowri air forc base
denver co 802795000
888 3327411
wwwdfasmilaboutcontactsairforcecontactshtm
navi
defens financ and account servic
cleveland center
1240 east ninth street
cleveland oh 441992055
888 3327411 or 216 5225096
wwwdfasmilaboutcontactsnavycontactshtml
marin corp
defens financ and account servic
kansa citi center
kansa citi mo 641970001
800 7564571 or 614 6938507
wwwdfasmilaboutcontactsmarinecorpshtml
depart of educ
the depart of educ inspector ge neral maintain financi and earn
statement from parent of student appli for pell grant formerli call basic
educ opportun grant
depart of hous and urban develop
the depart of hous and urban develop hud complianc divis
conduct investig of alleg hud violat thi divis handl investig of
fals statement on credit applic for feder hous administr fha loan
mortgag certif of no outstand oblig cost certif and other area of
fraud hud maintain central index file in washington dc contain inform
regard hud program and particip includ such individu and busi as
mortgag compani develop and borrow
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3437
depart of justic
the depart of justic us nation central bureau of the intern crimin
polic organ usncbinterpol ha direct contact with law enforc
author in more than 185 interpol memb er countri the usncb therefor can
request inform regard ownership previou investig and ani other materi
legal releas the inform avail is determin by the law of the countri from
which the materi is request
the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos atf is a princip law
enforc agenc within the unit state depart of justic that is dedic to
prevent terror reduc violent crime and protect the unit state the
atf retain
data on distilleri wineri breweri ma nufactur of tobacco product wholesal
and retail dealer of alcohol beverag and certain other manufactur dealer and
user of alcohol
investig report of alleg violat under it jurisdict
a list of feder licens firearm manufactur import and dealer
a complet list of all feder licens explos manufactur import and dealer
data on firearm licens given also conduct firearm license qualif and
complianc inspect
depart of labor
the depart of labor dol ha inform about the feder employe
compens act the job partnership train act the occup safeti health act
and the mine safeti health act the depart retain substanti data on busi that
have special work program affili with it
under the employ standard administr of the dol the offic of labormanag
standard olm administ and enforc most of the provis of the
labormanag report and disclosur act of 1959 lmrda the lmrda ha
report requir for certain labor organ union offic and employe
employ labor relat consult and sureti compani the lmrda requir cover
labor organ to annual file report with the olm the inform requir
includ name and titl of offic rate of due and fee loan receiv other
invest other asset other liabil fix asset loan payabl sale of invest
sourc of inform investig
3438 2011 fraud examin manual
and fix asset disburs to offic disburs to employe purchas of
invest and fix asset benefit and contribut gift and grant
in addit sureti compani that issu bond requir by lmrda or the employe
retir incom secur act of 1974 erisa ar requir to report premium receiv
and claim paid
depart of state
the depart of state maintain data on import and export licens the state
depart bureau of diplomat secur ha inform relat to previou
investig conduct by that offic the bureau of diplomat secur is a world leader
in intern investig threat analysi cyber secur counterterror secur
technolog and protect of peopl properti and inform
depart of the treasuri
the depart of the treasuri includ sever statutori inspector gener law
enforc agenc
within the intern revenu servic ir the crimin investig ci divis
conduct investig of tax fraud relat to incom tax excis tax occup tax and
violat of currencytransact report enforc effort includ tax violat monei
launder currenc crime and asset forfeitur the releas of taxpay inform to
other than ir personnel requir special procedur the ir inspect servic maintain
inform on subject of investig and their relationship to ir employe eg
threat made against collus with and briberi of ir employe
the financi crime enforc network fincen safeguard the financi system from
the abus of financi crime includ terrorist financ monei launder and other illicit
activ fincen work to maxim inform share among law enforc agenc
and it other partner in the regulatori and financi commun through cooper and
partnership fincen network approach encourag costeffect and effici measur
to combat monei launder domest and internation the usa patriot act
section 314b permit financi institut upon provid notic to the unit state
depart of the treasuri to share inform with on anoth in order to identifi and
report to the feder government activ that mai involv monei launder or terrorist
activ howev access to these record by outsid parti is extrem limit
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3439
depart of homeland secur
under the border and transport director of the depart of homeland secur
the us custom and border protect servic retain data on busi that ar involv
in import and export includ list and record of import export custom hous
broker and trucker the offic of investig look into alleg violat of import
and export practic the custom and border protect servic is also involv in the
nation narcot border interdict system and special agent from the offic of
investig have been particip in the organ crime drug enforc task
forc custom might provid inform rel to busi that violat the statut
it enforc
the us secret servic maintain record on forger counterfeit and busi that
have contact the servic concern forg or counterfeit oblig of the unit state
such as treasuri note in addit the treasur of the unit state can provid copi of
cancel check paid by the us treasuri the secret servic also investig counterfeit
and other financi crime includ financi institut fraud ident theft comput
fraud and computerbas attack on our nation financi bank and
telecommun infrastructur
depart of veteran affair
record of loan tuition payment insur payment and nonrestrict medic data
relat to disabl pension ar maintain at va region offic locat in sever
metropolitan area throughout the countri
drug enforc administr
the drug enforc administr dea maintain inform on licens handler
of narcot and the crimin record of user pusher and supplier of narcot
feder aviat administr
the feder aviat administr faa maintain record reflect the chain of
ownership of all civil aircraft in the unit state these record includ document about
the manufactur sale transfer inspect and modif of an aircraft includ the bill
of sale sale contract mortgag and lien
sourc of inform investig
3440 2011 fraud examin manual
the faa also maintain record on pilot aircraft mechan flight engin and other
individu whom it certifi for flight safeti posit these record includ inform on
certif held medic and law enforc histori
feder bureau of investig
an agenc within the depart of justic the feder bureau of investig fbi
provid inform on crimin record and fingerprint as well as nonrestrict
inform pertain to crimin offens and subvers activ it also provid
inform about want miss and unidentifi peopl and foreign fugit the fbi
current investig case involv counterterror counterintellig cyber crime
public corrupt civil right whitecollar crime organ crime major theft and
violent crime
the integr autom fingerprint identif system more commonli known as
iafi is a nation fingerprint and criminalhistori system maintain by the feder
bureau of investig crimin justic inform servic cji divis the iafi
provid autom fingerprint search capabl latent search capabl electron
imag storag and electron exchang of fingerprint and respons 24 hour a dai 365
dai a year as a result of submit fingerprint electron agenc receiv electron
respons to crimin 10print fingerprint submiss within two hour and within 24
hour for civil fingerprint submiss
the iafi maintain the largest biometr databas in the world contain the fingerprint
and correspond crimin histori inform for more than 55 million subject in the
crimin master file the fingerprint and correspond crimin histori inform ar
submit voluntarili by state local and feder law enforc agenc
feder commun commiss
the feder commun commiss fcc licens all radio oper in the unit
state individu or corpor bodi appli for author to construct new broadcast
station or to chang exist station also must file with the fcc inform contain in
the file includ detail on program technic aspect of the propos facil
ownership and financi statu
feder energi regulatori commiss
electr util and natur ga compani ar requir to file annual report with the feder
energi regulatori commiss the report provid excel financi pictur of the
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3441
compani and provid inform about offic director and stockhold who own
more than 10 percent of the compani
feder highwai administr
the feder highwai administr licens regul inspect and regist all motor
carrier oper in interst commerc it keep record of it inspect of motor
carrier and a histori of violat of each carrier
feder maritim commiss
the feder maritim commiss investig applic for licens to engag in
oceango freightforward activ applic provid inform to the commiss
cover most aspect of their histori includ name resid date and place of birth
and citizenship of all corpor offic and director name of partnership member of
individu proprietor and name of direct holder of 5 percent or more of compani stock
financi industri regulatori author
in 2007 the financi industri regulatori author finra wa creat through the
consolid of nasd and the member regul enforc and arbitr function
of the new york stock exchang finra is dedic to investor protect and market
integr through effect and effici regul and complementari complianc and
technologybas servic
finra touch virtual everi aspect of the secur businessfrom regist and
educ industri particip to examin secur firm write rule enforc those
rule and the feder secur law inform and educ the invest public provid
trade report and other industri util and administ the largest disput resolut
forum for investor and regist firm it also perform market regul under contract
for the nasdaq stock market the american stock exchang the intern secur
exchang and the chicago climat exchang
secur brokerdeal must regist with the sec and in those state where thei plan to
do busi if thei plan to do busi with the public thei must also becom finra
member typic registr requir for the sec state and nasd includ busi
financi disciplinari inform and disclosur of crimin convict
sourc of inform investig
3442 2011 fraud examin manual
gener servic administr
the gener servic administr gsa ha consider inform on architect
engin person properti auction real estat apprais construct contractor
sale broker and busi that contract with the gsa the agenc also maintain the
gsa consolid list a computer roster of suspend and debar bidder
the gsa is also respons for the exclud parti list system epl which is an
electron webbas system that identifi parti that exclud from receiv feder
contract certain subcontract and certain type of feder financi and nonfinanci
assist and benefit the epl keep it user commun awar of suspect terrorist
individu bar from enter the unit state and those subject to administr and
statutori exclus the user is abl to search view and download both current and
archiv exclus
nation aeronaut and space administr
the nation aeronaut and space administr nasa is respons for the nation
public space program and longterm aerospac research more than 90 percent of nasa
multibilliondollar budget goe to nasa contractor file maintain by it offic of
procur contain inform about a contractor and it employe nasa requir that
contract firm submit the follow data with their propos name and qualif of
the contractor and resum of the personnel who will be directli assign to the project the
resum should includ educ background work experi length of servic with the
firm and project on which these individu have work
nation archiv and record administr
the nation archiv and record administr oper feder record center
throughout the countri includ the nation personnel record center in st loui mo
and the feder regist and the nation archiv build in washington dc it also is
respons for region archiv and the presidenti librari the nation personnel
record center in st loui store the personnel record of former member of the arm
forc and former feder civilian employe procedur for investig inquiri into these
record ar avail from the center for inform call 1 314 8010800
the feder regist is the medium for notifi the public of offici agenc action all
feder regul must be publish in it the offic of the feder regist provid a
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3443
period workshop on the us of the feder regist as an inform sourc a handbook
on the us of the feder regist is also avail for inform call 1 202 7416000
nation railroad passeng corpor
the nation railroad passeng corpor amtrak maintain inform on
passeng includ reserv histori method of payment and date of travel the
railroad industri railroad contractor subcontractor vendor and train rout and
schedul
nuclear regulatori commiss
the nuclear regulatori commiss nrc maintain applic and licens of peopl
and compani that export nuclear materi and equip from the unit state the
nrc determin whether propos export would be inim to our defens and secur
and for certain export whether thei come under the term of an agreement that establish
the ground rule for nuclear cooper and trade between the unit state and the
countri of destin
offic of foreign asset control
the offic of foreign asset control ofac is an offic within the depart of the
treasuri charg with administ and enforc us sanction polici against target
foreign organ and individu who sponsor terror and intern narcot
traffick ofac maintain a list of individu al government entiti compani and
merchant vessel around the world that ar known or suspect to engag in illeg activ
person or entiti on the list known as special design nation and block person
sdn includ foreign agent front organ terrorist and terrorist organ
and drug traffick the list contain thousand of variat on name of individu
government entiti compani and merchant vessel and is updat on a regular basi
current inform on licens issu with regard to sdn and other block person mai
be obtain or verifi by call ofac licens at 202 6222480
secur and exchang commiss record
the secur and exchang commiss sec maintain public record of corpor
with stock and secur sold to the public these record includ the follow
inform
financi statement
identif of offic and director
sourc of inform investig
3444 2011 fraud examin manual
identif of owner of more than 10 percent of a businesss stock
a descript of the registr properti and busi
a descript of the signific provis of the secur to be offer for sale and it
relationship to the registr other capit secur
identif of event of interest to investor
identif of account and attornei
a histori of the busi
the sec also maintain file on individu and firm report to it for violat feder or
state secur law the inform in these file pertain to offici action taken against
such peopl and firm includ denial refus suspens and revoc of
registr injunct fraud order stop order and ceaseanddesist order and arrest
indict convict sentenc and other offici action
moreov chang in benefici ownership by offic director and princip stockhold
of secur list and regist on a nation secur exchang or of secur of public
util compani and certain closedend invest compani can be access through the
sec edgar system on the sec websit also as of septemb 2008 thi inform
can also be access on the sec new idea interact data electron applic
system idea will at first supplement and then eventu replac the edgar system
which will becom an archiv of sec file made prior to the introduct of the idea
system
most of a compani inform file with edgar and idea can be obtain in
electron form by us the onlin sec search featur at wwwsecgov to obtain paper
copi of sec record and document histor sec file special report and studi
speech and testimoni contact the offic of investor educ and advocaci at 202
5518090 or through email at publicinfosecgov
some import corpor file with the sec ar discuss below
annual report of publicli trade compani form 10k
form 10k is an annual report requir by the sec it contain the compani incom
statement and balanc sheet inform on it debt structur foreign ownership properti
own subsidiari industri descript depreci dilut and other kei busi
inform if the file compani ha file for bankruptci been the target of a sharehold
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3445
lawsuit or been su for patent infring such inform mai also show up in the 10
k excerpt or complet report ar avail via lexisnexi or dialog databas
quarterli report of publicli trade compani form 10q
form 10q is same as the form 10k but it must file quarterli instead of annual
special event in publicli trade compani form 8k
form 8k which is on of the most common type of form file with the sec is file to
notifi investor of ani unschedul materi corpor event
registr of secur form 8a
form 8a is on of the form us to regist secur for offer to the public it contain
inform regard the type of secur detail of the issuanc and inform about the
issuer
registr of secur by successor form 8b
form 8b is a file with the sec that concern the registr of secur of certain
successor issuer it contain the name of issuer and the relationship to the primari
registrantissu
special event in foreign secur form 6k
foreign privat issuer must submit a form 6k the inform contain in a form 6k
is similar to that contain in a form 10k and a form 8k
report of acquisit of benefici ownership of 5 percent or more of capit stock of public compani form 13d
form 13d must be file when an investor acquir five percent of ani public compani
thi form contain a descript of the secur ani agreement or other undertak by
the report entiti the sourc of fund for the acquisit the purpos of the acquisit
and the relationship of the parti also if acquisit result in chang of control it
contain background inform on each person report
feder trade commiss file
the feder trade commiss ftc which is the feder agenc respons for
enforc of the fair credit report act archiv inform on action taken against
compani and individu as well as consent decre ie judici recognit of an agreement
sourc of inform investig
3446 2011 fraud examin manual
between parti to a suit and judgment against compani and individu detail
inform on particular compani or action is avail through a request under the
freedom of inform act
occup safeti and health administr record
the occup safeti and health administr osha is charg with the
enforc of legisl design to protect employe who rais complaint about the
health and safeti of their workplac osha inform includ the name address
countycountri number of employe and sic code of ani busi subject to a health and
safeti inspect purpos and scope of the in spection offic and offic conduct the
inspect hour spent and total number of vi olat and penalti assess as a result of
the inspect a search of osha inform also encompass all parallel state agenc
interst commerc commiss
the interst commerc commiss icc identifi liabil and car insur carrier for
all surfac transport compani engag in interst and foreign commerc
inform kept by the icc includ the identif and address of the insur carrier
the limit of the insur polici the polici number and the statu
us small busi administr
the us small busi administr sba is a feder agenc that provid support to
small busi the sba guarante loan made by privat lender and make direct loan
for busi construct expans or convers for purchas of machineri equip
facil suppli or materi and for work ing capit a loan applic sole owner
partnership corpor or other must complet sba form provid inform about
the busi and it princip owner offic and director
addition the sba arrang contract and guarante loan for qualifi small minor
own busi for some of these busi the sba might be the onli sourc for
financi and other inform about the busi their princip their asset and other
data becaus their stock is not publicli held these busi ar not subject to public
disclosur law
the sba also connect small firm own by social and econom disadvantag
american with contract set asid by other feder agenc for the purpos of increas
opportun for small busi gener
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3447
unit state state depart
the unit state state depart known as the state depart is respons for the
countri intern relat it maintain the intern traffic in arm regul
itar debar list which contain a list of parti bar from particip in the
export of defens articl eg technic data or in the furnish of defens servic
for which a licens or approv is requir under the intern traffic in arm
regul 22 cfr sec 1277
treasuri direct
treasuri direct is a financi servic websit that allow individu to bui and redeem
secur from the depart of the treasuri in electron form it maintain inform
on purchas and redeem us save bond regist bond market secur and
special secur specif the inform includ the seri of bond involv and the
surnam given name middl name or initi and address of each person in whose name
bond were purchas
us citizenship and immigr servic
formerli the immigr and natur servic the us citizenship and immigr
servic usci is a bureau of the depart of homeland secur the usci is
charg with overse law immigr in the unit state and it retain a number of
record includ alien registr record issu after august 27 1940 from juli 1 1920
to august 27 1940 each immigr wa given an immigr identif card list of
passeng and crew on vessel from foreign port passeng manifest and declar
ship date and point of entri natur record name of wit to natur
proceed and acquaint of the individu deport proceed and financi
statement of alien and peopl sponsor an immigr entri
us coast guard
the coast guard is a branch of the arm forc that carri out three basic role maritim
safeti maritim secur and maritim stewardship it maintain name of merchant
marin on us vessel and investig record pertain to them record relat to
maritim drug smuggl record on crimin investig and record on document
us vessel
sourc of inform investig
3448 2011 fraud examin manual
us govern account offic
the govern account offic gao is the audit evalu and investig
agenc of the unit state congress gao internet home page provid access to recent
gao audit product and comptrol gener decis as well as inform on how to
order paper copi of both recent and older gao product in addit gao audit
product from fiscal year 1995 forward and recent decis ar avail in electron form
at the govern print offic websit gao product includ those not avail
on the internet mai also be order by call 202 5126000 or tdd 301 4130006
us postal servic
the postal servic which is respons for provid postal servic in the unit state
maintain valuabl inform includ the name and address of post offic box
holder check with the local post offic to learn the ident of the inspector who can
furnish the inform photocopi of postal monei order and request for copi of
postal monei order ar made through the local us postal inspect servic offic usual
by subpoena
feder procur data system
the feder procur data system fpd collect develop and dissemin feder
contract inform mani feder agenc report their contract and purchas to the
fpd which catalog the inform for govern and public us contract agre
upon as long ago as 1978 ar searchabl the fpd is best sourc for feder procur
inform and it websit wwwfpdsgov is also fairli explanatori and easi to navig
fedworld inform network
establish by the nation technic inform servic fedworld provid access to a
comprehens inventori of inform dissemin by the feder govern
essenti it is a onestop shop spot for feder government inform includ a
govern locat databas us custom rule suprem court decis and a foreign
new alert servic it websit is wwwfedworldgov
nation motor vehicl titl inform system
establish by the anticar theft act of 1992 the nation motor vehicl titl
inform system nmvti is an electron databas us to authent and exchang
kei vehicl histori data such as titl inform and certain theft data the primari
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3449
reason for creat the nmvti wa to address the lack of conform among state vehicl
document law which is on of the kei factor contribut to titl fraud
the new databas effect on januari 1 2010 is design to prevent titl wash which
occur when a vehicl brand ie a perman design indic that the vehicl ha
incur damag through collus flood fire or other incid requir repair is remov
by retitl the vehicl in a state that doesnt carri forward ani brand on the new titl
