2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Commercial Sources of Information


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Commercial Sources of Information 
 
Associations and Lobby Groups 
Associations and lobby groups have information about their member firms. Two of the best 
sources are the Better Business Bureau and a city’s Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.454   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Better Business Bureau 
A number of Better Business Bureaus are located throughout the country. They are 
sponsored by local businesses and offer a variety of services, including background 
information on local businesses and organizations. The bureaus generally keep information 
about criminal rackets and cons and their operators and can provide information about the 
business reputations of local groups. 
 
Chamber of Commerce 
Chambers of Commerce generally have city directories and often keep back issues of the 
directories. They also have information regarding reputations of businesses and operators in 
the area. 
 
Abstract and Title Companies 
In addition to records of individual transactions, abstract and title companies often publish 
and distribute papers to attorneys, real estate brokers, insurance companies, and financial 
institutions. These papers contain information about transfers of property, locations, 
mortgage amounts, and release of mortgages. 
 
Bonding Companies 
Bonding companies provide bonding services, including surety bonds, license bonds, permit 
bonds, bid bonds, and so on. To get bonded, an entity will have to submit an application for 
a bond at a bonding company. The application for a bond contains the applicant’s (person or 
firm) financial statement and data. The information contained in a bond application is 
essentially the same information that is required in loan applications (though in greater 
detail). 
 
Credit Card Records 
Credit card records often contain valuable information concerning the individual debtor, but 
laws and regulations must be checked before obtaining these records. Information on 
expenditures can be obtained from firms such as MasterCard, American Express, Diners 
Club, Discover, and Visa. This information usually requires a subpoena. 
 
Stockbrokers 
Stockbrokers maintain information, which is similar to that which is maintained by financial 
institutions, on many of their clients, especially those who have margin accounts. And they 
maintain records of transactions for all clients. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.455 
Western Union 
Western Union is a non-bank money transfer provider, and it stores records for paid money 
orders. These records contain the original telegram, by purchaser or sender, and bank drafts 
by Western Union. Western Union retains orders for less than $1,000 for two years and 
orders of $1,000 or more for six years. 
 
Carfax 
Carfax is a private service that provides vehicle history information. It determines whether 
there is an odometer discrepancy or evidence of prior salvage or title washing. Carfax’s 
unique database contains more than five billion records. They receive information from 
thousands of sources, including all Departments of Motor Vehicles (DMVs) in the United 
States and Canada, as well as many vehicle inspection stations, auto auctions, fleet 
management and rental agencies, automobile manufacturers, and fire and  
police departments.  
 
International Air Transport Association 
The International Air Transport Association is an international industry trade group of the 
leading airlines, and it has information on all international matters dealing with aviation 
security, including counterterrorism efforts worldwide. It also monitors and attempts to 
prevent fraud against airlines, such as ticket fraud. 
 
International Foundation for Art Research 
The International Foundation for Art Research (IFAR) is a nonprofit organization 
established in 1969 to help prevent the circulation of forged and misattributed works of art. 
IFAR offers an Authentication Service to help resolve controversies concerning the 
authenticity of works of art. IFAR also publishes quarterly journals on authentication 
research, art law, theft and recovery, and an extensive listing of recently reported stolen and 
missing art and antiques. The IFAR’s website is www.ifar.org. 
 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners’ (NAIC) is an organization of 
insurance regulators from the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and the U.S. territories. It 
provides a forum for the development of policy when uniformity is appropriate. A state 
regulator’s primary responsibility is to protect the interests of insurance consumers and the 
association helps regulators fulfill that obligation. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.456   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The NAIC’s website is a particularly effecti ve resource for consumer protection because 
potential investors can visit their site to verify if an insurance promoter is licensed to sell the 
investment. The NAIC’s website can be accessed at www.naic.org. 
 
 



:


commerci sourc of inform
associ and lobbi group
associ and lobbi group have inform about their member firm two of the best
sourc ar the better busi bureau and a citi chamber of commerc
sourc of inform investig
3454 2011 fraud examin manual
better busi bureau
a number of better busi bureau ar locat throughout the countri thei ar
sponsor by local busi and offer a varieti of servic includ background
inform on local busi and organ the bureau gener keep inform
about crimin racket and con and their oper and can provid inform about the
busi reput of local group
chamber of commerc
chamber of commerc gener have citi directori and often keep back issu of the
directori thei also have inform regard reput of busi and oper in
the area
abstract and titl compani
in addit to record of individu transact abstract and titl compani often publish
and distribut paper to attornei real estat broker insur compani and financi
institut these paper contain inform about transfer of properti locat
mortgag amount and releas of mortgag
bond compani
bond compani provid bond servic includ sureti bond licens bond permit
bond bid bond and so on to get bond an entiti will have to submit an applic for
a bond at a bond compani the applic for a bond contain the applic person or
firm financi statement and data the inform contain in a bond applic is
essenti the same inform that is requir in loan applic though in greater
detail
credit card record
credit card record often contain valuabl inform concern the individu debtor but
law and regul must be check befor obtain these record inform on
expenditur can be obtain from firm such as mastercard american express diner
club discov and visa thi inform usual requir a subpoena
stockbrok
stockbrok maintain inform which is similar to that which is maintain by financi
institut on mani of their client especi those who have margin account and thei
maintain record of transact for all client
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3455
western union
western union is a nonbank monei transfer provid and it store record for paid monei
order these record contain the origin telegram by purchas or sender and bank draft
by western union western union retain order for less than 1000 for two year and
order of 1000 or more for six year
carfax
carfax is a privat servic that provid vehicl histori inform it determin whether
there is an odomet discrep or evid of prior salvag or titl wash carfax
uniqu databas contain more than five billion record thei receiv inform from
thousand of sourc includ all depart of motor vehicl dmv in the unit
state and canada as well as mani vehicl inspect station auto auction fleet
manag and rental agenc automobil manufactur and fire and
polic depart
intern air transport associ
the intern air transport associ is an intern industri trade group of the
lead airlin and it ha inform on all intern matter deal with aviat
secur includ counterterror effort worldwid it also monitor and attempt to
prevent fraud against airlin such as ticket fraud
intern foundat for art research
the intern foundat for art research ifar is a nonprofit organ
establish in 1969 to help prevent the circul of forg and misattribut work of art
ifar offer an authent servic to help resolv controversi concern the
authent of work of art ifar also publish quarterli journal on authent
research art law theft and recoveri and an extens list of recent report stolen and
miss art and antiqu the ifar websit is wwwifarorg
nation associ of insur commission
the nation associ of insur commission naic is an organ of
insur regul from the 50 state the district of columbia and the us territori it
provid a forum for the develop of polici when uniform is appropri a state
regul primari respons is to protect the interest of insur consum and the
associ help regul fulfil that oblig
sourc of inform investig
3456 2011 fraud examin manual
the naic websit is a particularli effecti ve resourc for consum protect becaus
potenti investor can visit their site to verifi if an insur promot is licens to sell the
invest the naic websit can be access at wwwnaicorg
