2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Directories


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Directories 
Directories provide data on national, trade, business, and commercial associations. Some of 
the more frequently used directories are discussed below. 
 
D&B Directories 
D&B is a business and financial information services company, and it is the leader in 
business credit reports. D&B provides access to  a variety of resources and is renowned for 
products like America’s Corporate Families and the Million Dollar Database. 
 
America’s Corporate Families  
This three-volume print directory, published by D&B, provides complete detailed 
information on U.S. family members of foreign parent companies and foreign subsidiaries of 
U.S. corporations. It includes data on more than 13,000 U.S. subsidiaries, 1,900 U.S. 
ultimates, and 31,000 foreign subsidiaries.   
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.459 
D&B’s Million Dollar Database 
D&B’s Million Dollar Database provides access to information on approximately 23 million 
businesses in over 200 countries worldwide. Information available includes annual sales, 
corporate officers, locations, phone numbers, type of business, and number of employees. 
 
American Medical Association Directory of Physicians 
Available in four hardbound volumes, this directory, which is published by the American 
Medical Association, lists physicians alphabetica lly and geographically. Each physician listing 
contains information on state and city of practice, year of birth, medical school and year of 
graduation, year of license, residence and office address, specialty, and membership in 
associated medical organizations. The Directory also contains a name index of all doctors in 
the United States. 
 
Best’s Insurance Reports 
Best’s Insurance Reports presents comprehensive statistical reports of the financial position, 
history, and operating results of thousands of property/casualty or life/health insurance 
companies operating in the United States and Canada. The individual report on each 
institution includes a review of its history, management and operations, investments, 
operating results, and other statistical compilations. The Reports are available online, in print, 
or in CD.  
 
City Directories 
City directories usually contain the name, residence, occupation, and sometimes the place of 
employment of a city’s influential people. Such  directories can usually be found at public 
libraries, chambers of commerce, and secondhand bookstores. 
 
Congressional Directory 
The Congressional Directory is the official directory of the U.S. Congress. It presents short 
biographies on each member of the Senate and House, listed by state or district, and 
additional data, such as committee memberships, terms of service, administrative assistants 
and/or secretaries, and room and telephone numbers. It also lists officials of the courts, 
military establishments, and other federal departments and agencies, including Washington, 
D.C., governmental officials, governors of states and territories, foreign diplomats, and 
members of the press, radio, and television galleries. The directory is compiled by the Joint 
Committee on Printing, Washington, D.C., and is available through the Government 
Printing Office. 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.460   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Gale 
Gale, part of Cengage Learning, is an educational publishing company. It is known for its 
online databases and multi-volume reference works. Some of its resources include: Gale Gale 
Directory Library, Gale Directory of Databases, Directories in Print, Gale Directory of Publications and 
Broadcast Media, Encyclopedia of Associations, and Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources.  
 
Gale Directory Library 
The Gale Directory Library provides online access to some of Gale’s most popular 
directories on companies, publishers, associations, and so on. It includes online access to  
Gale Directory of Databases, Gale Directories in Print, Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast 
Media, Encyclopedia of Associations, Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources.  
 
With Gale Directory Library, users can use state-of-the-art functionality to perform a range 
of data sorting, filtering, and exporting. Users can use the library to find contacts, 
companies, individuals, or publications by searching with a name or keyword; generate lists 
and analyze trends by exporting data to Word or Excel; and search across a growing number 
of directory titles. Each directory can be searched individually by its own unique data fields, 
or the entire directory collection can be searched. 
 
Gale Directory of Databases 
This two-volume directory provides detailed descriptions of nearly 20,000 publicly available 
databases, database products, online services, and database vendors and distributors 
worldwide in a variety of formats. Entries include producer name and contact information, 
description, cost, and more.  
 
Detailed listings provide complete information on databases, producers, and vendors. 
Database listings include content and subject coverage, type, language, time span, update 
frequency, geographic coverage, producer contact information, and vendor availability. 
Producer and vendor entries feature full contact information, including address, phone, fax, 
website addresses, e-mail addresses, former names, branch office locations, and a list of 
available databases and products. For online vendors (or hosts), entries cover conditions of 
access, networks used, and gateway access. For portable vendors, entries include a list of 
distributors. The Directory of Databases is also available on the Gale Directory Library. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.461 
Directories in Print 
This publication, published by Gale, thoroughly describes and indexes about 16,000 
directories of all kinds, including business and industrial directories, professional and 
scientific rosters, foreign directories, and other lists and guides. Directories in Print  covers a 
wide range of subjects, including general business; manufacturing industries and commercial 
services; banking, insurance, and financial services; advertising, marketing, and public 
relations; health care services; law, military,  and government; and associations, philanthropy, 
ethnic groups, and religion. Directories in Print is available online on Gale Directory Library.  
 
Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast Media  
This three-volume directory contains information on 57,000 radio and television stations, 
cable companies, and print-media publishers. Entries provide addresses, phone and fax 
numbers, e-mail addresses, website addresses, key personnel, owner information, hours of 
operation, and much more. Providing access to information on U.S., Canadian, and 
international media outlets, Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast Media  also includes ad 
rates, circulation statistics, local programming information, and other essential data. The 
Directory of Publications and Broadcast Media  is available online on the Gale Directory Library. 
 
Encyclopedia of Associations 
Gale publishes a series of Encyclopedia of Associations in regional, national, and 
international editions. It publishes the Encyclopedia of Associations: National Organizations of the 
U.S., which lists each chartered public and private association in the United States and 
provides valuable information about each association’s officers and purpose. In addition, 
publishes the Encyclopedia of Associations:  International Organizations  and the Ency clopedia of 
Associations: Regional, State, and Local. These Encyclopedias can be found online on Gale 
Directory Library. 
 
Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources 
Published by Gale, this comprehensive directory is a bibliographic guide to more than 
35,000 live, print, and electronic sources of information covering more than 1,100 subjects 
of particular interest to business professionals. Citations cover abstracts and indexes, 
almanacs and yearbooks, bibliographies, CD-ROM and online databases, directories, 
encyclopedias and dictionaries, periodicals and newspapers, research centers and institutes, 
statistic sources, trade and professional societies, and many other sources of business 
information. The Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources  is available online on Gale 
Directory Library. 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.462   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SEC Filings 
EDGAR 
EDGAR (Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval) is a system that collects 
documents submitted by companies and others who are required by law to file with the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). EDGAR performs automated collection, 
validation, indexing, acceptance, and forwarding of SEC filings. Its primary purpose is to 
increase the efficiency and fairness of the securities market to benefit investors, 
corporations, and the economy by accelerating the receipt, acceptance, dissemination, and 
analysis of time-sensitive corporate information filed with the SEC.  
 
Not all documents that public companies file with the SEC, however, will be available on 
EDGAR. Even so, several important documents, such as Form 10-K or 10-KSB, are 
required to be filed on the EDGAR system. For more information, visit 
www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml. 
 
Interactive Data Electronic Applications  
In August 2008, the SEC unveiled the successor to the agency’s EDGAR database, which 
will give investors far faster and easier access to key financial information about public 
companies and mutual funds. The new system is called IDEA, short for Interactive Data 
Electronic Applications. Based on a completely new architecture being built from the 
ground up, it will at first supplement and then eventually replace the EDGAR system.  
 
Currently, most SEC filings are available only in government-prescribed forms through 
EDGAR. Investors looking for information must sift through one form at a time, and then 
re-keyboard the information — a painstaking task. With IDEA, investors will be able to 
instantly collate information from thousands of companies and forms, and create reports 
and analysis on the fly, in any way they choose.  
 
In 2009, however, CaseWare International, the developer of IDEA — Data Analysis 
Software, filed suit against the SEC over the use of the IDEA name. That same year, the 
SEC agreed to discontinue its use of the mark IDEA. At this point, it is not clear what the 
SEC will call its new system.  
 
e-Government and Web Directory: U.S. Federal Government Online 
The e-Government and Web Directory is a guidebook for anyone looking for official U.S. 
governmental resources on the Internet. The directory contains more than 2,000 website 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.463 
records that provide descriptions and URLs for each site. U.S. government organization 
charts are supplemented with URLs for the 16  cabinet-level departments and agencies, the 
House of Representatives and the Senate, and the federal judicial branch. It also provides 
great detail on the House and Senate in two appendices. Appendix A provides a roster of 
congressional members with their websites, and Appendix B provides a listing of House and 
Senate committees with committee URLs and the names of chairpersons and ranking 
minority members. This print publication can be purchased at www.bernan.com. 
 
Factiva 
Factiva, from Dow Jones, is a business information and research tool. It is tailored for 
business and financial news searches, maintaining a catalog of more than 28,000 of the 
world’s leading news and business sources from  157 countries, 350 geographic regions, and 
in 23 languages. Factiva allows users to pay for only the articles downloaded and does not 
require an annual subscription. 
 
Carroll Publishing  
Carroll Publishing is a government information resource. It provides access to government 
information for all levels of government, and it offers a line of information products, 
including the Federal Directory and the Federal Organization Charts.  
 
Federal Directory 
Carroll Publishing’s Federal Directory combines all three branches of the government into 
one volume. It contains nearly 38,000 names, titles, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses 
of senior- and mid-level governmental officials in the executive office of the president, all 15 
cabinet-level federal departments, independent agencies, U.S. Congress, and the federal court 
system. This directory features a keyword index to help users quickly find program and 
regulatory offices, and it is updated four times a year. 
 
Federal Organization Charts 
This loose-leaf chart produced by Carroll Publishing provides names, addresses, and 
telephone numbers of staff members in the White House, executive departments, 
independent agencies, quasi-governmental organizations, and congressional support offices. 
It has name and key word indexes and is updated monthly. Due to the high cost of 
maintaining this directory, it generally available at selected federal governmental libraries. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.464   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Foreign Representatives in the U.S. Yellow Book 
This directory has names and titles of more than 19,000 international business and 
governmental leaders and sections on corporations, financial institutions, foreign nations, 
intergovernmental organizations, foreign press, and law firms. It includes officials’ titles, 
addresses, and telephone and fax numbers. This yellow book is broken down into  
six sections: 
• Corporations: Lists more than 1,000 leading foreign-based corporations with more than 
2,000 U.S. offices and subsidiaries. 
• Financial institutions: Lists more than 230 leading foreign-based financial institutions 
and more than 600 U.S. representative offices. 
• Foreign nations: Lists embassies and consulates in 191 countries with permanent 
missions to the United Nations. 
• Intergovernmental organizations: Lists the U.S. offices in entities such as the United 
Nations, European Union, and the World Bank Group. 
• Foreign press: Lists more than 210 international media outlets with bureaus in the U.S. 
• Law firms: Lists foreign law firms with a U.S. presence. 
 
Index to Legal Periodicals 
Published by H. W. Wilson, the Index to Legal Periodicals offers international coverage and 
access to scholarly articles, symposia, jurisdictional surveys, court decisions, legislation, 
books, book reviews, and more. This source indexes more than 1,025 legal journals, law 
reviews, yearbooks, institutes, statutes, bar association publications, university publications, 
and governmental publications, with the full text of nearly 325 select periodicals available. 
 
Inmate Locator 
Inmate Locator is a Federal Bureau of Prisons on line database. It contains information on all 
federal prisoners incarcerated since 1982. The information includes physical description, 
inmate profile, inmate location or release location, numerical identifiers, personal history, 
security designation, past and present institution assignments, custody classification, and 
sentencing information. To locate an inmate, visit the Federal Bureau of Prison’s inmate 
locator at www.bop.gov. 
 
IHS Fairplay  
IHS Fairplay, formerly Lloyd’s Register—Fairplay, supplies a range of comprehensive 
shipping databases, registers, online information, and a tailored research and system-development 
service for customers’ specific needs.  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.465 
Magazines for Libraries 
Published by Bowker, Magazines for Libraries lists almost every magazine (general, technical, 
and scholarly) that a library might wish to stock and describes the formats in which the 
magazines are available. 
 
Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory 
The Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory contains biographical information on most lawyers 
and law firms practicing in the United States and Canada. 
 
Mergent  
Mergent’s publications are similar to D&B’s. Mergent’s reports can provide information 
about firms listed on the New York and American stock exchanges as well as companies 
listed on regional American exchanges. Mergent also provides Mergent Online, which 
provides online access to Mergent’s comprehensive global company database. 
 
Mergent’s Bank and Finance Manual and News Reports 
Mergent’s Bank and Finance Manual and News Reports is a business and financial information 
resource containing information on nearly 2,000 corporations. It covers the field of finance 
represented by banks, insurance companies, investment companies, unit investment trusts, 
and miscellaneous financial enterprises. It also includes information on real estate companies 
and real estate investment trust. Additionally, it provides other relevant facts and figures, 
including information on corporations’ auditors, general counsel, exchange and symbol, 
number of employees, number of shareholders, address, telephone and fax numbers, 
shareholder-relations contact, stock-price ranges, dividends, report of independent auditors, 
transfer agents, stock splits, and annual meeting date.  
 
Mergent’s Bank and Finance News Reports  are published each month in print and each week 
online and contain material that updates Mergent’s Bank and Finance Manual. The reports 
include news items, interim financial statements, personnel changes, new company 
descriptions, merger proposals, details about new debts and stock issues, security offerings, 
announcements of new financing, and call notices.  
 
National Insurance Crime Bureau 
The National Insurance Crime Bureau (NICB) is a leading not-for-profit organization 
dedicated to preventing, detecting, and defeating insurance fraud and vehicle theft through 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.466   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
information analysis, investigations, training, and public awareness. The NICB combats auto 
theft by investigating cases referred to it by insurers and through its online databases.  
 
The NICB publishes the Passenger Vehicle Identification Manual  annually. This manual contains 
the structure and decoding of vehicle identification numbers (VINs) from the last three 
model years for most U.S. and Canadian passenger vehicles, including light-duty trucks  
and motorcycles.  
 
The NICB publishes the Commercial Vehicle and Off-Road Equipment Identification Manual  every 
five years. This manual contains the structure of vehicle identification numbers for 
commercial vehicles and the structure of product identification numbers (PIN) for off-road 
equipment from the last five model years.  
 
These manuals also include: 
• Summary of the Federal Motor Vehicle Theft Prevention Standard, which requires VIN 
markings on major parts of passenger vehicles that are part of high-theft lines 
• General information on VIN structure and decoding of trucks, tractors, and trailers 
along with PIN structure and decoding for off-road equipment 
• Glossary of vehicle-related terminology 
 
VINCheck is another service available from  the National Insurance Crime Bureau. NICB’s 
VINCheck is a service provided to the public to  assist in determining if a vehicle has been 
reported as stolen. NICB’s VINCheck database contains vehicles that have been reported 
stolen by cooperating NICB members, but not recovered. A Vehicle Identification Number 
(VIN) is required to perform a search. This information is made available, free of charge, as 
a public service to help consumers determine whether a specific vehicle has been reported as 
stolen and to assist NICB and law enforcement in locating stolen vehicles. A maximum of 
five VINCheck searches can be conducted within a 24-hour period. 
 
In the 1980s, states and regions experiencing high levels of auto thefts began to form Anti-
 Car Theft (ACT) groups, funded by voluntary grants from coalitions of law enforcement 
groups, state funds, insurers, and consumers, to promote public awareness of vehicle theft 
and lobby for the passage of state legislation aimed at combating thefts. A few states have 
enacted Automobile Theft Prevention Authorities (ATPAs), which are nonprofit 
organizations dedicated to preventing motor vehicle thefts. States that have active ATPAs 
include Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Louisian a, Maryland, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.467 
Texas, and Washington. State ATPAs are mostly funded by a small surcharge on drivers’ 
licenses or registration fees, or on auto insurance policies sold in the state. 
 
National Motor Vehicle Title Information System 
Established by the Anti-Car Theft Act of 1992, the National Motor Vehicle Title 
Information System (NMVTIS) is an electronic database used to authenticate and exchange 
key vehicle history data, such as titling information and certain theft data. The primary 
reason for creating the NMVTIS was to address the lack of conformity among state vehicle 
documentation laws, which is one of the key factors contributing to title fraud.  
 
The new database, which went into full effect on January 1, 2010, is designed in part to 
prevent title washing, which occurs when a vehicle’s brand (i.e., a permanent designation 
indicating that the vehicle has incurred damage through collusion, flood, fire, or other 
incident that requires repair) is removed by re-titling the vehicle in another state that does 
not carry forward any brands on the new title. 
 
The National Directory of Law Enforcement Administrators 
This annually updated database contains information on more than 40,000 listings, which 
include the names, addresses, telephone numbers, and fax numbers of highway patrol 
offices; prosecuting attorneys; municipal, county,  campus, state correctional, federal, military, 
airport, and harbor law enforcement agencies. 
 
National Trade and Professional Associations Directory 
The National Trade and Professional Associations lists more than 7,800 active national trade 
associations, professional associations, technical organizations, and labor unions, and the 
20,363 executives who run them. Each listing in this directory contains an address, telephone 
and fax number, e-mail address, name/title of top executives, purpose of the organization, 
history, membership size and composition, annual budget, staff size, publications, and 
annual meetings. It also provides a listing of firms that provide administration and 
management services to associations on a contract basis, including a list of their full-time 
client associations. Other features include cont act information, serial publications, upcoming 
convention schedule, membership and staff size, budget figures, and background 
information. The 2010 edition of the National Trade and Professional Associations directory 
can be purchased online through Columbia Books and Information Services, and it is 
available online at www.AssociationExecs.com. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.468   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The New York Times Article Archive 
The New York Times Article Archive contains the complete back file of the New York Times. 
It contains more than 13-million articles in all, and it can be searched at 
www.NYTimes.com. The archive is divided in to two sections: 1851 to 1980 and 1981 to 
present.  
 
PubMed 
PubMed is a database service that provides free access to more than 20 million citations 
from MEDLINE and other life science journals for biomedical articles dating back to the 
1950s. PubMed includes links to full-te xt articles and other related resources. 
 
Reader’s Guide to Periodical Literature 
The Reader’s Guide  is a reference guide to articles published in periodicals and scholarly 
journals. The guide contains a full dictionary catalog of all articles by author, subject, and 
title, where possible. The entries refer to the volume, number of the periodical, starting and 
inclusive pages of the article, date of publication, and graphic material in the article, such as 
portraits. There is an electronic retrospective version of the guide available for 1890 to 1982.  
 
Standard & Poor’s NetAdvantage  
NetAdvantage is a subscription-based service provided by Standard & Poor’s. It is a 
comprehensive source of business and investment information, offering online access to 
Standard & Poor’s independent research, da ta, and commentary on stocks, bonds, funds, 
and industries. This service also includes export tools to enable researches to download data 
into spreadsheet programs for further analysis. Some of NetAdvantage’s premium 
publications are discussed below. 
 
Corporation Records  
This directory has information on more than 10,000 public companies. Each description 
includes company background, stock and bond descriptions, balance sheet and earnings 
information, officers and directors, capital expenditures, subsidiaries, and more. 
 
Company Profile 
NetAdvantage also publishes a comprehensive company profile for more than 10,500 
publicly traded companies. Each profile includes  a business description, an interactive 
charting tool, statistics, analyst ratings, valuation and financial information, as well as the 
latest stock price quote, company news, and information on competitors.  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.469 
Register of Corporations, Directors, and Executives 
The Register of Corporations, Directors, and Executives gives short summaries about 
corporate executives and directors, including their titles, the name of the company they work 
for, their academic credentials, membership in fraternal organizations, and available business 
and residential contact information. 
 
Register of Public Companies 
This Register provides brief descriptions of publicly traded companies, including stock 
symbol, total annual sales, number of employees, officer names, and North American 
Industry Classification System (NAICS) assignments. 
 
Register of Private Companies 
The Register of Private Companies provides hard to find information on approximately 
85,000 private companies, including (when available) their address, telephone number, 
officers and directors, total annual sales, number of employees, line of business, primary and 
secondary NAICS classifications, principal bank, law firm, accounting firm, and more. 
 
Security Dealers of North America 
The Security Dealers of North America is a listing of North American securities dealers, 
providing a brief description of each dealer’s business; a listing of the states in which it is 
registered to do business; the location of its ma in office; the names of its officers, clearing 
firm, associations, and memberships; and the number of employees and registered 
representatives it employs. 
 
The Global Banking Resource 
The Global Banking Resource (TGBR) is a comprehensive database of financial institutions, 
and it provides data on financial institutions’ contacts, correspondents, subsidiaries, affiliates, 
financial information, payment information, and much more. 
 
Yellow Book Series 
Associations Yellow Book 
The Associations Yellow Book, which is published by Leadership Directories, provides access to 
information on major trade and professional associations. Semiannual editions provide 
current information on chief staff executive turnovers, changes in staff and governing 
boards, mergers, and name changes. It features (1) more than 32,000 officers, executives, and 
staff, with the titles, affiliations, education, and telephone and fax numbers of more than 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.470   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
1,000 associations with budgets exceeding $2 million; (2) the addresses, e-mail addresses, 
Internet address, telephone numbers, and fax numbers of the associations’ headquarters and 
branches; (3) the associations’ board members and outside affiliations; (4) the associations’ 
committees and chairpeople, Washington representatives, political action committees, and 
foundations; (5) the associations’ publications, including editors; and (6) the associations’ 
annual budget, tax status, number of employees, and number of members. 
 
Corporate Yellow Book 
The Corporate Yellow Book is a directory of the people who manage, direct, and shape the 
largest public and privately held companies in the United States. Published quarterly, it 
enables subscribers to access corporate leaders, including board members who are taking 
increased responsibility for corporate decision-making and administrative-services 
professionals. The directory features (1) the names and titles of more than 26,000 executives, 
including more than 7,000 corporate board members and their outside affiliations; (2) the 
direct-dial telephone numbers of executives and more than 10,000 e-mail addresses for 
officers, management, and administrative-services professionals; (3) the addresses, telephone 
and fax numbers, and Internet addresses of each entity’s corporate headquarters, foreign 
subsidiaries, and divisions; (5) the contacts for each entity’s administrative services, such as 
benefits, corporate contributions, foundations, governmental affairs, information systems, 
libraries and information centers, purchasing, real estate and facilities, recruitment, and 
shareholder relations; and (6) four indexes:  organization, industry, geographical, and 
individual’s name. 
 
Judicial Yellow Book 
The Judicial Yellow Book provides detailed biographical information for state and federal 
judges and gives information on each judge’s staff, including law clerks. It features 
information on more than 2,200 federal judges and more than 1,300 state judges, providing 
depth and detail on each judge’s chambers. 
 
Law Firms Yellow Book 
The Law Firms Yellow Book has information on more than 700 of the largest law firms in the 
United States. It provides up-to-date information on changes in firm management and 
structure. It is also the only personnel directory that clearly identifies the partners who make 
a firm’s business decisions and supervise its practice areas, and the administration that 
manage its operations. It focuses on the administrators and attorneys in these firms, and it is 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.471 
indexed by practice area, law schools, geography, name, and organization (including affiliates 
and subsidiaries). It is published semi-annually. 
 
Municipal Yellow Book 
The Municipal Yellow Book  provides information on city and county governments and local 
authorities in the United States. It contains data on more than 38,000 elected and 
administrative officials, including their names, addresses, and telephone and fax numbers. It 
also contains sections on cities and counties, which feature complex hierarchies of municipal 
officials. This directory also has listings for local departments, agencies, subdivisions, and 
branches. 
 
News Media Yellow Book 
The News Media Yellow Book is a directory containing information on the leading news media 
organizations in the United States. It contains listings of more than 38,000 reporters, writers, 
editors, and producers. It features 10 sections — on newspapers, news services, networks, 
television stations, radio stations, programs, periodicals, non-U.S. media, publishers, and 
biographical index. This directory is fully updated on a quarterly basis. 
 
State Yellow Book 
The State Yellow Book provides information on members of the executive and legislative 
branches of the 50 state governments, as well as American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, and 
the Virgin Islands. It has a subject and a personnel index, and it includes information on 
government officials, departments, agencies, and legislative committees. Informational 
profiles of all states and territories are also provided. This directory is fully updated on a 
quarterly basis. 
 
Federal Regional Yellow Book 
The Federal Regional Yellow Book is released semi-annually, and it describes federal regional 
offices located outside Washington, D.C. It contains information on more than 40,000 
regional directors and administrative staff members at federal departments and agencies. It 
also has information on administrators and professional staff at federal laboratories, research 
centers, military installations, and service academies. 
 
Financial Yellow Book 
The Financial Yellow Book is a semi-annual directory that lists the names and titles of more 
than 26,000 executives, including more than 4,000 board members, at more than 560 leading 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.472   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
financial institutions. The directory also has complete contact information, including address, 
telephone and fax numbers, and e-mail for executives and outside board members. The 
directory has four indexes — on organization, geographical location, individual name, and 
industry.  
 
Government Affairs Yellow Book 
The Government Affairs Yellow Book contains information on corporations; financial 
institutions; trade and professional associations; labor unions; interest groups including 
coalitions, public interest groups, governmental agencies; and governmental affairs 
organizations. It contains a section on federal, state, and municipal government that includes 
the governmental-affairs staff for federal agencies; state governments; and leading cities, 
counties, and authorities. Its “Government Affairs Representatives” section lists more than 
1,200 lobbying firms, law firms, and public relations firms. It details the issues that lobbyists 
contest, as well as the coalitions they form to advance their legislative agenda. Four indexes 
are included—on subject, geographical location, personnel, and master. 
 
 



:


directori
directori provid data on nation trade busi and commerci associ some of
the more frequent us directori ar discuss below
db directori
db is a busi and financi inform servic compani and it is the leader in
busi credit report db provid access to a varieti of resourc and is renown for
product like america corpor famili and the million dollar databas
america corpor famili
thi threevolum print directori publish by db provid complet detail
inform on us famili member of foreign parent compani and foreign subsidiari of
us corpor it includ data on more than 13000 us subsidiari 1900 us
ultim and 31000 foreign subsidiari
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3459
db million dollar databas
db million dollar databas provid access to inform on approxim 23 million
busi in over 200 countri worldwid inform avail includ annual sale
corpor offic locat phone number type of busi and number of employe
american medic associ directori of physician
avail in four hardbound volum thi directori which is publish by the american
medic associ list physician alphabetica lly and geograph each physician list
contain inform on state and citi of practic year of birth medic school and year of
graduat year of licens resid and offic address specialti and membership in
associ medic organ the directori also contain a name index of all doctor in
the unit state
best insur report
best insur report present comprehens statist report of the financi posit
histori and oper result of thousand of propertycasualti or lifehealth insur
compani oper in the unit state and canada the individu report on each
institut includ a review of it histori manag and oper invest
oper result and other statist compil the report ar avail onlin in print
or in cd
citi directori
citi directori usual contain the name resid occup and sometim the place of
employ of a citi influenti peopl such directori can usual be found at public
librari chamber of commerc and secondhand bookstor
congression directori
the congression directori is the offici directori of the us congress it present short
biographi on each member of the senat and hous list by state or district and
addit data such as committe membership term of servic administr assist
andor secretari and room and telephon number it also list offici of the court
militari establish and other feder depart and agenc includ washington
dc government offici governor of state and territori foreign diplomat and
member of the press radio and televis galleri the directori is compil by the joint
committe on print washington dc and is avail through the govern
print offic
sourc of inform investig
3460 2011 fraud examin manual
gale
gale part of cengag learn is an educ publish compani it is known for it
onlin databas and multivolum refer work some of it resourc includ gale gale
directori librari gale directori of databas directori in print gale directori of public and
broadcast media encyclopedia of associ and encyclopedia of busi inform sourc
gale directori librari
the gale directori librari provid onlin access to some of gale most popular
directori on compani publish associ and so on it includ onlin access to
gale directori of databas gale directori in print gale directori of public and broadcast
media encyclopedia of associ encyclopedia of busi inform sourc
with gale directori librari user can us stateoftheart function to perform a rang
of data sort filter and export user can us the librari to find contact
compani individu or public by search with a name or keyword gener list
and analyz trend by export data to word or excel and search across a grow number
of directori titl each directori can be search individu by it own uniqu data field
or the entir directori collect can be search
gale directori of databas
thi twovolum directori provid detail descript of nearli 20000 publicli avail
databas databas product onlin servic and databas vendor and distributor
worldwid in a varieti of format entri includ produc name and contact inform
descript cost and more
detail list provid complet inform on databas produc and vendor
databas list includ content and subject coverag type languag time span updat
frequenc geograph coverag produc contact inform and vendor avail
produc and vendor entri featur full contact inform includ address phone fax
websit address email address former name branch offic locat and a list of
avail databas and product for onlin vendor or host entri cover condit of
access network us and gatewai access for portabl vendor entri includ a list of
distributor the directori of databas is also avail on the gale directori librari
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3461
directori in print
thi public publish by gale thoroughli describ and index about 16000
directori of all kind includ busi and industri directori profession and
scientif roster foreign directori and other list and guid directori in print cover a
wide rang of subject includ gener busi manufactur industri and commerci
servic bank insur and financi servic advertis market and public
relat health care servic law militari and govern and associ philanthropi
ethnic group and religion directori in print is avail onlin on gale directori librari
gale directori of public and broadcast media
thi threevolum directori contain inform on 57000 radio and televis station
cabl compani and printmedia publish entri provid address phone and fax
number email address websit address kei personnel owner inform hour of
oper and much more provid access to inform on us canadian and
intern media outlet gale directori of public and broadcast media also includ ad
rate circul statist local program inform and other essenti data the
directori of public and broadcast media is avail onlin on the gale directori librari
encyclopedia of associ
gale publish a seri of encyclopedia of associ in region nation and
intern edit it publish the encyclopedia of associ nation organ of the
us which list each charter public and privat associ in the unit state and
provid valuabl inform about each associ offic and purpos in addit
publish the encyclopedia of associ intern organ and the enci clopedia of
associ region state and local these encyclopedia can be found onlin on gale
directori librari
encyclopedia of busi inform sourc
publish by gale thi comprehens directori is a bibliograph guid to more than
35000 live print and electron sourc of inform cover more than 1100 subject
of particular interest to busi profession citat cover abstract and index
almanac and yearbook bibliographi cdrom and onlin databas directori
encyclopedia and dictionari period and newspap research center and institut
statist sourc trade and profession societi and mani other sourc of busi
inform the encyclopedia of busi inform sourc is avail onlin on gale
directori librari
sourc of inform investig
3462 2011 fraud examin manual
sec file
edgar
edgar electron data gather analysi and retriev is a system that collect
document submit by compani and other who ar requir by law to file with the
secur and exchang commiss sec edgar perform autom collect
valid index accept and forward of sec file it primari purpos is to
increas the effici and fair of the secur market to benefit investor
corpor and the economi by acceler the receipt accept dissemin and
analysi of timesensit corpor inform file with the sec
not all document that public compani file with the sec howev will be avail on
edgar even so sever import document such as form 10k or 10ksb ar
requir to be file on the edgar system for more inform visit
wwwsecgovedgarshtml
interact data electron applic
in august 2008 the sec unveil the successor to the agenc edgar databas which
will give investor far faster and easier access to kei financi inform about public
compani and mutual fund the new system is call idea short for interact data
electron applic base on a complet new architectur be built from the
ground up it will at first supplement and then eventu replac the edgar system
current most sec file ar avail onli in governmentprescrib form through
edgar investor look for inform must sift through on form at a time and then
rekeyboard the inform a painstak task with idea investor will be abl to
instantli collat inform from thousand of compani and form and creat report
and analysi on the fly in ani wai thei choos
in 2009 howev casewar intern the develop of idea data analysi
softwar file suit against the sec over the us of the idea name that same year the
sec agre to discontinu it us of the mark idea at thi point it is not clear what the
sec will call it new system
egovern and web directori us feder govern onlin
the egovern and web directori is a guidebook for anyon look for offici us
government resourc on the internet the directori contain more than 2000 websit
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3463
record that provid descript and url for each site us govern organ
chart ar supplement with url for the 16 cabinetlevel depart and agenc the
hous of repres and the senat and the feder judici branch it also provid
great detail on the hous and senat in two appendic appendix a provid a roster of
congression member with their websit and appendix b provid a list of hous and
senat committe with committe url and the name of chairperson and rank
minor member thi print public can be purchas at wwwbernancom
factiva
factiva from dow jone is a busi inform and research tool it is tailor for
busi and financi new search maintain a catalog of more than 28000 of the
world lead new and busi sourc from 157 countri 350 geograph region and
in 23 languag factiva allow user to pai for onli the articl download and doe not
requir an annual subscript
carrol publish
carrol publish is a govern inform resourc it provid access to govern
inform for all level of govern and it offer a line of inform product
includ the feder directori and the feder organ chart
feder directori
carrol publish feder directori combin all three branch of the govern into
on volum it contain nearli 38000 name titl telephon number and email address
of senior and midlevel government offici in the execut offic of the presid all 15
cabinetlevel feder depart independ agenc us congress and the feder court
system thi directori featur a keyword index to help user quickli find program and
regulatori offic and it is updat four time a year
feder organ chart
thi looseleaf chart produc by carrol publish provid name address and
telephon number of staff member in the white hous execut depart
independ agenc quasigovernment organ and congression support offic
it ha name and kei word index and is updat monthli due to the high cost of
maintain thi directori it gener avail at select feder government librari
sourc of inform investig
3464 2011 fraud examin manual
foreign repres in the us yellow book
thi directori ha name and titl of more than 19000 intern busi and
government leader and section on corpor financi institut foreign nation
intergovernment organ foreign press and law firm it includ offici titl
address and telephon and fax number thi yellow book is broken down into
six section
corpor list more than 1000 lead foreignbas corpor with more than
2000 us offic and subsidiari
financi institut list more than 230 lead foreignbas financi institut
and more than 600 us repres offic
foreign nation list embassi and consul in 191 countri with perman
mission to the unit nation
intergovernment organ list the us offic in entiti such as the unit
nation european union and the world bank group
foreign press list more than 210 intern media outlet with bureau in the us
law firm list foreign law firm with a us presenc
index to legal period
publish by h w wilson the index to legal period offer intern coverag and
access to scholarli articl symposia jurisdict survei court decis legisl
book book review and more thi sourc index more than 1025 legal journal law
review yearbook institut statut bar associ public univers public
and government public with the full text of nearli 325 select period avail
inmat locat
inmat locat is a feder bureau of prison on line databas it contain inform on all
feder prison incarcer sinc 1982 the inform includ physic descript
inmat profil inmat locat or releas locat numer identifi person histori
secur design past and present institut assign custodi classif and
sentenc inform to locat an inmat visit the feder bureau of prison inmat
locat at wwwbopgov
ih fairplai
ih fairplai formerli lloyd registerfairplai suppli a rang of comprehens
ship databas regist onlin inform and a tailor research and systemdevelop
servic for custom specif need
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3465
magazin for librari
publish by bowker magazin for librari list almost everi magazin gener technic
and scholarli that a librari might wish to stock and describ the format in which the
magazin ar avail
martindalehubbel law directori
the martindalehubbel law directori contain biograph inform on most lawyer
and law firm practic in the unit state and canada
mergent
mergent public ar similar to db mergent report can provid inform
about firm list on the new york and american stock exchang as well as compani
list on region american exchang mergent also provid mergent onlin which
provid onlin access to mergent comprehens global compani databas
mergent bank and financ manual and new report
mergent bank and financ manual and new report is a busi and financi inform
resourc contain inform on nearli 2000 corpor it cover the field of financ
repres by bank insur compani invest compani unit invest trust
and miscellan financi enterpris it also includ inform on real estat compani
and real estat invest trust addition it provid other relev fact and figur
includ inform on corpor auditor gener counsel exchang and symbol
number of employe number of sharehold address telephon and fax number
shareholderrel contact stockpric rang dividend report of independ auditor
transfer agent stock split and annual meet date
mergent bank and financ new report ar publish each month in print and each week
onlin and contain materi that updat mergent bank and financ manual the report
includ new item interim financi statement personnel chang new compani
descript merger propos detail about new debt and stock issu secur offer
announc of new financ and call notic
nation insur crime bureau
the nation insur crime bureau nicb is a lead notforprofit organ
dedic to prevent detect and defeat insur fraud and vehicl theft through
sourc of inform investig
3466 2011 fraud examin manual
inform analysi investig train and public awar the nicb combat auto
theft by investig case refer to it by insur and through it onlin databas
the nicb publish the passeng vehicl identif manual annual thi manual contain
the structur and decod of vehicl identif number vin from the last three
model year for most us and canadian passeng vehicl includ lightduti truck
and motorcycl
the nicb publish the commerci vehicl and offroad equip identif manual everi
five year thi manual contain the structur of vehicl identif number for
commerci vehicl and the structur of product identif number pin for offroad
equip from the last five model year
these manual also includ
summari of the feder motor vehicl theft prevent standard which requir vin
mark on major part of passeng vehicl that ar part of hightheft line
gener inform on vin structur and decod of truck tractor and trailer
along with pin structur and decod for offroad equip
glossari of vehiclerel terminolog
vincheck is anoth servic avail from the nation insur crime bureau nicb
vincheck is a servic provid to the public to assist in determin if a vehicl ha been
report as stolen nicb vincheck databas contain vehicl that have been report
stolen by cooper nicb member but not recov a vehicl identif number
vin is requir to perform a search thi inform is made avail free of charg as
a public servic to help consum determin whether a specif vehicl ha been report as
stolen and to assist nicb and law enforc in locat stolen vehicl a maximum of
five vincheck search can be conduct within a 24hour period
in the 1980 state and region experienc high level of auto theft began to form anti
car theft act group fund by voluntari grant from coalit of law enforc
group state fund insur and consum to promot public awar of vehicl theft
and lobbi for the passag of state legisl aim at combat theft a few state have
enact automobil theft prevent author atpa which ar nonprofit
organ dedic to prevent motor vehicl theft state that have activ atpa
includ arizona colorado florida louisian a maryland michigan ohio pennsylvania
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3467
texa and washington state atpa ar mostli fund by a small surcharg on driver
licens or registr fee or on auto insur polici sold in the state
nation motor vehicl titl inform system
establish by the anticar theft act of 1992 the nation motor vehicl titl
inform system nmvti is an electron databas us to authent and exchang
kei vehicl histori data such as titl inform and certain theft data the primari
reason for creat the nmvti wa to address the lack of conform among state vehicl
document law which is on of the kei factor contribut to titl fraud
the new databas which went into full effect on januari 1 2010 is design in part to
prevent titl wash which occur when a vehicl brand ie a perman design
indic that the vehicl ha incur damag through collus flood fire or other
incid that requir repair is remov by retitl the vehicl in anoth state that doe
not carri forward ani brand on the new titl
the nation directori of law enforc administr
thi annual updat databas contain inform on more than 40000 list which
includ the name address telephon number and fax number of highwai patrol
offic prosecut attornei municip counti campu state correct feder militari
airport and harbor law enforc agenc
nation trade and profession associ directori
the nation trade and profession associ list more than 7800 activ nation trade
associ profession associ technic organ and labor union and the
20363 execut who run them each list in thi directori contain an address telephon
and fax number email address nametitl of top execut purpos of the organ
histori membership size and composit annual budget staff size public and
annual meet it also provid a list of firm that provid administr and
manag servic to associ on a contract basi includ a list of their fulltim
client associ other featur includ cont act inform serial public upcom
convent schedul membership and staff size budget figur and background
inform the 2010 edit of the nation trade and profession associ directori
can be purchas onlin through columbia book and inform servic and it is
avail onlin at wwwassociationexecscom
sourc of inform investig
3468 2011 fraud examin manual
the new york time articl archiv
the new york time articl archiv contain the complet back file of the new york time
it contain more than 13million articl in all and it can be search at
wwwnytimescom the archiv is divid in to two section 1851 to 1980 and 1981 to
present
pubm
pubm is a databas servic that provid free access to more than 20 million citat
from medlin and other life scienc journal for biomed articl date back to the
1950 pubm includ link to fullt xt articl and other relat resourc
reader guid to period literatur
the reader guid is a refer guid to articl publish in period and scholarli
journal the guid contain a full dictionari catalog of all articl by author subject and
titl where possibl the entri refer to the volum number of the period start and
inclus page of the articl date of public and graphic materi in the articl such as
portrait there is an electron retrospect version of the guid avail for 1890 to 1982
standard poor netadvantag
netadvantag is a subscriptionbas servic provid by standard poor it is a
comprehens sourc of busi and invest inform offer onlin access to
standard poor independ research da ta and commentari on stock bond fund
and industri thi servic also includ export tool to enabl research to download data
into spreadsheet program for further analysi some of netadvantag premium
public ar discuss below
corpor record
thi directori ha inform on more than 10000 public compani each descript
includ compani background stock and bond descript balanc sheet and earn
inform offic and director capit expenditur subsidiari and more
compani profil
netadvantag also publish a comprehens compani profil for more than 10500
publicli trade compani each profil includ a busi descript an interact
chart tool statist analyst rate valuat and financi inform as well as the
latest stock price quot compani new and inform on competitor
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3469
regist of corpor director and execut
the regist of corpor director and execut give short summari about
corpor execut and director includ their titl the name of the compani thei work
for their academ credenti membership in fratern organ and avail busi
and residenti contact inform
regist of public compani
thi regist provid brief descript of publicli trade compani includ stock
symbol total annual sale number of employe offic name and north american
industri classif system naic assign
regist of privat compani
the regist of privat compani provid hard to find inform on approxim
85000 privat compani includ when avail their address telephon number
offic and director total annual sale number of employe line of busi primari and
secondari naic classif princip bank law firm account firm and more
secur dealer of north america
the secur dealer of north america is a list of north american secur dealer
provid a brief descript of each dealer busi a list of the state in which it is
regist to do busi the locat of it ma in offic the name of it offic clear
firm associ and membership and the number of employe and regist
repres it emploi
the global bank resourc
the global bank resourc tgbr is a comprehens databas of financi institut
and it provid data on financi institut contact correspond subsidiari affili
financi inform payment inform and much more
yellow book seri
associ yellow book
the associ yellow book which is publish by leadership directori provid access to
inform on major trade and profession associ semiannu edit provid
current inform on chief staff execut turnov chang in staff and govern
board merger and name chang it featur 1 more than 32000 offic execut and
staff with the titl affili educ and telephon and fax number of more than
sourc of inform investig
3470 2011 fraud examin manual
1000 associ with budget exceed 2 million 2 the address email address
internet address telephon number and fax number of the associ headquart and
branch 3 the associ board member and outsid affili 4 the associ
committe and chairpeopl washington repres polit action committe and
foundat 5 the associ public includ editor and 6 the associ
annual budget tax statu number of employe and number of member
corpor yellow book
the corpor yellow book is a directori of the peopl who manag direct and shape the
largest public and privat held compani in the unit state publish quarterli it
enabl subscrib to access corpor leader includ board member who ar take
increas respons for corpor decisionmak and administrativeservic
profession the directori featur 1 the name and titl of more than 26000 execut
includ more than 7000 corpor board member and their outsid affili 2 the
directdi telephon number of execut and more than 10000 email address for
offic manag and administrativeservic profession 3 the address telephon
and fax number and internet address of each entiti corpor headquart foreign
subsidiari and divis 5 the contact for each entiti administr servic such as
benefit corpor contribut foundat government affair inform system
librari and inform center purchas real estat and facil recruit and
sharehold relat and 6 four index organ industri geograph and
individu name
judici yellow book
the judici yellow book provid detail biograph inform for state and feder
judg and give inform on each judg staff includ law clerk it featur
inform on more than 2200 feder judg and more than 1300 state judg provid
depth and detail on each judg chamber
law firm yellow book
the law firm yellow book ha inform on more than 700 of the largest law firm in the
unit state it provid uptod inform on chang in firm manag and
structur it is also the onli personnel directori that clearli identifi the partner who make
a firm busi decis and supervis it practic area and the administr that
manag it oper it focus on the administr and attornei in these firm and it is
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3471
index by practic area law school geographi name and organ includ affili
and subsidiari it is publish semiannu
municip yellow book
the municip yellow book provid inform on citi and counti govern and local
author in the unit state it contain data on more than 38000 elect and
administr offici includ their name address and telephon and fax number it
also contain section on citi and counti which featur complex hierarchi of municip
offici thi directori also ha list for local depart agenc subdivis and
branch
new media yellow book
the new media yellow book is a directori contain inform on the lead new media
organ in the unit state it contain list of more than 38000 report writer
editor and produc it featur 10 section on newspap new servic network
televis station radio station program period nonu media publish and
biograph index thi directori is fulli updat on a quarterli basi
state yellow book
the state yellow book provid inform on member of the execut and legisl
branch of the 50 state govern as well as american samoa guam puerto rico and
the virgin island it ha a subject and a personnel index and it includ inform on
govern offici depart agenc and legisl committe inform
profil of all state and territori ar also provid thi directori is fulli updat on a
quarterli basi
feder region yellow book
the feder region yellow book is releas semiannu and it describ feder region
offic locat outsid washington dc it contain inform on more than 40000
region director and administr staff member at feder depart and agenc it
also ha inform on administr and profession staff at feder laboratori research
center militari instal and servic academi
financi yellow book
the financi yellow book is a semiannu directori that list the name and titl of more
than 26000 execut includ more than 4000 board member at more than 560 lead
sourc of inform investig
3472 2011 fraud examin manual
financi institut the directori also ha complet contact inform includ address
telephon and fax number and email for execut and outsid board member the
directori ha four index on organ geograph locat individu name and
industri
govern affair yellow book
the govern affair yellow book contain inform on corpor financi
institut trade and profession associ labor union interest group includ
coalit public interest group government agenc and government affair
organ it contain a section on feder state and municip govern that includ
the governmentalaffair staff for feder agenc state govern and lead citi
counti and author it govern affair repres section list more than
1200 lobbi firm law firm and public relat firm it detail the issu that lobbyist
contest as well as the coalit thei form to advanc their legisl agenda four index
ar includedon subject geograph locat personnel and master
