2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Directories/Gale Directory of Databases


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Gale Directory of Databases, Gale Directories in Print, Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast 
Media, Encyclopedia of Associations, Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources.  
 
With Gale Directory Library, users can use state-of-the-art functionality to perform a range 
of data sorting, filtering, and exporting. Users can use the library to find contacts, 
companies, individuals, or publications by searching with a name or keyword; generate lists 
and analyze trends by exporting data to Word or Excel; and search across a growing number 
of directory titles. Each directory can be searched individually by its own unique data fields, 
or the entire directory collection can be searched. 
 
Gale Directory of Databases 
This two-volume directory provides detailed descriptions of nearly 20,000 publicly available 
databases, database products, online services, and database vendors and distributors 
worldwide in a variety of formats. Entries include producer name and contact information, 
description, cost, and more.  
 
Detailed listings provide complete information on databases, producers, and vendors. 
Database listings include content and subject coverage, type, language, time span, update 
frequency, geographic coverage, producer contact information, and vendor availability. 
Producer and vendor entries feature full contact information, including address, phone, fax, 
website addresses, e-mail addresses, former names, branch office locations, and a list of 
available databases and products. For online vendors (or hosts), entries cover conditions of 
access, networks used, and gateway access. For portable vendors, entries include a list of 
distributors. The Directory of Databases is also available on the Gale Directory Library. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.461 



:


gale directori of databas gale directori in print gale directori of public and broadcast
media encyclopedia of associ encyclopedia of busi inform sourc
with gale directori librari user can us stateoftheart function to perform a rang
of data sort filter and export user can us the librari to find contact
compani individu or public by search with a name or keyword gener list
and analyz trend by export data to word or excel and search across a grow number
of directori titl each directori can be search individu by it own uniqu data field
or the entir directori collect can be search
gale directori of databas
thi twovolum directori provid detail descript of nearli 20000 publicli avail
databas databas product onlin servic and databas vendor and distributor
worldwid in a varieti of format entri includ produc name and contact inform
descript cost and more
detail list provid complet inform on databas produc and vendor
databas list includ content and subject coverag type languag time span updat
frequenc geograph coverag produc contact inform and vendor avail
produc and vendor entri featur full contact inform includ address phone fax
websit address email address former name branch offic locat and a list of
avail databas and product for onlin vendor or host entri cover condit of
access network us and gatewai access for portabl vendor entri includ a list of
distributor the directori of databas is also avail on the gale directori librari
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3461
