2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Banks and Financial Institutions


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Banks and Financial Institutions 
The relationship between banks and their customers is confidential, and there are numerous 
laws and regulations that protect consumers’ personal financial information held by financial 
institutions. 
 
Laws Limiting Access to Banking Records 
The primary law protecting the privacy of consumer information held by financial 
institutions is the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, which was signed into law in 1999. The Act 
required the federal government to adopt regulations requiring financial institutions to 
ensure the security and confidentiality of customer records and information.  
 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act also made it a crime for certain institutions—banks, stock 
brokerage firms, insurance companies, loan companies, credit card issuers, and credit 
bureaus—to obtain, disclose, or provide documents under false pretenses pertaining to a 
customer’s financial information.  
 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act applies not only to people who use false pretenses, but also to 
any third party requesting the information when it is known or should be known that false 
pretenses will be used. But certain parties are exempted from this rule. Exempted parties 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.473 
include law enforcement agencies and insurance companies conducting related claims 
investigations. It also exempts state-licensed private investigators who are attempting to 
collect delinquent child support. 
 
Under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, fraud examiners should be extremely careful about 
obtaining financial information from financial institutions.  
 
In addition to the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, the Right to Financial Privacy Act (12, U.S.C., 
§§ 3401-3422) also limit access to consumer in formation held by financial institutions. In 
general, the Right to Financial Privacy Act prohibits financial institutions from releasing a 
customer’s financial information to governmental agencies without the customer’s consent, a 
court order, a subpoena, a search warrant, or other formal demand. Thus, if the government 
is requesting information, it must also comply with the Right to Financial Privacy Act. And 
even though the law applies only to demands by governmental agencies, most banks and 
other financial institutions will not release such information to private parties absent legal 
process, such as a subpoena issued in a civil lawsuit. 
 
Types of Financial Records 
As a general rule of thumb, financial information can be obtained only by subpoena. If you 
are able to obtain a subpoena, the following financial information should be requested. 
 
Master Files of Customers  
The master files of customers (e.g., depositors, debtors, and safe deposit box holders) that 
are maintained by the bank should detail where all of its important records are stored.  
 
Safe-Deposit Box Records 
Valuable information can be obtained from a safe-deposit box record. These records usually 
provide the name(s) of the person(s) renting the box, how often a person visited it, the dates 
he visited it, and the times he visited it. The times and frequency of visits can be valuable if 
they correspond to times and dates of deposits or withdrawals from other accounts.  
 
The contents of a safe-deposit box, however, are not known by bank officials, and they are 
never recorded on the box holder’s file. More over, banks usually require the customer’s 
consent, a search warrant, or a court order before an authorized bank official can open a safe 
deposit box. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.474   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Account Opening Records 
Records required to open accounts at financial institutions can also be valuable. Savings 
account applications can provide handwriting samples and certain personal information 
about customers, varying from one bank to another. Likewise, applications for checking 
accounts should provide handwriting samples and certain personal information, varying 
from one bank to another. 
 
Records of Deposits 
Records of account deposits reflect the date of deposit, amounts of currency and checks, 
and the drawee banks of checks. Also, checking account deposit slips might identify the 
account holder’s financial associates. 
 
Records of Withdrawals 
Withdrawal records should reflect the date of withdrawal, the amounts of currency and 
checks, and the drawee banks of checks.  
 
Additionally, for large withdrawals, some banks will request that the customer give a reason 
for withdrawing the money. The customer is not required to give such information, and the 
bank cannot refuse to honor the withdrawal. Similarly, some savings and loan associations 
might demand notice on large withdrawals. 
 
Federal Regulatory Agencies 
Export-Import Bank of the United States 
The Export-Import Bank is the official export credit agency of the United States federal 
government. It loans funds to foreign countries and businesses to buy goods from U.S. 
companies. Borrowers can obtain up to 50 percent of the purchase price of the goods being 
acquired. Selling companies must submit a supplier certificate to the bank. This certificate 
must include a statement regarding commissions paid, especially in a foreign country, to 
foreign sales “represent atives” or “agents.” 
 
Farm Credit Administration 
The Farm Credit Administration oversees and regulates entities within the farm credit 
system, which is a network of borrower-owned lending institutions and related service 
organizations serving all 50 states and Puerto Rico. Some of the entities regulated are the 
Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation (which markets the securities the banks sell 
to raise loan funds), the Farm Credit System Financial Assistance Corporation (which 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.475 
provides capital through the purchase of preferred stock issued by institutions that received 
financial assistance from the Farm Credit System Assistance Board), and the Federal 
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation (which provides a secondary market for agricultural real 
estate and rural housing mortgages).  
 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) is an independent agency of the federal 
government that insures deposits in banks and savings associations.  
 
Federal or state banks or savings associations that apply to be insured by the FDIC must 
submit an application that covers financial history, financial condition, capital structure, 
management, future earnings prospects, convenience to and needs of the community, and 
consistency of corporate powers.  
 
FDIC insured banks are examined annually by FDIC insured examiners; FDIC savings 
associations are examined periodically by FDIC examiners. Each examination includes an 
appraisal of management, directors, officers, and staff.  
 
The examination reports contain white and pink sheets. The white sheets provide 
examination findings; a copy is given to the bank’s board of directors. The examiner, 
however, retains the pink sheets, which contain confidential information, including an 
alphabetical list of all directors, officers, and principal employees; their titles; and comments 
on every individual to the fullest extent possible. The examiner also comments on the 
capabilities of each individual, gives his approximate age, and cites other business affiliations. 
Additionally, the examiner completes a form for each individual, setting forth his estimated 
net worth, par value of stock owned, and salary. 
 
Inquiries regarding types of FDIC records available to the public (including records available 
under the Freedom of Information Act) should be directed to the appropriate FDIC 
regional office or to the Office of the Executive Secretary. 
 
Federal Housing Finance Board 
The Federal Housing Finance Board (Finance Board) is an independent regulatory agency in 
the executive branch. It succeeded the Federal Home Loan Bank Board and is responsible 
for administering and enforcing the Federal Home Loan Bank Act.  
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.476   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Finance Board supervises the 12 federal home loan banks (FHLBs), which were created 
by the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, and issues regulations and orders for carrying out the 
Act’s purposes. Savings associations that make  long-term home mortgage loans are eligible 
to become members of an FHLB.  
 
In addition, the Finance Board implements community-oriented mortgage lending and 
affordable housing programs; prescribes rules and conditions under which banks are 
authorized to borrow; issues consolidated FH LB bonds, notes, or debentures that are the 
obligation of all FHLBs; and ensures that the FHLBs remain adequately capitalized and 
operate in a sound manner. 
 
The FHLB system provides a flexible credit re serve for member savings institutions engaged 
in home mortgage lending and includes 12 regional FHLBs that are federally chartered, 
privately capitalized, and independently managed. The 12 FHLBs help their member 
financial institutions meet their communities’ diverse housing-finance and economic-
 development needs. 
 
Each FHLB is capitalized by the capital-stock investments of its member financial 
institutions and its retained earnings. The proceeds of these stock investments are used to 
issue and sell consolidated obligations, which are sold to investors (e.g., commercial banks, 
foreign central banks, mutual funds, corporations, government agencies, and individuals).  
 
In addition, the FHLBs provide loans to their member financial institutions.  
 
Federal Reserve System 
The Federal Reserve System, which serves as the nation’s central bank, is a valuable source 
of information on banks that it has chartered.  
 
The Federal Reserve System’s Board of Gover nors regulates state-chartered banks that are 
members of the Federal Reserve System, their subsidiaries, and holding companies, as well as 
the activities of foreign banks that operate within the United States 
 
On an annual basis, reserve system examin ers visit and report on chartered banks. Their 
examination reports contain two parts: the open part, a copy of which is given to the bank, 
and the confidential part, which is kept by the reserve system and contains qualifications of 
management, lists of officers and directors, and background data on the officers. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.477 
A bank must file a registration statement for its securities. The registration statement must 
be followed by an annual report that provides considerable data on the securities issued as 
well as employment information on all directors and those who own more than 10 percent 
of any class of the bank’s securities. The Federal Reserve System maintains these statements. 
 
National Credit Union Administration 
The National Credit Union Administration regulates, insures, and supervises all federal credit 
unions as well as state-chartered credit unions that apply for its insurance. 
 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), which is within the U.S. Department 
of the Treasury, regulates national banks and maintains information concerning them. The 
OCC conducts examinations of the national banks to determine their financial positions and 
to evaluate their assets. The bank examiners’ reports contain information about bank 
records, loans, and operations. In view of their purpose and the basis on which they are 
obtained, reports of national bank examinations, as well as related correspondence and 
papers, are considered confidential. Requests for these documents should include the 
subject’s name and address, the information desired, the reason it is needed, and the 
intended use. 
 
 



:


bank and financi institut
the relationship between bank and their custom is confidenti and there ar numer
law and regul that protect consum person financi inform held by financi
institut
law limit access to bank record
the primari law protect the privaci of consum inform held by financi
institut is the grammleachblilei act which wa sign into law in 1999 the act
requir the feder govern to adopt regul requir financi institut to
ensur the secur and confidenti of custom record and inform
the grammleachblilei act also made it a crime for certain institutionsbank stock
brokerag firm insur compani loan compani credit card issuer and credit
bureausto obtain disclos or provid document under fals pretens pertain to a
custom financi inform
the grammleachblilei act appli not onli to peopl who us fals pretens but also to
ani third parti request the inform when it is known or should be known that fals
pretens will be us but certain parti ar exempt from thi rule exempt parti
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3473
includ law enforc agenc and insur compani conduct relat claim
investig it also exempt statelicens privat investig who ar attempt to
collect delinqu child support
under the grammleachblilei act fraud examin should be extrem care about
obtain financi inform from financi institut
in addit to the grammleachblilei act the right to financi privaci act 12 usc
34013422 also limit access to consum in format held by financi institut in
gener the right to financi privaci act prohibit financi institut from releas a
custom financi inform to government agenc without the custom consent a
court order a subpoena a search warrant or other formal demand thu if the govern
is request inform it must also compli with the right to financi privaci act and
even though the law appli onli to demand by government agenc most bank and
other financi institut will not releas such inform to privat parti absent legal
process such as a subpoena issu in a civil lawsuit
type of financi record
as a gener rule of thumb financi inform can be obtain onli by subpoena if you
ar abl to obtain a subpoena the follow financi inform should be request
master file of custom
the master file of custom eg depositor debtor and safe deposit box holder that
ar maintain by the bank should detail where all of it import record ar store
safedeposit box record
valuabl inform can be obtain from a safedeposit box record these record usual
provid the name of the person rent the box how often a person visit it the date
he visit it and the time he visit it the time and frequenc of visit can be valuabl if
thei correspond to time and date of deposit or withdraw from other account
the content of a safedeposit box howev ar not known by bank offici and thei ar
never record on the box holder file more over bank usual requir the custom
consent a search warrant or a court order befor an author bank offici can open a safe
deposit box
sourc of inform investig
3474 2011 fraud examin manual
account open record
record requir to open account at financi institut can also be valuabl save
account applic can provid handwrit sampl and certain person inform
about custom vari from on bank to anoth likewis applic for check
account should provid handwrit sampl and certain person inform vari
from on bank to anoth
record of deposit
record of account deposit reflect the date of deposit amount of currenc and check
and the drawe bank of check also check account deposit slip might identifi the
account holder financi associ
record of withdraw
withdraw record should reflect the date of withdraw the amount of currenc and
check and the drawe bank of check
addition for larg withdraw some bank will request that the custom give a reason
for withdraw the monei the custom is not requir to give such inform and the
bank cannot refus to honor the withdraw similarli some save and loan associ
might demand notic on larg withdraw
feder regulatori agenc
exportimport bank of the unit state
the exportimport bank is the offici export credit agenc of the unit state feder
govern it loan fund to foreign countri and busi to bui good from us
compani borrow can obtain up to 50 percent of the purchas price of the good be
acquir sell compani must submit a supplier certif to the bank thi certif
must includ a statement regard commiss paid especi in a foreign countri to
foreign sale repres ativ or agent
farm credit administr
the farm credit administr overse and regul entiti within the farm credit
system which is a network of borrowerown lend institut and relat servic
organ serv all 50 state and puerto rico some of the entiti regul ar the
feder farm credit bank fund corpor which market the secur the bank sell
to rais loan fund the farm credit system financi assist corpor which
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3475
provid capit through the purchas of prefer stock issu by institut that receiv
financi assist from the farm credit system assist board and the feder
agricultur mortgag corpor which provid a secondari market for agricultur real
estat and rural hous mortgag
feder deposit insur corpor
the feder deposit insur corpor fdic is an independ agenc of the feder
govern that insur deposit in bank and save associ
feder or state bank or save associ that appli to be insur by the fdic must
submit an applic that cover financi histori financi condit capit structur
manag futur earn prospect conveni to and need of the commun and
consist of corpor power
fdic insur bank ar examin annual by fdic insur examin fdic save
associ ar examin period by fdic examin each examin includ an
apprais of manag director offic and staff
the examin report contain white and pink sheet the white sheet provid
examin find a copi is given to the bank board of director the examin
howev retain the pink sheet which contain confidenti inform includ an
alphabet list of all director offic and princip employe their titl and comment
on everi individu to the fullest extent possibl the examin also comment on the
capabl of each individu give hi approxim ag and cite other busi affili
addition the examin complet a form for each individu set forth hi estim
net worth par valu of stock own and salari
inquiri regard type of fdic record avail to the public includ record avail
under the freedom of inform act should be direct to the appropri fdic
region offic or to the offic of the execut secretari
feder hous financ board
the feder hous financ board financ board is an independ regulatori agenc in
the execut branch it succeed the feder home loan bank board and is respons
for administ and enforc the feder home loan bank act
sourc of inform investig
3476 2011 fraud examin manual
the financ board supervis the 12 feder home loan bank fhlb which were creat
by the feder home loan bank act and issu regul and order for carri out the
act purpos save associ that make longterm home mortgag loan ar elig
to becom member of an fhlb
in addit the financ board implement communityori mortgag lend and
afford hous program prescrib rule and condit under which bank ar
author to borrow issu consolid fh lb bond note or debentur that ar the
oblig of all fhlb and ensur that the fhlb remain adequ capit and
oper in a sound manner
the fhlb system provid a flexibl credit re serv for member save institut engag
in home mortgag lend and includ 12 region fhlb that ar feder charter
privat capit and independ manag the 12 fhlb help their member
financi institut meet their commun divers housingfin and econom
develop need
each fhlb is capit by the capitalstock invest of it member financi
institut and it retain earn the proce of these stock invest ar us to
issu and sell consolid oblig which ar sold to investor eg commerci bank
foreign central bank mutual fund corpor govern agenc and individu
in addit the fhlb provid loan to their member financi institut
feder reserv system
the feder reserv system which serv as the nation central bank is a valuabl sourc
of inform on bank that it ha charter
the feder reserv system board of gover nor regul statechart bank that ar
member of the feder reserv system their subsidiari and hold compani as well as
the activ of foreign bank that oper within the unit state
on an annual basi reserv system examin er visit and report on charter bank their
examin report contain two part the open part a copi of which is given to the bank
and the confidenti part which is kept by the reserv system and contain qualif of
manag list of offic and director and background data on the offic
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3477
a bank must file a registr statement for it secur the registr statement must
be follow by an annual report that provid consider data on the secur issu as
well as employ inform on all director and those who own more than 10 percent
of ani class of the bank secur the feder reserv system maintain these statement
nation credit union administr
the nation credit union administr regul insur and supervis all feder credit
union as well as statechart credit union that appli for it insur
offic of the comptrol of the currenc
the offic of the comptrol of the currenc occ which is within the us depart
of the treasuri regul nation bank and maintain inform concern them the
occ conduct examin of the nation bank to determin their financi posit and
to evalu their asset the bank examin report contain inform about bank
record loan and oper in view of their purpos and the basi on which thei ar
obtain report of nation bank examin as well as relat correspond and
paper ar consid confidenti request for these document should includ the
subject name and address the inform desir the reason it is need and the
intend us
