2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Investigative and Law Enforcement Information Centers and Databases


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Investigative and Law Enforcement Information Centers and Databases 
 
National Law Enforcement Telecommunications System 
The National Law Enforcement Telecommunications System (NLETS) is the International 
Justice and Public Safety Information Sharing Network, which is a sophisticated 
communication network that links all law enforcement and criminal justice agencies in the 
United States, Puerto Rico, and, through a computerized link to INTERPOL, Canada.  
 
NLETS provides two basic capabilities to its users. First, it is an international, computer-based 
message-switching system that links together state, local, and federal law enforcement 
and justice agencies for the purpose of information exchange. Second, it provides 
information-services support for a growing number of justice-related applications. To 
accomplish this, NLETS supports data-communi cations links to state networks using a 
commercial frame-relay service. All agencies within each state are serviced through this state 
interface. Federal and international systems operate in much the same manner. The primary 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.478   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
NLETS operational site is located in the Arizona Department of Public Safety’s facility, and 
a disaster-recovery site that enables full resumption of operations in fewer than 30 minutes 
was developed with the Idaho State Police. 
 
The user population is composed of federal agencies with a justice component, selected 
international agencies, and all states and territories, all of which are cooperatively exchanging 
data. Agencies include state and local law enforcement groups, motor vehicle and licensing 
departments, and a variety of federal enforcement offices, such as the U.S. Customs Service, 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Department of Justice, U.S. Secret Service, U.S. Marshals 
Service, Naval Investigative Service, Air Force Office of Special Investigations, Department 
of State, Department of the Army, and Department of the Interior. The National Auto 
Theft Bureau also is linked to NLETS. NLETS users can send free-form messages to other 
users either individually or via a broadcast message. 
 
A great deal of information is available to law enforcement through the network, including: 
• Vehicle registrations by license plate or vehicle identification number 
• Driver’s license and history by name and date of birth, or driver’s license number (some 
states support driver’s license queries by name only) 
• Criminal records by name and date of birth, state identification number, or FBI number 
• Boat registrations by hull number, registration number, or name 
• Snowmobile registrations by registration number, vehicle identification number, or 
owner’s name and date of birth 
• Hazardous material file by UN number, which is an internationally recognized code for 
hazardous material 
• Private aircraft tracking data by registration number or date range 
• Aircraft registrations by registration number, serial number, or name of registrant 
• Directory of participating agencies by originating agency identifier 
• Registration information on diplomatic license plates 
• Index to parole/probation and corrections information 
• Sex offenders registration information 
 
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police’s Canadian  Police Information Centre provides many 
additional files, including: 
• Wanted people by name and date of birth 
• Criminal history by name or FPS (Canadian national identification number) 
• Stolen vehicles by license number or vehicle identification number 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.479 
• Stolen articles by serial number 
• Stolen guns by serial number 
• Stolen securities by serial number, corporation name, issuer, or name of owner 
• Stolen boats and motors by license number, hull number, registration number, or name 
of owner 
 
Defense Clearance and Investigation Index 
The Defense Clearance and Investigations Index (DCII) is part of the Defense Security 
Service (DSS) that is overseen by the Department of Defense (DOD). 
 
The DCII is an automated index of DOD investigations and security decisions regarding 
personnel that have been made by DOD adju dicators. Normally, the DSS limits the DCII’s 
access to the Department of Defense and other federal agencies. 
 
El Paso Intelligence Center 
The El Paso Intelligence Center’s (EPIC) mission is to provide timely and expeditious 
support to federal, state, local, tribal, and international law enforcement agencies. Prior to 
2001, EPIC provided entities a complete and accurate intelligence picture of worldwide 
movements of transportable drugs, weapons, and illegal aliens into the United States. It 
analyzed raw data and provided tactical and operational intelligence to agencies involved in 
the antidrug effort. EPIC also provided strategic assessments of drug movement and 
concealment techniques. After September 11th, 2001, EPIC was called upon to support 
investigations to find those responsible for the terrorist attacks, and its mission expanded to 
include counterterrorism efforts. 
 
EPIC member agencies include the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; 
Coast Guard; Department of Defense; Department of Homeland Security’s Customs and 
Border Protection; Department of Homeland Security’s Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement; Department of the Interior; Drug Enforcement Administration; Federal 
Bureau of Investigation; Internal Revenue Service; Marshals Service; National Drug 
Intelligence Center; Secret Service; and Tr ansportation Security Administration.  
 
Initially EPIC focused on the United States-Mexico border with an emphasis on Mexico’s 
heroin traffickers and illegal alien smugglers, but with the increased use of aircraft, seagoing 
vessels, and global networks to facilitate drug trafficking, EPIC’s focus broadened and 
became international in scope. EPIC serves federal agencies, all 50 states, the District of 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.480   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Columbia, Canada, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virg in Islands, and Guam, and it supports law 
enforcement efforts conducted by its foreign counterparts throughout the world. It currently 
has Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with  Canada, Australia, and the Netherlands. 
 
Member agencies have direct access to all EPIC  information, with appropriate safeguards to 
provide for the protection and the secure communication of highly sensitive or classified 
information. State and local law enforcement entities have access to EPIC data through a 
designated group within the respective organization or through a member agency. 
 
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN)—an organization established by the 
U.S. Department of the Treasury—collects, analyzes, and disseminates intelligence on 
financial crimes. Its mission is to provide a government-wide, multisource intelligence and 
analytical network to support law enforcement agencies in the detection, investigation, and 
prosecution of financial crimes. The participating agencies are the Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; U.S. Customs Service and Border Protection; Drug 
Enforcement Administration; Federal Bureau of  Investigation; Internal Revenue Service; 
U.S. Marshals Service; Postal Inspecti on Service; and U.S. Secret Service.  
 
FinCEN’s financial database c ontains information from reports required under the Bank 
Secrecy Act, including the Currency Transaction Report; Report of International 
Transportation of Currency or Monetary In struments; Currency Transaction Report by 
Casinos and Card Clubs and by Depository Institutions; Reports of Foreign Bank and 
Financial Accounts; Registrations of Money Services Businesses; Designation of Exempt 
Person; and Suspicious Activity Reports by Depository Institutions, Securities and Futures 
Industries, Insurance Industries, Casinos and Card Clubs, and Money Services Businesses. 
Furthermore, FinCEN has access to data from IRS Form 8300 (Reports of Cash Payments 
Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business). 
 
FinCEN produces two types of products: tactical support documents and strategic analyses. 
The tactical support products either provide information and leads on criminal organizations 
and activities that are under investigation by law enforcement or proactively identify 
previously undetected criminal organizations and activities so that investigations can be 
initiated. The FinCEN’s work product can also assist in identifying assets for seizure and 
forfeiture purposes and supporting ongoing investigations. Its strategic analyses look at 
financial crimes and money laundering with an emphasis on the future. FinCEN collects, 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.481 
processes, analyzes, and develops intelligence on emerging trends, patterns, and issues 
related to the proceeds of illicit activities. 
 
FinCEN uses the majority of its resources to assist agencies in investigations of the financial 
aspects of the illegal narcotics trade. FinCEN then prioritizes investigations of such non-
 narcotic crimes as money laundering, Bank Secrecy Act violations, corruption, treason, 
bankruptcy fraud, financial institution fraud, and government contract fraud. In both the 
narcotic and non-narcotic areas, FinCEN concentrates on investigations of national or 
international criminal organizations. 
 
Interagency Border Inspection System 
The Interagency Border Inspection System (IBIS) was initiated in 1989 by U.S. Customs and 
Border Protection to improve border enforcement and to facilitate inspection of individuals 
applying for admission to the United States at ports of entry and pre-inspection facilities. 
IBIS is considered a presidential priority and receives White House guidance regarding 
policy, coordination, and control. U.S. Customs and Border Protection, law enforcement, 
and regulatory personnel from 20 other federal agencies or bureaus use IBIS. Some of these 
agencies are the Federal Bureau of Investigation; Interpol; the Drug Enforcement 
Administration; the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; the Internal 
Revenue Service; the Coast Guard; the Federal Aviation Administration; and the Secret 
Service. Information from IBIS is also shared with the Department of State for use by 
consular offices at U.S. embassies and consulates. IBIS strives to provide travelers with 
expeditious clearance at ports of entry while allowing border enforcement agencies to focus 
their limited resources on potentially non-compliant travelers. IBIS provides the law 
enforcement community with access to computer-based enforcement files on suspect 
individuals, businesses, vehicles, aircraft, and vessels. It also provides access to National 
Crime Information Center (NCIC) records on wanted persons; stolen vehicles, vessels, or 
firearms; license information; criminal histories; and previous federal inspections. IBIS  
users can also interface with all 50 states via the National Law Enforcement 
Telecommunications Systems.  
 
International Chamber of Commerce Commercial Crime Bureau 
The International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) established the Commercial Crime Bureau 
(CCB) in January 1992 to act as a focal point for fraud prevention and to encourage 
cooperation between commerce and law enforcement agencies. The CCB maintains an 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.482   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
extensive database on all aspects of commercial fraud. The CCS also operates Fraudnet, a 
unique global network of law firms that specialize in tackling business crime.  
 
International Criminal Police Organization 
The International Criminal Police Organizati on, better known by its radio designation 
INTERPOL, is a network of National Central Bureaus in more than 186 member countries 
that share information with each other to assist law enforcement agencies in the detection 
and deterrence of international crime. Each Bureau is an agency of the member country’s 
government and serves as the liaison between that country’s law enforcement agencies and 
the INTERPOL network. In the United Sta tes, the National Central Bureau (USNCB) is 
under the direction and control of the Department of Justice and co-managed by the 
Department of Homeland Security. 
 
To support ongoing investigations that require international assistance, INTERPOL 
provides information regarding: 
• Location of suspects/fugitives/witnesses 
• International wanted circulars 
• Criminal history check 
• Terrorism prevention 
• Stolen art 
• Tracing of weapons and motor vehicles abroad 
• License plate, driver license check, and vehicle registration data 
 
International Criminal Police Organization Case Tracking System 
The International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) Case Tracking Systems 
(ICTS), located at the U.S. National Central Bureau (USNCB) in Washington, D.C., contains 
information about people, property, and organizations involved in international criminal 
activity. The USNCB can determine the history of an international connection in an 
investigation or the existence of any previous international criminal activity. The USNCB 
operates to provide international support for U.S. law enforcement. 
 
Sixteen federal and state law enforcement agencies are represented at the USNCB, and all 50 
states have established INTERPOL liaison offices. Agencies represented at the USNCB 
include the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; Environmental 
Protection Agency; Drug Enforcement Administ ration; Federal Bureau of Investigation; 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement; Transportation Security Administration; U.S. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.483 
Coast Guard; Bureau of Customs and Border Protection; U.S. Marshals Service; U.S. 
Department of Defense; U.S. Department of State; U.S. F ood and Drug Administration; 
U.S. Postal Inspection Service;  and U.S. Secret Service. 
 
Interstate Identification Index 
The Interstate Identification Index (III) is an “index-pointer” system for the interstate 
exchange of criminal records. Under the III, the FBI maintains an index of people arrested 
for felonies or serious misdemeanors under state or federal law. The index includes 
identification data (name, birth date, race, sex, etc.) and the FBI and state identification 
numbers (SIDs) from all states that have information about an individual. 
 
Search queries from justice agencies nationwide are transmitted via state telecommunications 
networks and the FBI’s National Crime Information Center (NCIC) lines. Searches are made 
by name and other identifiers. The III held the criminal histories of more than 64.9 million 
individuals as of September 2008. Forty-eight states participated in the III as of that date. 
Ten also participated in the National Fingerprint File (NFF). The NFF states have assumed 
responsibility for criminal and non-criminal requests.  
 
Joint Maritime Information Element 
The Joint Maritime Information Element (JMIE) — a consortium of 15 U.S. government 
agencies in the law enforcement and intelligence communities — provides access to 
repositories of formatted data at the secret level on worldwide merchant vessel locations, 
characteristics, registries/ownership, commercial cargo imports and exports through U.S. 
ports, and commercial cargo imports and exports in selected foreign countries and 
worldwide ports. Consortium members are the Office of Naval Intelligence, Military Sealift 
Command, Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of State, Executive Office of 
the President’s Office of National Drug Control Policy, U.S. Customs Service, Central 
Intelligence Agency, U.S. Coast Guard, Maritime Administration, Department of Energy, 
Defense Intelligence Agency, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, INTERPOL, 
Bureau of Census, and National Security Agency. 
 
The system provides information on maritime-related law enforcement and national foreign 
intelligence data to aid members’ operational targeting, such as narcotics interdiction, 
smuggling, sea and defense-zone surveillance, border control, petroleum-traffic monitoring, 
and emergency sealift management. Thirty-five sites are operational, allowing access to data 
sources that provide at-sea and in-port location information and characteristics on 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.484   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
commercial and private vessels and vessel registration files for Florida, California, Delaware, 
Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. 
 
Law Enforcement Support Center 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s Law Enforcement Su pport Center (LESC) 
serves as a national operations center by providing timely immigration status and identity 
information to local, state, and federal law enforcement agencies on aliens suspected, 
arrested, or convicted of criminal activities. The LESC operates 24 hours a day, seven days a 
week, responding to requests from federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies with 
information gathered from eight DHS databases, the National Crime Information Center 
(NCIC), the Interstate Identification Index (III), and other state criminal history indices.  
 
In addition to providing real-time assistance to law enforcement agencies that are 
investigating, or have arrested, foreign-born individuals involved in criminal activity, the 
LESC also performs the following investigative functions: administers and controls 
immigration-related cases for Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE); provides 
support to a host of ongoing multiagency investigative initiatives; acts as the central point of 
contact for the FBI’s National Instant Criminal  Background Check System (NICS) program; 
handles queries and field responses relating to national security employment issues; provides 
the law enforcement community with NCIC hit confirmation information; and offers ICE 
special agents and deportation officers after-hours support via digitally recorded duty lines 
confirmed with personal identification numbers. 
 
Excluded Parties Listing System 
The Excluded Parties Listing System (EPLS) is a Web-based database maintained by the 
General Services Administration that identifies those parties excluded throughout the U.S. 
government (unless otherwise noted) from receiving federal contracts or certain 
subcontracts and from certain types of federal financial and nonfinancial assistance and 
benefits. 
 
National Tracing Center 
The National Tracing Center (NTC), a branch of the Firearms Enforcement Division of the 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF), is the country’s only crime 
gun tracing facility. It provides 24-hour assistance to duly authorized law enforcement 
agencies in the United States and those in many foreign countries. Using the ATF’s Firearms 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.485 
Tracing System, the NTC systematically tracks firearms used to commit crimes from their 
place of manufacture to the place of sale. 
 
National White-Collar Crime Center 
The National White-Collar Crime Center (NW3C) seeks to provide a nationwide support 
system for agencies involved in the prevention, investigation, and prosecution of economic 
and high-tech crimes and to support and partner with other appropriate entities in 
addressing homeland security initiatives as they relate to economic and high-tech crimes. The 
NW3C has a database system that contains information on individuals and businesses 
suspected of economic criminal activity, including advance-fee loan schemes, credit card 
fraud, computer fraud, and securities and investment fraud.  
 
Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Information System 
The Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Information System (NADDIS) is a centralized 
automated file of summaries of reports on subjects of interest to the Drug Enforcement 
Administration (DEA), consisting of more than 5.9 million records on individuals, 
businesses, vessels, aircraft, and selected airfields identified through the DEA investigative 
reporting system and related investigative records. Inquiries should be limited to narcotics-
 related cases or files and/or smugglers of funds, other contraband, and aliens. NADDIS is 
accessible through the El Paso Intelligence Center (EPIC) and the DEA. 
 
National Automated Immigration Lookout System 
The National Automated Immigration Lookout System (NAILS) is a Bureau of Immigration 
and Custom Enforcement system. The system provides an index of the names of all 
individuals who might be denied entry into the United States. Names in NAILS are passed 
to the Treasury Enforcement Communications System (TECS); therefore, a search of 
NAILS is not necessary if TECS has been searched. 
 
National Crime Information Center 
The National Crime Information Center (NCIC), located at the FBI headquarters in 
Washington, is a widely used law enforcement computer system. Most major law 
enforcement agencies have NCIC connections. 
 
An NCIC file often contains information about: 
• Stolen, missing, or recovered guns 
• Stolen articles (that have a serial number) 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.486   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Wanted people (for questioning or arrest) 
• Stolen/wanted vehicles (autos, aircraft, motorcycles) 
• Stolen license plates 
• Stolen, embezzled, or missing securities, stocks, bonds, and currency 
• Stolen/wanted boats 
• Missing people 
• Index to state and federal criminal history records 
• Unidentified people 
• Foreign fugitives 
• ATF violent felon file 
• U.S. Secret Service protection file 
• Gang and terrorist organizations file 
• Deported felon file 
• Originating agency identifier file 
• Protective order file 
 
NCIC is a computerized index of criminal justice information (e.g., criminal record history 
information, fugitives, stolen properties, and missing persons). It is available to federal, state, 
and local law enforcement and other criminal justice agencies and is operational 24 hours a 
day, 365 days a year.  
 
The purpose of maintaining the NCIC system is to provide a computerized database for 
ready access by a criminal justice agency making an inquiry and for prompt disclosure of 
information in the system from other criminal justice agencies. This information assists 
authorized agencies in criminal justice and related law enforcement objectives, such as 
apprehending fugitives, locating missing persons, locating and returning stolen property, as 
well as in the protection of the law enforcement officers encountering the individuals 
described in the system. 
 
Regional Information Sharing System 
The Regional Information Sharing System (RISS) program consists of six multistate projects 
that facilitate regional criminal information exchange and provide other related support 
service to federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies throughout all 50 states, Canada, 
the District of Columbia, Australia, U.S. Territories, and England. 
• Middle Atlantic-Great Lakes Organized Crime Law Enforcement Network (MAGLOCLEN). 
MAGLOCLEN includes law enforcement agencies in Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.487 
Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey, Delawa re, Maryland, and Washington, D.C. The 
center also has member agencies in Canada, England, and Australia. MAGLOCLEN is 
located at 140 Terry Drive, Suite 100, Newtown, Pennsylvania 18940, or can be reached 
at (215) 504-4910 or (800) 345-1322. 
• Mid-States Organized Crime In formation Center (MOCIC). MOCIC includes law enforcement 
agencies in North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, 
Wisconsin, and Illinois. The center also has member agencies in Canada. MOCIC is 
located 1610 East Sunshine Street, #110, Springfield, Missouri 65804, or can be reached 
at (800) 846-6242 or (417) 883-4383. 
• New England State Police In formation Network (NESPIN).  NESPIN incorporates law 
enforcement agencies in Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, 
and Rhode Island. The center also has member agencies in Canada. NESPIN is located 
at 124 Grove Street, Suite 105, Franklin, MA 02038, or can be reached at (800) 343-5682 
or (508) 528-8200. 
• Regional Organized Crime Information Center (ROCIC).  ROCIC serves 800 law enforcement 
agencies in Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana,  Arkansas, Mississippi, Alabama, Tennessee, 
Kentucky, West Virginia, Virginia, North Caro lina, South Carolina, Georgia and Florida, 
as well as Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  Islands. ROCIC is located at 545 Marriott 
Drive, Suite 850, Nashville, Tennessee 37214, or can be reached at (800) 238-7985. 
• Rocky Mountain Information Network (RMIN). The RMIN has 13,000 members in more 
than 1,000 agencies in Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Utah, Nevada, Idaho, Wyoming, 
and Montana. The center also has member agencies in Canada. The RMIN is located at 
2828 North Central Avenue, Suite 1000, Phoenix, Arizona 85004, or can be reached at 
(602) 351-2320. 
• Western States Information Network (WSIN).  The WSIN provides narcotics intelligence and 
related services to its member law enforcement agencies in California, Oregon, 
Washington, Alaska, and Hawaii. The center also has members in Canada, Australia, and 
Guam. The WSIN’s address is P.O. Box 90 3198, Sacramento, California 94203-1980, 
and it can be called at (800) 824-7902 (outside of California) and (800) 952- 5258  
(in California). 
 
Treasury Enforcement Communications Systems 
The Treasury Enforcement Communications Systems (TECS) is a Department of the 
Treasury system managed by the Internal Revenue Service. TECS is a computerized 
information system designed to identify individuals and businesses suspected of, or involved 
in, a violation of federal law. TECS is also a communication system that transmits messages 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.488   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
among Treasury law enforcement offices and other federal, national, state, and local law 
enforcement agencies. 
 
TECS provides access to the FBI’s National Crime Information Center (NCIC) and the 
National Law Enforcement Telecommunication Systems (NLETS) with the capability of 
communicating directly with state and local enforcement agencies. The NLETS provides 
direct access to state motor vehicle departments.  
 
Participants include the U.S. Customs Service; Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and 
Explosives; Drug Enforcement Administration; U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services; 
Department of State; U.S. Coast Guard; Fe deral Bureau of Investigation (NCIC Section); 
U.S. Marshals Service; Internal Revenue Service; EPIC; INTERPOL (National Central 
Bureau); and Department of Agriculture. 
 
TECS works on a soundex-type system. If an inquiry is made regarding a certain name, then 
all similar sounding names on record are provided to the inquirer. Inquiries on TECS might 
be made by name alone, even if no identifying number—such as date of birth, FBI number, 
or Social Security number—is available. 
 
When TECS provides a list of similar sounding names, the subjects’ sex, race, and date of 
birth also are included. The inquirer then can determine which subject, if any, is of interest. 
If a name is selected, TECS can provide additional information, including special 
instructions (such as “armed and dangerous”), full  name, race, sex, height, weight, hair color, 
eye color, date of birth, fugitive (which agency), background information, miscellaneous 
number (such as FBI), where and by whom a warrant is held, date of offense, alias, case 
number, and NCIC number. 
 
United Nations Crime and Justice Information Network 
The United Nations Crime and Justice Information Network (UNCJIN) is funded in part by 
the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics. The goal of the UNCJIN is to establish a worldwide 
network to enhance the dissemination and exchange of information concerning criminal 
justice and crime prevention issues. 
 
World Criminal Justice Library Network 
The World Criminal Justice Library Network (WCJLN) is a network that is used to share 
services and information concerning criminal justice. The group has developed an 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.489 
international network to disseminate national and international crime statistics and criminal 
justice profiles. 
  
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.501 



:


investig and law enforc inform center and databas
nation law enforc telecommun system
the nation law enforc telecommun system nlet is the intern
justic and public safeti inform share network which is a sophist
commun network that link all law enforc and crimin justic agenc in the
unit state puerto rico and through a computer link to interpol canada
nlet provid two basic capabl to it user first it is an intern computerbas
messageswitch system that link togeth state local and feder law enforc
and justic agenc for the purpos of inform exchang second it provid
informationservic support for a grow number of justicerel applic to
accomplish thi nlet support datacommuni cation link to state network us a
commerci framerelai servic all agenc within each state ar servic through thi state
interfac feder and intern system oper in much the same manner the primari
sourc of inform investig
3478 2011 fraud examin manual
nlet oper site is locat in the arizona depart of public safeti facil and
a disasterrecoveri site that enabl full resumpt of oper in fewer than 30 minut
wa develop with the idaho state polic
the user popul is compos of feder agenc with a justic compon select
intern agenc and all state and territori all of which ar cooper exchang
data agenc includ state and local law enforc group motor vehicl and licens
depart and a varieti of feder enforc offic such as the us custom servic
feder bureau of investig depart of justic us secret servic us marshal
servic naval investig servic air forc offic of special investig depart
of state depart of the armi and depart of the interior the nation auto
theft bureau also is link to nlet nlet user can send freeform messag to other
user either individu or via a broadcast messag
a great deal of inform is avail to law enforc through the network includ
vehicl registr by licens plate or vehicl identif number
driver licens and histori by name and date of birth or driver licens number some
state support driver licens queri by name onli
crimin record by name and date of birth state identif number or fbi number
boat registr by hull number registr number or name
snowmobil registr by registr number vehicl identif number or
owner name and date of birth
hazard materi file by un number which is an internation recogn code for
hazard materi
privat aircraft track data by registr number or date rang
aircraft registr by registr number serial number or name of registr
directori of particip agenc by origin agenc identifi
registr inform on diplomat licens plate
index to paroleprob and correct inform
sex offend registr inform
the royal canadian mount polic canadian polic inform centr provid mani
addit file includ
want peopl by name and date of birth
crimin histori by name or fp canadian nation identif number
stolen vehicl by licens number or vehicl identif number
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3479
stolen articl by serial number
stolen gun by serial number
stolen secur by serial number corpor name issuer or name of owner
stolen boat and motor by licens number hull number registr number or name
of owner
defens clearanc and investig index
the defens clearanc and investig index dcii is part of the defens secur
servic dss that is overseen by the depart of defens dod
the dcii is an autom index of dod investig and secur decis regard
personnel that have been made by dod adju dicat normal the dss limit the dcii
access to the depart of defens and other feder agenc
el paso intellig center
the el paso intellig center epic mission is to provid time and expediti
support to feder state local tribal and intern law enforc agenc prior to
2001 epic provid entiti a complet and accur intellig pictur of worldwid
movement of transport drug weapon and illeg alien into the unit state it
analyz raw data and provid tactic and oper intellig to agenc involv in
the antidrug effort epic also provid strateg assess of drug movement and
conceal techniqu after septemb 11th 2001 epic wa call upon to support
investig to find those respons for the terrorist attack and it mission expand to
includ counterterror effort
epic member agenc includ the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos
coast guard depart of defens depart of homeland secur custom and
border protect depart of homeland secur immigr and custom
enforc depart of the interior drug enforc administr feder
bureau of investig intern revenu servic marshal servic nation drug
intellig center secret servic and tr ansport secur administr
initi epic focus on the unit statesmexico border with an emphasi on mexico
heroin traffick and illeg alien smuggler but with the increas us of aircraft seago
vessel and global network to facilit drug traffick epic focu broaden and
becam intern in scope epic serv feder agenc all 50 state the district of
sourc of inform investig
3480 2011 fraud examin manual
columbia canada puerto rico the us virg in island and guam and it support law
enforc effort conduct by it foreign counterpart throughout the world it current
ha memoranda of understand mou with canada australia and the netherland
member agenc have direct access to all epic inform with appropri safeguard to
provid for the protect and the secur commun of highli sensit or classifi
inform state and local law enforc entiti have access to epic data through a
design group within the respect organ or through a member agenc
financi crime enforc network
the financi crime enforc network fincenan organ establish by the
us depart of the treasurycollect analyz and dissemin intellig on
financi crime it mission is to provid a governmentwid multisourc intellig and
analyt network to support law enforc agenc in the detect investig and
prosecut of financi crime the particip agenc ar the bureau of alcohol
tobacco firearm and explos us custom servic and border protect drug
enforc administr feder bureau of investig intern revenu servic
us marshal servic postal inspecti on servic and us secret servic
fincen financi databas c ontain inform from report requir under the bank
secreci act includ the currenc transact report report of intern
transport of currenc or monetari in strument currenc transact report by
casino and card club and by depositori institut report of foreign bank and
financi account registr of monei servic busi design of exempt
person and suspici activ report by depositori institut secur and futur
industri insur industri casino and card club and monei servic busi
furthermor fincen ha access to data from ir form 8300 report of cash payment
over 10000 receiv in a trade or busi
fincen produc two type of product tactic support document and strateg analys
the tactic support product either provid inform and lead on crimin organ
and activ that ar under investig by law enforc or proactiv identifi
previous undetect crimin organ and activ so that investig can be
initi the fincen work product can also assist in identifi asset for seizur and
forfeitur purpos and support ongo investig it strateg analys look at
financi crime and monei launder with an emphasi on the futur fincen collect
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3481
process analyz and develop intellig on emerg trend pattern and issu
relat to the proce of illicit activ
fincen us the major of it resourc to assist agenc in investig of the financi
aspect of the illeg narcot trade fincen then priorit investig of such non
narcot crime as monei launder bank secreci act violat corrupt treason
bankruptci fraud financi institut fraud and govern contract fraud in both the
narcot and nonnarcot area fincen concentr on investig of nation or
intern crimin organ
interag border inspect system
the interag border inspect system ibi wa initi in 1989 by us custom and
border protect to improv border enforc and to facilit inspect of individu
appli for admiss to the unit state at port of entri and preinspect facil
ibi is consid a presidenti prioriti and receiv white hous guidanc regard
polici coordin and control us custom and border protect law enforc
and regulatori personnel from 20 other feder agenc or bureau us ibi some of these
agenc ar the feder bureau of investig interpol the drug enforc
administr the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos the intern
revenu servic the coast guard the feder aviat administr and the secret
servic inform from ibi is also share with the depart of state for us by
consular offic at us embassi and consul ibi strive to provid travel with
expediti clearanc at port of entri while allow border enforc agenc to focu
their limit resourc on potenti noncompli travel ibi provid the law
enforc commun with access to computerbas enforc file on suspect
individu busi vehicl aircraft and vessel it also provid access to nation
crime inform center ncic record on want person stolen vehicl vessel or
firearm licens inform crimin histori and previou feder inspect ibi
user can also interfac with all 50 state via the nation law enforc
telecommun system
intern chamber of commerc commerci crime bureau
the intern chamber of commerc icc establish the commerci crime bureau
ccb in januari 1992 to act as a focal point for fraud prevent and to encourag
cooper between commerc and law enforc agenc the ccb maintain an
sourc of inform investig
3482 2011 fraud examin manual
extens databas on all aspect of commerci fraud the cc also oper fraudnet a
uniqu global network of law firm that special in tackl busi crime
intern crimin polic organ
the intern crimin polic organizati on better known by it radio design
interpol is a network of nation central bureau in more than 186 member countri
that share inform with each other to assist law enforc agenc in the detect
and deterr of intern crime each bureau is an agenc of the member countri
govern and serv as the liaison between that countri law enforc agenc and
the interpol network in the unit sta te the nation central bureau usncb is
under the direct and control of the depart of justic and comanag by the
depart of homeland secur
to support ongo investig that requir intern assist interpol
provid inform regard
locat of suspectsfugitiveswit
intern want circular
crimin histori check
terror prevent
stolen art
trace of weapon and motor vehicl abroad
licens plate driver licens check and vehicl registr data
intern crimin polic organ case track system
the intern crimin polic organ interpol case track system
ict locat at the us nation central bureau usncb in washington dc contain
inform about peopl properti and organ involv in intern crimin
activ the usncb can determin the histori of an intern connect in an
investig or the exist of ani previou intern crimin activ the usncb
oper to provid intern support for us law enforc
sixteen feder and state law enforc agenc ar repres at the usncb and all 50
state have establish interpol liaison offic agenc repres at the usncb
includ the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos environment
protect agenc drug enforc administ ration feder bureau of investig
us immigr and custom enforc transport secur administr us
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3483
coast guard bureau of custom and border protect us marshal servic us
depart of defens us depart of state us f ood and drug administr
us postal inspect servic and us secret servic
interst identif index
the interst identif index iii is an indexpoint system for the interst
exchang of crimin record under the iii the fbi maintain an index of peopl arrest
for feloni or seriou misdemeanor under state or feder law the index includ
identif data name birth date race sex etc and the fbi and state identif
number sid from all state that have inform about an individu
search queri from justic agenc nationwid ar transmit via state telecommun
network and the fbi nation crime inform center ncic line search ar made
by name and other identifi the iii held the crimin histori of more than 649 million
individu as of septemb 2008 fortyeight state particip in the iii as of that date
ten also particip in the nation fingerprint file nff the nff state have assum
respons for crimin and noncrimin request
joint maritim inform element
the joint maritim inform element jmie a consortium of 15 us govern
agenc in the law enforc and intellig commun provid access to
repositori of format data at the secret level on worldwid merchant vessel locat
characterist registriesownership commerci cargo import and export through us
port and commerci cargo import and export in select foreign countri and
worldwid port consortium member ar the offic of naval intellig militari sealift
command drug enforc administr depart of state execut offic of
the presid offic of nation drug control polici us custom servic central
intellig agenc us coast guard maritim administr depart of energi
defens intellig agenc us citizenship and immigr servic interpol
bureau of censu and nation secur agenc
the system provid inform on maritimerel law enforc and nation foreign
intellig data to aid member oper target such as narcot interdict
smuggl sea and defensezon surveil border control petroleumtraff monitor
and emerg sealift manag thirtyf site ar oper allow access to data
sourc that provid atsea and inport locat inform and characterist on
sourc of inform investig
3484 2011 fraud examin manual
commerci and privat vessel and vessel registr file for florida california delawar
puerto rico and the virgin island
law enforc support center
us immigr and custom enforc law enforc su pport center lesc
serv as a nation oper center by provid time immigr statu and ident
inform to local state and feder law enforc agenc on alien suspect
arrest or convict of crimin activ the lesc oper 24 hour a dai seven dai a
week respond to request from feder state and local law enforc agenc with
inform gather from eight dh databas the nation crime inform center
ncic the interst identif index iii and other state crimin histori indic
in addit to provid realtim assist to law enforc agenc that ar
investig or have arrest foreignborn individu involv in crimin activ the
lesc also perform the follow investig function administ and control
immigrationrel case for immigr and custom enforc ic provid
support to a host of ongo multiag investig initi act as the central point of
contact for the fbi nation instant crimin background check system nic program
handl queri and field respons relat to nation secur employ issu provid
the law enforc commun with ncic hit confirm inform and offer ic
special agent and deport offic afterhour support via digit record duti line
confirm with person identif number
exclud parti list system
the exclud parti list system epl is a webbas databas maintain by the
gener servic administr that identifi those parti exclud throughout the us
govern unless otherwis note from receiv feder contract or certain
subcontract and from certain type of feder financi and nonfinanci assist and
benefit
nation trace center
the nation trace center ntc a branch of the firearm enforc divis of the
bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos atf is the countri onli crime
gun trace facil it provid 24hour assist to duli author law enforc
agenc in the unit state and those in mani foreign countri us the atf firearm
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3485
trace system the ntc systemat track firearm us to commit crime from their
place of manufactur to the place of sale
nation whitecollar crime center
the nation whitecollar crime center nw3c seek to provid a nationwid support
system for agenc involv in the prevent investig and prosecut of econom
and hightech crime and to support and partner with other appropri entiti in
address homeland secur initi as thei relat to econom and hightech crime the
nw3c ha a databas system that contain inform on individu and busi
suspect of econom crimin activ includ advancefe loan scheme credit card
fraud comput fraud and secur and invest fraud
narcot and danger drug inform system
the narcot and danger drug inform system naddi is a central
autom file of summari of report on subject of interest to the drug enforc
administr dea consist of more than 59 million record on individu
busi vessel aircraft and select airfield identifi through the dea investig
report system and relat investig record inquiri should be limit to narcot
relat case or file andor smuggler of fund other contraband and alien naddi is
access through the el paso intellig center epic and the dea
nation autom immigr lookout system
the nation autom immigr lookout system nail is a bureau of immigr
and custom enforc system the system provid an index of the name of all
individu who might be deni entri into the unit state name in nail ar pass
to the treasuri enforc commun system tec therefor a search of
nail is not necessari if tec ha been search
nation crime inform center
the nation crime inform center ncic locat at the fbi headquart in
washington is a wide us law enforc comput system most major law
enforc agenc have ncic connect
an ncic file often contain inform about
stolen miss or recov gun
stolen articl that have a serial number
sourc of inform investig
3486 2011 fraud examin manual
want peopl for question or arrest
stolenw vehicl auto aircraft motorcycl
stolen licens plate
stolen embezzl or miss secur stock bond and currenc
stolenw boat
miss peopl
index to state and feder crimin histori record
unidentifi peopl
foreign fugit
atf violent felon file
us secret servic protect file
gang and terrorist organ file
deport felon file
origin agenc identifi file
protect order file
ncic is a computer index of crimin justic inform eg crimin record histori
inform fugit stolen properti and miss person it is avail to feder state
and local law enforc and other crimin justic agenc and is oper 24 hour a
dai 365 dai a year
the purpos of maintain the ncic system is to provid a computer databas for
readi access by a crimin justic agenc make an inquiri and for prompt disclosur of
inform in the system from other crimin justic agenc thi inform assist
author agenc in crimin justic and relat law enforc object such as
apprehend fugit locat miss person locat and return stolen properti as
well as in the protect of the law enforc offic encount the individu
describ in the system
region inform share system
the region inform share system riss program consist of six multist project
that facilit region crimin inform exchang and provid other relat support
servic to feder state and local law enforc agenc throughout all 50 state canada
the district of columbia australia us territori and england
middl atlanticgreat lake organ crime law enforc network magloclen
magloclen includ law enforc agenc in indiana michigan ohio
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3487
pennsylvania new york new jersei delawa re maryland and washington dc the
center also ha member agenc in canada england and australia magloclen is
locat at 140 terri drive suit 100 newtown pennsylvania 18940 or can be reach
at 215 5044910 or 800 3451322
midstat organ crime in format center mocic mocic includ law enforc
agenc in north dakota south dakota nebraska kansa minnesota iowa missouri
wisconsin and illinoi the center also ha member agenc in canada mocic is
locat 1610 east sunshin street 110 springfield missouri 65804 or can be reach
at 800 8466242 or 417 8834383
new england state polic in format network nespin nespin incorpor law
enforc agenc in main new hampshir vermont massachusett connecticut
and rhode island the center also ha member agenc in canada nespin is locat
at 124 grove street suit 105 franklin ma 02038 or can be reach at 800 3435682
or 508 5288200
region organ crime inform center rocic rocic serv 800 law enforc
agenc in texa oklahoma louisiana arkansa mississippi alabama tennesse
kentucki west virginia virginia north caro lina south carolina georgia and florida
as well as puerto rico and the us virgin island rocic is locat at 545 marriott
drive suit 850 nashvil tennesse 37214 or can be reach at 800 2387985
rocki mountain inform network rmin the rmin ha 13000 member in more
than 1000 agenc in arizona new mexico colorado utah nevada idaho wyom
and montana the center also ha member agenc in canada the rmin is locat at
2828 north central avenu suit 1000 phoenix arizona 85004 or can be reach at
602 3512320
western state inform network wsin the wsin provid narcot intellig and
relat servic to it member law enforc agenc in california oregon
washington alaska and hawaii the center also ha member in canada australia and
guam the wsin address is po box 90 3198 sacramento california 942031980
and it can be call at 800 8247902 outsid of california and 800 952 5258
in california
treasuri enforc commun system
the treasuri enforc commun system tec is a depart of the
treasuri system manag by the intern revenu servic tec is a computer
inform system design to identifi individu and busi suspect of or involv
in a violat of feder law tec is also a commun system that transmit messag
sourc of inform investig
3488 2011 fraud examin manual
among treasuri law enforc offic and other feder nation state and local law
enforc agenc
tec provid access to the fbi nation crime inform center ncic and the
nation law enforc telecommun system nlet with the capabl of
commun directli with state and local enforc agenc the nlet provid
direct access to state motor vehicl depart
particip includ the us custom servic bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and
explos drug enforc administr us citizenship and immigr servic
depart of state us coast guard fe deral bureau of investig ncic section
us marshal servic intern revenu servic epic interpol nation central
bureau and depart of agricultur
tec work on a soundextyp system if an inquiri is made regard a certain name then
all similar sound name on record ar provid to the inquir inquiri on tec might
be made by name alon even if no identifi numbersuch as date of birth fbi number
or social secur numberi avail
when tec provid a list of similar sound name the subject sex race and date of
birth also ar includ the inquir then can determin which subject if ani is of interest
if a name is select tec can provid addit inform includ special
instruct such as arm and danger full name race sex height weight hair color
ey color date of birth fugit which agenc background inform miscellan
number such as fbi where and by whom a warrant is held date of offens alia case
number and ncic number
unit nation crime and justic inform network
the unit nation crime and justic inform network uncjin is fund in part by
the us bureau of justic statist the goal of the uncjin is to establish a worldwid
network to enhanc the dissemin and exchang of inform concern crimin
justic and crime prevent issu
world crimin justic librari network
the world crimin justic librari network wcjln is a network that is us to share
servic and inform concern crimin justic the group ha develop an
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3489
intern network to dissemin nation and intern crime statist and crimin
justic profil
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3501
