2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE 
 
Fraud examiners now have a number of online investigative resources available through their 
personal computers. But not so long ago, examiners had to travel to the county courthouse 
or state capital to search for public records. Fraud examiners today, however, have enough 
information available through different online sources to conduct entire inquiries without 
leaving their seat.  
 
 
Investigating with the Internet 
A great deal of information can be accessed through the Internet for little or no cost. This 
section explains some Internet basics, as well as how to use its services to obtain information 
about people, businesses, and fraud in general. 
 
The Internet is a decentralized global network of millions of diverse computers and 
computer networks. These networks can all “talk” to each other because they have agreed to 
use a common communications protocol called TCP/IP, which is named after its two most 
important protocols: Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and Internet Protocol (IP). 
 
Essentially, the Internet is a tool for communications between people and businesses. In 
general, the Internet is a giant network linking together millions of computers worldwide. 
 
The Internet is not organized by any uniform system, such as libraries’ Dewey Decimal 
System. Instead, it remains a free-floating, loosely-strung gold mine of information, available 
to those who understand how to use it. Unless you know the exact addresses of the Internet 
sites you are looking for, it is necessary to learn how to find the information.  
 
An Internet site, or page, is a single Web address, generally introduced by a person or a 
company to post information on a topic or to generate or promote business. There are a 
number of websites that will be of use to a fraud examiner, and some are listed and 
discussed at the end of this chapter. 
 
Traditional Methods for Finding Information on the Internet 
The most basic way to find information on the Internet is to execute searches using search 
engines or meta-search engines, or to locate information using website directories.  
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.502   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Search Engines 
Search engines are website tools that allow you to type in keywords describing the subject in 
which you are interested. The search engine will then scour the pages of the Internet and 
attempt to locate pages that may have pertinent information. For instance, in a search for the 
keyword fraud, the search engine will likely bring back a number of pages that have some 
relevant link to fraud (such as the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners’ website, located 
at www.ACFE.com). There are several prominent search engines on the Internet, and each 
functions in a different way. An extensive list of search engines is provided at the end of the 
chapter; however, a few of the more popular engines are described below. 
 
GOOGLE  
Google is the most-used search engine in the United States and has advanced search 
capabilities. Individual Web pages are ranked by the engine’s software according to how 
often the page is linked to by others, determining the page’s “importance” by the number of 
links and the identity of the linking page. Google is a good source for finding targeted 
information on a particular topic. Additionally, learning Google-specific search operators will 
provide the investigator with an extremely powerful tool for online investigations. 
 
For example, Google Groups is a searchable Usenet archive. It scans thousands of postings 
of Usenet groups, which are electronic bulletin boards classified by subject (see 
“Newsgroups” below). A search using Google Groups will reveal instances in which the 
terms you specify appear in a posting on the Internet. You can search by the name or e-mail 
address of users who have posted to newsgroups, or by subject, keywords, attachments, and 
so on. 
 
BING 
Bing (formerly Live Search, Windows Live Search, and MSN Search) is the current Web 
search engine from Microsoft. Bing automatically groups search results in different 
categories, depending on the type of searches users are conducting. Bing also provides the 
ability to save and share search histories via Windows Live SkyDrive, Facebook, and e-mail. 
 
In addition to providing many of the same search resources found in other popular engines 
(e.g., it provides searches specific to travel, video, pictures, and maps), Bing has several 
useful features. For example, Bing maintains an ongoing history of searches, giving 
researchers a way to identify what they looked up and in what order. And Bing’s image 
search is easier to manage than others because it displays more images on the results screen.  
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.503 
ALTAVISTA 
Altavista is a detail-oriented search engine. Because it reads the individual text of every page 
listed on the Internet, Altavista is very useful for finding random information. If you are 
simply “casting your line” to see what information might be available on a topic, this is a 
good engine to use. However, Altavista’s searches are so thorough you will encounter every 
page that contains your keyword(s), ending with as many as 200,000 hits. Successful Altavista 
searching requires you to construct your search carefully.  
 
YAHOO!  
Yahoo! is a multifaceted website containing a first-rate directory (see below for more 
information about directories), but it is also equipped with a search engine. In 2009, 
however, Yahoo! announced that its search engine would be powered by Bing. And, as of 
July 2010, up to 25 percent of the search results provided by Yahoo! Search are powered by 
Bing. 
 
EXCITE  
Excite’s search engine is good for broad general topics because it a simultaneous search of 
the Web, news headlines, sports scores, and company information. Results are grouped on a 
single page. Weeding through the results can sometimes be a chore. 
 
LYCOS  
Lycos provides advanced search capabilities, including the ability to search for specific 
media. Its Lycos Pro feature allows users to fine-tune searches. Lycos’s index of Web pages 
is smaller than those of some other services.’ 
 
ASK.COM  
Formerly AskJeeves, Ask.com is a good site for beginners and for general queries. The 
engine leads users through questions to help narrow the search, and also searches six other 
search sites. (For similar services, see metasearch engines, below.) Ask.com’s ability to 
interpret natural language makes it easy to use, though constructing precise queries can be 
difficult for the same reason. 
 
Meta-search Engines 
Meta-search engines send user requests to several other search engines and display the 
results. Some of the more common meta-search engines are described below. 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.504   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
METACRAWLER  
Metacrawler uses meta-search technology to search the Internet’s top search engines, 
including Google, Yahoo! Search, Bing, Ask.com, and more. It searches the best results from 
the combined pool of the world’s leading search engines instead of results from only one 
search engine.  
 
DOGPILE  
Owned by Infospace, this engine sends a query to a customizable list of search engines, 
directories, and specialty search sites (e.g., Google, Yahoo! Search, Bing, Ask.com) and then 
displays the results from each search engine individually. Once the results are retrieved, the 
innovative meta-search technology used by Dogpile goes to work removing duplicates and 
analyzing the results to help ensure that the best results top the list. The Comparison View 
feature lets users compare results from the leading engines with the click of a button. 
 
MAMMA  
Mamma is a “smart” meta-search engine; every time users type in a query, Mamma 
simultaneously searches a variety of engines, directories, and content sites; properly formats 
the words and syntax for each; compiles their results in a virtual database; eliminates 
duplicates; and displays them in a uniform manner according to relevance.  
 
SURFWAX  
SurfWax claims to provide the best use of relevant search results from the open Internet. It 
uses a cohesive matrix to search, sort, extract, and relate information from both the Internet 
and enterprise intranets. Surfwax offers multiple search tools, including FocusWords, 
SearchSets, SiteSnaps, and ContextZooming. 
 
Directories 
The road to mining information on the Internet does not always go through search engines. 
Some of the best investigative tools an examiner has online are directories. As the name 
suggests, directories  are specialized websites that collect the names of numerous other related 
websites, allowing the user to browse through a complete listing of possible sites to visit. 
Directories contain links to pages that have a commonality. Some all-inclusive directories 
cover a plethora of different topics, and others are more focused on particular subjects or 
disciplines. These include several accounting and auditing directories that fraud examiners 
may find very useful. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.505 
The upside to using directories is that you can logically navigate a search, easing through the 
different categories until you find what you are looking for. However, directories contain 
only a portion of the sites and pages available on the Internet; therefore, the fraud examiner 
should use directories in concert with a search engine and not instead of one. 
 
YAHOO!  
In addition to its search engine, Yahoo! has an intricate directory, possibly the most 
comprehensive and all-inclusive on the Internet. The directory is built and maintained by 
Yahoo! employees, with input from users. Yahoo! functions much like a pyramid: it begins 
with several large pools of categories, such as entertainment and government, and then 
allows the user to select more specific options from each broad category. For instance, an 
examiner could select “education,” then “universities,” then “university libraries,” until 
finally encountering a direct link to the main library catalog for the University of Texas. By 
paring down your selections to increasingly narrow topics, you can generally find several 
useful websites.  
 
VIRTUAL LIBRARY  
The Virtual Library (VL) is the oldest catalog of the Web, started by Tim Berners-Lee, the 
creator of the HTML that makes the Internet possible. Unlike commercial catalogs, it is run 
by a loose confederation of volunteers who compile pages of key links for particular areas in 
which they have expertise. While not the biggest index of the Web, the VL pages are widely 
praised as guides to particular sections of the Internet. 
 
INTERNET PUBLIC LIBRARY  
Run by librarians, this service indexes Web pages by topic. The Internet Public Library also 
contains an array of guides, such as online magazines and newspapers, associations, and tips 
for conducting research. 
 
OPEN DIRECTORY PROJECT 
Founded in 1998, Open Directory Project (dmoz.org) is the largest human-edited directory 
on the Internet. Dmoz.org provides non-commercial moderation of registered sites and is 
maintained by a community of volunteer editors. It provides site listings grouped into 
categories and subcategories.   
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.506   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
BEST OF THE WEB DIRECTORY 
The Best of the Web Directory is a commercial directory that provides site listings 
categorized by topic and region.  
 
BUSINESS.COM 
Business.com is an Internet search engine and Web directory that provides site listings in 
more than 65,000 business categories.  
 
Nontraditional Methods for Finding Information on the Internet 
Moving beyond the use of Google and other tr aditional methods of searching the Internet is 
important for individuals conducting fraud examinations. This section will examine how to 
use the following websites to obtain information on the Internet: 
• eBay 
• Whois 
• Craigslist 
• Archive 
• Zoominfo  
• GuideStar 
•  NOZA  
 
In addition to the above sites, this section will also discuss how an examiner can find 
valuable information using social networking sites.  
 
The websites addressed in this discussion are tried and true resources that fraud examiners 
should be comfortable with using. But before using these sites, establish an undercover e-mail 
account to use when searching. The e-mail account should be set up through a web-based
service like Hotmail, Yahoo!, or Gmail. Examiners should not use any of the following 
information when creating the e-mail account: 
• Personal names 
• Geographical region 
• Favorite sports teams 
• Hobbies 
 
In addition, a discreet e-mail account should have certain characteristics, such as a gender-neutral 
name. The handle should be comprised of numbers and letters that appear to be for 
a purpose, giving it added credibility and authenticity. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.507 
EXAMPLE  
LS-194-2183@yahoo.com  
 
eBay 
The online auction website eBay.com can be a valuable resource for fraud examiners. It 
maintains lengthy, detailed logs for each transaction, but this high-level information should 
be obtained with a subpoena. To conduct a more general search using a person’s name or e-mail 
address on eBay: 
• Go to “Advanced Search” in the upper-right corner of eBay’s home page. 
• Choose “Find a Member” from the left column. 
• Type in the first half of the person’s personal e-mail address (e.g., for 
crazybird@gmail.com, type “crazybird”). 
 
After finding a match, the examiner should visit the user’s eBay profile and read everything 
available on the page. An examiner can gain insight into a fraud examination by examining 
any items the subject bought or sold and by reviewing any comments the subject has made.  
 
Once the examiner has read the user’s comments, he should click the user’s “Feedback 
Profile.” Along the right side of the page will be a few selectable items under “Member 
Quick Links”; the investigator should select “View ID History” to see if the member has 
changed his ID over the past ten years. In addition, the examiner can make the suspect one 
of his “Favorite Sellers,” to receive alerts when the subject places new items for sale on 
eBay. 
 
The Whois Protocol 
Whois is a query response protocol that is used to search databases that store domain 
registration records, including domain name, server addresses, technical contacts, and 
addresses. These databases can be queried at the following sites: 
• Networksolutions.com will provide the ownership and registration information for a 
website.  
• Arin.net is a whois server that searches for the registrant and IP address range of a 
particular IP address.  
• Allwhois.com will find the whois database for a particular domain name.  
• Whatismyipaddress.com provides a collection of tools for locating information about an 
IP address.   
• Traceroute.org—like whatismyipaddress.com— can be used to trace IP addresses.  
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.508   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Craigslist 
Craigslist.org is a network of online communities, featuring free classified advertisements 
with sections dedicated to jobs, housing, personals, items for sale, services, résumés, and so 
on.  
 
The key to searching Craigslist is getting past the geographic restriction. For example, if the 
examiner is looking for items in the Silicon Valley, he cannot search other areas at the same 
time. To expand the search, the examiner must specify another area or use 
SearchTempest.com, a tool that allows users to search multiple Craigslist sites at once.  
 
Archive 
Archive.org offers researchers and historians a view of other websites captured by the 
Wayback Machine on a specific date. To access archived sites, enter a web address in the 
search box, and the engine will return a list of archived dates available. For example, a search 
of www.data2know.com returns a list of archived pages, starting on August 18, 2000.  
 
Zoominfo 
Another great resource on the Internet is Zoominfo.com. Zoominfo collates information 
from websites and then software bots — also known as intelligent agents — capture and match to 
particular individuals or companies.  
 
Zoominfo searches are conducted by company, person, or industry. Although Zoominfo 
searches can return a large amount of information, examiners must understand that this 
information is generated from other websites and should be verified. 
 
Zoominfo search results look résumés and include information like business experience, 
association connections, education credentials, and so on.  
 
GuideStar 
GuideStar is a great starting point to find data about nonprofits. GuideStar gathers and 
publicizes information about more than 850,000 nonprofit organizations. It obtains 
information from a variety of sources, including the IRS’s Form 990 data—this provides 
information on the filing organization’s mission, programs, and finances—and from 
individual organizations.  
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.509 
Noza 
Nozasearch.com is a Web-based database of charitable giving designed as a research tool for 
nonprofit organizations. It gathers data about private foundations’ activities that might be of 
interest to grant-seekers, philanthropic organizations, and individual donors.  
 
Social-Networking Websites 
Social-networking sites can be searched like traditional websites. Although a lot of the 
information available on social-networking sites can be found using traditional search 
engines, there is an ever-growing number of resources that an examiner can use to search 
these sites. For example, each social network has a search engine for locating members by 
name, phone number, or e-mail address. In general, users can search for members without 
logging in (e.g., MySpace’s default settings allow non-members to view members’ 
information) and searches can be done anonymously.  
 
If, however, a member’s profile is private, the researcher will only see a snapshot of the 
member’s information. For example, to view a member’s profile in Facebook or LinkedIn, 
the researcher must connect with the other member. If an examiner wants to view a private 
profile, he should create a compelling, attractive, and simple profile for himself and ask to be 
invited into the subject’s network. It is not necessary to create a false identity, and examiners 
should not use someone else’s identity. But if the examiner is interesting enough, good 
looking enough, or just savvy enough, he will probably be accepted into the network.  
 
An entirely separate category of search engines has been designed specifically to find 
information within social networks. These search engines use social networks to order, 
prioritize, or refine search results. Some popular social-networking search engines include 
Spokeo, Yoname, Technorati, Icerocket, and FriendFeed. This section discusses these search 
engines along with how to search photo-sharing sites. 
 
SPOKEO 
Spokeo is a social-network aggregator site that gathers information about people by 
searching for their e-mail addresses on various social-networking sites. Essentially, it is 
designed to locate and track online profiles within social networks. This site allows users to 
search by a person’s name, e-mail address, or phone number. This can be helpful if an 
examiner knows about the subject’s profile in Facebook and Myspace but is not aware that 
the subject is also a member of Hi5 and Xanga.  
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.510   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
For investigators and researchers, this is an incredible tool that gathers subject information 
in a way that other research tools cannot. One of Spokeo’s best features is its ability to track 
activity on members’ profiles. If the subject posts something on one of the popular social-networking 
sites, such as MySpace or Facebook, the post will appear in Spokeo’s search 
results and that person will be tracked for future updates.  
 
Spokeo allows a user to search and track a limited number of e-mail addresses or names for 
free, but requires a fee after a certain number of searches. 
 
YONAME 
Yoname is similar to Spokeo, but it searches  many social networks that Spokeo does not. 
Yoname is a free service, but the results can be random. Spokeo has a better return rate on 
its searches. It is important to note that if an examiner searches by a user’s e-mail address, 
Yoname will send the user an e-mail saying that someone was looking up “yo name” in 
Yoname. Although the e-mail does not contain the searcher’s information, it could be 
enough to alert a suspicious fraudster.  
 
TECHNORATI 
Technorati is a search engine for websites like YouTube, MySpace, Blog, Xanga, and so 
forth. The engine searches blogs with a variety of filters. A user can search by entering a 
topic into the Technorati search field, or he can use some of the site’s search categories, 
including photos, videos, and blogs. Using Technorati’s Advanced Search option, the 
examiner can narrow down a search to a particular blog and search by tags to sites that are 
linked to a particular blog. Although getting started with Technorati can be difficult, it can 
be a very useful resource. 
 
ICEROCKET 
Icerocket offers a unique array of tools. Backed by Mark Cuban, owner of the Dallas 
Mavericks, Icerocket was designed to track what people were searching for. It focuses 
primarily on blogs, using meta-tagging to categorize and index the content contained within 
blogs. As a result, a user can search by keyword, which captures any relevant matches found 
on a website and prioritizes matches marked as tagged searches. 
 
Like Technorati, Icerocket also allows users to  narrow down blog searches with an advanced 
search link or by using search operators, such as title, author, and tag. For example, a search 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.511 
for [title:“public records”] would find pages with  “public records” in their title. Similarly, a 
search for [title:“public records” author:“John Doe”] will return blog posts by John Doe that 
have “public records” in their title. 
 
In addition to searching blogs, Icerocket searches through image directories, Twitter, and 
MySpace. Even though an examiner can search MySpace directly, the Icerocket search 
engine tool for MySpace presents a more traditional search environment. 
 
FRIENDFEED 
FriendFeed is a real-time feed aggregator that consolidates the updates from social-networking 
sites, social-bookmarking sites, blogs, and other types of RSS feed. FriendFeed 
facilitates tracking users’ social-media activities (e.g., posting on blogs or Twitter) across a 
broad range of different social networks. According to FriendFeed’s website, its goal is to 
make Internet content more applicable and helpful by using social-network sites as tools for 
discovering intriguing information.  
 
 
A Guide to Successful Internet Searching 
 
Running Searches 
The Internet is not so much a service as a tool. To tap its rich information sources, you have 
to learn how to construct proper queries; that is, you have to learn how to ask for what you 
want. Search engines all have their limitations, but the most serious impediment to locating 
good information is the user’s lack of search skills.  
 
Most searching uses keywords. For instance, when hunting for the latest statistics on check 
fraud, the logical keywords are check  and fraud. However, if you typed in those words, the 
search engine would return numerous sites that have nothing to do with check fraud. By 
placing both words inside quotation marks (i.e., “check fraud”), you will get better results. 
Still, the list of hits will be in the thousands, so you might want to further narrow the search 
using the techniques below. 
 
Boolean Operators 
The best way to utilize a search engine is to use two, or possibly three, keywords that best 
describe the topic. If the words succeed one another, as in the case of check fraud,  then it may 
be beneficial to use Boolean operators to aid one’s search. Boolean operators  are symbols that 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.512   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
help the search engine to better understand exactly what it is searching for. Putting the “+” 
symbol between “check+fraud,” for example, will indicate to the search engine that it is to 
search only for pages that have the word fraud immediately following check.  If you insert the 
word and,  so that the search reads check and fraud, the search engine will understand to search 
for websites and pages that contain both the words check  and fraud,  but not necessarily right 
next to each other.  
 
Some of the more common Boolean operator symbols, or connectors, are shown below. 
 
 
Reserved Words and Noise Words 
The connector words and, or, not, and near are considered reserved words, and are therefore 
ignored when they appear in a search phrase. Similarly, noise words are common words with 
very little meaning (e.g., in, of, and the); such words are also ignored unless the user puts the 
entire phrase in parentheses. (See the Specific Search Operators section, below, for more 
direction on reserved and noise words.)  
 
The following are some of the common noise words ignored by most search engines. And 
and or are marked with an asterisk because they are both noise words and reserved words.  
  
Boolean Operators
 
+  Designates words that must appear right next to each other. 
–  Designates words that should not appear on a Web page. 
“ ” Designates a list of words that must appear together in an exact order, 
such as “holy cow.”  
and Designates two or more words that must both appear on a page, but not 
necessarily next to each other. 
or  Designates two connected words, one of which must appear on a page. 
not Designates words that should not appear on the page, much like the minus 
sign. 
near Designates words that should appear within a certain number of words of 
each other. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.513 
the and *  of 
his my there 
when is are 
so or *  it 
 
Specific Search Operators 
Online researchers rely on search engines to search Web pages for specified keywords and 
return a list of the Web pages containing the keywords. Although these engines return 
results instantly and with little effort, the simplicity of these tools often removes the benefits 
of more complex searching techniques. To determine a search engine or database’s abilities, 
consult the service’s FAQ or search help page. 
 
This section examines the advanced search features of the Google and Bing because they 
provide some of the most robust and useful tools for experts conducting searches. 
 
GOOGLE OPERATORS 
In addition to the basic Boolean operators discussed above, several operators can smarten 
up a Google search and return the right link faster.  
 
Operators Search Results Example  
~ Searches for synonyms of a given 
word 
[ automobiles ~glossary ]   will 
find pages with automobiles  as well 
as words like dictionaries, glossary, 
encyclopedia, etc. 
define: Returns definitions from websites for 
the particular term 
[ define:fraud ] will show 
definitions for fraud.  
site: Returns search results from only one 
website 
[ site:virtuallibrarian.com fraud ] 
will find all fraud-related pages on  
virtuallibrarian.com. 
filetype: Searches for items with a particular 
filetype 
[ filetype:doc ] will restrict the 
results to MS Word files matching 
specified search terms.   
link: Returns pages that  link to a particular 
website 
[ link:virtuallibrarian.com ] will 
return pages with links to 
virtuallibrarian.com.  
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.514   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
allintitle: Restricts results to those containing 
all the search terms specified in the 
title 
[ allintitle: mortgage fraud ] will 
return only documents that 
contain the words mortgage  and 
fraud in the title. 
allintext: Returns documents containing all the 
search terms in their text 
[ allintext: fraud skimming 
materiality ] will return only pages 
in which the words fraud, skimming, 
and materiality  appear in the text of 
the page. 
* Treated as a placeholder for one or 
more words 
[ “fraud * alert” ] tells Google to 
find pages containing a phrase that 
starts with fraud  followed by one or 
more words, followed by alert. 
 
In addition, Google operators can be combined. For example, the query [site:hp.com 
filetype:pdf “5010 LaserJet” printer FAQ] will search for an Adobe Acrobat PDF file of 
frequently asked questions regarding the 5010 LaserJet printer located on the Hewlett 
Packard website. 
 
There are numerous other operators and search techniques that work with each Google 
search service. A good resource for less-known Google operators and search tips is 
www.googleguide.com. 
 
BING OPERATORS 
Although Bing and Google share some of the same search resources, Bing has search 
operators that are unique to its search engine.  
 
Operators Search Results Example  
contains: Searches for pages where there’s a 
hyperlink to a file with the extension  
[swimming dolphin 
contains:wmv] will find wmv 
clips of dolphins swimming.    
inanchor: Returns pages that contain the specified 
terms in the link anchors of Web pages 
[inanchor: useful fraud sites] 
searches for pages that are called 
useful fraud sites by others. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.515 
inbody: Restricts results to those containing all 
the search terms specified in the body 
[inbody: securities fraud] will 
return only documents that 
contain the words securities  and 
fraud in their body.  
intitle: Restricts results to those containing all 
the search terms specified in the title 
[intitle: securities fraud] will 
return only documents that 
contain the words securities  and 
fraud in their title. 
ip: Finds websites hosted by a specific IP 
address 
[ IP:198.46.34.22 ] finds 
websites hosted by the specified 
IP address.  
prefer: Adds emphasis to a search term to help 
focus the search results 
[fraud prefer:Ponzi] specifies the 
type of fraud that the user wants 
to find.  
 
 
Online Public Database Searches 
Online public records databases are another source of information that can be accessed 
online. These databases are numerous and varied; they compile records from the federal, 
state, and county/local levels, and most can be readily accessed from a home computer after 
subscribing to their services. The costs associated with these databases can be equally varied. 
There are several access options available, and an examiner should be prepared to use any 
and all, separately or in combination. Keep in mind, however, that it may be necessary to 
spend time examining the actual documents to get the whole picture. 
 
A public records database will tell the researcher whether a particular record, or some of the 
information contained in that record, exists. However, note that such databases will not 
provide a copy of the actual document. For example, an examiner can conduct a property 
record search to find out that John Doe owns the property at 121 Main Street in Peoria, IL; 
however, if he needs a copy of the actual deed, he will have to retrieve it from the county 
clerk’s office. 
 
Additionally, there is a wealth of information now available on the Internet. As a caveat, 
however, remember that online records companies have to get their information from 
somewhere. Often, it comes directly from the county. But if the information in the county’s 
records was entered into the database incorrectly, then the report you will receive from the 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.516   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
database company will also be incorrect. Therefore, it is important to remember that 
accessing information online is never a full substitute for an examination of the public 
record itself. 
 
Remember, however, that if an examiner accesses certain types of information through an 
online service, he may be subject to the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), as discussed in 
the previous chapter. Again, the FCRA prohibits consumer reporting agencies from releasing 
personal information about an individual (e.g., information about the consumer’s character, 
general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living) to third parties without 
authorization, and it limits disclosure of consumer credit information, such as a subject’s 
credit history, to third parties. Thus, before accessing such information, you should always 
contact your attorney. 
 
Limitations of Online Public Database Searches 
There are, however, limitations to online public database searches, including: 
• Online coverage varies widely from state to state. The fraud examiner should determine 
whether specific information is available for each investigation. 
• Searches are limited in the area they cover. Fortunately for the crook, most of his public 
record “evidence” is generally filed at the county level. If he is smart enough to know 
how to conduct transactions outside his normal locality, then he can be tough to track 
without using multijurisdictional online sources. Making sure you are looking in the right 
county is important. You can be off by one county and miss pertinent land holdings, 
divorce records, liens, and so forth. 
• All online public records are brief abstracts of the original public record. 
• The source of the information compiled in a vendor’s database must be reliable. 
• Information must be checked to determine if it is accurate and current.  
• The records or publications that have been compiled in an electronic format may not go 
back very far. 
• Also, Internet search engines are notoriously erratic in their retrieval. 
 
Online Searches Through Database Vendors 
Any public records search should begin with a commercial database vendor. There are 
several companies that provide varying levels of public record information to subscribers. A 
description of some of these companies and the records they can provide are discussed later. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.517 
These companies provide access to a wide range of information that is stored in a central 
database, allowing a subscriber to access it from his computer. Some information is actually 
retrieved in hard copy and mailed or faxed to the subscriber, even though the request was 
made through the online service. 
 
Some companies require a yearly or monthly subscription fee in addition to the fee for each 
search. Others operate on a “pay as you go” principle that allows you to pay only for the 
searches you conduct. Therefore, it is important to shop around to get the best deal for your 
level of usage. 
 
For some practitioners, it may be more economical to enlist the aid of service companies, 
information brokers, and professional online investigators. These companies will conduct 
research for examiners, typically using online services and manual document retrieval from 
local sources. Although the cost of these services is higher than doing it yourself, it may be 
the best choice for occasional records searches.  
 
Using an Online Database to Find Information 
In the past, investigators hot on the heels of an asset-hider or suspect were hamstrung by the 
available investigative resources. In attempting to uncover unreported income, the 
investigator was forced to travel to the courthouse for the county in which the suspect 
conducted business, request the county files available, and take a number. These treks to  
the middle-of-nowhere were rarely cost-effective and were often fruitless in the search for 
pertinent information. 
 
This has all changed, however, and now maybe the flatfoot’s feet won’t be so flat. Thanks to 
the advent of online investigative services, such as LexisNexis, inquiries to the far-flung 
reaches of the United States can be conducted from a personal computer. These services 
have packaged a variety of invaluable investigative sources at very reasonable prices. 
 
Access to these services is accomplished in either one of two ways. Some services allow 
users to log in through an Internet site. Others provide access to their database through a 
software program and a modem. Each user has a user ID and password to gain access. 
 
The following is a description of how online searches can be used to conduct background 
checks and locate people, assets, and legal records. 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.518   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Locating People Using Online Records 
The first step to maximize search results is to discover a past address of the suspect; search 
activities should begin from that point. Second, the user should know the most powerful and 
useful types of searches, which are identified below. Third, it is important to keep in mind 
the cost effectiveness of the search activity and avoid ordering online searches that yield 
unnecessary or impractical information. 
 
The search methodology used by most online services is known as “text-string matching,” 
which means that all information entered in the data inquiry field will seek an exact match in 
the database. Typically, you may use truncation techniques (partial or abbreviated entries 
such as the first initial of the first name) only with first names and business names.  
 
Some common types of searches used to locate people using online records are discussed 
below. 
 
CREDIT HEADER SEARCHES 
Credit header searches are among the most powerful locator tools. These searches return 
information from credit reports on individuals. They are a valuable source because almost all 
people have been involved in some credit activity either under their true names or an 
assumed (or known as) name. It is appropriate to keep in mind that for common names, it 
may be necessary to use the Social Security number or date of birth to differentiate the 
subject from other people with the same name. The credit bureau headers offer two search 
mechanisms. First, the examiner can discover a current address, an address history, and 
Social Security number(s) associated with the target by using a past address up to seven years 
old. Second, once the Social Security number is in hand, the headers can be searched for 
matches, because the Social Security number is a national identity number. Although Social 
Security numbers are protected from disclosure by the Privacy Act, it has become practically 
impossible for individuals to avoid disclosing them on public records. 
 
CURRENT OCCUPANT/NEW ADDRESS SEARCHES 
A current occupant/new address search may be used to identify the occupant of an address, 
to confirm occupancy, to uncover a forwarding address, or to develop a list of neighbors 
who may know the suspect’s current whereabouts. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.519 
LAST NAME SEARCHES 
Last name searches can be used if the past address is unknown. This search produces better 
results if the name is not common; however, if  the last name is common, differentiating 
information should be included in the search. It should also be noted that some searches will 
return the identities of neighbors, who can be contacted for additional information about the 
suspect. 
 
BANKRUPTCY FILINGS, TAX LIENS, AND COURT JUDGMENTS 
Bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and court judgments have emerged in recent years as locator 
tools because such records contain valid Social Security numbers. The dramatic increase in 
individual bankruptcy claims has also particularly prompted their emergence as locator tools.  
 
DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES RECORDS SEARCHES 
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) records used to be good locator tools, but recent 
restrictions on them have reduced the effectiveness of such searches. Before Congress 
amended the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act in 1999, drivers could “opt out” and ask that 
their personal information (e.g., Social Security numbers, photographs, etc.) not be released. 
Under the amended law, however, drivers are no longer required to opt out; instead, the 
amended law imposes an “opt in” system requiring that drivers provide express 
authorization for the release of information. Moreover, individual states may not update 
their records frequently enough to provide the examiner with useful information. Searches 
such as Driver Identification can be useful on a spot basis, however. 
 
VOTER REGISTRATION RECORD SEARCHES 
In a few states, voter registration records are available, but as with DMV records, they may 
not be updated frequently. However, to the extent that date of birth information is available, 
such records can augment other searches. Also note any legal restrictions attached to the use 
of voter information. 
 
BUSINESS FILINGS SEARCHES  
Fictitious business name/doing business as filings include owner name(s), business name(s), 
file date, and file number. As noted in the previous chapter, in most states, individuals and 
corporations are required to file a doing business as (or an assumed or fictitious business 
name) statement with the county where they conduct their business. The records of sole 
proprietorship businesses, however, may not be available in the corporate/limited 
partnership records that are found at the state level. Nevertheless, the fraud examiner may be 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.520   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
able to locate these records by conducting an online search. By searching an individual or 
business name, the examiner can gather information from fictitious business name filings, 
including owner name, business name, file date, and file number. Some counties provide 
business address information, and in these counties, the examiner can also conduct searches 
using the business address.  
 
FEDERAL TAX ID SEARCHES 
Businesses can use the IRS website (www.irs.gov) to enter both the name and Federal Tax 
ID of a vendor or other business to confirm that the two match. 
 
Obtaining Financial Information and Locating Assets 
Discovering whether assets exist, where they exist, and whether they are recoverable can be 
accomplished with a search of federal, state, local, and proprietary records. These records 
can be further divided into those identifying “hard” assets and those regarding the potential 
for assets, credit capacity, or credit worthiness. 
 
SEARCHES FOR HARD ASSETS 
• The ownership of real property may be discoverable through the use of property 
searches, to the extent that they are available at the local or county level within individual 
states. 
• The ownership of vehicles can be inferred through the use of the DMV Vehicle Name 
Index, to the extent that the records within the controlling state agency reflect vehicles 
registered to a specific person or organization at a particular address. Conversely, the 
ownership of a particular vehicle may be inferred from the DMV vehicle registration 
searches. 
• An assumed business name search may be helpful in identifying a sole proprietorship 
business in which attachable assets are available.  
• The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) is extraordinary in that it can be useful in a wide 
variety of business situations. A search of UCC filings can help identify personal 
property that an individual or business has financed. UCC filings can also disclose when 
and where a debtor obtained personal loans, the type of property that he pledged to the 
lender to secure the loan, and the debtor’s current address 
• The ownership of an aircraft can be determined by searching the Aircraft Ownership 
Database by business name, person name, or wing number. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.521 
SEARCHES FOR ASSET POTENTIAL 
• The question of whether it is realistically possible to recover known assets may be 
partially answered by searching bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and tax judgments. 
• Again, the versatility of a UCC filings search is seen through the identification of assets 
that may have been pledged, in whole or in part, to secure a loan. For example, in a case 
where a bank lender has secured a loan through some type of chattel as collateral and has 
sought to perfect its lien on the chattel through a UCC filing at the state level, it can be 
fairly assumed that the debtor has a bank account with the secured party. Thus, a bank 
account asset may be identified as a recoverable asset.   
• Consumer credit reports and business credit reports searches may help develop a clearer 
picture of the target’s potential for asset recovery in terms of credit capacity and 
creditworthiness. Although access to consumer credit reports is restricted by the Fair 
Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), business credit reports are not governed by the FCRA. 
Business credit reports often contain information that is useful in verifying information, 
understanding business relationships, and developing basic financial information about 
an organization. 
 
Finding Legal Records  
The searches available to find these records can be grouped in three broad categories: on- 
site court searches, index or broad coverage searches, and public filings. 
 
ON-SITE COURT SEARCHES  
On-site court records searches  are performed by individuals who travel to county and municipal 
courthouses to search for records that match the search criteria that have been provided to 
them.  
 
These searches are directed by court, by county, or, as is the case with federal records, by the 
district court for the particular area. Accordingly, the examiner must carefully consider the 
potential location of court records. Such considerations should take into account the 
locations of the suspect’s current and past reside nces and his current and past businesses or 
employers. The results will include any litigation in which the individual was involved, 
including civil actions, criminal actions, divorces, and judgments. However, it will not return 
information concerning litigation that has been sealed by the court or information 
concerning juvenile offenders.  
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.522   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The coverage for these searches varies according to the service used. Additionally, each court 
has varying rules regarding how the search is conducted, the times when searches may be 
conducted, the repository location, and the search methods. If the subscriber is interested in 
a particular type of record, such as a divorce record, it may be necessary to call the 
company’s customer-support unit to adjust the search query. Types of records available 
include: 
• Federal civil court records, including bankruptcy records, are available for all types of 
civil litigation conducted in federal court. 
• Federal criminal court records are available for felony charges. 
• State civil court records are available based on a division of upper and lower court 
records. The division is a function of the differences within each state concerning the 
amounts in controversy. 
• State criminal court records can be obtained on a ten- or seven-year search basis for 
felonies, misdemeanors, or a combination of both. 
 
INDEX/BROAD COVERAGE SEARCHES  
These searches are useful when an examiner needs a search strategy broader than the by 
court/by county method used with on-site court record searches or that makes use of an 
index of basic information in court records. 
• Searches of defendant suits are available in all states, but provide coverage limited to 
specific counties and courts. When searching a specific state’s database, the examiner 
should review the help menu to determine the scope of the search abilities. 
• Searches of statewide criminal convictions are available in some jurisdictions. Review the 
help menu for special release requirements, the number of years available, if the record is 
for convictions only, and if the search encompasses both felonies and misdemeanors. 
• Searches of marriage/divorce indexes are available in some states. 
 
PUBLIC FILINGS 
In the United States, public companies, nonprofits, and some private companies must 
submit financial filings and forms to different government entities. Public companies, for 
example, submit various filings to the Securities and Exchange Commission (e.g., the annual 
report and the 10-K). These public filings provide a wealth of information about the filing 
company, including the nature of its business, its history, its organizational structure, its 
auditor, its balance sheets, and its income statements. Similarly, public filings are available for 
nonprofits, which must file the Form 990 to the Internal Revenue Service.  
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.523 
Public filings are available for free, as well as through fee-based services.  
 
Conducting Background Checks  
This type of search activity generally involves two broad areas: discovering what the public 
records reveal with respect to individuals and businesses with whom the subscriber may wish 
to do business and discovering information about prospective employees. In general, online 
public records databases are generally the best sources of background information. 
 
But before conducting any background checks, consult with legal counsel.  
 
DUE DILIGENCE 
As business organizations seek to identify vendors, clients, or strategic partners or seek to 
loan or collect money, they frequently conduct public record inquiries focused on other 
businesses or individuals who are principals of business organizations. This type of public 
record inquiry involves such issues as verification of application information, debt burden, 
adverse financial information, credit capacity or worthiness, business relationships (the so-called 
family tree), litigation history, and criminal background. Useful searches include the 
following: 
• Corporate/limited partnership searches are available in all states to verify information, 
identify principals, and develop other business relationships. 
• Bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and judgments searches respond to issues of adverse 
financial information and credit capacity/worthiness. 
• UCC filings answer questions of debt burden. This search will be helpful to identify 
hidden ownership or partnership interests, and it will be helpful to locate address 
information on debtors. 
• State and federal civil court records provide answers to questions concerning litigation 
history, past business relationships, and the potential for debt burden either as a function 
of an adverse judgment or as a function of financing expensive litigation. 
• State and federal criminal court records identify the possibility of a criminal background. 
• The use of consumer credit reports and business credit reports helps resolve questions 
concerning credit capacity and creditworthiness. In addition, the business report is useful 
in verifying information, understanding business relationships, and developing basic 
financial information about an organization. 
• Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) searches may be useful in 
developing adverse information or verifying information given by a prospective vendor, 
client, or strategic partner. 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.524   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Aircraft mechanics, airmen, medical license, DEA controlled substances, and other 
licenses may serve to verify that basic professional and occupational standards are met by 
a prospective vendor, client, or strategic partner. 
 
EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND 
Online record inquiries regarding employment history have increased significantly over the 
past few years. Corporate downsizing has disaffected an increasing number of workers to the 
point that it is easier for them to rationalize employee defalcation, fraud, or embezzlement. 
The same economic phenomenon of downsizing, combined with business pressure to 
increase productivity and the friction of modern life, have apparently produced an increase 
in workplace violence. Liabilities for employers and businesses have expanded through 
negligence standards and the respondeat superior doctrine for such tortious conduct as vehicle 
operation, assault, battery, false imprisonment, sexual harassment, and discrimination. 
Finally, the potential to be held liable for negative references has deterred past employers 
from responding to prospective employers’ inquiries about an employee. Therefore, 
prospective employers must increasingly rely on public information.  
 
Some of the searches useful in developing background information are listed below (where 
permitted by law): 
• Credit header searches are useful in confirming address and Social Security number 
information. 
• State and federal criminal court records and statewide criminal convictions may be used 
to uncover past criminal problems presaging similar difficulties. Indeed, criminal 
background checks may be mandated by law. For example, the Violent Crime Control 
and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 makes it a felony for insurance companies, as well as 
persons employing anyone to conduct the business of insurance, to hire any individual 
convicted of a felony involving dishonesty or a breach of trust.  
• Aircraft mechanics, airmen, medical license, and other licenses are available to ensure 
that basic job requirements are met in the appropriate circumstance. 
• Consumer credit reports may be obtained for purposes of employee selection, retention,  
and promotion. 
• Public filings such as bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and judgments may be obtained to 
identify adverse financial matters that can serve as potential motivators for fraud, 
defamation, and embezzlement. 
• Where a prospective or current employee drives a personally owned vehicle or an 
employer-owned vehicle in furthering the interests of the employer, such activity may 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.525 
expose the employer to liability for damages;  therefore, DMV driving records must be 
checked. 
• Basic information concerning job qualification can be verified through education 
verification and employment verification searches. Note: These are verification tools 
only; they are not definitional in terms of discovering past or current employment. 
• Although workers’ compensation searches may return the subject’s name, Social Security 
number, date of birth, employer’s name, date and type of accident, and nature and extent 
of inquiry, the Americans with Disabilities Act may limit usage of the search results. The 
Act purports to prevent prospective employers from using workers’ compensation 
records in denying employment to otherwise qualified applicants. 
 
Public Record Database Vendors 
Listed below is information about some of the larger commercial database vendors. You can 
shop various services to find the one that meets your needs in the most cost-effective 
manner and the one that fits your current case. In some instances, it may be necessary to use 
more than one service to get an accurate and complete profile. These companies get their 
information from various sources and on various update schedules, so a search in any one 
database may return different results than a search done elsewhere. 
 
Asset Locator and Business Background Check by KnowX 
KnowX is a product of the LexisNexis Risk and Information Analytics Group, and it claims 
to be the most comprehensive source of public information on the Web. It offers easily 
navigable public records searches in various categories, among them asset searches, adverse 
filings, property valuation, and people- and business-locator tools. One can also verify 
licenses, conduct background checks, and look up a company’s history. KnowX is an 
altogether user-friendly source of information.  
 
Most importantly, users can run KnowX’s business background check to uncover 
bankruptcies, judgments, lawsuits, liens, and UCC filings against a business with one search. 
In addition, KnowX’s asset locator service enables users to locate assets such as real estate, 
aircraft, and watercraft with one search. This software can also be used to verify ownership 
and assess property value. 
 
KnowX can be found at www.knowx.com. 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.526   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
US Datalink 
US Datalink is an employee background check service. Although it cannot retrieve 
information as quickly as some other vendors, US Datalink is the only company that relies 
entirely on manual searches for its information. US Datalink exclusively sends its researchers 
to the county courthouse to look up the requested information, as opposed to the electronic 
and possibly faulty information that other online investigative databases use. Therefore, if a 
fraud examiner has the time to wait for his inquiry, US Datalink might be the most reliable 
option. US Datalink also has media resources, and it can be found at www.usdatalink.com. 
 
infoUSA 
infoUSA compiles business and consumer data, and it offers a wide range of data processing 
services. infoUSA users have access to information on 14 million U.S. businesses, 13 million 
executives and professionals, and 210 million U.S. consumers. Searches of infoUSA’s 
database can produce results for a broad range of information, including sales volume, 
corporate linkage, contact names and titles, company history, credit ratings, and any 
headlines involving the business. Furthermore, the versatility of the searches is one of 
infoUSA’s better features; searches can be performed according to business size, location, 
length of time in operation, gender or race of owners, and industry. infoUSA is located at 
www.infousa.com. 
 
Veris 
Veris is a Social Security validation service; it specializes in providing verification of Social 
Security numbers, possible mail drop addresses, dates of birth, and death records. Veris 
allows an investigator to match a Social Security number to a name; however, this service is 
costly (cost per search begins at $115, but the actual cost depends on the type of search and 
number of searches being conducted) but very accurate. Veris can be accessed at www.veris-ssn.com. 
 
CSC Diligenz 
CSC Diligenz is a Web-based due diligence service. It is a great database for retrieving 
information about businesses. With its weekly database updates, CSC Diligenz’s strength lies 
in the reliability of its public record information. CSC Diligenz can produce a business’s 
financial statements, records pertaining to corporate status, business credit, and licensing 
information. UCC filings, bankruptcy, judgments, and corporate good-standing searches are 
just a few of their services. Diligenz is located at www.diligenz.com. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.527 
Dialog 
Dialog is a ProQuest company, and it offers users with access to more than 1,200 databases. 
It contains nearly 2 billion records, including references and abstracts of published literature; 
statistical tables; the full text of selected articles; and directory, business, and financial data. 
Dialog can be accessed at www.dialog.com. 
 
D&B 
D&B is a business information service provider. The variety of information available 
through D&B is impressive. It is probably one of the most comprehensive and diverse 
sources available, with facts on more than 130 million companies in more than 190 
countries. D&B is renowned for products like Business Information Report  and Industry Norms 
and Key Business Ratios,  both excellent tools. It is located at www.dnb.com. 
 
Hoover’s 
Hoover’s, a D&B company, is a one-stop reference for business information. Hoover’s 
provides comprehensive, up-to-date business information for professionals who need 
intelligence on U.S. and global companies, industries, and professionals. Hoover’s database 
consists of 65 million companies with in-depth coverage of 40,000 public and non-public 
U.S. and international companies. Subscribers also have access to information on more than 
15 million small, private business across the United States. Hoover’s is located at 
www.hoovers.com. 
 
LexisNexis 
LexisNexis is a legal and business information database that provides its subscribers with 
daily newspapers for either a flat fee or a per-use fee. LexisNexis maintains a cavernous 
database of U.S. and international media sources, including daily newspapers, magazines, and 
television transcripts. In addition, LexisNexis offers a service in which the user can request 
immediate information on difficult-to-find topics. LexisNexis will research the topic and give 
the user the information as quickly as possible. For more information, visit www.lexis.com. 
 
In one form or another, LexisNexis has been in the information business for nearly 30 years. 
It is now one of the leading electronic data firms in the world. Users can obtain access to 
public records, media publications, and court cases and records. For more information, visit 
www.lexisnexis.com. 
 
DCS Information Systems 
Founded in 1967, DCS Information Systems is an established source for investigative 
information. DCS provides online investigative solutions for business and government — 
from financial institutions to law enforcement or investigators. Their online database 
products help organizations prevent and detect fraud; verify application information; screen 
potential employees; and locate debtors, missing  persons, heirs, or assets. DCS provides 
information comprising public records and publicly available information. Its AmeriFind 
online resource system is separated into three areas, making searches simple: 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.528   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• PrimeData provides banking and finance information. 
• QuickFind serves general investigations, security, and fraud prevention and detection. 
• FraudTracer serves insurance fraud investigations and claims. 
 
G.A. Public Records Services 
G.A. Public Records Services specializes in onsite county-level criminal record information. 
It can usually provide a report within 24– 72 hours, has access to records in thousands of 
counties coast to coast. G.A. Public Records Services provides search services for 
employment screening, corporate due diligence, fraud investigations, private investigations, 
and tenant screening. For more information, visit www.gaprs.com. 
 
Experian 
Experian is one of the major providers of consumer credit information, and it provides a 
variety of other public information. Experian provides services on consumer and business 
credit, direct marketing, and real estate information services. Experian maintains credit 
information on more than 210 million U.S. consumers and more than 18 million U.S. 
businesses. Its National Consumer Database is updated 65 times per year with information 
on more than 110 million U.S. households. The National Business Database is updated 
monthly, has facts on more than 18 million companies in all industries, and has more than 
200 million cross-industry application records to help detect inconsistencies in incoming 
applications.  
 
Some of the services provided by Experian include: 
• Business Snapshot Reports that summarize credit histories, including payment patterns 
and legal filings, of small businesses or contractors. 
• Precise ID with Knowledge IQ consist of  scoring, analytics, and knowledge-based 
authentication, and it provides real-time and online validation and verification and fraud 
assessment of names, addresses, Social Security numbers, dates of birth, drivers’ licenses, 
and telephone numbers. 
 
TransUnion  
TransUnion is one of the big three credit report companies, and it offers credit information 
and services for consumers and businesses alike. More specifically, TransUnion is a global 
provider of business intelligence services with technology-based intelligence products, 
including innovative credit-decision and fraud-prevention tools, advanced target-marketing 
products, risk and profitability models, and portfolio management.  
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.529 
TransUnion also offers a Fraud Victim Assistance Department (FVAD). Since its inception, 
the FVAD has helped millions of consumers resolve or prevent problems with credit fraud. 
The FVAD comprises three distinct teams: 
• The Consumer Protection Team (CPT) 
• The Fraud Investigation Response and Support Team (FIRST) 
• The Fraud Assistance and Support Team (FAST) 
 
Search Systems 
Search Systems is a public records directory with more than 55,000 searchable public record 
databases. Its search capabilities include business information, corporate filings, property 
records, deeds, mortgages, criminal and civil court filings, inmates, offenders, births, deaths, 
marriages, unclaimed property, and professional licenses. One of its many directories, the 
criminal records and offenders search, has access to more than 300 million criminal records, 
and its Search Systems Premium offers instant access to more than 100 million bankruptcy, 
judgment, and tax liens. For more information, visit http://publicrecords.searchsystems.net. 
 
Westlaw  
Westlaw is an online legal research service, and it provides access to a comprehensive and 
current collection of public records. Its People Finder database directory contains 
information on individuals compiled from numerous public sources, including telephone 
directories, publishers’ mailing lists, change of address files, real estate filings, utility records, 
public demographic and consumer household data, voter registration records, driver’s license 
data, federal and state death records, and credit header data. For more information, visit 
www.westlaw.com.  
 
Newspaper/Media Databases 
Newspapers, periodicals, and journals can be excellent sources of information in a fraud 
investigation, particularly when searching for background information on an individual or a 
business. For example, in a Texas case, a person accused of insider trading was cleared using 
materials from an media database search. Defense attorneys gathered more than 300 
published comments about the company’s financial prospects and showed that someone 
following the advice distributed freely in the press would have made more money than  
the accused.2 
                                                 
2 Bernstein, Paul. Computers for Lawyers: A Complete Guide to Law Office Automation. 2nd ed. Chicago: ATLA Press, 
1997. 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.530   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Searchable databases containing information from literally hundreds of published sources 
can usually be accessed for free at most libraries. There are also a number of online 
databases that deal specifically with news and media resources. These databases compile a 
number of different media resources and allow the user to search for a specific topic, 
returning articles or transcripts that pertain to the requested subject. Most publications allow 
users to search their archives for free; the full text of articles is available, but usually for a fee. 
Using one of the following services allows users to search many publications at once. 
 
Factiva 
Factiva, from Dow Jones, is tailored for business and financial news searches, maintaining a 
catalog of more than 28,000 of the world’s leading news and business sources from 159 
countries, 350 geographic regions, and in 23 languages. Factiva allows users to pay only for 
the articles downloaded and does not require an annual subscription. For more information, 
visit www.factiva.com. 
 
Highbeam Research  
HighBeam has an extensive archive containing millions of documents from leading 
publications that are updated daily or going back as far as 20 years. Searchable sources 
include newspapers, magazines, journals, transcripts, books, dictionaries, and almanacs. For 
more information, visit www.highbeam.com. 
 
ProQuest 
ProQuest is a data service that offers access to thousands of online journals and magazines 
covering a wide array of subjects. ProQuest’s vast content pools are available to researchers 
through libraries of all types and include the world’s largest digital newspaper archive; 
periodical databases comprising the output of thousands of titles and spanning more than 
500 years, with many in full-text, full-image format; an extensive dissertation collection; and 
various other scholarly collections. For more information, visit www.proquest.com. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.531 
Other News Database Services 
• Newspapers on the Net (www.onlinenewspapers.com) 
• Newswise (www.newswise.com) 
 
 
Useful Websites 
The following is a list of websites grouped by topic that should prove useful to fraud 
examiners and other anti-fraud professionals. 
 
 
Search Engines 
About.com http://www.about.com
All the Web http://www.alltheweb.com
AltaVista http://www.altavista.com
Ask.com http://www.ask.com
Bing http://www.bing.com
Complete Planet http://aip.completeplanet.com
Copernic http://www.copernic.com
Dmoz http://www.dmoz.org
Dogpile http://www.dogpile.com
Exalead http://www.exalead.com
Excite http://www.excite.com
Go.com http://go.com
Google http://www.google.com
HotBot http://www.hotbot.com
Icerocket http://www.icerocket.com
IWon http://home.iwon.com
Infomine http://infomine.ucr.edu
Internet 101 http://www.internet101.org
Law Crawler — Legal Issues http://lawcrawler.findlaw.com
Legal Engine http://www.legalengine.com
Lococitato http://www.lococitato.com
LookSmart http://www.looksmart.com
Lycos http://www.lycos.com
Mamma http://www.mamma.com
Meta 360 http://www.meta360.com
Metacrawler http://www.metacrawler.com
Monster Crawler http://www.monstercrawler.com
My Way http://goto.myway.com
Northern Light Business http://www.nlsearch.com/bresearch.php
Search Engine Watch http://searchenginewatch.com
Search Monger http://www.searchmonger.com
Search.com http://www.search.com
Search Site http://www.searchsite.com
Snap http://www.snap.com
Spokeo http://www.spokeo.com
Surf Canyon http://www.surfcanyon.com
SurfWax http://www.surfwax.com
Technorati http://technorati.com
WebCrawler http://www.webcrawler.com
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.532   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Web Ferret http://www.webferret.com
Yahoo! http://www.yahoo.com
YoName http://www.yoname.com
Zoominfo http://www.zoominfo.com
  
 
Social-Networking Sites 
Twitter www.twitter.com
MySpace www.myspace.com
Facebook www.facebook.com
Classmates Online www.classmates.com
LinkedIn www.linkedin.com
Reunion www.reunion.com
Bebo www.bebo.com
Orkut www.orkut.com
Hi5 http://hi5.com
Xanga www.xanga.com
Spoke www.spoke.com
Alt www.alt.com
  
 
News Sources 
ABCNews.com http://abcnews. go.com
BNET Research Center http://findarticles.com
CBS http://www.cbsnews.com
CNN Interactive http://www.cnn.com
CRAYON http://www.crayon.net
Dialog Web http://www.dialogweb.com
Dow Jones Factiva http://www.factiva.com
FOX http://www.foxnews.com
Highbeam http://www.highbeam.com
Investigative Reporters and Editors http://www.ire.org
LexisNexis http://www.lexisnexis.com
Market Watch http://www.marketwatch.com
MSNBC http://www.msnbc.msn.com
MSN Money http://moneycentral.msn.com/home.asp 
NBC http://www.nbc.com
CNET News http://news.cnet.com
NewsLink http://newslink.org
Online News papers http://www.onlinenewspapers.com
Refdesk http://www.refdesk.com
Reuters http://www.reuters.com
Salon http://www.salon.com
Slate http://www.slate.com
The Council of State Governments http://www.csg.org
Wired News http://www.wired.com
  
 
Newspapers 
Annapolis Capital-Gazette http://www.hometownannapolis.com
Augusta Chronicle http://chronicle.augusta.com
Baltimore Sun http://www.baltimoresun.com
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.533 
Boston Globe http://www.boston.com/boston globe
Casper Star-Tribune (WY) http://www.trib.com
Chattanooga Times Free Press http://www.timesfreepress.com
Chicago Sun-Times http://www.suntimes.com
Chicago Tribune http://www.chicagotribune.com
Christian Science Monitor http://www.csmonitor.com
Colorado Springs Gazette http://www.gazette.com
Daily Gazette (NY) http://www.dailygazette.com
Dallas Morning News http://www.dallasnews.com
Desert News (UT) http://www.deseretnews.com
Detroit Free Press http://www.freep.com
Evansville Courier & Press (IN) http://www.courier press.com
Florida Times-Union http://www.jacksonville.com
Fort Worth Star-Telegram http://www.star-telegram.com
Gainesville Sun http://www.gainesville.com
Houston Chronicle http://www.chron.com
Knoxville News-Sentinel http://www.knoxnews.com
Los Angeles Times http://www.latimes.com
Miami Herald http://www.miamiherald.com
Missoulian (MT) http://www.missoulian.com
New York Daily News http://www.nydailynews.com
New York Post http://www.nypost.com
New York Times http://www.nytimes.com
Newsday http://www.newsday.com
Norfolk Virginian-Pilot http://hamptonroads.com/pilotonline
Orange County Register http://www.ocregister.com
Orlando Sentinel http://www.orlandosentinel.com
Raleigh News and Observer http://www.newsobserver.com
Roanoke Times http://www.roanoke.com
Salt Lake Tribune http://www.sltrib.com
San Diego Union-Tribune http://www.signonsandiego.com
San Francisco Chronicle/Examiner http://www.sfgate.com
San Jose Mercury News http://www.mercurynews.com
Seattle Times http://seattletimes.nwsource.com
Sioux City Journal http://www.siouxcityjournal.com
St. Paul Pioneer Press http://www.twincities.com
St. Petersburg Times http://www.tampabay.com
The New York Times on the Web http://www.nytimes.com
USA Today http://www.usatoday.com
Wall Street Journal http://online.wsj.com
Washington Post http://www.washingtonpost.com
  
 
University Library Sites 
Brigham Young University http://www.lib.byu.edu
Cal State University — Long Beach http://www.csulb.edu/library
Carnegie Mellon University http://www.library.cmu.edu
Claremont Colleges http://voxlibris.claremont.edu
Cornell University http://www.cornell.edu/libraries
Drexel University http://www.library.drexel.edu
Duke University http://library.duke.edu
Eastern Michigan University http://www.emich.edu/halle
Georgetown University http://library.georgetown.edu
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.534   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Harvard University (HOLLIS—Harvard Online Library Information System) http://lib.harvard.edu 
Indiana Univ. / Purdue Univ. http://www.ulib.iupui.edu
Iowa State University http://www.lib.iastate.edu
Johns Hopkins University http://www.welch.jhu.edu
Kansas State University http://www.lib.ksu.edu
Louisiana State University http://www.lib.lsu.edu
Mansfield University http://lib.mansfield.edu/index.cfm
Miami (OH) University http://www.lib.muohio.edu
Middle Tennessee State University http://library.mtsu.edu
MIT University http://libraries.mit.edu
New Mexico State University http://lib.nmsu.edu
North Carolina State University http://www.lib.ncsu.edu
Princeton University http://libweb.princeton.edu
Tulane University http://library.tulane.edu
University of Arizona http://www.arizona.edu/home/libraries.php 
University of Cal-Berkeley http://www.lib.berkeley.edu
University of Cal-Los Angeles http://www2.library.ucla.edu
University of Cal-Riverside http://library.ucr.edu
University of Florida http://web.uflib.ufl.edu
University of Houston http://info.lib.uh.edu
University of Idaho http://www.lib.uidaho.edu
University of Iowa http://www.lib.uiowa.edu
University of Maine http://www.library.umaine.edu
University System of Maryland and Affiliated Institutions http://www.itd.umd.edu 
University of Michigan http://www.lib.umich.edu
University of Minnesota http://www1.umn.edu
University of New Orleans http://www.uno.edu
University of North Carolina http://www.ils.unc.edu/index.html
University of North Carolina-Charlotte http://www.uncc.edu
University of Virginia http://www.virginia.edu/libraries
Vanderbilt University http://www.library.vanderbilt.edu
Washington University http://www.lib.washington.edu
  
 
State Government Listings 
Alabama http://www.alabama.gov
Alaska http://www.state.ak.us
Arizona http://az.gov
Arkansas http://www.state.ar.us
California http://www.ca.gov
Colorado http://colorado.gov
Connecticut http://www.ct.gov
Delaware http://delaware.gov
Florida http://www.myflorida.com
Georgia http://www.georgia.gov
Hawaii http://www.ehawaii.gov
Idaho http://www.state.id.us
Illinois http://www.illinois.gov
Indiana http://www.state.in.us
Iowa http://www.iowa.gov
Kansas http://www.kansas.gov
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.535 
Kentucky http://kentucky.gov
Louisiana http://www.louisiana.gov
Maine http://www.maine.gov
Maryland http://www.maryland.gov
Massachusetts http://www.mass.gov
Michigan http://www.michigan.gov
Minnesota http://www.state.mn.us
Mississippi http://www.ms.gov
Missouri http://www.mo.gov
Montana http://mt.gov
Nebraska http://www.nebraska.gov
Nevada http://www.nv.gov
New Hampshire http://www.nh.gov
New Jersey http://www.state.nj.us
New Mexico http://www.newmexico.gov
New York http://www.state.ny.us
North Carolina http://www.state.nc.us
North Dakota http://www.nd.gov
Ohio http://www.ohio.gov
Oklahoma http://www.ok.gov
Oregon http://www.oregon.gov
Pennsylvania http://www.state.pa.us
Rhode Island http://www.ri.gov
South Carolina http://www.sc.gov
South Dakota http://www.sd.gov
Tennessee http://www.tennessee.gov
Texas http://www.state.tx.us
Utah http://www.utah.gov
Vermont http://vermont.gov
Virginia http://www.virginia.gov
Washington http://www.state.wa.us
West Virginia http://www.wv.gov
Wisconsin http://www.wisconsin.gov
Wyoming http://wyoming.gov
  
 
Telephone Numbers and Addresses 
AOL Hometown-home page finder http://site.aol.com/netfind/hometown.html 
AT&T AnyWho http://www.anywho.com
555-1212 http://www.555-1212.com
Big Yellow http://www.bigyellow.com
Bigbook http://www.bigbook.com 
E-mail addresses, reverse phone http://www.iaf.net
GTE Superpages http://www.superpages.com
InfoSpace http://www.infospaceinc.com
InfoUSA http://www.infousa.com
Intelius-people search http://find.intelius.com
Military Personnel Records http://www.archives.gov
PeopleFinders.com http://www. peoplefinders.com
People Search http://www. peoplesearch.net
Phone Numbers (Infobel) http://www.infobel.com/teldir
Register.com http://www.register.com
Search-By-Number http://www.search-by-number.com
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.536   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Semaphore Corp http://www.semaphorecorp.com
Switchboard http://www.switchboard.com
The PI Mall http://www.pimall.com
U.S Web Finder http://uswebfinder.com
WhoWhere? http://www.whowhere.com
Yahoo! People Search http://people.yahoo.com
Yellowbook http://www.yellowbook.com
  
 
Maps  
Bing Maps http://www.bing.com/maps
Google Maps http://maps.google.com
MapQuest http://www.mapquest.com
Maps On Us http://www.mapsonus.com
  
 
Databases — Public Record Searches 
BRB Publications, Inc. http://www.brb pub.com
ChoicePoint http://www.choice point.net
ChoicePoint: AutotrackXP http://atxp.choicepoint.com
DCS Information Systems http://www.dnis.com
Dialog http://www.dialog.com
Diligenz http://www.diligenz.com
Dun & Bradstreet http://www.dnb.com
Experian http://www.experian.com
FedWorld Http://www.fedworld.gov
G.S. Public Record Services http://www.gaprs.biz
InfoUSA http://www.infousa.com
KnowX http://www.knowx.com
LexisNexis http://global.lexisnexis.com/us
Locate Fast http://www.loc8fast.com
Merlin Information Systems http://www.merlindata.com
National Center for Health Statistics, Vital Records http://www.cdc.gov/nchs 
Noncommercial Organizations http://www.pir.org
PublicData http://www.publicdata.com
Searchsystems.net http://www.searchsystems.net
Social Security Number Verification Services http://www.veris-ssn.com
USDatalink http://www.usdatalink.net
  
 
Legal Resources 
Docusearch Investigations http://www.docusearch.com
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts http://www.uscourts.gov
Attorney search http://lawyers.findlaw.com
California Laws http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/calaw.html
Courthouse News http://www.courthousenews.com
Cyber Securities Laws http://www.cybersecuritieslaw.com
Divorce Central http://www.divorcecentral.com
Federal Legislative Information on the Internet http://thomas.loc.gov 
FindLaw http://www.findlaw.com
FindLaw California Codes and Statutes http://california.findlaw.com
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.537 
Florida Statutes http://www.fdle.state.fl.us/statutes
Law on the Web http://www.law.com
Lawyers http://www.lawyers.com
Lawyer Directory http://www.lawyers.findlaw.com
Legal Ethics http://www.legalethics.com
Legal Info Institute of Cornell http://www.law.cornell.edu
Legal Research on the Web http://gsulaw.gsu.edu/metaindex
Legal Studies at the University of Massachusetts http://www.umass.edu/legal 
Martindale http://www.martindale.com
Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing http://www.occ.treas.gov/BSA/BSAmain.htm 
National Center for State Courts http://www.ncsconline.org
Nolo http://www.nolo.com
Online Sunshine — Florida Legislature http://www.leg.state.fl.us
Practical Law Company http://us.practicallaw.com
Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press http://www.rcfp.org
Reporters Committee — Taping Conversations http://www.rcfp.org/taping/index.html 
Supreme Court of the U.S. http://www.supremecourt.gov
U.S. Supreme Court Decisions - before 1975 http://supcourt.ntis.gov
U.S. Supreme Court Internet Sites http://llrx.com/features/scourtsites.htm 
University of Chicago Law School http://www1.lib.uchicago.edu
  
 
Government Sites and Criminal Justice Resources 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) http://http://www.atf.gov/ 
Bureau of Industry and Security’s List of Denied Persons http://www.bis.doc.gov/dpl 
Central Intelligence Agency http://www.cia.gov
Class Action http://www.classaction.com 
County Sheriff’s Offices — By State http://www.corrections.com/links
Court Websites http://www.uscourts.gov
Courtlink http://www.lexisnexis.com/courtlink/online 
Database of Government Websites http://www.usa.gov
Federal Citizen Information Center http://www.pueblo.gsa.gov
FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin http://www.fbi.gov/publications/leb/leb.htm 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security http://www.dhs.gov
FedWorld  http://www.fedworld.gov
Federal Bureau of Investigation http://www.fbi.gov
Federal Bureau of Prisons http://www.bop.gov
Federal Election Commission http://www.fec.gov
Federal Election Commission information http://www.fec.gov/ans/answers.shtml 
Federal Inspector General http://www.ignet.gov
Federal Judicial Center http://www.fjc.gov
Florida Department of Corrections http://www.dc.state.fl.us
Florida Department of Law Enforcement http://www.fdle.state.fl.us
Florida Department of State http://www.dos.state.fl.us
Florida Government Website http://myflorida.com/portal/Government 
GovSpot http://www.govspot.com
Internal Revenue Service http://www.irs.gov
Investigator’s Guide to the Sources of http://www.gao.gov/special.pubs/soi.htm 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.538   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Information (GAO/OSI-97-2) 
Library of Congress http://www.loc.gov
National Address Server http://www.cedar.buffalo.edu/adserv.html 
National Archives  http://www.archives.gov
National Center for State Courts http://www.ncsconline.org
National Criminal Justice Reference Service http://www.ncjrs.org
Noblis http://www.noblis.org
Nonprofit Gateway http://www.usa.gov/Business/Nonprofit.shtml 
Directorate of Defense Trade Controls http://pmddtc.state.gov
Police Officers Internet Directory http://www.officer.com
Public Access to Electronic Records — PACER http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov 
Published List of Recalls — National Highway Traffic Safety Administration http://www-odi.nhtsa.dot.gov 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca
SEC Enforcement Regulatory Actions http://www.sec.gov/rules.shtml
SEC Division of Enforcement http://www.sec.gov/divisions/enforce.shtml 
Securities & Exchange Commission EDGAR http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml 
Securities Class Action Clearinghouse http://securities.stanford.edu
Selective Service System http://www.sss.gov
Sex Offenders Registry http://www.fbi.gov/hq/cid/cac/states.htm 
Social Security Death Index Search http://ssdi.rootsweb.com
SSN Validation Database http://usinfosearch.com/ssn_validation_database.htm 
State and Federal Prisons http://www.bop.gov
State and Local Government on the Internet http://www.statelocal gov.net 
State Legislatures http://www.ncsl.org
Superior Information Services http://www.superiorinfo.com
Texas Department of Public Safety—Crime Records http://records.txdps.state.tx.us 
USA.gov http://www.usa.gov
U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission http://www.cftc.gov 
U.S. Department of Justice http://www.usdoj.gov
U.S. Department of Justice — Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section http://www.cybercrime.gov 
U.S. Federal Inspectors General http://www.ignet.gov
U.S. Federal Communications Commission http://www.fcc.gov
U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation http://www.fdic.gov
U.S. Federal Food & Drug Administration http://www.fda.gov
U.S. General Services Administration http://www.gsa.gov
U.S. Government Printing Office http://www.access.gpo.gov
U.S. Federal Trade Commission http://www.ftc.gov
U.S. Government Accountability Office http://www.gao.gov
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office http://www.uspto.gov
U.S. Postal Service http://www.usps.gov/ncsc
U.S. Supreme Court http://www.supremecourtus.gov
United Nations Crime & Justice Information Network (UNCJIN) http://www.uncjin.org 
Vital Records Database http://www.vitalrec.com
Voter’s Registration http://www.global-locate.com
White House http://www.whitehouse.gov
  
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.539 
Other Fraud-Related Websites  and Websites of Interest 
ACL — Data Analysis Software http://www.acl.com
Active Most Wanted and Criminal Investigations http://www.activemostwanted.com 
Association of College and University Auditors http://www.acua.org 
AFU and Urban Legends Archive http://www.snopes.com
Any Birthday http://www.anybirthday.com
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners http://www.ACFE.com
Better Business Bureau Web Server http://www.bbb.org
Broward County Sheriff’s Office http://www.sheriff.org
CBA: Consumer Tips for Visa and MasterCard http://www.cba.ca
Company Site Locator http://www.switchboard.com
Computer Security Institute http://www.gocsi.com
Consumer Education — Fraud http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/consumer.shtm 
Corrections Connection http://www.corrections.com
CPA Directory http://www.cpadirectory.com/index.cfm 
Check Fraud http://www.ckfraud.org
Black Book Online http://www.blackbookonline.info
Cyber Space Law Center http://www.findlaw.com/01topics/10cyberspace/index.html
Dan Moldea http://www.moldea.com
EndFraud.com http://www.endfraud.com
Financial Scandals http://www.ex.ac.uk/~RDavies/arian/scandals 
Forensic Accounting Information http://www.forensic-accounting-information.com 
Fraud Index http://www.scambusters.org
Fuld & Company’s Internet Intelligence Index http://www.fuld.com 
High Technology Crime Investigation Association http://htcia.org 
Hoover’s http://www.hoovers.com
Identity Theft—Privacy Rights Clearinghouse http://www.privacyrights.org  
Identity Theft Assumption and Deterrence Act http://www.identitytheft.org 
Internet Anti-Scam http://www.nerdworld.com/nw1319.html 
Internet Center for Corruption Research http://www.icgg.org
Internet Crime Complaint Center http://www.ic3.gov
Inventor Fraud Center, National http://www.inventorfraud.com
Investor Protection Trust http://www.investor protection.org
Justice Reference Service, National http://www.ncjrs.org
Loss Prevention Concepts http://www.lpconline.com
Missing Money http://www.missingmoney.com
Municipal Bond Scandals http://www.lissack.com
BBB Wise Giving Alliance http://give.org
National Consumers League’s Fraud Center http://www.fraud.org
National White Collar Crime Center http://www.nw3c.org
Network Solutions — Website operator Information http://www.networksolutions.com 
Nigeria - The 419 Coalition Website http://home.rica.net/alphae/419coal
Noble Ventures — Asset Searches http://www.nobleventures.com
Offshore Business News & Research http://offshorebusiness.com
Ponzi Schemes http://www.crimes-of-persuasion.com
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.540   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Compliance Headquarters http://www.complianceheadquarters.com 
Privacy Tools http://www.privacytools.com
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse http://www. privacyrights.org/links.htm 
Scambusters http://www.scambusters.org
Scams and Swindles http://www.swindles.com
ScamWatch http://www.scamwatch.gov.au
Security Management Online http://www.securitymanagement.com
Software & Information Industry Association - Anti-Piracy Division http://www.siia.net/piracy 
SSA Fraud Reporting http://www.socialsecurity.gov
Taxpayers Against Fraud http://www.taf.org
TD Bank Fraud Prevention http://www.tdbanknorth.com/bank/fraud_ prevention.html
Urban Legends Reference Pages http://www.snopes.com
U.S. Postal Inspection Service — Consumer Fraud http://postalinspectors.uspis.gov 
Verizon Business http://www.verizonbusiness.com/us
Virus Bulletin http://www.virusbtn.com/resources/ prevalence 
Website hoax— F-Secure http://www.f-secure.com/virus-info/hoax 
Website hoax — Vmyths http://www.vmyths.com
Website hoax — Symantec http://www.symantec.com/business/security_response
Whistleblower’s Website: Phillips and Cohen http://www.phillipsandcohen.com
World Bank http://www.worldbank.org
  
 
Health Care/Insurance Fraud  
AMA Select http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/home/index.shtml 
America’s Health Insurance Plans http://www.ahip.org
American Bar Association—Medicine & Law Committee http://www.abanet.org/tips/medicine/links.html#fraud 
American Medical Association http://www.ama-assn.org
Coalition Against Insurance Fraud http://www.insurancefraud.org
Corrections Links — Health Care http://www.corrections.com/networks/healthcare 
Department of Health and Human Services OIG http://www.hhs.gov 
Ed Hayes — Indexes to medical sites http://www.edha yes.com
Excluded Parties List System http://www.epls.gov
Health Information Technology — U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services http://www.hhs.gov/healthit/federalprojectlist.html 
HIPAA  http://www.cms.hhs.gov/HIPAAGenInfo 
International Association of Special Investigation Units http://www.iasiu.org 
Medical Economics Magazine http://www.memag.com
Medical Information Bureau http://www.mib.com
Medicare Fraud and Abuse Training — Online http://www.cms.hhs.gov/Contr actorLearningResources 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners http://www.naic.org 
National Coalition on Health Care http://www.nchc.org
National Fraud Information Center http://www.fraud.org
National Health Care Anti-Fraud Association http://www.nhcaa.org 
National Insurance Crime Bureau http://www.nicb.org
National Practitioner Data Bank http://www.npdb-hipdb.com
Office of Inspector General, Health and http://oig.hhs.gov
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.541 
Human Services Office of Inspector General, Social Security http://www.ssa.gov/oig/guideline.htm
PDR — Physician Desk Reference http://www.pdr.net
Property Casualty Insurer’s Association of America http://www.pciaa.net/sitehome.nsf/main 
Research America — medical links http://www.researchamerica.org/links
The HMO Page http://www.hmo page.org
Ultimate Insurance Links http://www.ultimateinsurancelinks.com 
University of Florida—College of Medicine — Compliance http://www.med.ufl.edu/research/rac/compliance 
Insurance Quotes http://www.insurance quotes.com
  
 
State Insurance Fraud Divisions  
Alabama http://www.aldoi.gov
Alaska http://www.commerce.state.ak.us/insurance 
Arizona http://www.id.state.az.us/fraud.html
Arkansas http://insurance.arkansas.gov
California http://www.insurance.ca.gov/0300-fraud/index.cfm 
Colorado http://www.dora.state.co.us/Insurance
Connecticut http://www.ct.gov/cid
Delaware http://www.delawareinsurance.gov
Florida http://www.fldfs.com/fraud
Georgia http://www.inscomm.state.ga.us
Hawaii http://dccakaku1.hawaii.gov/dcca/areas/ins 
Idaho http://www.doi.idaho.gov
Illinois http://www.insurance.illinois.gov
Indiana http://www.in.gov/idoi
Iowa http://www.iid.state.ia.us
Kansas http://www.ksinsurance.org
Kentucky http://insurance.ky.gov
Louisiana http://www.ldi.state.la.us
Maine http://www.maine.gov/pfr/insurance
Maryland http://www.mdinsurance.state.md.us
Massachusetts http://www.mass.gov/doi
Michigan http://www.michigan.gov
Minnesota http://www.state.mn.us
Mississippi http://www.mid.state.ms.us
Missouri http://insurance.mo.gov
Montana http://sao.mt.gov/insurance/index.asp
Nebraska http://www.doi.ne.gov
Nevada http://www.doi.state.nv.us
New Hampshire http://www.nh.gov/insurance
New Mexico http://www.stopfraud.org/
New Jersey http://www.state.nj.us/dobi/index.html 
New York http://www.ins.state.ny.us/nyins.htm
North Carolina http://www.ncdoi.com
North Dakota http://www.nd.gov/ndins
Ohio http://www.ohioinsurance.gov
Oklahoma http://www.oid.state.ok.us
Oregon http://www.cbs.state.or.us/external/ins 
Pennsylvania http://www.insurance.pa.gov
Puerto Rico http://www.ocs.gobierno.pr
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.542   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Rhode Island http://www.dbr.state.ri.us/divisions/insurance 
South Carolina http://www.doi.sc.gov
South Dakota http://www.state.sd.us/drr2/reg/insurance 
Tennessee http://www.state. tn.us/commerce/insurance 
Texas http://www.tdi.state.tx.us
Utah http://www.insurance.utah.gov
Vermont http://www.bishca.state.vt.us
Virginia http://www.scc.virginia.gov/division/boi 
Washington http://www.insurance.wa.gov
West Virginia http://www.wvinsurance.gov
Wisconsin http://oci.wi.gov
Wyoming http://insurance.state.wy.us
  
 
Telecom Fraud/Security  
Federal Communications Commission http://www.fcc.gov
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority http://www.finra.org
Help Net Security http://www.net-security.org
International Engineering Consortium http://www.iec.org
Neural Technologies http://www.neuralt.com
Travelassist Magazine — Phone Card Fraud http://www.travelassist.com/mag/a27.html 
 
 
Auditing 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants http://www.aicpa.org 
COSO http://www.coso.org
Government Auditing Standards http://www.gao.gov/govaud/ybk01.htm 
Institute of Internal Auditors http://www.theiia.org
Internal Auditing World Wide Web http://www.bitwise.net/iawww
International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board http://www.ifac.org/IAASB 
UNC Business Manual  http://www.unc.edu/finance/busman
  
 
Investment Resources 
Corporate Information http://www.corporateinformation.com
EDGAR Online http://freeedgar.com
Kiplinger http://www.kiplinger.com
Thestreet.com http://www.thestreet.com
Wall Street Network http://www.wallstreetnet.com
  
 
International Sites 
 
Global Search Engines 
Bubl link http://bubl.ac.uk
Euroseek  http://www.euroseek.com
Matilda — Mega Search Engine Australia http://www.aussieseek.com
Search Engine Colossus http://www.searchenginecolossus.com
Search New Zealand http://www.searchnz.co.nz
Voila http://www.voila.fr
WebWombat http://webwombat.com.au
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.543 
Newspapers 
BBC News http://news.bbc.co.uk
Evening Standard http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/standard 
Financial Times http://news.ft.com/home
International Herald Tribune http://global.nytimes.com
Internet Public Library http://www.ipl.org/div/news
Le Monde http://www.lemonde.fr
Newspaper Society http://www.newspapersoc.org.uk
Onlinenewspapers.com http://www.onlinenewspapers.com
The Daily Telegraph http://www.telegraph.co.uk
The Guardian Unlimited http://www.guardian.co.uk
The Independent http://www.independent.co.uk
The Irish Times http://www.ireland.com
The Newspaper Society Database http://www.nsdatabase.co.uk/index.html 
The Scotsman http://www.scotsman.com
The Times Online http://www.timesonline.co.uk
Times Higher Education Supplement http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/ 
Times of India http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com


News and Information Services 
BBC News http://www.bbc.co.uk
Canada.com http://www.canada.com/index.html
Euronews  http://www.euronews.net
Future Events News Service http://www.fens.com
Global Investigative Journalism http://www.globalinvestigativejournalism.org 
Hansard (House of Commons Debates http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm/cmhansrd.htm
ITN Online http://itn.co.uk
Microsoft Network News http://uk.msn.com
NewsNow http://www.newsnow.co.uk
NineMSN http://ninemsn.com.au
Sky News http://news.sky.com/skynews/home
The Economist http://www.economist.com
The Press Association http://www.pressassociation.com
UK Business Park — Media News http://www.ukbusiness park.co.uk
Yahoo! UK & Ireland News http://uk.news.yahoo.com
  
 
Libraries 
Aberdeen University http://www.abdn.ac.uk/library
British Library http://www.bl.uk
Cambridge University http://www.lib.cam.ac.uk
Edinburgh University http://www.lib.ed.ac.uk/lib
Exeter University  http://www.as.ex.ac.uk/library
Glasgow University http://www.lib.gla.ac.uk
King’s College, London http://www.kcl.ac.uk/iss
Oxford University http://www.ox.ac.uk/libraries
Public Libraries (UK) http://dspace.dial.pipex.com/town/square/ac940/weblibs.html
University, London’s Global http://www.ucl.ac.uk
University of Bath http://www.bath.ac.uk/library
University of East Anglia http://www1.uea.ac.uk/cm/home/services/units/is 
 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.544   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Telephone Numbers 
AOL International Directories http://site.aol.com/netfind/international.html 
Infobel World http://www.infobel.com/teldir
UK Business Directory http://www.freeindex.co.uk
Yellow Pages http://www.yell.com
  
 
Maps 
MapMachine http://plasma.nationalgeographic.com/mapmachine 
Maporama http://world.maporama.com
MapQuest http://www.mapquest.com
MultiMap http://www.multimap.com/map/places.cgi 
Ordnance Survey http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite 
Street Map http://www.streetmap.co.uk
The RAC http://www.rac.co.uk
  
 
Legal Resources 
Access to Law http://www.Accesstolaw.com
Centre for Commercial Law Studies — University of London http://www.ccls.edu 
Consumer Law Center http://www.hg.org/consume.html
Dundee University Legal Websites Directory http://www.Dundee.ac.uk/law
FindLaw International Resources http://www.findlaw.com/12international 
Her Majesty’s Court Service  http://www.hmcourts-service.gov.uk
InfoLaw Gateway http://www.infolaw.co.uk
LawLink http://www.lawlink.ie
The Law Commission http://www.lawcom.gov.uk
The Law Society of England and Wales http://www.lawsociety.org.uk/home.law 
 
 
Government Sites and Law Enforcement Sites 
Australia — Attorney General’s Department http://www.ag.gov.au
Australia’s Ministerial Council on Consumer Affairs http://www.consumer.gov.au 
Australian Courts and Legislation http://www.nla.gov.au/oz/law.html
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade http://www.dfat.gov.au 
Australian Privacy Commissioner http://www.privacy.gov.au
City of London Police http://www.cityoflondon.police.uk
Department for Business Enterprise & Regulatory Reform http://www.berr.gov.uk 
Government Information Centre http://www.direct.gov.uk/en/index.htm 
Information Commissioner Office http://www.ico.gov.uk
Financial Services Authority http://www.fsa.gov.uk
Foreign and Commonwealth Office http://www.fco.gov.uk
HM Treasury http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk
International Centre for Criminal Law Reform and Criminal Justice Policy http://www.icclr.law.ubc.ca 
Ministry of Economic Development http://www.med.govt.nz
National Criminal Intelligence Service http://www.direct.gov.uk/en/index.htm 
New Zealand Ministry of Consumer Affairs http://www.consumeraffairs.govt.nz
New Zealand Government Online http://newzealand.govt.nz
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.545 
New Zealand Police Links http://www.policeassn.org.nz/links.htm 
Organized Crime—Nathanson Centre http://www.yorku.ca/nathanson
Intellectual Property Office http://www.ipo.gov.uk
Royal Canadian Mounted Police http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca
Serious Organised Crime Agency http://www.soca.gov.uk
The European Commission http://ec.europa.eu
The Home Office  http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk
The National Archives http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/default.htm 
nited Kingdom Parliament http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk 
Worldwide Embassies and Consulates http://www.embassyworld.com
  
 
Specialized Fraud-Related Websites and Websites of Interest  
Association of British Insurers http://www.abi.or.uk
Australian Institute of Criminology http://www.aic.gov.au
Department for Work and Pensions http://www.dwp.gov.uk
HM Treasury Fraud Reports http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk
Serious Fraud Office http://www.sfo.gov.uk
The Insolvency Service http://www.insolvency.gov.uk
  
 
Auditing 
UK National Audit Office http://www.nao.org.uk
HM Revenue and Customs http://www.hmrc.gov.uk
Insolvency Procedures and Corporate Rescue http://www.insolvency.gov.uk 
Association of Business Recovery Professionals http://www.r3.org.uk 
Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales http://www.icaew.co.uk 
Association of Charted Certified Accountants http://www.acca.co.uk 
Charted Institute of Management Accountants http://www.cimaglobal.com 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of cotland http://www.icas.org.uk 
Institute of Chartered Accountants in Ireland http://www.icai.ie 
London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange — Euronext http://www.euronext.com 


 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.601 



:


access inform onlin
fraud examin now have a number of onlin investig resourc avail through their
person comput but not so long ago examin had to travel to the counti courthous
or state capit to search for public record fraud examin todai howev have enough
inform avail through differ onlin sourc to conduct entir inquiri without
leav their seat
investig with the internet
a great deal of inform can be access through the internet for littl or no cost thi
section explain some internet basic as well as how to us it servic to obtain inform
about peopl busi and fraud in gener
the internet is a decentr global network of million of divers comput and
comput network these network can all talk to each other becaus thei have agre to
us a common commun protocol call tcpip which is name after it two most
import protocol transmiss control protocol tcp and internet protocol ip
essenti the internet is a tool for commun between peopl and busi in
gener the internet is a giant network link togeth million of comput worldwid
the internet is not organ by ani uniform system such as librari dewei decim
system instead it remain a freefloat looselystrung gold mine of inform avail
to those who understand how to us it unless you know the exact address of the internet
site you ar look for it is necessari to learn how to find the inform
an internet site or page is a singl web address gener introduc by a person or a
compani to post inform on a topic or to gener or promot busi there ar a
number of websit that will be of us to a fraud examin and some ar list and
discuss at the end of thi chapter
tradit method for find inform on the internet
the most basic wai to find inform on the internet is to execut search us search
engin or metasearch engin or to locat inform us websit directori
access inform onlin investig
3502 2011 fraud examin manual
search engin
search engin ar websit tool that allow you to type in keyword describ the subject in
which you ar interest the search engin will then scour the page of the internet and
attempt to locat page that mai have pertin inform for instanc in a search for the
keyword fraud the search engin will like bring back a number of page that have some
relev link to fraud such as the associ of certifi fraud examin websit locat
at wwwacfecom there ar sever promin search engin on the internet and each
function in a differ wai an extens list of search engin is provid at the end of the
chapter howev a few of the more popular engin ar describ below
googl
googl is the mostus search engin in the unit state and ha advanc search
capabl individu web page ar rank by the engin softwar accord to how
often the page is link to by other determin the page import by the number of
link and the ident of the link page googl is a good sourc for find target
inform on a particular topic addition learn googlespecif search oper will
provid the investig with an extrem power tool for onlin investig
for exampl googl group is a searchabl usenet archiv it scan thousand of post
of usenet group which ar electron bulletin board classifi by subject see
newsgroup below a search us googl group will reveal instanc in which the
term you specifi appear in a post on the internet you can search by the name or email
address of user who have post to newsgroup or by subject keyword attach and
so on
bing
bing formerli live search window live search and msn search is the current web
search engin from microsoft bing automat group search result in differ
categori depend on the type of search user ar conduct bing also provid the
abil to save and share search histori via window live skydriv facebook and email
in addit to provid mani of the same search resourc found in other popular engin
eg it provid search specif to travel video pictur and map bing ha sever
us featur for exampl bing maintain an ongo histori of search give
research a wai to identifi what thei look up and in what order and bing imag
search is easier to manag than other becaus it displai more imag on the result screen
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3503
altavista
altavista is a detailori search engin becaus it read the individu text of everi page
list on the internet altavista is veri us for find random inform if you ar
simpli cast your line to see what inform might be avail on a topic thi is a
good engin to us howev altavista search ar so thorough you will encount everi
page that contain your keyword end with as mani as 200000 hit success altavista
search requir you to construct your search carefulli
yahoo
yahoo is a multifacet websit contain a firstrat directori see below for more
inform about directori but it is also equip with a search engin in 2009
howev yahoo announc that it search engin would be power by bing and as of
juli 2010 up to 25 percent of the search result provid by yahoo search ar power by
bing
excit
excit search engin is good for broad gener topic becaus it a simultan search of
the web new headlin sport score and compani inform result ar group on a
singl page weed through the result can sometim be a chore
lyco
lyco provid advanc search capabl includ the abil to search for specif
media it lyco pro featur allow user to finetun search lycoss index of web page
is smaller than those of some other servic
askcom
formerli askjeev askcom is a good site for beginn and for gener queri the
engin lead user through question to help narrow the search and also search six other
search site for similar servic see metasearch engin below askcom abil to
interpret natur languag make it easi to us though construct precis queri can be
difficult for the same reason
metasearch engin
metasearch engin send user request to sever other search engin and displai the
result some of the more common metasearch engin ar describ below
access inform onlin investig
3504 2011 fraud examin manual
metacrawl
metacrawl us metasearch technolog to search the internet top search engin
includ googl yahoo search bing askcom and more it search the best result from
the combin pool of the world lead search engin instead of result from onli on
search engin
dogpil
own by infospac thi engin send a queri to a customiz list of search engin
directori and specialti search site eg googl yahoo search bing askcom and then
displai the result from each search engin individu onc the result ar retriev the
innov metasearch technolog us by dogpil goe to work remov duplic and
analyz the result to help ensur that the best result top the list the comparison view
featur let user compar result from the lead engin with the click of a button
mamma
mamma is a smart metasearch engin everi time user type in a queri mamma
simultan search a varieti of engin directori and content site properli format
the word and syntax for each compil their result in a virtual databas elimin
duplic and displai them in a uniform manner accord to relev
surfwax
surfwax claim to provid the best us of relev search result from the open internet it
us a cohes matrix to search sort extract and relat inform from both the internet
and enterpris intranet surfwax offer multipl search tool includ focusword
searchset sitesnap and contextzoom
directori
the road to mine inform on the internet doe not alwai go through search engin
some of the best investig tool an examin ha onlin ar directori as the name
suggest directori ar special websit that collect the name of numer other relat
websit allow the user to brows through a complet list of possibl site to visit
directori contain link to page that have a common some allinclus directori
cover a plethora of differ topic and other ar more focus on particular subject or
disciplin these includ sever account and audit directori that fraud examin
mai find veri us
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3505
the upsid to us directori is that you can logic navig a search eas through the
differ categori until you find what you ar look for howev directori contain
onli a portion of the site and page avail on the internet therefor the fraud examin
should us directori in concert with a search engin and not instead of on
yahoo
in addit to it search engin yahoo ha an intric directori possibl the most
comprehens and allinclus on the internet the directori is built and maintain by
yahoo employe with input from user yahoo function much like a pyramid it begin
with sever larg pool of categori such as entertain and govern and then
allow the user to select more specif option from each broad categori for instanc an
examin could select educ then univers then univers librari until
final encount a direct link to the main librari catalog for the univers of texa by
pare down your select to increasingli narrow topic you can gener find sever
us websit
virtual librari
the virtual librari vl is the oldest catalog of the web start by tim bernersle the
creator of the html that make the internet possibl unlik commerci catalog it is run
by a loos confeder of volunt who compil page of kei link for particular area in
which thei have expertis while not the biggest index of the web the vl page ar wide
prais as guid to particular section of the internet
internet public librari
run by librarian thi servic index web page by topic the internet public librari also
contain an arrai of guid such as onlin magazin and newspap associ and tip
for conduct research
open directori project
found in 1998 open directori project dmozorg is the largest humanedit directori
on the internet dmozorg provid noncommerci moder of regist site and is
maintain by a commun of volunt editor it provid site list group into
categori and subcategori
access inform onlin investig
3506 2011 fraud examin manual
best of the web directori
the best of the web directori is a commerci directori that provid site list
categor by topic and region
businesscom
businesscom is an internet search engin and web directori that provid site list in
more than 65000 busi categori
nontradit method for find inform on the internet
move beyond the us of googl and other tr adit method of search the internet is
import for individu conduct fraud examin thi section will examin how to
us the follow websit to obtain inform on the internet
ebai
whoi
craigslist
archiv
zoominfo
guidestar
noza
in addit to the abov site thi section will also discuss how an examin can find
valuabl inform us social network site
the websit address in thi discuss ar tri and true resourc that fraud examin
should be comfort with us but befor us these site establish an undercov email
account to us when search the email account should be set up through a webbas
servic like hotmail yahoo or gmail examin should not us ani of the follow
inform when creat the email account
person name
geograph region
favorit sport team
hobbi
in addit a discreet email account should have certain characterist such as a genderneutr
name the handl should be compris of number and letter that appear to be for
a purpos give it ad credibl and authent
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3507
exampl
ls1942183yahoocom
ebai
the onlin auction websit ebaycom can be a valuabl resourc for fraud examin it
maintain lengthi detail log for each transact but thi highlevel inform should
be obtain with a subpoena to conduct a more gener search us a person name or email
address on ebai
go to advanc search in the upperright corner of ebai home page
choos find a member from the left column
type in the first half of the person person email address eg for
crazybirdgmailcom type crazybird
after find a match the examin should visit the user ebai profil and read everyth
avail on the page an examin can gain insight into a fraud examin by examin
ani item the subject bought or sold and by review ani comment the subject ha made
onc the examin ha read the user comment he should click the user feedback
profil along the right side of the page will be a few select item under member
quick link the investig should select view id histori to see if the member ha
chang hi id over the past ten year in addit the examin can make the suspect on
of hi favorit seller to receiv alert when the subject place new item for sale on
ebai
the whoi protocol
whoi is a queri respons protocol that is us to search databas that store domain
registr record includ domain name server address technic contact and
address these databas can be queri at the follow site
networksolutionscom will provid the ownership and registr inform for a
websit
arinnet is a whoi server that search for the registr and ip address rang of a
particular ip address
allwhoiscom will find the whoi databas for a particular domain name
whatismyipaddresscom provid a collect of tool for locat inform about an
ip address
tracerouteorglik whatismyipaddresscom can be us to trace ip address
access inform onlin investig
3508 2011 fraud examin manual
craigslist
craigslistorg is a network of onlin commun featur free classifi advertis
with section dedic to job hous person item for sale servic rsum and so
on
the kei to search craigslist is get past the geograph restrict for exampl if the
examin is look for item in the silicon vallei he cannot search other area at the same
time to expand the search the examin must specifi anoth area or us
searchtempestcom a tool that allow user to search multipl craigslist site at onc
archiv
archiveorg offer research and historian a view of other websit captur by the
wayback machin on a specif date to access archiv site enter a web address in the
search box and the engin will return a list of archiv date avail for exampl a search
of wwwdata2knowcom return a list of archiv page start on august 18 2000
zoominfo
anoth great resourc on the internet is zoominfocom zoominfo collat inform
from websit and then softwar bot also known as intellig agent captur and match to
particular individu or compani
zoominfo search ar conduct by compani person or industri although zoominfo
search can return a larg amount of inform examin must understand that thi
inform is gener from other websit and should be verifi
zoominfo search result look rsum and includ inform like busi experi
associ connect educ credenti and so on
guidestar
guidestar is a great start point to find data about nonprofit guidestar gather and
public inform about more than 850000 nonprofit organ it obtain
inform from a varieti of sourc includ the irss form 990 datathi provid
inform on the file organ mission program and financesand from
individu organ
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3509
noza
nozasearchcom is a webbas databas of charit give design as a research tool for
nonprofit organ it gather data about privat foundat activ that might be of
interest to grantseek philanthrop organ and individu donor
socialnetwork websit
socialnetwork site can be search like tradit websit although a lot of the
inform avail on socialnetwork site can be found us tradit search
engin there is an evergrow number of resourc that an examin can us to search
these site for exampl each social network ha a search engin for locat member by
name phone number or email address in gener user can search for member without
log in eg myspac default set allow nonmemb to view member
inform and search can be done anonym
if howev a member profil is privat the research will onli see a snapshot of the
member inform for exampl to view a member profil in facebook or linkedin
the research must connect with the other member if an examin want to view a privat
profil he should creat a compel attract and simpl profil for himself and ask to be
invit into the subject network it is not necessari to creat a fals ident and examin
should not us someon els ident but if the examin is interest enough good
look enough or just savvi enough he will probabl be accept into the network
an entir separ categori of search engin ha been design specif to find
inform within social network these search engin us social network to order
priorit or refin search result some popular socialnetwork search engin includ
spokeo yonam technorati icerocket and friendfe thi section discuss these search
engin along with how to search photoshar site
spokeo
spokeo is a socialnetwork aggreg site that gather inform about peopl by
search for their email address on variou socialnetwork site essenti it is
design to locat and track onlin profil within social network thi site allow user to
search by a person name email address or phone number thi can be help if an
examin know about the subject profil in facebook and myspac but is not awar that
the subject is also a member of hi5 and xanga
access inform onlin investig
3510 2011 fraud examin manual
for investig and research thi is an incred tool that gather subject inform
in a wai that other research tool cannot on of spokeo best featur is it abil to track
activ on member profil if the subject post someth on on of the popular socialnetwork
site such as myspac or facebook the post will appear in spokeo search
result and that person will be track for futur updat
spokeo allow a user to search and track a limit number of email address or name for
free but requir a fee after a certain number of search
yonam
yonam is similar to spokeo but it search mani social network that spokeo doe not
yonam is a free servic but the result can be random spokeo ha a better return rate on
it search it is import to note that if an examin search by a user email address
yonam will send the user an email sai that someon wa look up yo name in
yonam although the email doe not contain the searcher inform it could be
enough to alert a suspici fraudster
technorati
technorati is a search engin for websit like youtub myspac blog xanga and so
forth the engin search blog with a varieti of filter a user can search by enter a
topic into the technorati search field or he can us some of the site search categori
includ photo video and blog us technorati advanc search option the
examin can narrow down a search to a particular blog and search by tag to site that ar
link to a particular blog although get start with technorati can be difficult it can
be a veri us resourc
icerocket
icerocket offer a uniqu arrai of tool back by mark cuban owner of the dalla
maverick icerocket wa design to track what peopl were search for it focus
primarili on blog us metatag to categor and index the content contain within
blog as a result a user can search by keyword which captur ani relev match found
on a websit and priorit match mark as tag search
like technorati icerocket also allow user to narrow down blog search with an advanc
search link or by us search oper such as titl author and tag for exampl a search
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3511
for titlepubl record would find page with public record in their titl similarli a
search for titlepubl record authorjohn doe will return blog post by john doe that
have public record in their titl
in addit to search blog icerocket search through imag directori twitter and
myspac even though an examin can search myspac directli the icerocket search
engin tool for myspac present a more tradit search environ
friendfe
friendfe is a realtim feed aggreg that consolid the updat from socialnetwork
site socialbookmark site blog and other type of rss feed friendfe
facilit track user socialmedia activ eg post on blog or twitter across a
broad rang of differ social network accord to friendfe websit it goal is to
make internet content more applic and help by us socialnetwork site as tool for
discov intrigu inform
a guid to success internet search
run search
the internet is not so much a servic as a tool to tap it rich inform sourc you have
to learn how to construct proper queri that is you have to learn how to ask for what you
want search engin all have their limit but the most seriou impedi to locat
good inform is the user lack of search skill
most search us keyword for instanc when hunt for the latest statist on check
fraud the logic keyword ar check and fraud howev if you type in those word the
search engin would return numer site that have noth to do with check fraud by
place both word insid quotat mark ie check fraud you will get better result
still the list of hit will be in the thousand so you might want to further narrow the search
us the techniqu below
boolean oper
the best wai to util a search engin is to us two or possibl three keyword that best
describ the topic if the word succe on anoth as in the case of check fraud then it mai
be benefici to us boolean oper to aid on search boolean oper ar symbol that
access inform onlin investig
3512 2011 fraud examin manual
help the search engin to better understand exactli what it is search for put the
symbol between checkfraud for exampl will indic to the search engin that it is to
search onli for page that have the word fraud immedi follow check if you insert the
word and so that the search read check and fraud the search engin will understand to search
for websit and page that contain both the word check and fraud but not necessarili right
next to each other
some of the more common boolean oper symbol or connector ar shown below
reserv word and nois word
the connector word and or not and near ar consid reserv word and ar therefor
ignor when thei appear in a search phrase similarli nois word ar common word with
veri littl mean eg in of and the such word ar also ignor unless the user put the
entir phrase in parenthes see the specif search oper section below for more
direct on reserv and nois word
the follow ar some of the common nois word ignor by most search engin and
and or ar mark with an asterisk becaus thei ar both nois word and reserv word
boolean oper
design word that must appear right next to each other
design word that should not appear on a web page
design a list of word that must appear togeth in an exact order
such as holi cow
and design two or more word that must both appear on a page but not
necessarili next to each other
or design two connect word on of which must appear on a page
not design word that should not appear on the page much like the minu
sign
near design word that should appear within a certain number of word of
each other
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3513
the and of
hi my there
when is ar
so or it
specif search oper
onlin research reli on search engin to search web page for specifi keyword and
return a list of the web page contain the keyword although these engin return
result instantli and with littl effort the simplic of these tool often remov the benefit
of more complex search techniqu to determin a search engin or databas abil
consult the servic faq or search help page
thi section examin the advanc search featur of the googl and bing becaus thei
provid some of the most robust and us tool for expert conduct search
googl oper
in addit to the basic boolean oper discuss abov sever oper can smarten
up a googl search and return the right link faster
oper search result exampl
search for synonym of a given
word
automobil glossari will
find page with automobil as well
as word like dictionari glossari
encyclopedia etc
defin return definit from websit for
the particular term
definefraud will show
definit for fraud
site return search result from onli on
websit
sitevirtuallibrariancom fraud
will find all fraudrel page on
virtuallibrariancom
filetyp search for item with a particular
filetyp
filetypedoc will restrict the
result to ms word file match
specifi search term
link return page that link to a particular
websit
linkvirtuallibrariancom will
return page with link to
virtuallibrariancom
access inform onlin investig
3514 2011 fraud examin manual
allintitl restrict result to those contain
all the search term specifi in the
titl
allintitl mortgag fraud will
return onli document that
contain the word mortgag and
fraud in the titl
allintext return document contain all the
search term in their text
allintext fraud skim
materi will return onli page
in which the word fraud skim
and materi appear in the text of
the page
treat as a placehold for on or
more word
fraud alert tell googl to
find page contain a phrase that
start with fraud follow by on or
more word follow by alert
in addit googl oper can be combin for exampl the queri sitehpcom
filetypepdf 5010 laserjet printer faq will search for an adob acrobat pdf file of
frequent ask question regard the 5010 laserjet printer locat on the hewlett
packard websit
there ar numer other oper and search techniqu that work with each googl
search servic a good resourc for lessknown googl oper and search tip is
wwwgoogleguidecom
bing oper
although bing and googl share some of the same search resourc bing ha search
oper that ar uniqu to it search engin
oper search result exampl
contain search for page where there a
hyperlink to a file with the extens
swim dolphin
containswmv will find wmv
clip of dolphin swim
inanchor return page that contain the specifi
term in the link anchor of web page
inanchor us fraud site
search for page that ar call
us fraud site by other
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3515
inbodi restrict result to those contain all
the search term specifi in the bodi
inbodi secur fraud will
return onli document that
contain the word secur and
fraud in their bodi
intitl restrict result to those contain all
the search term specifi in the titl
intitl secur fraud will
return onli document that
contain the word secur and
fraud in their titl
ip find websit host by a specif ip
address
ip198463422 find
websit host by the specifi
ip address
prefer add emphasi to a search term to help
focu the search result
fraud preferponzi specifi the
type of fraud that the user want
to find
onlin public databas search
onlin public record databas ar anoth sourc of inform that can be access
onlin these databas ar numer and vari thei compil record from the feder
state and countyloc level and most can be readili access from a home comput after
subscrib to their servic the cost associ with these databas can be equal vari
there ar sever access option avail and an examin should be prepar to us ani
and all separ or in combin keep in mind howev that it mai be necessari to
spend time examin the actual document to get the whole pictur
a public record databas will tell the research whether a particular record or some of the
inform contain in that record exist howev note that such databas will not
provid a copi of the actual document for exampl an examin can conduct a properti
record search to find out that john doe own the properti at 121 main street in peoria il
howev if he need a copi of the actual deed he will have to retriev it from the counti
clerk offic
addition there is a wealth of inform now avail on the internet as a caveat
howev rememb that onlin record compani have to get their inform from
somewher often it come directli from the counti but if the inform in the counti
record wa enter into the databas incorrectli then the report you will receiv from the
access inform onlin investig
3516 2011 fraud examin manual
databas compani will also be incorrect therefor it is import to rememb that
access inform onlin is never a full substitut for an examin of the public
record itself
rememb howev that if an examin access certain type of inform through an
onlin servic he mai be subject to the fair credit report act fcra as discuss in
the previou chapter again the fcra prohibit consum report agenc from releas
person inform about an individu eg inform about the consum charact
gener reput person characterist or mode of live to third parti without
author and it limit disclosur of consum credit inform such as a subject
credit histori to third parti thu befor access such inform you should alwai
contact your attornei
limit of onlin public databas search
there ar howev limit to onlin public databas search includ
onlin coverag vari wide from state to state the fraud examin should determin
whether specif inform is avail for each investig
search ar limit in the area thei cover fortun for the crook most of hi public
record evid is gener file at the counti level if he is smart enough to know
how to conduct transact outsid hi normal local then he can be tough to track
without us multijurisdict onlin sourc make sure you ar look in the right
counti is import you can be off by on counti and miss pertin land hold
divorc record lien and so forth
all onlin public record ar brief abstract of the origin public record
the sourc of the inform compil in a vendor databas must be reliabl
inform must be check to determin if it is accur and current
the record or public that have been compil in an electron format mai not go
back veri far
also internet search engin ar notori errat in their retriev
onlin search through databas vendor
ani public record search should begin with a commerci databas vendor there ar
sever compani that provid vari level of public record inform to subscrib a
descript of some of these compani and the record thei can provid ar discuss later
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3517
these compani provid access to a wide rang of inform that is store in a central
databas allow a subscrib to access it from hi comput some inform is actual
retriev in hard copi and mail or fax to the subscrib even though the request wa
made through the onlin servic
some compani requir a yearli or monthli subscript fee in addit to the fee for each
search other oper on a pai as you go principl that allow you to pai onli for the
search you conduct therefor it is import to shop around to get the best deal for your
level of usag
for some practition it mai be more econom to enlist the aid of servic compani
inform broker and profession onlin investig these compani will conduct
research for examin typic us onlin servic and manual document retriev from
local sourc although the cost of these servic is higher than do it yourself it mai be
the best choic for occasion record search
us an onlin databas to find inform
in the past investig hot on the heel of an assethid or suspect were hamstrung by the
avail investig resourc in attempt to uncov unreport incom the
investig wa forc to travel to the courthous for the counti in which the suspect
conduct busi request the counti file avail and take a number these trek to
the middleofnowher were rare costeffect and were often fruitless in the search for
pertin inform
thi ha all chang howev and now mayb the flatfoot feet wont be so flat thank to
the advent of onlin investig servic such as lexisnexi inquiri to the farflung
reach of the unit state can be conduct from a person comput these servic
have packag a varieti of invalu investig sourc at veri reason price
access to these servic is accomplish in either on of two wai some servic allow
user to log in through an internet site other provid access to their databas through a
softwar program and a modem each user ha a user id and password to gain access
the follow is a descript of how onlin search can be us to conduct background
check and locat peopl asset and legal record
access inform onlin investig
3518 2011 fraud examin manual
locat peopl us onlin record
the first step to maxim search result is to discov a past address of the suspect search
activ should begin from that point second the user should know the most power and
us type of search which ar identifi below third it is import to keep in mind
the cost effect of the search activ and avoid order onlin search that yield
unnecessari or impract inform
the search methodolog us by most onlin servic is known as textstr match
which mean that all inform enter in the data inquiri field will seek an exact match in
the databas typic you mai us truncat techniqu partial or abbrevi entri
such as the first initi of the first name onli with first name and busi name
some common type of search us to locat peopl us onlin record ar discuss
below
credit header search
credit header search ar among the most power locat tool these search return
inform from credit report on individu thei ar a valuabl sourc becaus almost all
peopl have been involv in some credit activ either under their true name or an
assum or known as name it is appropri to keep in mind that for common name it
mai be necessari to us the social secur number or date of birth to differenti the
subject from other peopl with the same name the credit bureau header offer two search
mechan first the examin can discov a current address an address histori and
social secur number associ with the target by us a past address up to seven year
old second onc the social secur number is in hand the header can be search for
match becaus the social secur number is a nation ident number although social
secur number ar protect from disclosur by the privaci act it ha becom practic
imposs for individu to avoid disclos them on public record
current occupantnew address search
a current occupantnew address search mai be us to identifi the occup of an address
to confirm occup to uncov a forward address or to develop a list of neighbor
who mai know the suspect current whereabout
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3519
last name search
last name search can be us if the past address is unknown thi search produc better
result if the name is not common howev if the last name is common differenti
inform should be includ in the search it should also be note that some search will
return the ident of neighbor who can be contact for addit inform about the
suspect
bankruptci file tax lien and court judgment
bankruptci file tax lien and court judgment have emerg in recent year as locat
tool becaus such record contain valid social secur number the dramat increas in
individu bankruptci claim ha also particularli prompt their emerg as locat tool
depart of motor vehicl record search
depart of motor vehicl dmv record us to be good locat tool but recent
restrict on them have reduc the effect of such search befor congress
amend the driver privaci protect act in 1999 driver could opt out and ask that
their person inform eg social secur number photograph etc not be releas
under the amend law howev driver ar no longer requir to opt out instead the
amend law impos an opt in system requir that driver provid express
author for the releas of inform moreov individu state mai not updat
their record frequent enough to provid the examin with us inform search
such as driver identif can be us on a spot basi howev
voter registr record search
in a few state voter registr record ar avail but as with dmv record thei mai
not be updat frequent howev to the extent that date of birth inform is avail
such record can augment other search also note ani legal restrict attach to the us
of voter inform
busi file search
fictiti busi namedo busi as file includ owner name busi name
file date and file number as note in the previou chapter in most state individu and
corpor ar requir to file a do busi as or an assum or fictiti busi
name statement with the counti where thei conduct their busi the record of sole
proprietorship busi howev mai not be avail in the corporatelimit
partnership record that ar found at the state level nevertheless the fraud examin mai be
access inform onlin investig
3520 2011 fraud examin manual
abl to locat these record by conduct an onlin search by search an individu or
busi name the examin can gather inform from fictiti busi name file
includ owner name busi name file date and file number some counti provid
busi address inform and in these counti the examin can also conduct search
us the busi address
feder tax id search
busi can us the ir websit wwwirsgov to enter both the name and feder tax
id of a vendor or other busi to confirm that the two match
obtain financi inform and locat asset
discov whether asset exist where thei exist and whether thei ar recover can be
accomplish with a search of feder state local and proprietari record these record
can be further divid into those identifi hard asset and those regard the potenti
for asset credit capac or credit worthi
search for hard asset
the ownership of real properti mai be discover through the us of properti
search to the extent that thei ar avail at the local or counti level within individu
state
the ownership of vehicl can be infer through the us of the dmv vehicl name
index to the extent that the record within the control state agenc reflect vehicl
regist to a specif person or organ at a particular address convers the
ownership of a particular vehicl mai be infer from the dmv vehicl registr
search
an assum busi name search mai be help in identifi a sole proprietorship
busi in which attach asset ar avail
the uniform commerci code ucc is extraordinari in that it can be us in a wide
varieti of busi situat a search of ucc file can help identifi person
properti that an individu or busi ha financ ucc file can also disclos when
and where a debtor obtain person loan the type of properti that he pledg to the
lender to secur the loan and the debtor current address
the ownership of an aircraft can be determin by search the aircraft ownership
databas by busi name person name or wing number
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3521
search for asset potenti
the question of whether it is realist possibl to recov known asset mai be
partial answer by search bankruptci file tax lien and tax judgment
again the versatil of a ucc file search is seen through the identif of asset
that mai have been pledg in whole or in part to secur a loan for exampl in a case
where a bank lender ha secur a loan through some type of chattel as collater and ha
sought to perfect it lien on the chattel through a ucc file at the state level it can be
fairli assum that the debtor ha a bank account with the secur parti thu a bank
account asset mai be identifi as a recover asset
consum credit report and busi credit report search mai help develop a clearer
pictur of the target potenti for asset recoveri in term of credit capac and
creditworthi although access to consum credit report is restrict by the fair
credit report act fcra busi credit report ar not govern by the fcra
busi credit report often contain inform that is us in verifi inform
understand busi relationship and develop basic financi inform about
an organ
find legal record
the search avail to find these record can be group in three broad categori on
site court search index or broad coverag search and public file
onsit court search
onsit court record search ar perform by individu who travel to counti and municip
courthous to search for record that match the search criteria that have been provid to
them
these search ar direct by court by counti or as is the case with feder record by the
district court for the particular area accordingli the examin must carefulli consid the
potenti locat of court record such consider should take into account the
locat of the suspect current and past resid nce and hi current and past busi or
employ the result will includ ani litig in which the individu wa involv
includ civil action crimin action divorc and judgment howev it will not return
inform concern litig that ha been seal by the court or inform
concern juvenil offend
access inform onlin investig
3522 2011 fraud examin manual
the coverag for these search vari accord to the servic us addition each court
ha vari rule regard how the search is conduct the time when search mai be
conduct the repositori locat and the search method if the subscrib is interest in
a particular type of record such as a divorc record it mai be necessari to call the
compani customersupport unit to adjust the search queri type of record avail
includ
feder civil court record includ bankruptci record ar avail for all type of
civil litig conduct in feder court
feder crimin court record ar avail for feloni charg
state civil court record ar avail base on a divis of upper and lower court
record the divis is a function of the differ within each state concern the
amount in controversi
state crimin court record can be obtain on a ten or sevenyear search basi for
feloni misdemeanor or a combin of both
indexbroad coverag search
these search ar us when an examin need a search strategi broader than the by
courtbi counti method us with onsit court record search or that make us of an
index of basic inform in court record
search of defend suit ar avail in all state but provid coverag limit to
specif counti and court when search a specif state databas the examin
should review the help menu to determin the scope of the search abil
search of statewid crimin convict ar avail in some jurisdict review the
help menu for special releas requir the number of year avail if the record is
for convict onli and if the search encompass both feloni and misdemeanor
search of marriagedivorc index ar avail in some state
public file
in the unit state public compani nonprofit and some privat compani must
submit financi file and form to differ govern entiti public compani for
exampl submit variou file to the secur and exchang commiss eg the annual
report and the 10k these public file provid a wealth of inform about the file
compani includ the natur of it busi it histori it organiz structur it
auditor it balanc sheet and it incom statement similarli public file ar avail for
nonprofit which must file the form 990 to the intern revenu servic
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3523
public file ar avail for free as well as through feebas servic
conduct background check
thi type of search activ gener involv two broad area discov what the public
record reveal with respect to individu and busi with whom the subscrib mai wish
to do busi and discov inform about prospect employe in gener onlin
public record databas ar gener the best sourc of background inform
but befor conduct ani background check consult with legal counsel
due dilig
as busi organ seek to identifi vendor client or strateg partner or seek to
loan or collect monei thei frequent conduct public record inquiri focus on other
busi or individu who ar princip of busi organ thi type of public
record inquiri involv such issu as verif of applic inform debt burden
advers financi inform credit capac or worthi busi relationship the socal
famili tree litig histori and crimin background us search includ the
follow
corporatelimit partnership search ar avail in all state to verifi inform
identifi princip and develop other busi relationship
bankruptci file tax lien and judgment search respond to issu of advers
financi inform and credit capacityworthi
ucc file answer question of debt burden thi search will be help to identifi
hidden ownership or partnership interest and it will be help to locat address
inform on debtor
state and feder civil court record provid answer to question concern litig
histori past busi relationship and the potenti for debt burden either as a function
of an advers judgment or as a function of financ expens litig
state and feder crimin court record identifi the possibl of a crimin background
the us of consum credit report and busi credit report help resolv question
concern credit capac and creditworthi in addit the busi report is us
in verifi inform understand busi relationship and develop basic
financi inform about an organ
occup safeti and health administr osha search mai be us in
develop advers inform or verifi inform given by a prospect vendor
client or strateg partner
access inform onlin investig
3524 2011 fraud examin manual
aircraft mechan airmen medic licens dea control substanc and other
licens mai serv to verifi that basic profession and occup standard ar met by
a prospect vendor client or strateg partner
employ background
onlin record inquiri regard employ histori have increas significantli over the
past few year corpor downsiz ha disaffect an increas number of worker to the
point that it is easier for them to ration employe defalc fraud or embezzl
the same econom phenomenon of downsiz combin with busi pressur to
increas product and the friction of modern life have appar produc an increas
in workplac violenc liabil for employ and busi have expand through
neglig standard and the respondeat superior doctrin for such tortiou conduct as vehicl
oper assault batteri fals imprison sexual harass and discrimin
final the potenti to be held liabl for neg refer ha deter past employ
from respond to prospect employ inquiri about an employe therefor
prospect employ must increasingli reli on public inform
some of the search us in develop background inform ar list below where
permit by law
credit header search ar us in confirm address and social secur number
inform
state and feder crimin court record and statewid crimin convict mai be us
to uncov past crimin problem presag similar difficulti inde crimin
background check mai be mandat by law for exampl the violent crime control
and law enforc act of 1994 make it a feloni for insur compani as well as
person emploi anyon to conduct the busi of insur to hire ani individu
convict of a feloni involv dishonesti or a breach of trust
aircraft mechan airmen medic licens and other licens ar avail to ensur
that basic job requir ar met in the appropri circumst
consum credit report mai be obtain for purpos of employe select retent
and promot
public file such as bankruptci file tax lien and judgment mai be obtain to
identifi advers financi matter that can serv as potenti motiv for fraud
defam and embezzl
where a prospect or current employe drive a person own vehicl or an
employerown vehicl in further the interest of the employ such activ mai
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3525
expos the employ to liabil for damag therefor dmv drive record must be
check
basic inform concern job qualif can be verifi through educ
verif and employ verif search note these ar verif tool
onli thei ar not definit in term of discov past or current employ
although worker compens search mai return the subject name social secur
number date of birth employ name date and type of accid and natur and extent
of inquiri the american with disabl act mai limit usag of the search result the
act purport to prevent prospect employ from us worker compens
record in deni employ to otherwis qualifi applic
public record databas vendor
list below is inform about some of the larger commerci databas vendor you can
shop variou servic to find the on that meet your need in the most costeffect
manner and the on that fit your current case in some instanc it mai be necessari to us
more than on servic to get an accur and complet profil these compani get their
inform from variou sourc and on variou updat schedul so a search in ani on
databas mai return differ result than a search done elsewher
asset locat and busi background check by knowx
knowx is a product of the lexisnexi risk and inform analyt group and it claim
to be the most comprehens sourc of public inform on the web it offer easili
navig public record search in variou categori among them asset search advers
file properti valuat and peopl and businessloc tool on can also verifi
licens conduct background check and look up a compani histori knowx is an
altogeth userfriendli sourc of inform
most importantli user can run knowx busi background check to uncov
bankruptci judgment lawsuit lien and ucc file against a busi with on search
in addit knowx asset locat servic enabl user to locat asset such as real estat
aircraft and watercraft with on search thi softwar can also be us to verifi ownership
and assess properti valu
knowx can be found at wwwknowxcom
access inform onlin investig
3526 2011 fraud examin manual
us datalink
us datalink is an employe background check servic although it cannot retriev
inform as quickli as some other vendor us datalink is the onli compani that reli
entir on manual search for it inform us datalink exclus send it research
to the counti courthous to look up the request inform as oppos to the electron
and possibl faulti inform that other onlin investig databas us therefor if a
fraud examin ha the time to wait for hi inquiri us datalink might be the most reliabl
option us datalink also ha media resourc and it can be found at wwwusdatalinkcom
infousa
infousa compil busi and consum data and it offer a wide rang of data process
servic infousa user have access to inform on 14 million us busi 13 million
execut and profession and 210 million us consum search of infousa
databas can produc result for a broad rang of inform includ sale volum
corpor linkag contact name and titl compani histori credit rate and ani
headlin involv the busi furthermor the versatil of the search is on of
infousa better featur search can be perform accord to busi size locat
length of time in oper gender or race of owner and industri infousa is locat at
wwwinfousacom
veri
veri is a social secur valid servic it special in provid verif of social
secur number possibl mail drop address date of birth and death record veri
allow an investig to match a social secur number to a name howev thi servic is
costli cost per search begin at 115 but the actual cost depend on the type of search and
number of search be conduct but veri accur veri can be access at wwwverisssncom
csc diligenz
csc diligenz is a webbas due dilig servic it is a great databas for retriev
inform about busi with it weekli databas updat csc diligenz strength li
in the reliabl of it public record inform csc diligenz can produc a businesss
financi statement record pertain to corpor statu busi credit and licens
inform ucc file bankruptci judgment and corpor goodstand search ar
just a few of their servic diligenz is locat at wwwdiligenzcom
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3527
dialog
dialog is a proquest compani and it offer user with access to more than 1200 databas
it contain nearli 2 billion record includ refer and abstract of publish literatur
statist tabl the full text of select articl and directori busi and financi data
dialog can be access at wwwdialogcom
db
db is a busi inform servic provid the varieti of inform avail
through db is impress it is probabl on of the most comprehens and divers
sourc avail with fact on more than 130 million compani in more than 190
countri db is renown for product like busi inform report and industri norm
and kei busi ratio both excel tool it is locat at wwwdnbcom
hoover
hoover a db compani is a onestop refer for busi inform hoover
provid comprehens uptod busi inform for profession who need
intellig on us and global compani industri and profession hoover databas
consist of 65 million compani with indepth coverag of 40000 public and nonpubl
us and intern compani subscrib also have access to inform on more than
15 million small privat busi across the unit state hoover is locat at
wwwhooverscom
lexisnexi
lexisnexi is a legal and busi inform databas that provid it subscrib with
daili newspap for either a flat fee or a perus fee lexisnexi maintain a cavern
databas of us and intern media sourc includ daili newspap magazin and
televis transcript in addit lexisnexi offer a servic in which the user can request
immedi inform on difficulttofind topic lexisnexi will research the topic and give
the user the inform as quickli as possibl for more inform visit wwwlexiscom
in on form or anoth lexisnexi ha been in the inform busi for nearli 30 year
it is now on of the lead electron data firm in the world user can obtain access to
public record media public and court case and record for more inform visit
wwwlexisnexiscom
dc inform system
found in 1967 dc inform system is an establish sourc for investig
inform dc provid onlin investig solut for busi and govern
from financi institut to law enforc or investig their onlin databas
product help organ prevent and detect fraud verifi applic inform screen
potenti employe and locat debtor miss person heir or asset dc provid
inform compris public record and publicli avail inform it amerifind
onlin resourc system is separ into three area make search simpl
access inform onlin investig
3528 2011 fraud examin manual
primedata provid bank and financ inform
quickfind serv gener investig secur and fraud prevent and detect
fraudtrac serv insur fraud investig and claim
ga public record servic
ga public record servic special in onsit countylevel crimin record inform
it can usual provid a report within 24 72 hour ha access to record in thousand of
counti coast to coast ga public record servic provid search servic for
employ screen corpor due dilig fraud investig privat investig
and tenant screen for more inform visit wwwgaprscom
experian
experian is on of the major provid of consum credit inform and it provid a
varieti of other public inform experian provid servic on consum and busi
credit direct market and real estat inform servic experian maintain credit
inform on more than 210 million us consum and more than 18 million us
busi it nation consum databas is updat 65 time per year with inform
on more than 110 million us household the nation busi databas is updat
monthli ha fact on more than 18 million compani in all industri and ha more than
200 million crossindustri applic record to help detect inconsist in incom
applic
some of the servic provid by experian includ
busi snapshot report that summar credit histori includ payment pattern
and legal file of small busi or contractor
precis id with knowledg iq consist of score analyt and knowledgebas
authent and it provid realtim and onlin valid and verif and fraud
assess of name address social secur number date of birth driver licens
and telephon number
transunion
transunion is on of the big three credit report compani and it offer credit inform
and servic for consum and busi alik more specif transunion is a global
provid of busi intellig servic with technologybas intellig product
includ innov creditdecis and fraudprevent tool advanc targetmarket
product risk and profit model and portfolio manag
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3529
transunion also offer a fraud victim assist depart fvad sinc it incept
the fvad ha help million of consum resolv or prevent problem with credit fraud
the fvad compris three distinct team
the consum protect team cpt
the fraud investig respons and support team first
the fraud assist and support team fast
search system
search system is a public record directori with more than 55000 searchabl public record
databas it search capabl includ busi inform corpor file properti
record deed mortgag crimin and civil court file inmat offend birth death
marriag unclaim properti and profession licens on of it mani directori the
crimin record and offend search ha access to more than 300 million crimin record
and it search system premium offer instant access to more than 100 million bankruptci
judgment and tax lien for more inform visit httppublicrecordssearchsystemsnet
westlaw
westlaw is an onlin legal research servic and it provid access to a comprehens and
current collect of public record it peopl finder databas directori contain
inform on individu compil from numer public sourc includ telephon
directori publish mail list chang of address file real estat file util record
public demograph and consum household data voter registr record driver licens
data feder and state death record and credit header data for more inform visit
wwwwestlawcom
newspapermedia databas
newspap period and journal can be excel sourc of inform in a fraud
investig particularli when search for background inform on an individu or a
busi for exampl in a texa case a person accus of insid trade wa clear us
materi from an media databas search defens attornei gather more than 300
publish comment about the compani financi prospect and show that someon
follow the advic distribut freeli in the press would have made more monei than
the accused2
2 bernstein paul comput for lawyer a complet guid to law offic autom 2nd ed chicago atla press
1997
access inform onlin investig
3530 2011 fraud examin manual
searchabl databas contain inform from liter hundr of publish sourc
can usual be access for free at most librari there ar also a number of onlin
databas that deal specif with new and media resourc these databas compil a
number of differ media resourc and allow the user to search for a specif topic
return articl or transcript that pertain to the request subject most public allow
user to search their archiv for free the full text of articl is avail but usual for a fee
us on of the follow servic allow user to search mani public at onc
factiva
factiva from dow jone is tailor for busi and financi new search maintain a
catalog of more than 28000 of the world lead new and busi sourc from 159
countri 350 geograph region and in 23 languag factiva allow user to pai onli for
the articl download and doe not requir an annual subscript for more inform
visit wwwfactivacom
highbeam research
highbeam ha an extens archiv contain million of document from lead
public that ar updat daili or go back as far as 20 year searchabl sourc
includ newspap magazin journal transcript book dictionari and almanac for
more inform visit wwwhighbeamcom
proquest
proquest is a data servic that offer access to thousand of onlin journal and magazin
cover a wide arrai of subject proquest vast content pool ar avail to research
through librari of all type and includ the world largest digit newspap archiv
period databas compris the output of thousand of titl and span more than
500 year with mani in fulltext fullimag format an extens dissert collect and
variou other scholarli collect for more inform visit wwwproquestcom
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3531
other new databas servic
newspap on the net wwwonlinenewspaperscom
newswis wwwnewswisecom
us websit
the follow is a list of websit group by topic that should prove us to fraud
examin and other antifraud profession
search engin
aboutcom httpwwwaboutcom
all the web httpwwwallthewebcom
altavista httpwwwaltavistacom
askcom httpwwwaskcom
bing httpwwwbingcom
complet planet httpaipcompleteplanetcom
copern httpwwwcoperniccom
dmoz httpwwwdmozorg
dogpil httpwwwdogpilecom
exalead httpwwwexaleadcom
excit httpwwwexcitecom
gocom httpgocom
googl httpwwwgooglecom
hotbot httpwwwhotbotcom
icerocket httpwwwicerocketcom
iwon httphomeiwoncom
infomin httpinfomineucredu
internet 101 httpwwwinternet101org
law crawler legal issu httplawcrawlerfindlawcom
legal engin httpwwwlegalenginecom
lococitato httpwwwlococitatocom
looksmart httpwwwlooksmartcom
lyco httpwwwlycoscom
mamma httpwwwmammacom
meta 360 httpwwwmeta360com
metacrawl httpwwwmetacrawlercom
monster crawler httpwwwmonstercrawlercom
my wai httpgotomywaycom
northern light busi httpwwwnlsearchcombresearchphp
search engin watch httpsearchenginewatchcom
search monger httpwwwsearchmongercom
searchcom httpwwwsearchcom
search site httpwwwsearchsitecom
snap httpwwwsnapcom
spokeo httpwwwspokeocom
surf canyon httpwwwsurfcanyoncom
surfwax httpwwwsurfwaxcom
technorati httptechnoraticom
webcrawl httpwwwwebcrawlercom
access inform onlin investig
3532 2011 fraud examin manual
web ferret httpwwwwebferretcom
yahoo httpwwwyahoocom
yonam httpwwwyonamecom
zoominfo httpwwwzoominfocom
socialnetwork site
twitter wwwtwittercom
myspac wwwmyspacecom
facebook wwwfacebookcom
classmat onlin wwwclassmatescom
linkedin wwwlinkedincom
reunion wwwreunioncom
bebo wwwbebocom
orkut wwworkutcom
hi5 httphi5com
xanga wwwxangacom
spoke wwwspokecom
alt wwwaltcom
new sourc
abcnewscom httpabcnew gocom
bnet research center httpfindarticlescom
cb httpwwwcbsnewscom
cnn interact httpwwwcnncom
crayon httpwwwcrayonnet
dialog web httpwwwdialogwebcom
dow jone factiva httpwwwfactivacom
fox httpwwwfoxnewscom
highbeam httpwwwhighbeamcom
investig report and editor httpwwwireorg
lexisnexi httpwwwlexisnexiscom
market watch httpwwwmarketwatchcom
msnbc httpwwwmsnbcmsncom
msn monei httpmoneycentralmsncomhomeasp
nbc httpwwwnbccom
cnet new httpnewscnetcom
newslink httpnewslinkorg
onlin new paper httpwwwonlinenewspaperscom
refdesk httpwwwrefdeskcom
reuter httpwwwreuterscom
salon httpwwwsaloncom
slate httpwwwslatecom
the council of state govern httpwwwcsgorg
wire new httpwwwwiredcom
newspap
annapoli capitalgazett httpwwwhometownannapoliscom
augusta chronicl httpchronicleaugustacom
baltimor sun httpwwwbaltimoresuncom
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3533
boston globe httpwwwbostoncomboston globe
casper startribun wy httpwwwtribcom
chattanooga time free press httpwwwtimesfreepresscom
chicago suntim httpwwwsuntimescom
chicago tribun httpwwwchicagotribunecom
christian scienc monitor httpwwwcsmonitorcom
colorado spring gazett httpwwwgazettecom
daili gazett ny httpwwwdailygazettecom
dalla morn new httpwwwdallasnewscom
desert new ut httpwwwdeseretnewscom
detroit free press httpwwwfreepcom
evansvil courier press in httpwwwcourier presscom
florida timesunion httpwwwjacksonvillecom
fort worth startelegram httpwwwstartelegramcom
gainesvil sun httpwwwgainesvillecom
houston chronicl httpwwwchroncom
knoxvil newssentinel httpwwwknoxnewscom
lo angel time httpwwwlatimescom
miami herald httpwwwmiamiheraldcom
missoulian mt httpwwwmissouliancom
new york daili new httpwwwnydailynewscom
new york post httpwwwnypostcom
new york time httpwwwnytimescom
newsdai httpwwwnewsdaycom
norfolk virginianpilot httphamptonroadscompilotonlin
orang counti regist httpwwwocregistercom
orlando sentinel httpwwworlandosentinelcom
raleigh new and observ httpwwwnewsobservercom
roanok time httpwwwroanokecom
salt lake tribun httpwwwsltribcom
san diego uniontribun httpwwwsignonsandiegocom
san francisco chronicleexamin httpwwwsfgatecom
san jose mercuri new httpwwwmercurynewscom
seattl time httpseattletimesnwsourcecom
sioux citi journal httpwwwsiouxcityjournalcom
st paul pioneer press httpwwwtwincitiescom
st petersburg time httpwwwtampabaycom
the new york time on the web httpwwwnytimescom
usa todai httpwwwusatodaycom
wall street journal httponlinewsjcom
washington post httpwwwwashingtonpostcom
univers librari site
brigham young univers httpwwwlibbyuedu
cal state univers long beach httpwwwcsulbedulibrari
carnegi mellon univers httpwwwlibrarycmuedu
claremont colleg httpvoxlibrisclaremontedu
cornel univers httpwwwcornelledulibrari
drexel univers httpwwwlibrarydrexeledu
duke univers httplibrarydukeedu
eastern michigan univers httpwwwemicheduhal
georgetown univers httplibrarygeorgetownedu
access inform onlin investig
3534 2011 fraud examin manual
harvard univers hollisharvard onlin librari inform system httplibharvardedu
indiana univ purdu univ httpwwwulibiupuiedu
iowa state univers httpwwwlibiastateedu
john hopkin univers httpwwwwelchjhuedu
kansa state univers httpwwwlibksuedu
louisiana state univers httpwwwliblsuedu
mansfield univers httplibmansfieldeduindexcfm
miami oh univers httpwwwlibmuohioedu
middl tennesse state univers httplibrarymtsuedu
mit univers httplibrariesmitedu
new mexico state univers httplibnmsuedu
north carolina state univers httpwwwlibncsuedu
princeton univers httplibwebprincetonedu
tulan univers httplibrarytulaneedu
univers of arizona httpwwwarizonaeduhomelibrariesphp
univers of calberkelei httpwwwlibberkeleyedu
univers of callo angel httpwww2libraryuclaedu
univers of calriversid httplibraryucredu
univers of florida httpwebuflibufledu
univers of houston httpinfolibuhedu
univers of idaho httpwwwlibuidahoedu
univers of iowa httpwwwlibuiowaedu
univers of main httpwwwlibraryumaineedu
univers system of maryland and affili institut httpwwwitdumdedu
univers of michigan httpwwwlibumichedu
univers of minnesota httpwww1umnedu
univers of new orlean httpwwwunoedu
univers of north carolina httpwwwilsunceduindexhtml
univers of north carolinacharlott httpwwwunccedu
univers of virginia httpwwwvirginiaedulibrari
vanderbilt univers httpwwwlibraryvanderbiltedu
washington univers httpwwwlibwashingtonedu
state govern list
alabama httpwwwalabamagov
alaska httpwwwstateaku
arizona httpazgov
arkansa httpwwwstatearu
california httpwwwcagov
colorado httpcoloradogov
connecticut httpwwwctgov
delawar httpdelawaregov
florida httpwwwmyfloridacom
georgia httpwwwgeorgiagov
hawaii httpwwwehawaiigov
idaho httpwwwstateidu
illinoi httpwwwillinoisgov
indiana httpwwwstateinu
iowa httpwwwiowagov
kansa httpwwwkansasgov
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3535
kentucki httpkentuckygov
louisiana httpwwwlouisianagov
main httpwwwmainegov
maryland httpwwwmarylandgov
massachusett httpwwwmassgov
michigan httpwwwmichigangov
minnesota httpwwwstatemnu
mississippi httpwwwmsgov
missouri httpwwwmogov
montana httpmtgov
nebraska httpwwwnebraskagov
nevada httpwwwnvgov
new hampshir httpwwwnhgov
new jersei httpwwwstatenju
new mexico httpwwwnewmexicogov
new york httpwwwstatenyu
north carolina httpwwwstatencu
north dakota httpwwwndgov
ohio httpwwwohiogov
oklahoma httpwwwokgov
oregon httpwwworegongov
pennsylvania httpwwwstatepau
rhode island httpwwwrigov
south carolina httpwwwscgov
south dakota httpwwwsdgov
tennesse httpwwwtennesseegov
texa httpwwwstatetxu
utah httpwwwutahgov
vermont httpvermontgov
virginia httpwwwvirginiagov
washington httpwwwstatewau
west virginia httpwwwwvgov
wisconsin httpwwwwisconsingov
wyom httpwyominggov
telephon number and address
aol hometownhom page finder httpsiteaolcomnetfindhometownhtml
att anywho httpwwwanywhocom
5551212 httpwww5551212com
big yellow httpwwwbigyellowcom
bigbook httpwwwbigbookcom
email address revers phone httpwwwiafnet
gte superpag httpwwwsuperpagescom
infospac httpwwwinfospaceinccom
infousa httpwwwinfousacom
inteliuspeopl search httpfindinteliuscom
militari personnel record httpwwwarchivesgov
peoplefinderscom httpwww peoplefinderscom
peopl search httpwww peoplesearchnet
phone number infobel httpwwwinfobelcomteldir
registercom httpwwwregistercom
searchbynumb httpwwwsearchbynumbercom
access inform onlin investig
3536 2011 fraud examin manual
semaphor corp httpwwwsemaphorecorpcom
switchboard httpwwwswitchboardcom
the pi mall httpwwwpimallcom
us web finder httpuswebfindercom
whowher httpwwwwhowherecom
yahoo peopl search httppeopleyahoocom
yellowbook httpwwwyellowbookcom
map
bing map httpwwwbingcommap
googl map httpmapsgooglecom
mapquest httpwwwmapquestcom
map on us httpwwwmapsonuscom
databas public record search
brb public inc httpwwwbrb pubcom
choicepoint httpwwwchoic pointnet
choicepoint autotrackxp httpatxpchoicepointcom
dc inform system httpwwwdniscom
dialog httpwwwdialogcom
diligenz httpwwwdiligenzcom
dun bradstreet httpwwwdnbcom
experian httpwwwexperiancom
fedworld httpwwwfedworldgov
gs public record servic httpwwwgaprsbiz
infousa httpwwwinfousacom
knowx httpwwwknowxcom
lexisnexi httpgloballexisnexiscomu
locat fast httpwwwloc8fastcom
merlin inform system httpwwwmerlindatacom
nation center for health statist vital record httpwwwcdcgovnch
noncommerci organ httpwwwpirorg
publicdata httpwwwpublicdatacom
searchsystemsnet httpwwwsearchsystemsnet
social secur number verif servic httpwwwverisssncom
usdatalink httpwwwusdatalinknet
legal resourc
docusearch investig httpwwwdocusearchcom
administr offic of the us court httpwwwuscourtsgov
attornei search httplawyersfindlawcom
california law httpwwwleginfocagovcalawhtml
courthous new httpwwwcourthousenewscom
cyber secur law httpwwwcybersecuritieslawcom
divorc central httpwwwdivorcecentralcom
feder legisl inform on the internet httpthomaslocgov
findlaw httpwwwfindlawcom
findlaw california code and statut httpcaliforniafindlawcom
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3537
florida statut httpwwwfdlestateflusstatut
law on the web httpwwwlawcom
lawyer httpwwwlawyerscom
lawyer directori httpwwwlawyersfindlawcom
legal ethic httpwwwlegalethicscom
legal info institut of cornel httpwwwlawcornelledu
legal research on the web httpgsulawgsuedumetaindex
legal studi at the univers of massachusett httpwwwumasseduleg
martindal httpwwwmartindalecom
monei launder and terrorist financ httpwwwocctreasgovbsabsamainhtm
nation center for state court httpwwwncsconlineorg
nolo httpwwwnolocom
onlin sunshin florida legislatur httpwwwlegstateflu
practic law compani httpuspracticallawcom
report committe for freedom of the press httpwwwrcfporg
report committe tape convers httpwwwrcfporgtapingindexhtml
suprem court of the us httpwwwsupremecourtgov
us suprem court decis befor 1975 httpsupcourtntisgov
us suprem court internet site httpllrxcomfeaturesscourtsiteshtm
univers of chicago law school httpwww1libuchicagoedu
govern site and crimin justic resourc
bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos atf httphttpwwwatfgov
bureau of industri and secur list of deni person httpwwwbisdocgovdpl
central intellig agenc httpwwwciagov
class action httpwwwclassactioncom
counti sheriff offic by state httpwwwcorrectionscomlink
court websit httpwwwuscourtsgov
courtlink httpwwwlexisnexiscomcourtlinkonlin
databas of govern websit httpwwwusagov
feder citizen inform center httpwwwpueblogsagov
fbi law enforc bulletin httpwwwfbigovpublicationsleblebhtm
us depart of homeland secur httpwwwdhsgov
fedworld httpwwwfedworldgov
feder bureau of investig httpwwwfbigov
feder bureau of prison httpwwwbopgov
feder elect commiss httpwwwfecgov
feder elect commiss inform httpwwwfecgovansanswersshtml
feder inspector gener httpwwwignetgov
feder judici center httpwwwfjcgov
florida depart of correct httpwwwdcstateflu
florida depart of law enforc httpwwwfdlestateflu
florida depart of state httpwwwdosstateflu
florida govern websit httpmyfloridacomportalgovern
govspot httpwwwgovspotcom
intern revenu servic httpwwwirsgov
investig guid to the sourc of httpwwwgaogovspecialpubssoihtm
access inform onlin investig
3538 2011 fraud examin manual
inform gaoosi972
librari of congress httpwwwlocgov
nation address server httpwwwcedarbuffaloeduadservhtml
nation archiv httpwwwarchivesgov
nation center for state court httpwwwncsconlineorg
nation crimin justic refer servic httpwwwncjrsorg
nobli httpwwwnoblisorg
nonprofit gatewai httpwwwusagovbusinessnonprofitshtml
director of defens trade control httppmddtcstategov
polic offic internet directori httpwwwofficercom
public access to electron record pacer httppacerpscuscourtsgov
publish list of recal nation highwai traffic safeti administr httpwwwodinhtsadotgov
royal canadian mount polic httpwwwrcmpgrcgcca
sec enforc regulatori action httpwwwsecgovrulesshtml
sec divis of enforc httpwwwsecgovdivisionsenforceshtml
secur exchang commiss edgar httpwwwsecgovedgarshtml
secur class action clearinghous httpsecuritiesstanfordedu
select servic system httpwwwsssgov
sex offend registri httpwwwfbigovhqcidcacstateshtm
social secur death index search httpssdirootswebcom
ssn valid databas httpusinfosearchcomssnvalidationdatabasehtm
state and feder prison httpwwwbopgov
state and local govern on the internet httpwwwstateloc govnet
state legislatur httpwwwncslorg
superior inform servic httpwwwsuperiorinfocom
texa depart of public safetycrim record httprecordstxdpsstatetxu
usagov httpwwwusagov
us commod futur trade commiss httpwwwcftcgov
us depart of justic httpwwwusdojgov
us depart of justic comput crime and intellectu properti section httpwwwcybercrimegov
us feder inspector gener httpwwwignetgov
us feder commun commiss httpwwwfccgov
us feder deposit insur corpor httpwwwfdicgov
us feder food drug administr httpwwwfdagov
us gener servic administr httpwwwgsagov
us govern print offic httpwwwaccessgpogov
us feder trade commiss httpwwwftcgov
us govern account offic httpwwwgaogov
us patent and trademark offic httpwwwusptogov
us postal servic httpwwwuspsgovncsc
us suprem court httpwwwsupremecourtusgov
unit nation crime justic inform network uncjin httpwwwuncjinorg
vital record databas httpwwwvitalreccom
voter registr httpwwwgloballocatecom
white hous httpwwwwhitehousegov
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3539
other fraudrel websit and websit of interest
acl data analysi softwar httpwwwaclcom
activ most want and crimin investig httpwwwactivemostwantedcom
associ of colleg and univers auditor httpwwwacuaorg
afu and urban legend archiv httpwwwsnopescom
ani birthdai httpwwwanybirthdaycom
associ of certifi fraud examin httpwwwacfecom
better busi bureau web server httpwwwbbborg
broward counti sheriff offic httpwwwsherifforg
cba consum tip for visa and mastercard httpwwwcbaca
compani site locat httpwwwswitchboardcom
comput secur institut httpwwwgocsicom
consum educ fraud httpwwwftcgovbcpconsumershtm
correct connect httpwwwcorrectionscom
cpa directori httpwwwcpadirectorycomindexcfm
check fraud httpwwwckfraudorg
black book onlin httpwwwblackbookonlineinfo
cyber space law center httpwwwfindlawcom01topics10cyberspaceindexhtml
dan moldea httpwwwmoldeacom
endfraudcom httpwwwendfraudcom
financi scandal httpwwwexacukrdaviesarianscand
forens account inform httpwwwforensicaccountinginformationcom
fraud index httpwwwscambustersorg
fuld compani internet intellig index httpwwwfuldcom
high technolog crime investig associ httphtciaorg
hoover httpwwwhooverscom
ident theftprivaci right clearinghous httpwwwprivacyrightsorg
ident theft assumpt and deterr act httpwwwidentitytheftorg
internet antiscam httpwwwnerdworldcomnw1319html
internet center for corrupt research httpwwwicggorg
internet crime complaint center httpwwwic3gov
inventor fraud center nation httpwwwinventorfraudcom
investor protect trust httpwwwinvestor protectionorg
justic refer servic nation httpwwwncjrsorg
loss prevent concept httpwwwlpconlinecom
miss monei httpwwwmissingmoneycom
municip bond scandal httpwwwlissackcom
bbb wise give allianc httpgiveorg
nation consum leagu fraud center httpwwwfraudorg
nation white collar crime center httpwwwnw3corg
network solut websit oper inform httpwwwnetworksolutionscom
nigeria the 419 coalit websit httphomericanetalphae419co
nobl ventur asset search httpwwwnobleventurescom
offshor busi new research httpoffshorebusinesscom
ponzi scheme httpwwwcrimesofpersuasioncom
access inform onlin investig
3540 2011 fraud examin manual
complianc headquart httpwwwcomplianceheadquarterscom
privaci tool httpwwwprivacytoolscom
privaci right clearinghous httpwww privacyrightsorglinkshtm
scambust httpwwwscambustersorg
scam and swindl httpwwwswindlescom
scamwatch httpwwwscamwatchgovau
secur manag onlin httpwwwsecuritymanagementcom
softwar inform industri associ antipiraci divis httpwwwsiianetpiraci
ssa fraud report httpwwwsocialsecuritygov
taxpay against fraud httpwwwtaforg
td bank fraud prevent httpwwwtdbanknorthcombankfraud preventionhtml
urban legend refer page httpwwwsnopescom
us postal inspect servic consum fraud httppostalinspectorsuspisgov
verizon busi httpwwwverizonbusinesscomu
viru bulletin httpwwwvirusbtncomresourc preval
websit hoax fsecur httpwwwfsecurecomvirusinfohoax
websit hoax vmyth httpwwwvmythscom
websit hoax symantec httpwwwsymanteccombusinesssecurityrespons
whistleblow websit phillip and cohen httpwwwphillipsandcohencom
world bank httpwwwworldbankorg
health careinsur fraud
ama select httpwwwamaassnorgamahomeindexshtml
america health insur plan httpwwwahiporg
american bar associationmedicin law committe httpwwwabanetorgtipsmedicinelinkshtmlfraud
american medic associ httpwwwamaassnorg
coalit against insur fraud httpwwwinsurancefraudorg
correct link health care httpwwwcorrectionscomnetworkshealthcar
depart of health and human servic oig httpwwwhhsgov
ed hay index to medic site httpwwwedha yescom
exclud parti list system httpwwweplsgov
health inform technolog us dept of health and human servic httpwwwhhsgovhealthitfederalprojectlisthtml
hipaa httpwwwcmshhsgovhipaageninfo
intern associ of special investig unit httpwwwiasiuorg
medic econom magazin httpwwwmemagcom
medic inform bureau httpwwwmibcom
medicar fraud and abus train onlin httpwwwcmshhsgovcontr actorlearningresourc
nation associ of insur commission httpwwwnaicorg
nation coalit on health care httpwwwnchcorg
nation fraud inform center httpwwwfraudorg
nation health care antifraud associ httpwwwnhcaaorg
nation insur crime bureau httpwwwnicborg
nation practition data bank httpwwwnpdbhipdbcom
offic of inspector gener health and httpoighhsgov
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3541
human servic offic of inspector gener social secur httpwwwssagovoigguidelinehtm
pdr physician desk refer httpwwwpdrnet
properti casualti insur associ of america httpwwwpciaanetsitehomensfmain
research america medic link httpwwwresearchamericaorglink
the hmo page httpwwwhmo pageorg
ultim insur link httpwwwultimateinsurancelinkscom
univers of floridacolleg of medicin complianc httpwwwmedufleduresearchraccompli
insur quot httpwwwinsur quotescom
state insur fraud divis
alabama httpwwwaldoigov
alaska httpwwwcommercestateakusinsur
arizona httpwwwidstateazusfraudhtml
arkansa httpinsurancearkansasgov
california httpwwwinsurancecagov0300fraudindexcfm
colorado httpwwwdorastatecousinsur
connecticut httpwwwctgovcid
delawar httpwwwdelawareinsurancegov
florida httpwwwfldfscomfraud
georgia httpwwwinscommstategau
hawaii httpdccakaku1hawaiigovdccaareasin
idaho httpwwwdoiidahogov
illinoi httpwwwinsuranceillinoisgov
indiana httpwwwingovidoi
iowa httpwwwiidstateiau
kansa httpwwwksinsuranceorg
kentucki httpinsurancekygov
louisiana httpwwwldistatelau
main httpwwwmainegovpfrinsur
maryland httpwwwmdinsurancestatemdu
massachusett httpwwwmassgovdoi
michigan httpwwwmichigangov
minnesota httpwwwstatemnu
mississippi httpwwwmidstatemsu
missouri httpinsurancemogov
montana httpsaomtgovinsuranceindexasp
nebraska httpwwwdoinegov
nevada httpwwwdoistatenvu
new hampshir httpwwwnhgovinsur
new mexico httpwwwstopfraudorg
new jersei httpwwwstatenjusdobiindexhtml
new york httpwwwinsstatenyusnyinshtm
north carolina httpwwwncdoicom
north dakota httpwwwndgovndin
ohio httpwwwohioinsurancegov
oklahoma httpwwwoidstateoku
oregon httpwwwcbsstateorusexternalin
pennsylvania httpwwwinsurancepagov
puerto rico httpwwwocsgobiernopr
access inform onlin investig
3542 2011 fraud examin manual
rhode island httpwwwdbrstateriusdivisionsinsur
south carolina httpwwwdoiscgov
south dakota httpwwwstatesdusdrr2reginsur
tennesse httpwwwstate tnuscommerceinsur
texa httpwwwtdistatetxu
utah httpwwwinsuranceutahgov
vermont httpwwwbishcastatevtu
virginia httpwwwsccvirginiagovdivisionboi
washington httpwwwinsurancewagov
west virginia httpwwwwvinsurancegov
wisconsin httpociwigov
wyom httpinsurancestatewyu
telecom fraudsecur
feder commun commiss httpwwwfccgov
financi industri regulatori author httpwwwfinraorg
help net secur httpwwwnetsecurityorg
intern engin consortium httpwwwiecorg
neural technolog httpwwwneuraltcom
travelassist magazin phone card fraud httpwwwtravelassistcommaga27html
audit
american institut of certifi public account httpwwwaicpaorg
coso httpwwwcosoorg
govern audit standard httpwwwgaogovgovaudybk01htm
institut of intern auditor httpwwwtheiiaorg
intern audit world wide web httpwwwbitwisenetiawww
intern audit and assur standard board httpwwwifacorgiaasb
unc busi manual httpwwwuncedufinancebusman
invest resourc
corpor inform httpwwwcorporateinformationcom
edgar onlin httpfreeedgarcom
kipling httpwwwkiplingercom
thestreetcom httpwwwthestreetcom
wall street network httpwwwwallstreetnetcom
intern site
global search engin
bubl link httpbublacuk
euroseek httpwwweuroseekcom
matilda mega search engin australia httpwwwaussieseekcom
search engin colossu httpwwwsearchenginecolossuscom
search new zealand httpwwwsearchnzconz
voila httpwwwvoilafr
webwombat httpwebwombatcomau
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3543
newspap
bbc new httpnewsbbccouk
even standard httpwwwthisislondoncoukstandard
financi time httpnewsftcomhom
intern herald tribun httpglobalnytimescom
internet public librari httpwwwiplorgdivnew
le mond httpwwwlemondefr
newspap societi httpwwwnewspapersocorguk
onlinenewspaperscom httpwwwonlinenewspaperscom
the daili telegraph httpwwwtelegraphcouk
the guardian unlimit httpwwwguardiancouk
the independ httpwwwindependentcouk
the irish time httpwwwirelandcom
the newspap societi databas httpwwwnsdatabasecoukindexhtml
the scotsman httpwwwscotsmancom
the time onlin httpwwwtimesonlinecouk
time higher educ supplement httpwwwtimeshighereducationcouk
time of india httptimesofindiaindiatimescom
new and inform servic
bbc new httpwwwbbccouk
canadacom httpwwwcanadacomindexhtml
euronew httpwwweuronewsnet
futur event new servic httpwwwfenscom
global investig journal httpwwwglobalinvestigativejournalismorg
hansard hous of common debat httpwwwpublicationsparliamentukpacmcmhansrdhtm
itn onlin httpitncouk
microsoft network new httpukmsncom
newsnow httpwwwnewsnowcouk
ninemsn httpninemsncomau
sky new httpnewsskycomskynewshom
the economist httpwwweconomistcom
the press associ httpwwwpressassociationcom
uk busi park media new httpwwwukbusi parkcouk
yahoo uk ireland new httpuknewsyahoocom
librari
aberdeen univers httpwwwabdnacuklibrari
british librari httpwwwbluk
cambridg univers httpwwwlibcamacuk
edinburgh univers httpwwwlibedacuklib
exet univers httpwwwasexacuklibrari
glasgow univers httpwwwlibglaacuk
king colleg london httpwwwkclacukiss
oxford univers httpwwwoxacuklibrari
public librari uk httpdspacedialpipexcomtownsquareac940weblibshtml
univers london global httpwwwuclacuk
univers of bath httpwwwbathacuklibrari
univers of east anglia httpwww1ueaacukcmhomeservicesunitsi
access inform onlin investig
3544 2011 fraud examin manual
telephon number
aol intern directori httpsiteaolcomnetfindinternationalhtml
infobel world httpwwwinfobelcomteldir
uk busi directori httpwwwfreeindexcouk
yellow page httpwwwyellcom
map
mapmachin httpplasmanationalgeographiccommapmachin
maporama httpworldmaporamacom
mapquest httpwwwmapquestcom
multimap httpwwwmultimapcommapplacescgi
ordnanc survei httpwwwordnancesurveycoukoswebsit
street map httpwwwstreetmapcouk
the rac httpwwwraccouk
legal resourc
access to law httpwwwaccesstolawcom
centr for commerci law studi univers of london httpwwwcclsedu
consum law center httpwwwhgorgconsumehtml
dunde univers legal websit directori httpwwwdundeeacuklaw
findlaw intern resourc httpwwwfindlawcom12intern
her majesti court servic httpwwwhmcourtsservicegovuk
infolaw gatewai httpwwwinfolawcouk
lawlink httpwwwlawlinki
the law commiss httpwwwlawcomgovuk
the law societi of england and wale httpwwwlawsocietyorgukhomelaw
govern site and law enforc site
australia attornei gener depart httpwwwaggovau
australia ministeri council on consum affair httpwwwconsumergovau
australian court and legisl httpwwwnlagovauozlawhtml
australian depart of foreign affair and trade httpwwwdfatgovau
australian privaci commission httpwwwprivacygovau
citi of london polic httpwwwcityoflondonpoliceuk
depart for busi enterpris regulatori reform httpwwwberrgovuk
govern inform centr httpwwwdirectgovukenindexhtm
inform commission offic httpwwwicogovuk
financi servic author httpwwwfsagovuk
foreign and commonwealth offic httpwwwfcogovuk
hm treasuri httpwwwhmtreasurygovuk
intern centr for crimin law reform and crimin justic polici httpwwwicclrlawubcca
ministri of econom develop httpwwwmedgovtnz
nation crimin intellig servic httpwwwdirectgovukenindexhtm
new zealand ministri of consum affair httpwwwconsumeraffairsgovtnz
new zealand govern onlin httpnewzealandgovtnz
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3545
new zealand polic link httpwwwpoliceassnorgnzlinkshtm
organ crimenathanson centr httpwwwyorkucanathanson
intellectu properti offic httpwwwipogovuk
royal canadian mount polic httpwwwrcmpgrcgcca
seriou organis crime agenc httpwwwsocagovuk
the european commiss httpeceuropaeu
the home offic httpwwwhomeofficegovuk
the nation archiv httpwwwnationalarchivesgovukdefaulthtm
nite kingdom parliament httpwwwparliamentthestationeryofficecouk
worldwid embassi and consul httpwwwembassyworldcom
special fraudrel websit and websit of interest
associ of british insur httpwwwabioruk
australian institut of criminolog httpwwwaicgovau
depart for work and pension httpwwwdwpgovuk
hm treasuri fraud report httpwwwhmtreasurygovuk
seriou fraud offic httpwwwsfogovuk
the insolv servic httpwwwinsolvencygovuk
audit
uk nation audit offic httpwwwnaoorguk
hm revenu and custom httpwwwhmrcgovuk
insolv procedur and corpor rescu httpwwwinsolvencygovuk
associ of busi recoveri profession httpwwwr3orguk
institut of charter account in england and wale httpwwwicaewcouk
associ of chart certifi account httpwwwaccacouk
chart institut of manag account httpwwwcimaglobalcom
institut of charter account of cotland httpwwwicasorguk
institut of charter account in ireland httpwwwicaii
london intern financi futur and option exchang euronext httpwwweuronextcom
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3601
