2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Investigating with the Internet


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Investigating with the Internet 
A great deal of information can be accessed through the Internet for little or no cost. This 
section explains some Internet basics, as well as how to use its services to obtain information 
about people, businesses, and fraud in general. 
 
The Internet is a decentralized global network of millions of diverse computers and 
computer networks. These networks can all “talk” to each other because they have agreed to 
use a common communications protocol called TCP/IP, which is named after its two most 
important protocols: Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and Internet Protocol (IP). 
 
Essentially, the Internet is a tool for communications between people and businesses. In 
general, the Internet is a giant network linking together millions of computers worldwide. 
 
The Internet is not organized by any uniform system, such as libraries’ Dewey Decimal 
System. Instead, it remains a free-floating, loosely-strung gold mine of information, available 
to those who understand how to use it. Unless you know the exact addresses of the Internet 
sites you are looking for, it is necessary to learn how to find the information.  
 
An Internet site, or page, is a single Web address, generally introduced by a person or a 
company to post information on a topic or to generate or promote business. There are a 
number of websites that will be of use to a fraud examiner, and some are listed and 
discussed at the end of this chapter. 
 
Traditional Methods for Finding Information on the Internet 
The most basic way to find information on the Internet is to execute searches using search 
engines or meta-search engines, or to locate information using website directories.  
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.502   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Search Engines 
Search engines are website tools that allow you to type in keywords describing the subject in 
which you are interested. The search engine will then scour the pages of the Internet and 
attempt to locate pages that may have pertinent information. For instance, in a search for the 
keyword fraud, the search engine will likely bring back a number of pages that have some 
relevant link to fraud (such as the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners’ website, located 
at www.ACFE.com). There are several prominent search engines on the Internet, and each 
functions in a different way. An extensive list of search engines is provided at the end of the 
chapter; however, a few of the more popular engines are described below. 
 
GOOGLE  
Google is the most-used search engine in the United States and has advanced search 
capabilities. Individual Web pages are ranked by the engine’s software according to how 
often the page is linked to by others, determining the page’s “importance” by the number of 
links and the identity of the linking page. Google is a good source for finding targeted 
information on a particular topic. Additionally, learning Google-specific search operators will 
provide the investigator with an extremely powerful tool for online investigations. 
 
For example, Google Groups is a searchable Usenet archive. It scans thousands of postings 
of Usenet groups, which are electronic bulletin boards classified by subject (see 
“Newsgroups” below). A search using Google Groups will reveal instances in which the 
terms you specify appear in a posting on the Internet. You can search by the name or e-mail 
address of users who have posted to newsgroups, or by subject, keywords, attachments, and 
so on. 
 
BING 
Bing (formerly Live Search, Windows Live Search, and MSN Search) is the current Web 
search engine from Microsoft. Bing automatically groups search results in different 
categories, depending on the type of searches users are conducting. Bing also provides the 
ability to save and share search histories via Windows Live SkyDrive, Facebook, and e-mail. 
 
In addition to providing many of the same search resources found in other popular engines 
(e.g., it provides searches specific to travel, video, pictures, and maps), Bing has several 
useful features. For example, Bing maintains an ongoing history of searches, giving 
researchers a way to identify what they looked up and in what order. And Bing’s image 
search is easier to manage than others because it displays more images on the results screen.  
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.503 
ALTAVISTA 
Altavista is a detail-oriented search engine. Because it reads the individual text of every page 
listed on the Internet, Altavista is very useful for finding random information. If you are 
simply “casting your line” to see what information might be available on a topic, this is a 
good engine to use. However, Altavista’s searches are so thorough you will encounter every 
page that contains your keyword(s), ending with as many as 200,000 hits. Successful Altavista 
searching requires you to construct your search carefully.  
 
YAHOO!  
Yahoo! is a multifaceted website containing a first-rate directory (see below for more 
information about directories), but it is also equipped with a search engine. In 2009, 
however, Yahoo! announced that its search engine would be powered by Bing. And, as of 
July 2010, up to 25 percent of the search results provided by Yahoo! Search are powered by 
Bing. 
 
EXCITE  
Excite’s search engine is good for broad general topics because it a simultaneous search of 
the Web, news headlines, sports scores, and company information. Results are grouped on a 
single page. Weeding through the results can sometimes be a chore. 
 
LYCOS  
Lycos provides advanced search capabilities, including the ability to search for specific 
media. Its Lycos Pro feature allows users to fine-tune searches. Lycos’s index of Web pages 
is smaller than those of some other services.’ 
 
ASK.COM  
Formerly AskJeeves, Ask.com is a good site for beginners and for general queries. The 
engine leads users through questions to help narrow the search, and also searches six other 
search sites. (For similar services, see metasearch engines, below.) Ask.com’s ability to 
interpret natural language makes it easy to use, though constructing precise queries can be 
difficult for the same reason. 
 
Meta-search Engines 
Meta-search engines send user requests to several other search engines and display the 
results. Some of the more common meta-search engines are described below. 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.504   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
METACRAWLER  
Metacrawler uses meta-search technology to search the Internet’s top search engines, 
including Google, Yahoo! Search, Bing, Ask.com, and more. It searches the best results from 
the combined pool of the world’s leading search engines instead of results from only one 
search engine.  
 
DOGPILE  
Owned by Infospace, this engine sends a query to a customizable list of search engines, 
directories, and specialty search sites (e.g., Google, Yahoo! Search, Bing, Ask.com) and then 
displays the results from each search engine individually. Once the results are retrieved, the 
innovative meta-search technology used by Dogpile goes to work removing duplicates and 
analyzing the results to help ensure that the best results top the list. The Comparison View 
feature lets users compare results from the leading engines with the click of a button. 
 
MAMMA  
Mamma is a “smart” meta-search engine; every time users type in a query, Mamma 
simultaneously searches a variety of engines, directories, and content sites; properly formats 
the words and syntax for each; compiles their results in a virtual database; eliminates 
duplicates; and displays them in a uniform manner according to relevance.  
 
SURFWAX  
SurfWax claims to provide the best use of relevant search results from the open Internet. It 
uses a cohesive matrix to search, sort, extract, and relate information from both the Internet 
and enterprise intranets. Surfwax offers multiple search tools, including FocusWords, 
SearchSets, SiteSnaps, and ContextZooming. 
 
Directories 
The road to mining information on the Internet does not always go through search engines. 
Some of the best investigative tools an examiner has online are directories. As the name 
suggests, directories  are specialized websites that collect the names of numerous other related 
websites, allowing the user to browse through a complete listing of possible sites to visit. 
Directories contain links to pages that have a commonality. Some all-inclusive directories 
cover a plethora of different topics, and others are more focused on particular subjects or 
disciplines. These include several accounting and auditing directories that fraud examiners 
may find very useful. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.505 
The upside to using directories is that you can logically navigate a search, easing through the 
different categories until you find what you are looking for. However, directories contain 
only a portion of the sites and pages available on the Internet; therefore, the fraud examiner 
should use directories in concert with a search engine and not instead of one. 
 
YAHOO!  
In addition to its search engine, Yahoo! has an intricate directory, possibly the most 
comprehensive and all-inclusive on the Internet. The directory is built and maintained by 
Yahoo! employees, with input from users. Yahoo! functions much like a pyramid: it begins 
with several large pools of categories, such as entertainment and government, and then 
allows the user to select more specific options from each broad category. For instance, an 
examiner could select “education,” then “universities,” then “university libraries,” until 
finally encountering a direct link to the main library catalog for the University of Texas. By 
paring down your selections to increasingly narrow topics, you can generally find several 
useful websites.  
 
VIRTUAL LIBRARY  
The Virtual Library (VL) is the oldest catalog of the Web, started by Tim Berners-Lee, the 
creator of the HTML that makes the Internet possible. Unlike commercial catalogs, it is run 
by a loose confederation of volunteers who compile pages of key links for particular areas in 
which they have expertise. While not the biggest index of the Web, the VL pages are widely 
praised as guides to particular sections of the Internet. 
 
INTERNET PUBLIC LIBRARY  
Run by librarians, this service indexes Web pages by topic. The Internet Public Library also 
contains an array of guides, such as online magazines and newspapers, associations, and tips 
for conducting research. 
 
OPEN DIRECTORY PROJECT 
Founded in 1998, Open Directory Project (dmoz.org) is the largest human-edited directory 
on the Internet. Dmoz.org provides non-commercial moderation of registered sites and is 
maintained by a community of volunteer editors. It provides site listings grouped into 
categories and subcategories.   
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.506   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
BEST OF THE WEB DIRECTORY 
The Best of the Web Directory is a commercial directory that provides site listings 
categorized by topic and region.  
 
BUSINESS.COM 
Business.com is an Internet search engine and Web directory that provides site listings in 
more than 65,000 business categories.  
 
Nontraditional Methods for Finding Information on the Internet 
Moving beyond the use of Google and other tr aditional methods of searching the Internet is 
important for individuals conducting fraud examinations. This section will examine how to 
use the following websites to obtain information on the Internet: 
• eBay 
• Whois 
• Craigslist 
• Archive 
• Zoominfo  
• GuideStar 
•  NOZA  
 
In addition to the above sites, this section will also discuss how an examiner can find 
valuable information using social networking sites.  
 
The websites addressed in this discussion are tried and true resources that fraud examiners 
should be comfortable with using. But before using these sites, establish an undercover e-mail 
account to use when searching. The e-mail account should be set up through a web-based
service like Hotmail, Yahoo!, or Gmail. Examiners should not use any of the following 
information when creating the e-mail account: 
• Personal names 
• Geographical region 
• Favorite sports teams 
• Hobbies 
 
In addition, a discreet e-mail account should have certain characteristics, such as a gender-neutral 
name. The handle should be comprised of numbers and letters that appear to be for 
a purpose, giving it added credibility and authenticity. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.507 
EXAMPLE  
LS-194-2183@yahoo.com  
 
eBay 
The online auction website eBay.com can be a valuable resource for fraud examiners. It 
maintains lengthy, detailed logs for each transaction, but this high-level information should 
be obtained with a subpoena. To conduct a more general search using a person’s name or e-mail 
address on eBay: 
• Go to “Advanced Search” in the upper-right corner of eBay’s home page. 
• Choose “Find a Member” from the left column. 
• Type in the first half of the person’s personal e-mail address (e.g., for 
crazybird@gmail.com, type “crazybird”). 
 
After finding a match, the examiner should visit the user’s eBay profile and read everything 
available on the page. An examiner can gain insight into a fraud examination by examining 
any items the subject bought or sold and by reviewing any comments the subject has made.  
 
Once the examiner has read the user’s comments, he should click the user’s “Feedback 
Profile.” Along the right side of the page will be a few selectable items under “Member 
Quick Links”; the investigator should select “View ID History” to see if the member has 
changed his ID over the past ten years. In addition, the examiner can make the suspect one 
of his “Favorite Sellers,” to receive alerts when the subject places new items for sale on 
eBay. 
 
The Whois Protocol 
Whois is a query response protocol that is used to search databases that store domain 
registration records, including domain name, server addresses, technical contacts, and 
addresses. These databases can be queried at the following sites: 
• Networksolutions.com will provide the ownership and registration information for a 
website.  
• Arin.net is a whois server that searches for the registrant and IP address range of a 
particular IP address.  
• Allwhois.com will find the whois database for a particular domain name.  
• Whatismyipaddress.com provides a collection of tools for locating information about an 
IP address.   
• Traceroute.org—like whatismyipaddress.com— can be used to trace IP addresses.  
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.508   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Craigslist 
Craigslist.org is a network of online communities, featuring free classified advertisements 
with sections dedicated to jobs, housing, personals, items for sale, services, résumés, and so 
on.  
 
The key to searching Craigslist is getting past the geographic restriction. For example, if the 
examiner is looking for items in the Silicon Valley, he cannot search other areas at the same 
time. To expand the search, the examiner must specify another area or use 
SearchTempest.com, a tool that allows users to search multiple Craigslist sites at once.  
 
Archive 
Archive.org offers researchers and historians a view of other websites captured by the 
Wayback Machine on a specific date. To access archived sites, enter a web address in the 
search box, and the engine will return a list of archived dates available. For example, a search 
of www.data2know.com returns a list of archived pages, starting on August 18, 2000.  
 
Zoominfo 
Another great resource on the Internet is Zoominfo.com. Zoominfo collates information 
from websites and then software bots — also known as intelligent agents — capture and match to 
particular individuals or companies.  
 
Zoominfo searches are conducted by company, person, or industry. Although Zoominfo 
searches can return a large amount of information, examiners must understand that this 
information is generated from other websites and should be verified. 
 
Zoominfo search results look résumés and include information like business experience, 
association connections, education credentials, and so on.  
 
GuideStar 
GuideStar is a great starting point to find data about nonprofits. GuideStar gathers and 
publicizes information about more than 850,000 nonprofit organizations. It obtains 
information from a variety of sources, including the IRS’s Form 990 data—this provides 
information on the filing organization’s mission, programs, and finances—and from 
individual organizations.  
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.509 
Noza 
Nozasearch.com is a Web-based database of charitable giving designed as a research tool for 
nonprofit organizations. It gathers data about private foundations’ activities that might be of 
interest to grant-seekers, philanthropic organizations, and individual donors.  
 
Social-Networking Websites 
Social-networking sites can be searched like traditional websites. Although a lot of the 
information available on social-networking sites can be found using traditional search 
engines, there is an ever-growing number of resources that an examiner can use to search 
these sites. For example, each social network has a search engine for locating members by 
name, phone number, or e-mail address. In general, users can search for members without 
logging in (e.g., MySpace’s default settings allow non-members to view members’ 
information) and searches can be done anonymously.  
 
If, however, a member’s profile is private, the researcher will only see a snapshot of the 
member’s information. For example, to view a member’s profile in Facebook or LinkedIn, 
the researcher must connect with the other member. If an examiner wants to view a private 
profile, he should create a compelling, attractive, and simple profile for himself and ask to be 
invited into the subject’s network. It is not necessary to create a false identity, and examiners 
should not use someone else’s identity. But if the examiner is interesting enough, good 
looking enough, or just savvy enough, he will probably be accepted into the network.  
 
An entirely separate category of search engines has been designed specifically to find 
information within social networks. These search engines use social networks to order, 
prioritize, or refine search results. Some popular social-networking search engines include 
Spokeo, Yoname, Technorati, Icerocket, and FriendFeed. This section discusses these search 
engines along with how to search photo-sharing sites. 
 
SPOKEO 
Spokeo is a social-network aggregator site that gathers information about people by 
searching for their e-mail addresses on various social-networking sites. Essentially, it is 
designed to locate and track online profiles within social networks. This site allows users to 
search by a person’s name, e-mail address, or phone number. This can be helpful if an 
examiner knows about the subject’s profile in Facebook and Myspace but is not aware that 
the subject is also a member of Hi5 and Xanga.  
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.510   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
For investigators and researchers, this is an incredible tool that gathers subject information 
in a way that other research tools cannot. One of Spokeo’s best features is its ability to track 
activity on members’ profiles. If the subject posts something on one of the popular social-networking 
sites, such as MySpace or Facebook, the post will appear in Spokeo’s search 
results and that person will be tracked for future updates.  
 
Spokeo allows a user to search and track a limited number of e-mail addresses or names for 
free, but requires a fee after a certain number of searches. 
 
YONAME 
Yoname is similar to Spokeo, but it searches  many social networks that Spokeo does not. 
Yoname is a free service, but the results can be random. Spokeo has a better return rate on 
its searches. It is important to note that if an examiner searches by a user’s e-mail address, 
Yoname will send the user an e-mail saying that someone was looking up “yo name” in 
Yoname. Although the e-mail does not contain the searcher’s information, it could be 
enough to alert a suspicious fraudster.  
 
TECHNORATI 
Technorati is a search engine for websites like YouTube, MySpace, Blog, Xanga, and so 
forth. The engine searches blogs with a variety of filters. A user can search by entering a 
topic into the Technorati search field, or he can use some of the site’s search categories, 
including photos, videos, and blogs. Using Technorati’s Advanced Search option, the 
examiner can narrow down a search to a particular blog and search by tags to sites that are 
linked to a particular blog. Although getting started with Technorati can be difficult, it can 
be a very useful resource. 
 
ICEROCKET 
Icerocket offers a unique array of tools. Backed by Mark Cuban, owner of the Dallas 
Mavericks, Icerocket was designed to track what people were searching for. It focuses 
primarily on blogs, using meta-tagging to categorize and index the content contained within 
blogs. As a result, a user can search by keyword, which captures any relevant matches found 
on a website and prioritizes matches marked as tagged searches. 
 
Like Technorati, Icerocket also allows users to  narrow down blog searches with an advanced 
search link or by using search operators, such as title, author, and tag. For example, a search 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.511 
for [title:“public records”] would find pages with  “public records” in their title. Similarly, a 
search for [title:“public records” author:“John Doe”] will return blog posts by John Doe that 
have “public records” in their title. 
 
In addition to searching blogs, Icerocket searches through image directories, Twitter, and 
MySpace. Even though an examiner can search MySpace directly, the Icerocket search 
engine tool for MySpace presents a more traditional search environment. 
 
FRIENDFEED 
FriendFeed is a real-time feed aggregator that consolidates the updates from social-networking 
sites, social-bookmarking sites, blogs, and other types of RSS feed. FriendFeed 
facilitates tracking users’ social-media activities (e.g., posting on blogs or Twitter) across a 
broad range of different social networks. According to FriendFeed’s website, its goal is to 
make Internet content more applicable and helpful by using social-network sites as tools for 
discovering intriguing information.  
 
 



:


investig with the internet
a great deal of inform can be access through the internet for littl or no cost thi
section explain some internet basic as well as how to us it servic to obtain inform
about peopl busi and fraud in gener
the internet is a decentr global network of million of divers comput and
comput network these network can all talk to each other becaus thei have agre to
us a common commun protocol call tcpip which is name after it two most
import protocol transmiss control protocol tcp and internet protocol ip
essenti the internet is a tool for commun between peopl and busi in
gener the internet is a giant network link togeth million of comput worldwid
the internet is not organ by ani uniform system such as librari dewei decim
system instead it remain a freefloat looselystrung gold mine of inform avail
to those who understand how to us it unless you know the exact address of the internet
site you ar look for it is necessari to learn how to find the inform
an internet site or page is a singl web address gener introduc by a person or a
compani to post inform on a topic or to gener or promot busi there ar a
number of websit that will be of us to a fraud examin and some ar list and
discuss at the end of thi chapter
tradit method for find inform on the internet
the most basic wai to find inform on the internet is to execut search us search
engin or metasearch engin or to locat inform us websit directori
access inform onlin investig
3502 2011 fraud examin manual
search engin
search engin ar websit tool that allow you to type in keyword describ the subject in
which you ar interest the search engin will then scour the page of the internet and
attempt to locat page that mai have pertin inform for instanc in a search for the
keyword fraud the search engin will like bring back a number of page that have some
relev link to fraud such as the associ of certifi fraud examin websit locat
at wwwacfecom there ar sever promin search engin on the internet and each
function in a differ wai an extens list of search engin is provid at the end of the
chapter howev a few of the more popular engin ar describ below
googl
googl is the mostus search engin in the unit state and ha advanc search
capabl individu web page ar rank by the engin softwar accord to how
often the page is link to by other determin the page import by the number of
link and the ident of the link page googl is a good sourc for find target
inform on a particular topic addition learn googlespecif search oper will
provid the investig with an extrem power tool for onlin investig
for exampl googl group is a searchabl usenet archiv it scan thousand of post
of usenet group which ar electron bulletin board classifi by subject see
newsgroup below a search us googl group will reveal instanc in which the
term you specifi appear in a post on the internet you can search by the name or email
address of user who have post to newsgroup or by subject keyword attach and
so on
bing
bing formerli live search window live search and msn search is the current web
search engin from microsoft bing automat group search result in differ
categori depend on the type of search user ar conduct bing also provid the
abil to save and share search histori via window live skydriv facebook and email
in addit to provid mani of the same search resourc found in other popular engin
eg it provid search specif to travel video pictur and map bing ha sever
us featur for exampl bing maintain an ongo histori of search give
research a wai to identifi what thei look up and in what order and bing imag
search is easier to manag than other becaus it displai more imag on the result screen
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3503
altavista
altavista is a detailori search engin becaus it read the individu text of everi page
list on the internet altavista is veri us for find random inform if you ar
simpli cast your line to see what inform might be avail on a topic thi is a
good engin to us howev altavista search ar so thorough you will encount everi
page that contain your keyword end with as mani as 200000 hit success altavista
search requir you to construct your search carefulli
yahoo
yahoo is a multifacet websit contain a firstrat directori see below for more
inform about directori but it is also equip with a search engin in 2009
howev yahoo announc that it search engin would be power by bing and as of
juli 2010 up to 25 percent of the search result provid by yahoo search ar power by
bing
excit
excit search engin is good for broad gener topic becaus it a simultan search of
the web new headlin sport score and compani inform result ar group on a
singl page weed through the result can sometim be a chore
lyco
lyco provid advanc search capabl includ the abil to search for specif
media it lyco pro featur allow user to finetun search lycoss index of web page
is smaller than those of some other servic
askcom
formerli askjeev askcom is a good site for beginn and for gener queri the
engin lead user through question to help narrow the search and also search six other
search site for similar servic see metasearch engin below askcom abil to
interpret natur languag make it easi to us though construct precis queri can be
difficult for the same reason
metasearch engin
metasearch engin send user request to sever other search engin and displai the
result some of the more common metasearch engin ar describ below
access inform onlin investig
3504 2011 fraud examin manual
metacrawl
metacrawl us metasearch technolog to search the internet top search engin
includ googl yahoo search bing askcom and more it search the best result from
the combin pool of the world lead search engin instead of result from onli on
search engin
dogpil
own by infospac thi engin send a queri to a customiz list of search engin
directori and specialti search site eg googl yahoo search bing askcom and then
displai the result from each search engin individu onc the result ar retriev the
innov metasearch technolog us by dogpil goe to work remov duplic and
analyz the result to help ensur that the best result top the list the comparison view
featur let user compar result from the lead engin with the click of a button
mamma
mamma is a smart metasearch engin everi time user type in a queri mamma
simultan search a varieti of engin directori and content site properli format
the word and syntax for each compil their result in a virtual databas elimin
duplic and displai them in a uniform manner accord to relev
surfwax
surfwax claim to provid the best us of relev search result from the open internet it
us a cohes matrix to search sort extract and relat inform from both the internet
and enterpris intranet surfwax offer multipl search tool includ focusword
searchset sitesnap and contextzoom
directori
the road to mine inform on the internet doe not alwai go through search engin
some of the best investig tool an examin ha onlin ar directori as the name
suggest directori ar special websit that collect the name of numer other relat
websit allow the user to brows through a complet list of possibl site to visit
directori contain link to page that have a common some allinclus directori
cover a plethora of differ topic and other ar more focus on particular subject or
disciplin these includ sever account and audit directori that fraud examin
mai find veri us
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3505
the upsid to us directori is that you can logic navig a search eas through the
differ categori until you find what you ar look for howev directori contain
onli a portion of the site and page avail on the internet therefor the fraud examin
should us directori in concert with a search engin and not instead of on
yahoo
in addit to it search engin yahoo ha an intric directori possibl the most
comprehens and allinclus on the internet the directori is built and maintain by
yahoo employe with input from user yahoo function much like a pyramid it begin
with sever larg pool of categori such as entertain and govern and then
allow the user to select more specif option from each broad categori for instanc an
examin could select educ then univers then univers librari until
final encount a direct link to the main librari catalog for the univers of texa by
pare down your select to increasingli narrow topic you can gener find sever
us websit
virtual librari
the virtual librari vl is the oldest catalog of the web start by tim bernersle the
creator of the html that make the internet possibl unlik commerci catalog it is run
by a loos confeder of volunt who compil page of kei link for particular area in
which thei have expertis while not the biggest index of the web the vl page ar wide
prais as guid to particular section of the internet
internet public librari
run by librarian thi servic index web page by topic the internet public librari also
contain an arrai of guid such as onlin magazin and newspap associ and tip
for conduct research
open directori project
found in 1998 open directori project dmozorg is the largest humanedit directori
on the internet dmozorg provid noncommerci moder of regist site and is
maintain by a commun of volunt editor it provid site list group into
categori and subcategori
access inform onlin investig
3506 2011 fraud examin manual
best of the web directori
the best of the web directori is a commerci directori that provid site list
categor by topic and region
businesscom
businesscom is an internet search engin and web directori that provid site list in
more than 65000 busi categori
nontradit method for find inform on the internet
move beyond the us of googl and other tr adit method of search the internet is
import for individu conduct fraud examin thi section will examin how to
us the follow websit to obtain inform on the internet
ebai
whoi
craigslist
archiv
zoominfo
guidestar
noza
in addit to the abov site thi section will also discuss how an examin can find
valuabl inform us social network site
the websit address in thi discuss ar tri and true resourc that fraud examin
should be comfort with us but befor us these site establish an undercov email
account to us when search the email account should be set up through a webbas
servic like hotmail yahoo or gmail examin should not us ani of the follow
inform when creat the email account
person name
geograph region
favorit sport team
hobbi
in addit a discreet email account should have certain characterist such as a genderneutr
name the handl should be compris of number and letter that appear to be for
a purpos give it ad credibl and authent
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3507
exampl
ls1942183yahoocom
ebai
the onlin auction websit ebaycom can be a valuabl resourc for fraud examin it
maintain lengthi detail log for each transact but thi highlevel inform should
be obtain with a subpoena to conduct a more gener search us a person name or email
address on ebai
go to advanc search in the upperright corner of ebai home page
choos find a member from the left column
type in the first half of the person person email address eg for
crazybirdgmailcom type crazybird
after find a match the examin should visit the user ebai profil and read everyth
avail on the page an examin can gain insight into a fraud examin by examin
ani item the subject bought or sold and by review ani comment the subject ha made
onc the examin ha read the user comment he should click the user feedback
profil along the right side of the page will be a few select item under member
quick link the investig should select view id histori to see if the member ha
chang hi id over the past ten year in addit the examin can make the suspect on
of hi favorit seller to receiv alert when the subject place new item for sale on
ebai
the whoi protocol
whoi is a queri respons protocol that is us to search databas that store domain
registr record includ domain name server address technic contact and
address these databas can be queri at the follow site
networksolutionscom will provid the ownership and registr inform for a
websit
arinnet is a whoi server that search for the registr and ip address rang of a
particular ip address
allwhoiscom will find the whoi databas for a particular domain name
whatismyipaddresscom provid a collect of tool for locat inform about an
ip address
tracerouteorglik whatismyipaddresscom can be us to trace ip address
access inform onlin investig
3508 2011 fraud examin manual
craigslist
craigslistorg is a network of onlin commun featur free classifi advertis
with section dedic to job hous person item for sale servic rsum and so
on
the kei to search craigslist is get past the geograph restrict for exampl if the
examin is look for item in the silicon vallei he cannot search other area at the same
time to expand the search the examin must specifi anoth area or us
searchtempestcom a tool that allow user to search multipl craigslist site at onc
archiv
archiveorg offer research and historian a view of other websit captur by the
wayback machin on a specif date to access archiv site enter a web address in the
search box and the engin will return a list of archiv date avail for exampl a search
of wwwdata2knowcom return a list of archiv page start on august 18 2000
zoominfo
anoth great resourc on the internet is zoominfocom zoominfo collat inform
from websit and then softwar bot also known as intellig agent captur and match to
particular individu or compani
zoominfo search ar conduct by compani person or industri although zoominfo
search can return a larg amount of inform examin must understand that thi
inform is gener from other websit and should be verifi
zoominfo search result look rsum and includ inform like busi experi
associ connect educ credenti and so on
guidestar
guidestar is a great start point to find data about nonprofit guidestar gather and
public inform about more than 850000 nonprofit organ it obtain
inform from a varieti of sourc includ the irss form 990 datathi provid
inform on the file organ mission program and financesand from
individu organ
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3509
noza
nozasearchcom is a webbas databas of charit give design as a research tool for
nonprofit organ it gather data about privat foundat activ that might be of
interest to grantseek philanthrop organ and individu donor
socialnetwork websit
socialnetwork site can be search like tradit websit although a lot of the
inform avail on socialnetwork site can be found us tradit search
engin there is an evergrow number of resourc that an examin can us to search
these site for exampl each social network ha a search engin for locat member by
name phone number or email address in gener user can search for member without
log in eg myspac default set allow nonmemb to view member
inform and search can be done anonym
if howev a member profil is privat the research will onli see a snapshot of the
member inform for exampl to view a member profil in facebook or linkedin
the research must connect with the other member if an examin want to view a privat
profil he should creat a compel attract and simpl profil for himself and ask to be
invit into the subject network it is not necessari to creat a fals ident and examin
should not us someon els ident but if the examin is interest enough good
look enough or just savvi enough he will probabl be accept into the network
an entir separ categori of search engin ha been design specif to find
inform within social network these search engin us social network to order
priorit or refin search result some popular socialnetwork search engin includ
spokeo yonam technorati icerocket and friendfe thi section discuss these search
engin along with how to search photoshar site
spokeo
spokeo is a socialnetwork aggreg site that gather inform about peopl by
search for their email address on variou socialnetwork site essenti it is
design to locat and track onlin profil within social network thi site allow user to
search by a person name email address or phone number thi can be help if an
examin know about the subject profil in facebook and myspac but is not awar that
the subject is also a member of hi5 and xanga
access inform onlin investig
3510 2011 fraud examin manual
for investig and research thi is an incred tool that gather subject inform
in a wai that other research tool cannot on of spokeo best featur is it abil to track
activ on member profil if the subject post someth on on of the popular socialnetwork
site such as myspac or facebook the post will appear in spokeo search
result and that person will be track for futur updat
spokeo allow a user to search and track a limit number of email address or name for
free but requir a fee after a certain number of search
yonam
yonam is similar to spokeo but it search mani social network that spokeo doe not
yonam is a free servic but the result can be random spokeo ha a better return rate on
it search it is import to note that if an examin search by a user email address
yonam will send the user an email sai that someon wa look up yo name in
yonam although the email doe not contain the searcher inform it could be
enough to alert a suspici fraudster
technorati
technorati is a search engin for websit like youtub myspac blog xanga and so
forth the engin search blog with a varieti of filter a user can search by enter a
topic into the technorati search field or he can us some of the site search categori
includ photo video and blog us technorati advanc search option the
examin can narrow down a search to a particular blog and search by tag to site that ar
link to a particular blog although get start with technorati can be difficult it can
be a veri us resourc
icerocket
icerocket offer a uniqu arrai of tool back by mark cuban owner of the dalla
maverick icerocket wa design to track what peopl were search for it focus
primarili on blog us metatag to categor and index the content contain within
blog as a result a user can search by keyword which captur ani relev match found
on a websit and priorit match mark as tag search
like technorati icerocket also allow user to narrow down blog search with an advanc
search link or by us search oper such as titl author and tag for exampl a search
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3511
for titlepubl record would find page with public record in their titl similarli a
search for titlepubl record authorjohn doe will return blog post by john doe that
have public record in their titl
in addit to search blog icerocket search through imag directori twitter and
myspac even though an examin can search myspac directli the icerocket search
engin tool for myspac present a more tradit search environ
friendfe
friendfe is a realtim feed aggreg that consolid the updat from socialnetwork
site socialbookmark site blog and other type of rss feed friendfe
facilit track user socialmedia activ eg post on blog or twitter across a
broad rang of differ social network accord to friendfe websit it goal is to
make internet content more applic and help by us socialnetwork site as tool for
discov intrigu inform
