2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Investigating with the Internet/Search Engines


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Search Engines 
Search engines are website tools that allow you to type in keywords describing the subject in 
which you are interested. The search engine will then scour the pages of the Internet and 
attempt to locate pages that may have pertinent information. For instance, in a search for the 
keyword fraud, the search engine will likely bring back a number of pages that have some 
relevant link to fraud (such as the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners’ website, located 
at www.ACFE.com). There are several prominent search engines on the Internet, and each 
functions in a different way. An extensive list of search engines is provided at the end of the 
chapter; however, a few of the more popular engines are described below. 
 
GOOGLE  
Google is the most-used search engine in the United States and has advanced search 
capabilities. Individual Web pages are ranked by the engine’s software according to how 
often the page is linked to by others, determining the page’s “importance” by the number of 
links and the identity of the linking page. Google is a good source for finding targeted 
information on a particular topic. Additionally, learning Google-specific search operators will 
provide the investigator with an extremely powerful tool for online investigations. 
 
For example, Google Groups is a searchable Usenet archive. It scans thousands of postings 
of Usenet groups, which are electronic bulletin boards classified by subject (see 
“Newsgroups” below). A search using Google Groups will reveal instances in which the 
terms you specify appear in a posting on the Internet. You can search by the name or e-mail 
address of users who have posted to newsgroups, or by subject, keywords, attachments, and 
so on. 
 
BING 
Bing (formerly Live Search, Windows Live Search, and MSN Search) is the current Web 
search engine from Microsoft. Bing automatically groups search results in different 
categories, depending on the type of searches users are conducting. Bing also provides the 
ability to save and share search histories via Windows Live SkyDrive, Facebook, and e-mail. 
 
In addition to providing many of the same search resources found in other popular engines 
(e.g., it provides searches specific to travel, video, pictures, and maps), Bing has several 
useful features. For example, Bing maintains an ongoing history of searches, giving 
researchers a way to identify what they looked up and in what order. And Bing’s image 
search is easier to manage than others because it displays more images on the results screen.  
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.503 
ALTAVISTA 
Altavista is a detail-oriented search engine. Because it reads the individual text of every page 
listed on the Internet, Altavista is very useful for finding random information. If you are 
simply “casting your line” to see what information might be available on a topic, this is a 
good engine to use. However, Altavista’s searches are so thorough you will encounter every 
page that contains your keyword(s), ending with as many as 200,000 hits. Successful Altavista 
searching requires you to construct your search carefully.  
 
YAHOO!  
Yahoo! is a multifaceted website containing a first-rate directory (see below for more 
information about directories), but it is also equipped with a search engine. In 2009, 
however, Yahoo! announced that its search engine would be powered by Bing. And, as of 
July 2010, up to 25 percent of the search results provided by Yahoo! Search are powered by 
Bing. 
 
EXCITE  
Excite’s search engine is good for broad general topics because it a simultaneous search of 
the Web, news headlines, sports scores, and company information. Results are grouped on a 
single page. Weeding through the results can sometimes be a chore. 
 
LYCOS  
Lycos provides advanced search capabilities, including the ability to search for specific 
media. Its Lycos Pro feature allows users to fine-tune searches. Lycos’s index of Web pages 
is smaller than those of some other services.’ 
 
ASK.COM  
Formerly AskJeeves, Ask.com is a good site for beginners and for general queries. The 
engine leads users through questions to help narrow the search, and also searches six other 
search sites. (For similar services, see metasearch engines, below.) Ask.com’s ability to 
interpret natural language makes it easy to use, though constructing precise queries can be 
difficult for the same reason. 
 



:


search engin
search engin ar websit tool that allow you to type in keyword describ the subject in
which you ar interest the search engin will then scour the page of the internet and
attempt to locat page that mai have pertin inform for instanc in a search for the
keyword fraud the search engin will like bring back a number of page that have some
relev link to fraud such as the associ of certifi fraud examin websit locat
at wwwacfecom there ar sever promin search engin on the internet and each
function in a differ wai an extens list of search engin is provid at the end of the
chapter howev a few of the more popular engin ar describ below
googl
googl is the mostus search engin in the unit state and ha advanc search
capabl individu web page ar rank by the engin softwar accord to how
often the page is link to by other determin the page import by the number of
link and the ident of the link page googl is a good sourc for find target
inform on a particular topic addition learn googlespecif search oper will
provid the investig with an extrem power tool for onlin investig
for exampl googl group is a searchabl usenet archiv it scan thousand of post
of usenet group which ar electron bulletin board classifi by subject see
newsgroup below a search us googl group will reveal instanc in which the
term you specifi appear in a post on the internet you can search by the name or email
address of user who have post to newsgroup or by subject keyword attach and
so on
bing
bing formerli live search window live search and msn search is the current web
search engin from microsoft bing automat group search result in differ
categori depend on the type of search user ar conduct bing also provid the
abil to save and share search histori via window live skydriv facebook and email
in addit to provid mani of the same search resourc found in other popular engin
eg it provid search specif to travel video pictur and map bing ha sever
us featur for exampl bing maintain an ongo histori of search give
research a wai to identifi what thei look up and in what order and bing imag
search is easier to manag than other becaus it displai more imag on the result screen
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3503
altavista
altavista is a detailori search engin becaus it read the individu text of everi page
list on the internet altavista is veri us for find random inform if you ar
simpli cast your line to see what inform might be avail on a topic thi is a
good engin to us howev altavista search ar so thorough you will encount everi
page that contain your keyword end with as mani as 200000 hit success altavista
search requir you to construct your search carefulli
yahoo
yahoo is a multifacet websit contain a firstrat directori see below for more
inform about directori but it is also equip with a search engin in 2009
howev yahoo announc that it search engin would be power by bing and as of
juli 2010 up to 25 percent of the search result provid by yahoo search ar power by
bing
excit
excit search engin is good for broad gener topic becaus it a simultan search of
the web new headlin sport score and compani inform result ar group on a
singl page weed through the result can sometim be a chore
lyco
lyco provid advanc search capabl includ the abil to search for specif
media it lyco pro featur allow user to finetun search lycoss index of web page
is smaller than those of some other servic
askcom
formerli askjeev askcom is a good site for beginn and for gener queri the
engin lead user through question to help narrow the search and also search six other
search site for similar servic see metasearch engin below askcom abil to
interpret natur languag make it easi to us though construct precis queri can be
difficult for the same reason
