2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Investigating with the Internet/Meta-search Engines


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Meta-search Engines 
Meta-search engines send user requests to several other search engines and display the 
results. Some of the more common meta-search engines are described below. 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.504   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
METACRAWLER  
Metacrawler uses meta-search technology to search the Internet’s top search engines, 
including Google, Yahoo! Search, Bing, Ask.com, and more. It searches the best results from 
the combined pool of the world’s leading search engines instead of results from only one 
search engine.  
 
DOGPILE  
Owned by Infospace, this engine sends a query to a customizable list of search engines, 
directories, and specialty search sites (e.g., Google, Yahoo! Search, Bing, Ask.com) and then 
displays the results from each search engine individually. Once the results are retrieved, the 
innovative meta-search technology used by Dogpile goes to work removing duplicates and 
analyzing the results to help ensure that the best results top the list. The Comparison View 
feature lets users compare results from the leading engines with the click of a button. 
 
MAMMA  
Mamma is a “smart” meta-search engine; every time users type in a query, Mamma 
simultaneously searches a variety of engines, directories, and content sites; properly formats 
the words and syntax for each; compiles their results in a virtual database; eliminates 
duplicates; and displays them in a uniform manner according to relevance.  
 
SURFWAX  
SurfWax claims to provide the best use of relevant search results from the open Internet. It 
uses a cohesive matrix to search, sort, extract, and relate information from both the Internet 
and enterprise intranets. Surfwax offers multiple search tools, including FocusWords, 
SearchSets, SiteSnaps, and ContextZooming. 
 



:


metasearch engin
metasearch engin send user request to sever other search engin and displai the
result some of the more common metasearch engin ar describ below
access inform onlin investig
3504 2011 fraud examin manual
metacrawl
metacrawl us metasearch technolog to search the internet top search engin
includ googl yahoo search bing askcom and more it search the best result from
the combin pool of the world lead search engin instead of result from onli on
search engin
dogpil
own by infospac thi engin send a queri to a customiz list of search engin
directori and specialti search site eg googl yahoo search bing askcom and then
displai the result from each search engin individu onc the result ar retriev the
innov metasearch technolog us by dogpil goe to work remov duplic and
analyz the result to help ensur that the best result top the list the comparison view
featur let user compar result from the lead engin with the click of a button
mamma
mamma is a smart metasearch engin everi time user type in a queri mamma
simultan search a varieti of engin directori and content site properli format
the word and syntax for each compil their result in a virtual databas elimin
duplic and displai them in a uniform manner accord to relev
surfwax
surfwax claim to provid the best us of relev search result from the open internet it
us a cohes matrix to search sort extract and relat inform from both the internet
and enterpris intranet surfwax offer multipl search tool includ focusword
searchset sitesnap and contextzoom
