2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Investigating with the Internet/Directories


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Directories 
The road to mining information on the Internet does not always go through search engines. 
Some of the best investigative tools an examiner has online are directories. As the name 
suggests, directories  are specialized websites that collect the names of numerous other related 
websites, allowing the user to browse through a complete listing of possible sites to visit. 
Directories contain links to pages that have a commonality. Some all-inclusive directories 
cover a plethora of different topics, and others are more focused on particular subjects or 
disciplines. These include several accounting and auditing directories that fraud examiners 
may find very useful. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.505 
The upside to using directories is that you can logically navigate a search, easing through the 
different categories until you find what you are looking for. However, directories contain 
only a portion of the sites and pages available on the Internet; therefore, the fraud examiner 
should use directories in concert with a search engine and not instead of one. 
 
YAHOO!  
In addition to its search engine, Yahoo! has an intricate directory, possibly the most 
comprehensive and all-inclusive on the Internet. The directory is built and maintained by 
Yahoo! employees, with input from users. Yahoo! functions much like a pyramid: it begins 
with several large pools of categories, such as entertainment and government, and then 
allows the user to select more specific options from each broad category. For instance, an 
examiner could select “education,” then “universities,” then “university libraries,” until 
finally encountering a direct link to the main library catalog for the University of Texas. By 
paring down your selections to increasingly narrow topics, you can generally find several 
useful websites.  
 
VIRTUAL LIBRARY  
The Virtual Library (VL) is the oldest catalog of the Web, started by Tim Berners-Lee, the 
creator of the HTML that makes the Internet possible. Unlike commercial catalogs, it is run 
by a loose confederation of volunteers who compile pages of key links for particular areas in 
which they have expertise. While not the biggest index of the Web, the VL pages are widely 
praised as guides to particular sections of the Internet. 
 
INTERNET PUBLIC LIBRARY  
Run by librarians, this service indexes Web pages by topic. The Internet Public Library also 
contains an array of guides, such as online magazines and newspapers, associations, and tips 
for conducting research. 
 
OPEN DIRECTORY PROJECT 
Founded in 1998, Open Directory Project (dmoz.org) is the largest human-edited directory 
on the Internet. Dmoz.org provides non-commercial moderation of registered sites and is 
maintained by a community of volunteer editors. It provides site listings grouped into 
categories and subcategories.   
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.506   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
BEST OF THE WEB DIRECTORY 
The Best of the Web Directory is a commercial directory that provides site listings 
categorized by topic and region.  
 
BUSINESS.COM 
Business.com is an Internet search engine and Web directory that provides site listings in 
more than 65,000 business categories.  
 



:


directori
the road to mine inform on the internet doe not alwai go through search engin
some of the best investig tool an examin ha onlin ar directori as the name
suggest directori ar special websit that collect the name of numer other relat
websit allow the user to brows through a complet list of possibl site to visit
directori contain link to page that have a common some allinclus directori
cover a plethora of differ topic and other ar more focus on particular subject or
disciplin these includ sever account and audit directori that fraud examin
mai find veri us
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3505
the upsid to us directori is that you can logic navig a search eas through the
differ categori until you find what you ar look for howev directori contain
onli a portion of the site and page avail on the internet therefor the fraud examin
should us directori in concert with a search engin and not instead of on
yahoo
in addit to it search engin yahoo ha an intric directori possibl the most
comprehens and allinclus on the internet the directori is built and maintain by
yahoo employe with input from user yahoo function much like a pyramid it begin
with sever larg pool of categori such as entertain and govern and then
allow the user to select more specif option from each broad categori for instanc an
examin could select educ then univers then univers librari until
final encount a direct link to the main librari catalog for the univers of texa by
pare down your select to increasingli narrow topic you can gener find sever
us websit
virtual librari
the virtual librari vl is the oldest catalog of the web start by tim bernersle the
creator of the html that make the internet possibl unlik commerci catalog it is run
by a loos confeder of volunt who compil page of kei link for particular area in
which thei have expertis while not the biggest index of the web the vl page ar wide
prais as guid to particular section of the internet
internet public librari
run by librarian thi servic index web page by topic the internet public librari also
contain an arrai of guid such as onlin magazin and newspap associ and tip
for conduct research
open directori project
found in 1998 open directori project dmozorg is the largest humanedit directori
on the internet dmozorg provid noncommerci moder of regist site and is
maintain by a commun of volunt editor it provid site list group into
categori and subcategori
access inform onlin investig
3506 2011 fraud examin manual
best of the web directori
the best of the web directori is a commerci directori that provid site list
categor by topic and region
businesscom
businesscom is an internet search engin and web directori that provid site list in
more than 65000 busi categori
