2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Investigating with the Internet/Social-Networking Websites


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Social-Networking Websites 
Social-networking sites can be searched like traditional websites. Although a lot of the 
information available on social-networking sites can be found using traditional search 
engines, there is an ever-growing number of resources that an examiner can use to search 
these sites. For example, each social network has a search engine for locating members by 
name, phone number, or e-mail address. In general, users can search for members without 
logging in (e.g., MySpace’s default settings allow non-members to view members’ 
information) and searches can be done anonymously.  
 
If, however, a member’s profile is private, the researcher will only see a snapshot of the 
member’s information. For example, to view a member’s profile in Facebook or LinkedIn, 
the researcher must connect with the other member. If an examiner wants to view a private 
profile, he should create a compelling, attractive, and simple profile for himself and ask to be 
invited into the subject’s network. It is not necessary to create a false identity, and examiners 
should not use someone else’s identity. But if the examiner is interesting enough, good 
looking enough, or just savvy enough, he will probably be accepted into the network.  
 
An entirely separate category of search engines has been designed specifically to find 
information within social networks. These search engines use social networks to order, 
prioritize, or refine search results. Some popular social-networking search engines include 
Spokeo, Yoname, Technorati, Icerocket, and FriendFeed. This section discusses these search 
engines along with how to search photo-sharing sites. 
 
SPOKEO 
Spokeo is a social-network aggregator site that gathers information about people by 
searching for their e-mail addresses on various social-networking sites. Essentially, it is 
designed to locate and track online profiles within social networks. This site allows users to 
search by a person’s name, e-mail address, or phone number. This can be helpful if an 
examiner knows about the subject’s profile in Facebook and Myspace but is not aware that 
the subject is also a member of Hi5 and Xanga.  
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.510   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
For investigators and researchers, this is an incredible tool that gathers subject information 
in a way that other research tools cannot. One of Spokeo’s best features is its ability to track 
activity on members’ profiles. If the subject posts something on one of the popular social-networking 
sites, such as MySpace or Facebook, the post will appear in Spokeo’s search 
results and that person will be tracked for future updates.  
 
Spokeo allows a user to search and track a limited number of e-mail addresses or names for 
free, but requires a fee after a certain number of searches. 
 
YONAME 
Yoname is similar to Spokeo, but it searches  many social networks that Spokeo does not. 
Yoname is a free service, but the results can be random. Spokeo has a better return rate on 
its searches. It is important to note that if an examiner searches by a user’s e-mail address, 
Yoname will send the user an e-mail saying that someone was looking up “yo name” in 
Yoname. Although the e-mail does not contain the searcher’s information, it could be 
enough to alert a suspicious fraudster.  
 
TECHNORATI 
Technorati is a search engine for websites like YouTube, MySpace, Blog, Xanga, and so 
forth. The engine searches blogs with a variety of filters. A user can search by entering a 
topic into the Technorati search field, or he can use some of the site’s search categories, 
including photos, videos, and blogs. Using Technorati’s Advanced Search option, the 
examiner can narrow down a search to a particular blog and search by tags to sites that are 
linked to a particular blog. Although getting started with Technorati can be difficult, it can 
be a very useful resource. 
 
ICEROCKET 
Icerocket offers a unique array of tools. Backed by Mark Cuban, owner of the Dallas 
Mavericks, Icerocket was designed to track what people were searching for. It focuses 
primarily on blogs, using meta-tagging to categorize and index the content contained within 
blogs. As a result, a user can search by keyword, which captures any relevant matches found 
on a website and prioritizes matches marked as tagged searches. 
 
Like Technorati, Icerocket also allows users to  narrow down blog searches with an advanced 
search link or by using search operators, such as title, author, and tag. For example, a search 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.511 
for [title:“public records”] would find pages with  “public records” in their title. Similarly, a 
search for [title:“public records” author:“John Doe”] will return blog posts by John Doe that 
have “public records” in their title. 
 
In addition to searching blogs, Icerocket searches through image directories, Twitter, and 
MySpace. Even though an examiner can search MySpace directly, the Icerocket search 
engine tool for MySpace presents a more traditional search environment. 
 
FRIENDFEED 
FriendFeed is a real-time feed aggregator that consolidates the updates from social-networking 
sites, social-bookmarking sites, blogs, and other types of RSS feed. FriendFeed 
facilitates tracking users’ social-media activities (e.g., posting on blogs or Twitter) across a 
broad range of different social networks. According to FriendFeed’s website, its goal is to 
make Internet content more applicable and helpful by using social-network sites as tools for 
discovering intriguing information.  
 
 



:


socialnetwork websit
socialnetwork site can be search like tradit websit although a lot of the
inform avail on socialnetwork site can be found us tradit search
engin there is an evergrow number of resourc that an examin can us to search
these site for exampl each social network ha a search engin for locat member by
name phone number or email address in gener user can search for member without
log in eg myspac default set allow nonmemb to view member
inform and search can be done anonym
if howev a member profil is privat the research will onli see a snapshot of the
member inform for exampl to view a member profil in facebook or linkedin
the research must connect with the other member if an examin want to view a privat
profil he should creat a compel attract and simpl profil for himself and ask to be
invit into the subject network it is not necessari to creat a fals ident and examin
should not us someon els ident but if the examin is interest enough good
look enough or just savvi enough he will probabl be accept into the network
an entir separ categori of search engin ha been design specif to find
inform within social network these search engin us social network to order
priorit or refin search result some popular socialnetwork search engin includ
spokeo yonam technorati icerocket and friendfe thi section discuss these search
engin along with how to search photoshar site
spokeo
spokeo is a socialnetwork aggreg site that gather inform about peopl by
search for their email address on variou socialnetwork site essenti it is
design to locat and track onlin profil within social network thi site allow user to
search by a person name email address or phone number thi can be help if an
examin know about the subject profil in facebook and myspac but is not awar that
the subject is also a member of hi5 and xanga
access inform onlin investig
3510 2011 fraud examin manual
for investig and research thi is an incred tool that gather subject inform
in a wai that other research tool cannot on of spokeo best featur is it abil to track
activ on member profil if the subject post someth on on of the popular socialnetwork
site such as myspac or facebook the post will appear in spokeo search
result and that person will be track for futur updat
spokeo allow a user to search and track a limit number of email address or name for
free but requir a fee after a certain number of search
yonam
yonam is similar to spokeo but it search mani social network that spokeo doe not
yonam is a free servic but the result can be random spokeo ha a better return rate on
it search it is import to note that if an examin search by a user email address
yonam will send the user an email sai that someon wa look up yo name in
yonam although the email doe not contain the searcher inform it could be
enough to alert a suspici fraudster
technorati
technorati is a search engin for websit like youtub myspac blog xanga and so
forth the engin search blog with a varieti of filter a user can search by enter a
topic into the technorati search field or he can us some of the site search categori
includ photo video and blog us technorati advanc search option the
examin can narrow down a search to a particular blog and search by tag to site that ar
link to a particular blog although get start with technorati can be difficult it can
be a veri us resourc
icerocket
icerocket offer a uniqu arrai of tool back by mark cuban owner of the dalla
maverick icerocket wa design to track what peopl were search for it focus
primarili on blog us metatag to categor and index the content contain within
blog as a result a user can search by keyword which captur ani relev match found
on a websit and priorit match mark as tag search
like technorati icerocket also allow user to narrow down blog search with an advanc
search link or by us search oper such as titl author and tag for exampl a search
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3511
for titlepubl record would find page with public record in their titl similarli a
search for titlepubl record authorjohn doe will return blog post by john doe that
have public record in their titl
in addit to search blog icerocket search through imag directori twitter and
myspac even though an examin can search myspac directli the icerocket search
engin tool for myspac present a more tradit search environ
friendfe
friendfe is a realtim feed aggreg that consolid the updat from socialnetwork
site socialbookmark site blog and other type of rss feed friendfe
facilit track user socialmedia activ eg post on blog or twitter across a
broad rang of differ social network accord to friendfe websit it goal is to
make internet content more applic and help by us socialnetwork site as tool for
discov intrigu inform
