2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/A Guide to Successful Internet Searching


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


A Guide to Successful Internet Searching 
 
Running Searches 
The Internet is not so much a service as a tool. To tap its rich information sources, you have 
to learn how to construct proper queries; that is, you have to learn how to ask for what you 
want. Search engines all have their limitations, but the most serious impediment to locating 
good information is the user’s lack of search skills.  
 
Most searching uses keywords. For instance, when hunting for the latest statistics on check 
fraud, the logical keywords are check  and fraud. However, if you typed in those words, the 
search engine would return numerous sites that have nothing to do with check fraud. By 
placing both words inside quotation marks (i.e., “check fraud”), you will get better results. 
Still, the list of hits will be in the thousands, so you might want to further narrow the search 
using the techniques below. 
 
Boolean Operators 
The best way to utilize a search engine is to use two, or possibly three, keywords that best 
describe the topic. If the words succeed one another, as in the case of check fraud,  then it may 
be beneficial to use Boolean operators to aid one’s search. Boolean operators  are symbols that 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.512   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
help the search engine to better understand exactly what it is searching for. Putting the “+” 
symbol between “check+fraud,” for example, will indicate to the search engine that it is to 
search only for pages that have the word fraud immediately following check.  If you insert the 
word and,  so that the search reads check and fraud, the search engine will understand to search 
for websites and pages that contain both the words check  and fraud,  but not necessarily right 
next to each other.  
 
Some of the more common Boolean operator symbols, or connectors, are shown below. 
 
 
Reserved Words and Noise Words 
The connector words and, or, not, and near are considered reserved words, and are therefore 
ignored when they appear in a search phrase. Similarly, noise words are common words with 
very little meaning (e.g., in, of, and the); such words are also ignored unless the user puts the 
entire phrase in parentheses. (See the Specific Search Operators section, below, for more 
direction on reserved and noise words.)  
 
The following are some of the common noise words ignored by most search engines. And 
and or are marked with an asterisk because they are both noise words and reserved words.  
  
Boolean Operators
 
+  Designates words that must appear right next to each other. 
–  Designates words that should not appear on a Web page. 
“ ” Designates a list of words that must appear together in an exact order, 
such as “holy cow.”  
and Designates two or more words that must both appear on a page, but not 
necessarily next to each other. 
or  Designates two connected words, one of which must appear on a page. 
not Designates words that should not appear on the page, much like the minus 
sign. 
near Designates words that should appear within a certain number of words of 
each other. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.513 
the and *  of 
his my there 
when is are 
so or *  it 
 
Specific Search Operators 
Online researchers rely on search engines to search Web pages for specified keywords and 
return a list of the Web pages containing the keywords. Although these engines return 
results instantly and with little effort, the simplicity of these tools often removes the benefits 
of more complex searching techniques. To determine a search engine or database’s abilities, 
consult the service’s FAQ or search help page. 
 
This section examines the advanced search features of the Google and Bing because they 
provide some of the most robust and useful tools for experts conducting searches. 
 
GOOGLE OPERATORS 
In addition to the basic Boolean operators discussed above, several operators can smarten 
up a Google search and return the right link faster.  
 
Operators Search Results Example  
~ Searches for synonyms of a given 
word 
[ automobiles ~glossary ]   will 
find pages with automobiles  as well 
as words like dictionaries, glossary, 
encyclopedia, etc. 
define: Returns definitions from websites for 
the particular term 
[ define:fraud ] will show 
definitions for fraud.  
site: Returns search results from only one 
website 
[ site:virtuallibrarian.com fraud ] 
will find all fraud-related pages on  
virtuallibrarian.com. 
filetype: Searches for items with a particular 
filetype 
[ filetype:doc ] will restrict the 
results to MS Word files matching 
specified search terms.   
link: Returns pages that  link to a particular 
website 
[ link:virtuallibrarian.com ] will 
return pages with links to 
virtuallibrarian.com.  
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.514   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
allintitle: Restricts results to those containing 
all the search terms specified in the 
title 
[ allintitle: mortgage fraud ] will 
return only documents that 
contain the words mortgage  and 
fraud in the title. 
allintext: Returns documents containing all the 
search terms in their text 
[ allintext: fraud skimming 
materiality ] will return only pages 
in which the words fraud, skimming, 
and materiality  appear in the text of 
the page. 
* Treated as a placeholder for one or 
more words 
[ “fraud * alert” ] tells Google to 
find pages containing a phrase that 
starts with fraud  followed by one or 
more words, followed by alert. 
 
In addition, Google operators can be combined. For example, the query [site:hp.com 
filetype:pdf “5010 LaserJet” printer FAQ] will search for an Adobe Acrobat PDF file of 
frequently asked questions regarding the 5010 LaserJet printer located on the Hewlett 
Packard website. 
 
There are numerous other operators and search techniques that work with each Google 
search service. A good resource for less-known Google operators and search tips is 
www.googleguide.com. 
 
BING OPERATORS 
Although Bing and Google share some of the same search resources, Bing has search 
operators that are unique to its search engine.  
 
Operators Search Results Example  
contains: Searches for pages where there’s a 
hyperlink to a file with the extension  
[swimming dolphin 
contains:wmv] will find wmv 
clips of dolphins swimming.    
inanchor: Returns pages that contain the specified 
terms in the link anchors of Web pages 
[inanchor: useful fraud sites] 
searches for pages that are called 
useful fraud sites by others. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.515 
inbody: Restricts results to those containing all 
the search terms specified in the body 
[inbody: securities fraud] will 
return only documents that 
contain the words securities  and 
fraud in their body.  
intitle: Restricts results to those containing all 
the search terms specified in the title 
[intitle: securities fraud] will 
return only documents that 
contain the words securities  and 
fraud in their title. 
ip: Finds websites hosted by a specific IP 
address 
[ IP:198.46.34.22 ] finds 
websites hosted by the specified 
IP address.  
prefer: Adds emphasis to a search term to help 
focus the search results 
[fraud prefer:Ponzi] specifies the 
type of fraud that the user wants 
to find.  
 
 



:


a guid to success internet search
run search
the internet is not so much a servic as a tool to tap it rich inform sourc you have
to learn how to construct proper queri that is you have to learn how to ask for what you
want search engin all have their limit but the most seriou impedi to locat
good inform is the user lack of search skill
most search us keyword for instanc when hunt for the latest statist on check
fraud the logic keyword ar check and fraud howev if you type in those word the
search engin would return numer site that have noth to do with check fraud by
place both word insid quotat mark ie check fraud you will get better result
still the list of hit will be in the thousand so you might want to further narrow the search
us the techniqu below
boolean oper
the best wai to util a search engin is to us two or possibl three keyword that best
describ the topic if the word succe on anoth as in the case of check fraud then it mai
be benefici to us boolean oper to aid on search boolean oper ar symbol that
access inform onlin investig
3512 2011 fraud examin manual
help the search engin to better understand exactli what it is search for put the
symbol between checkfraud for exampl will indic to the search engin that it is to
search onli for page that have the word fraud immedi follow check if you insert the
word and so that the search read check and fraud the search engin will understand to search
for websit and page that contain both the word check and fraud but not necessarili right
next to each other
some of the more common boolean oper symbol or connector ar shown below
reserv word and nois word
the connector word and or not and near ar consid reserv word and ar therefor
ignor when thei appear in a search phrase similarli nois word ar common word with
veri littl mean eg in of and the such word ar also ignor unless the user put the
entir phrase in parenthes see the specif search oper section below for more
direct on reserv and nois word
the follow ar some of the common nois word ignor by most search engin and
and or ar mark with an asterisk becaus thei ar both nois word and reserv word
boolean oper
design word that must appear right next to each other
design word that should not appear on a web page
design a list of word that must appear togeth in an exact order
such as holi cow
and design two or more word that must both appear on a page but not
necessarili next to each other
or design two connect word on of which must appear on a page
not design word that should not appear on the page much like the minu
sign
near design word that should appear within a certain number of word of
each other
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3513
the and of
hi my there
when is ar
so or it
specif search oper
onlin research reli on search engin to search web page for specifi keyword and
return a list of the web page contain the keyword although these engin return
result instantli and with littl effort the simplic of these tool often remov the benefit
of more complex search techniqu to determin a search engin or databas abil
consult the servic faq or search help page
thi section examin the advanc search featur of the googl and bing becaus thei
provid some of the most robust and us tool for expert conduct search
googl oper
in addit to the basic boolean oper discuss abov sever oper can smarten
up a googl search and return the right link faster
oper search result exampl
search for synonym of a given
word
automobil glossari will
find page with automobil as well
as word like dictionari glossari
encyclopedia etc
defin return definit from websit for
the particular term
definefraud will show
definit for fraud
site return search result from onli on
websit
sitevirtuallibrariancom fraud
will find all fraudrel page on
virtuallibrariancom
filetyp search for item with a particular
filetyp
filetypedoc will restrict the
result to ms word file match
specifi search term
link return page that link to a particular
websit
linkvirtuallibrariancom will
return page with link to
virtuallibrariancom
access inform onlin investig
3514 2011 fraud examin manual
allintitl restrict result to those contain
all the search term specifi in the
titl
allintitl mortgag fraud will
return onli document that
contain the word mortgag and
fraud in the titl
allintext return document contain all the
search term in their text
allintext fraud skim
materi will return onli page
in which the word fraud skim
and materi appear in the text of
the page
treat as a placehold for on or
more word
fraud alert tell googl to
find page contain a phrase that
start with fraud follow by on or
more word follow by alert
in addit googl oper can be combin for exampl the queri sitehpcom
filetypepdf 5010 laserjet printer faq will search for an adob acrobat pdf file of
frequent ask question regard the 5010 laserjet printer locat on the hewlett
packard websit
there ar numer other oper and search techniqu that work with each googl
search servic a good resourc for lessknown googl oper and search tip is
wwwgoogleguidecom
bing oper
although bing and googl share some of the same search resourc bing ha search
oper that ar uniqu to it search engin
oper search result exampl
contain search for page where there a
hyperlink to a file with the extens
swim dolphin
containswmv will find wmv
clip of dolphin swim
inanchor return page that contain the specifi
term in the link anchor of web page
inanchor us fraud site
search for page that ar call
us fraud site by other
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3515
inbodi restrict result to those contain all
the search term specifi in the bodi
inbodi secur fraud will
return onli document that
contain the word secur and
fraud in their bodi
intitl restrict result to those contain all
the search term specifi in the titl
intitl secur fraud will
return onli document that
contain the word secur and
fraud in their titl
ip find websit host by a specif ip
address
ip198463422 find
websit host by the specifi
ip address
prefer add emphasi to a search term to help
focu the search result
fraud preferponzi specifi the
type of fraud that the user want
to find
