2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/A Guide to Successful Internet Searching/Reserved Words and Noise Words


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Reserved Words and Noise Words 
The connector words and, or, not, and near are considered reserved words, and are therefore 
ignored when they appear in a search phrase. Similarly, noise words are common words with 
very little meaning (e.g., in, of, and the); such words are also ignored unless the user puts the 
entire phrase in parentheses. (See the Specific Search Operators section, below, for more 
direction on reserved and noise words.)  
 
The following are some of the common noise words ignored by most search engines. And 
and or are marked with an asterisk because they are both noise words and reserved words.  
  
Boolean Operators
 
+  Designates words that must appear right next to each other. 
–  Designates words that should not appear on a Web page. 
“ ” Designates a list of words that must appear together in an exact order, 
such as “holy cow.”  
and Designates two or more words that must both appear on a page, but not 
necessarily next to each other. 
or  Designates two connected words, one of which must appear on a page. 
not Designates words that should not appear on the page, much like the minus 
sign. 
near Designates words that should appear within a certain number of words of 
each other. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.513 
the and *  of 
his my there 
when is are 
so or *  it 
 



:


reserv word and nois word
the connector word and or not and near ar consid reserv word and ar therefor
ignor when thei appear in a search phrase similarli nois word ar common word with
veri littl mean eg in of and the such word ar also ignor unless the user put the
entir phrase in parenthes see the specif search oper section below for more
direct on reserv and nois word
the follow ar some of the common nois word ignor by most search engin and
and or ar mark with an asterisk becaus thei ar both nois word and reserv word
boolean oper
design word that must appear right next to each other
design word that should not appear on a web page
design a list of word that must appear togeth in an exact order
such as holi cow
and design two or more word that must both appear on a page but not
necessarili next to each other
or design two connect word on of which must appear on a page
not design word that should not appear on the page much like the minu
sign
near design word that should appear within a certain number of word of
each other
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3513
the and of
hi my there
when is ar
so or it
