2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Online Public Database Searches


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Online Public Database Searches 
Online public records databases are another source of information that can be accessed 
online. These databases are numerous and varied; they compile records from the federal, 
state, and county/local levels, and most can be readily accessed from a home computer after 
subscribing to their services. The costs associated with these databases can be equally varied. 
There are several access options available, and an examiner should be prepared to use any 
and all, separately or in combination. Keep in mind, however, that it may be necessary to 
spend time examining the actual documents to get the whole picture. 
 
A public records database will tell the researcher whether a particular record, or some of the 
information contained in that record, exists. However, note that such databases will not 
provide a copy of the actual document. For example, an examiner can conduct a property 
record search to find out that John Doe owns the property at 121 Main Street in Peoria, IL; 
however, if he needs a copy of the actual deed, he will have to retrieve it from the county 
clerk’s office. 
 
Additionally, there is a wealth of information now available on the Internet. As a caveat, 
however, remember that online records companies have to get their information from 
somewhere. Often, it comes directly from the county. But if the information in the county’s 
records was entered into the database incorrectly, then the report you will receive from the 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.516   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
database company will also be incorrect. Therefore, it is important to remember that 
accessing information online is never a full substitute for an examination of the public 
record itself. 
 
Remember, however, that if an examiner accesses certain types of information through an 
online service, he may be subject to the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), as discussed in 
the previous chapter. Again, the FCRA prohibits consumer reporting agencies from releasing 
personal information about an individual (e.g., information about the consumer’s character, 
general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living) to third parties without 
authorization, and it limits disclosure of consumer credit information, such as a subject’s 
credit history, to third parties. Thus, before accessing such information, you should always 
contact your attorney. 
 
Limitations of Online Public Database Searches 
There are, however, limitations to online public database searches, including: 
• Online coverage varies widely from state to state. The fraud examiner should determine 
whether specific information is available for each investigation. 
• Searches are limited in the area they cover. Fortunately for the crook, most of his public 
record “evidence” is generally filed at the county level. If he is smart enough to know 
how to conduct transactions outside his normal locality, then he can be tough to track 
without using multijurisdictional online sources. Making sure you are looking in the right 
county is important. You can be off by one county and miss pertinent land holdings, 
divorce records, liens, and so forth. 
• All online public records are brief abstracts of the original public record. 
• The source of the information compiled in a vendor’s database must be reliable. 
• Information must be checked to determine if it is accurate and current.  
• The records or publications that have been compiled in an electronic format may not go 
back very far. 
• Also, Internet search engines are notoriously erratic in their retrieval. 
 
Online Searches Through Database Vendors 
Any public records search should begin with a commercial database vendor. There are 
several companies that provide varying levels of public record information to subscribers. A 
description of some of these companies and the records they can provide are discussed later. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.517 
These companies provide access to a wide range of information that is stored in a central 
database, allowing a subscriber to access it from his computer. Some information is actually 
retrieved in hard copy and mailed or faxed to the subscriber, even though the request was 
made through the online service. 
 
Some companies require a yearly or monthly subscription fee in addition to the fee for each 
search. Others operate on a “pay as you go” principle that allows you to pay only for the 
searches you conduct. Therefore, it is important to shop around to get the best deal for your 
level of usage. 
 
For some practitioners, it may be more economical to enlist the aid of service companies, 
information brokers, and professional online investigators. These companies will conduct 
research for examiners, typically using online services and manual document retrieval from 
local sources. Although the cost of these services is higher than doing it yourself, it may be 
the best choice for occasional records searches.  
 
Using an Online Database to Find Information 
In the past, investigators hot on the heels of an asset-hider or suspect were hamstrung by the 
available investigative resources. In attempting to uncover unreported income, the 
investigator was forced to travel to the courthouse for the county in which the suspect 
conducted business, request the county files available, and take a number. These treks to  
the middle-of-nowhere were rarely cost-effective and were often fruitless in the search for 
pertinent information. 
 
This has all changed, however, and now maybe the flatfoot’s feet won’t be so flat. Thanks to 
the advent of online investigative services, such as LexisNexis, inquiries to the far-flung 
reaches of the United States can be conducted from a personal computer. These services 
have packaged a variety of invaluable investigative sources at very reasonable prices. 
 
Access to these services is accomplished in either one of two ways. Some services allow 
users to log in through an Internet site. Others provide access to their database through a 
software program and a modem. Each user has a user ID and password to gain access. 
 
The following is a description of how online searches can be used to conduct background 
checks and locate people, assets, and legal records. 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.518   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Locating People Using Online Records 
The first step to maximize search results is to discover a past address of the suspect; search 
activities should begin from that point. Second, the user should know the most powerful and 
useful types of searches, which are identified below. Third, it is important to keep in mind 
the cost effectiveness of the search activity and avoid ordering online searches that yield 
unnecessary or impractical information. 
 
The search methodology used by most online services is known as “text-string matching,” 
which means that all information entered in the data inquiry field will seek an exact match in 
the database. Typically, you may use truncation techniques (partial or abbreviated entries 
such as the first initial of the first name) only with first names and business names.  
 
Some common types of searches used to locate people using online records are discussed 
below. 
 
CREDIT HEADER SEARCHES 
Credit header searches are among the most powerful locator tools. These searches return 
information from credit reports on individuals. They are a valuable source because almost all 
people have been involved in some credit activity either under their true names or an 
assumed (or known as) name. It is appropriate to keep in mind that for common names, it 
may be necessary to use the Social Security number or date of birth to differentiate the 
subject from other people with the same name. The credit bureau headers offer two search 
mechanisms. First, the examiner can discover a current address, an address history, and 
Social Security number(s) associated with the target by using a past address up to seven years 
old. Second, once the Social Security number is in hand, the headers can be searched for 
matches, because the Social Security number is a national identity number. Although Social 
Security numbers are protected from disclosure by the Privacy Act, it has become practically 
impossible for individuals to avoid disclosing them on public records. 
 
CURRENT OCCUPANT/NEW ADDRESS SEARCHES 
A current occupant/new address search may be used to identify the occupant of an address, 
to confirm occupancy, to uncover a forwarding address, or to develop a list of neighbors 
who may know the suspect’s current whereabouts. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.519 
LAST NAME SEARCHES 
Last name searches can be used if the past address is unknown. This search produces better 
results if the name is not common; however, if  the last name is common, differentiating 
information should be included in the search. It should also be noted that some searches will 
return the identities of neighbors, who can be contacted for additional information about the 
suspect. 
 
BANKRUPTCY FILINGS, TAX LIENS, AND COURT JUDGMENTS 
Bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and court judgments have emerged in recent years as locator 
tools because such records contain valid Social Security numbers. The dramatic increase in 
individual bankruptcy claims has also particularly prompted their emergence as locator tools.  
 
DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES RECORDS SEARCHES 
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) records used to be good locator tools, but recent 
restrictions on them have reduced the effectiveness of such searches. Before Congress 
amended the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act in 1999, drivers could “opt out” and ask that 
their personal information (e.g., Social Security numbers, photographs, etc.) not be released. 
Under the amended law, however, drivers are no longer required to opt out; instead, the 
amended law imposes an “opt in” system requiring that drivers provide express 
authorization for the release of information. Moreover, individual states may not update 
their records frequently enough to provide the examiner with useful information. Searches 
such as Driver Identification can be useful on a spot basis, however. 
 
VOTER REGISTRATION RECORD SEARCHES 
In a few states, voter registration records are available, but as with DMV records, they may 
not be updated frequently. However, to the extent that date of birth information is available, 
such records can augment other searches. Also note any legal restrictions attached to the use 
of voter information. 
 
BUSINESS FILINGS SEARCHES  
Fictitious business name/doing business as filings include owner name(s), business name(s), 
file date, and file number. As noted in the previous chapter, in most states, individuals and 
corporations are required to file a doing business as (or an assumed or fictitious business 
name) statement with the county where they conduct their business. The records of sole 
proprietorship businesses, however, may not be available in the corporate/limited 
partnership records that are found at the state level. Nevertheless, the fraud examiner may be 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.520   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
able to locate these records by conducting an online search. By searching an individual or 
business name, the examiner can gather information from fictitious business name filings, 
including owner name, business name, file date, and file number. Some counties provide 
business address information, and in these counties, the examiner can also conduct searches 
using the business address.  
 
FEDERAL TAX ID SEARCHES 
Businesses can use the IRS website (www.irs.gov) to enter both the name and Federal Tax 
ID of a vendor or other business to confirm that the two match. 
 
Obtaining Financial Information and Locating Assets 
Discovering whether assets exist, where they exist, and whether they are recoverable can be 
accomplished with a search of federal, state, local, and proprietary records. These records 
can be further divided into those identifying “hard” assets and those regarding the potential 
for assets, credit capacity, or credit worthiness. 
 
SEARCHES FOR HARD ASSETS 
• The ownership of real property may be discoverable through the use of property 
searches, to the extent that they are available at the local or county level within individual 
states. 
• The ownership of vehicles can be inferred through the use of the DMV Vehicle Name 
Index, to the extent that the records within the controlling state agency reflect vehicles 
registered to a specific person or organization at a particular address. Conversely, the 
ownership of a particular vehicle may be inferred from the DMV vehicle registration 
searches. 
• An assumed business name search may be helpful in identifying a sole proprietorship 
business in which attachable assets are available.  
• The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) is extraordinary in that it can be useful in a wide 
variety of business situations. A search of UCC filings can help identify personal 
property that an individual or business has financed. UCC filings can also disclose when 
and where a debtor obtained personal loans, the type of property that he pledged to the 
lender to secure the loan, and the debtor’s current address 
• The ownership of an aircraft can be determined by searching the Aircraft Ownership 
Database by business name, person name, or wing number. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.521 
SEARCHES FOR ASSET POTENTIAL 
• The question of whether it is realistically possible to recover known assets may be 
partially answered by searching bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and tax judgments. 
• Again, the versatility of a UCC filings search is seen through the identification of assets 
that may have been pledged, in whole or in part, to secure a loan. For example, in a case 
where a bank lender has secured a loan through some type of chattel as collateral and has 
sought to perfect its lien on the chattel through a UCC filing at the state level, it can be 
fairly assumed that the debtor has a bank account with the secured party. Thus, a bank 
account asset may be identified as a recoverable asset.   
• Consumer credit reports and business credit reports searches may help develop a clearer 
picture of the target’s potential for asset recovery in terms of credit capacity and 
creditworthiness. Although access to consumer credit reports is restricted by the Fair 
Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), business credit reports are not governed by the FCRA. 
Business credit reports often contain information that is useful in verifying information, 
understanding business relationships, and developing basic financial information about 
an organization. 
 
Finding Legal Records  
The searches available to find these records can be grouped in three broad categories: on- 
site court searches, index or broad coverage searches, and public filings. 
 
ON-SITE COURT SEARCHES  
On-site court records searches  are performed by individuals who travel to county and municipal 
courthouses to search for records that match the search criteria that have been provided to 
them.  
 
These searches are directed by court, by county, or, as is the case with federal records, by the 
district court for the particular area. Accordingly, the examiner must carefully consider the 
potential location of court records. Such considerations should take into account the 
locations of the suspect’s current and past reside nces and his current and past businesses or 
employers. The results will include any litigation in which the individual was involved, 
including civil actions, criminal actions, divorces, and judgments. However, it will not return 
information concerning litigation that has been sealed by the court or information 
concerning juvenile offenders.  
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.522   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The coverage for these searches varies according to the service used. Additionally, each court 
has varying rules regarding how the search is conducted, the times when searches may be 
conducted, the repository location, and the search methods. If the subscriber is interested in 
a particular type of record, such as a divorce record, it may be necessary to call the 
company’s customer-support unit to adjust the search query. Types of records available 
include: 
• Federal civil court records, including bankruptcy records, are available for all types of 
civil litigation conducted in federal court. 
• Federal criminal court records are available for felony charges. 
• State civil court records are available based on a division of upper and lower court 
records. The division is a function of the differences within each state concerning the 
amounts in controversy. 
• State criminal court records can be obtained on a ten- or seven-year search basis for 
felonies, misdemeanors, or a combination of both. 
 
INDEX/BROAD COVERAGE SEARCHES  
These searches are useful when an examiner needs a search strategy broader than the by 
court/by county method used with on-site court record searches or that makes use of an 
index of basic information in court records. 
• Searches of defendant suits are available in all states, but provide coverage limited to 
specific counties and courts. When searching a specific state’s database, the examiner 
should review the help menu to determine the scope of the search abilities. 
• Searches of statewide criminal convictions are available in some jurisdictions. Review the 
help menu for special release requirements, the number of years available, if the record is 
for convictions only, and if the search encompasses both felonies and misdemeanors. 
• Searches of marriage/divorce indexes are available in some states. 
 
PUBLIC FILINGS 
In the United States, public companies, nonprofits, and some private companies must 
submit financial filings and forms to different government entities. Public companies, for 
example, submit various filings to the Securities and Exchange Commission (e.g., the annual 
report and the 10-K). These public filings provide a wealth of information about the filing 
company, including the nature of its business, its history, its organizational structure, its 
auditor, its balance sheets, and its income statements. Similarly, public filings are available for 
nonprofits, which must file the Form 990 to the Internal Revenue Service.  
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.523 
Public filings are available for free, as well as through fee-based services.  
 
Conducting Background Checks  
This type of search activity generally involves two broad areas: discovering what the public 
records reveal with respect to individuals and businesses with whom the subscriber may wish 
to do business and discovering information about prospective employees. In general, online 
public records databases are generally the best sources of background information. 
 
But before conducting any background checks, consult with legal counsel.  
 
DUE DILIGENCE 
As business organizations seek to identify vendors, clients, or strategic partners or seek to 
loan or collect money, they frequently conduct public record inquiries focused on other 
businesses or individuals who are principals of business organizations. This type of public 
record inquiry involves such issues as verification of application information, debt burden, 
adverse financial information, credit capacity or worthiness, business relationships (the so-called 
family tree), litigation history, and criminal background. Useful searches include the 
following: 
• Corporate/limited partnership searches are available in all states to verify information, 
identify principals, and develop other business relationships. 
• Bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and judgments searches respond to issues of adverse 
financial information and credit capacity/worthiness. 
• UCC filings answer questions of debt burden. This search will be helpful to identify 
hidden ownership or partnership interests, and it will be helpful to locate address 
information on debtors. 
• State and federal civil court records provide answers to questions concerning litigation 
history, past business relationships, and the potential for debt burden either as a function 
of an adverse judgment or as a function of financing expensive litigation. 
• State and federal criminal court records identify the possibility of a criminal background. 
• The use of consumer credit reports and business credit reports helps resolve questions 
concerning credit capacity and creditworthiness. In addition, the business report is useful 
in verifying information, understanding business relationships, and developing basic 
financial information about an organization. 
• Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) searches may be useful in 
developing adverse information or verifying information given by a prospective vendor, 
client, or strategic partner. 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.524   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Aircraft mechanics, airmen, medical license, DEA controlled substances, and other 
licenses may serve to verify that basic professional and occupational standards are met by 
a prospective vendor, client, or strategic partner. 
 
EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND 
Online record inquiries regarding employment history have increased significantly over the 
past few years. Corporate downsizing has disaffected an increasing number of workers to the 
point that it is easier for them to rationalize employee defalcation, fraud, or embezzlement. 
The same economic phenomenon of downsizing, combined with business pressure to 
increase productivity and the friction of modern life, have apparently produced an increase 
in workplace violence. Liabilities for employers and businesses have expanded through 
negligence standards and the respondeat superior doctrine for such tortious conduct as vehicle 
operation, assault, battery, false imprisonment, sexual harassment, and discrimination. 
Finally, the potential to be held liable for negative references has deterred past employers 
from responding to prospective employers’ inquiries about an employee. Therefore, 
prospective employers must increasingly rely on public information.  
 
Some of the searches useful in developing background information are listed below (where 
permitted by law): 
• Credit header searches are useful in confirming address and Social Security number 
information. 
• State and federal criminal court records and statewide criminal convictions may be used 
to uncover past criminal problems presaging similar difficulties. Indeed, criminal 
background checks may be mandated by law. For example, the Violent Crime Control 
and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 makes it a felony for insurance companies, as well as 
persons employing anyone to conduct the business of insurance, to hire any individual 
convicted of a felony involving dishonesty or a breach of trust.  
• Aircraft mechanics, airmen, medical license, and other licenses are available to ensure 
that basic job requirements are met in the appropriate circumstance. 
• Consumer credit reports may be obtained for purposes of employee selection, retention,  
and promotion. 
• Public filings such as bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and judgments may be obtained to 
identify adverse financial matters that can serve as potential motivators for fraud, 
defamation, and embezzlement. 
• Where a prospective or current employee drives a personally owned vehicle or an 
employer-owned vehicle in furthering the interests of the employer, such activity may 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.525 
expose the employer to liability for damages;  therefore, DMV driving records must be 
checked. 
• Basic information concerning job qualification can be verified through education 
verification and employment verification searches. Note: These are verification tools 
only; they are not definitional in terms of discovering past or current employment. 
• Although workers’ compensation searches may return the subject’s name, Social Security 
number, date of birth, employer’s name, date and type of accident, and nature and extent 
of inquiry, the Americans with Disabilities Act may limit usage of the search results. The 
Act purports to prevent prospective employers from using workers’ compensation 
records in denying employment to otherwise qualified applicants. 
 
Public Record Database Vendors 
Listed below is information about some of the larger commercial database vendors. You can 
shop various services to find the one that meets your needs in the most cost-effective 
manner and the one that fits your current case. In some instances, it may be necessary to use 
more than one service to get an accurate and complete profile. These companies get their 
information from various sources and on various update schedules, so a search in any one 
database may return different results than a search done elsewhere. 
 
Asset Locator and Business Background Check by KnowX 
KnowX is a product of the LexisNexis Risk and Information Analytics Group, and it claims 
to be the most comprehensive source of public information on the Web. It offers easily 
navigable public records searches in various categories, among them asset searches, adverse 
filings, property valuation, and people- and business-locator tools. One can also verify 
licenses, conduct background checks, and look up a company’s history. KnowX is an 
altogether user-friendly source of information.  
 
Most importantly, users can run KnowX’s business background check to uncover 
bankruptcies, judgments, lawsuits, liens, and UCC filings against a business with one search. 
In addition, KnowX’s asset locator service enables users to locate assets such as real estate, 
aircraft, and watercraft with one search. This software can also be used to verify ownership 
and assess property value. 
 
KnowX can be found at www.knowx.com. 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.526   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
US Datalink 
US Datalink is an employee background check service. Although it cannot retrieve 
information as quickly as some other vendors, US Datalink is the only company that relies 
entirely on manual searches for its information. US Datalink exclusively sends its researchers 
to the county courthouse to look up the requested information, as opposed to the electronic 
and possibly faulty information that other online investigative databases use. Therefore, if a 
fraud examiner has the time to wait for his inquiry, US Datalink might be the most reliable 
option. US Datalink also has media resources, and it can be found at www.usdatalink.com. 
 
infoUSA 
infoUSA compiles business and consumer data, and it offers a wide range of data processing 
services. infoUSA users have access to information on 14 million U.S. businesses, 13 million 
executives and professionals, and 210 million U.S. consumers. Searches of infoUSA’s 
database can produce results for a broad range of information, including sales volume, 
corporate linkage, contact names and titles, company history, credit ratings, and any 
headlines involving the business. Furthermore, the versatility of the searches is one of 
infoUSA’s better features; searches can be performed according to business size, location, 
length of time in operation, gender or race of owners, and industry. infoUSA is located at 
www.infousa.com. 
 
Veris 
Veris is a Social Security validation service; it specializes in providing verification of Social 
Security numbers, possible mail drop addresses, dates of birth, and death records. Veris 
allows an investigator to match a Social Security number to a name; however, this service is 
costly (cost per search begins at $115, but the actual cost depends on the type of search and 
number of searches being conducted) but very accurate. Veris can be accessed at www.veris-ssn.com. 
 
CSC Diligenz 
CSC Diligenz is a Web-based due diligence service. It is a great database for retrieving 
information about businesses. With its weekly database updates, CSC Diligenz’s strength lies 
in the reliability of its public record information. CSC Diligenz can produce a business’s 
financial statements, records pertaining to corporate status, business credit, and licensing 
information. UCC filings, bankruptcy, judgments, and corporate good-standing searches are 
just a few of their services. Diligenz is located at www.diligenz.com. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.527 
Dialog 
Dialog is a ProQuest company, and it offers users with access to more than 1,200 databases. 
It contains nearly 2 billion records, including references and abstracts of published literature; 
statistical tables; the full text of selected articles; and directory, business, and financial data. 
Dialog can be accessed at www.dialog.com. 
 
D&B 
D&B is a business information service provider. The variety of information available 
through D&B is impressive. It is probably one of the most comprehensive and diverse 
sources available, with facts on more than 130 million companies in more than 190 
countries. D&B is renowned for products like Business Information Report  and Industry Norms 
and Key Business Ratios,  both excellent tools. It is located at www.dnb.com. 
 
Hoover’s 
Hoover’s, a D&B company, is a one-stop reference for business information. Hoover’s 
provides comprehensive, up-to-date business information for professionals who need 
intelligence on U.S. and global companies, industries, and professionals. Hoover’s database 
consists of 65 million companies with in-depth coverage of 40,000 public and non-public 
U.S. and international companies. Subscribers also have access to information on more than 
15 million small, private business across the United States. Hoover’s is located at 
www.hoovers.com. 
 
LexisNexis 
LexisNexis is a legal and business information database that provides its subscribers with 
daily newspapers for either a flat fee or a per-use fee. LexisNexis maintains a cavernous 
database of U.S. and international media sources, including daily newspapers, magazines, and 
television transcripts. In addition, LexisNexis offers a service in which the user can request 
immediate information on difficult-to-find topics. LexisNexis will research the topic and give 
the user the information as quickly as possible. For more information, visit www.lexis.com. 
 
In one form or another, LexisNexis has been in the information business for nearly 30 years. 
It is now one of the leading electronic data firms in the world. Users can obtain access to 
public records, media publications, and court cases and records. For more information, visit 
www.lexisnexis.com. 
 
DCS Information Systems 
Founded in 1967, DCS Information Systems is an established source for investigative 
information. DCS provides online investigative solutions for business and government — 
from financial institutions to law enforcement or investigators. Their online database 
products help organizations prevent and detect fraud; verify application information; screen 
potential employees; and locate debtors, missing  persons, heirs, or assets. DCS provides 
information comprising public records and publicly available information. Its AmeriFind 
online resource system is separated into three areas, making searches simple: 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.528   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• PrimeData provides banking and finance information. 
• QuickFind serves general investigations, security, and fraud prevention and detection. 
• FraudTracer serves insurance fraud investigations and claims. 
 
G.A. Public Records Services 
G.A. Public Records Services specializes in onsite county-level criminal record information. 
It can usually provide a report within 24– 72 hours, has access to records in thousands of 
counties coast to coast. G.A. Public Records Services provides search services for 
employment screening, corporate due diligence, fraud investigations, private investigations, 
and tenant screening. For more information, visit www.gaprs.com. 
 
Experian 
Experian is one of the major providers of consumer credit information, and it provides a 
variety of other public information. Experian provides services on consumer and business 
credit, direct marketing, and real estate information services. Experian maintains credit 
information on more than 210 million U.S. consumers and more than 18 million U.S. 
businesses. Its National Consumer Database is updated 65 times per year with information 
on more than 110 million U.S. households. The National Business Database is updated 
monthly, has facts on more than 18 million companies in all industries, and has more than 
200 million cross-industry application records to help detect inconsistencies in incoming 
applications.  
 
Some of the services provided by Experian include: 
• Business Snapshot Reports that summarize credit histories, including payment patterns 
and legal filings, of small businesses or contractors. 
• Precise ID with Knowledge IQ consist of  scoring, analytics, and knowledge-based 
authentication, and it provides real-time and online validation and verification and fraud 
assessment of names, addresses, Social Security numbers, dates of birth, drivers’ licenses, 
and telephone numbers. 
 
TransUnion  
TransUnion is one of the big three credit report companies, and it offers credit information 
and services for consumers and businesses alike. More specifically, TransUnion is a global 
provider of business intelligence services with technology-based intelligence products, 
including innovative credit-decision and fraud-prevention tools, advanced target-marketing 
products, risk and profitability models, and portfolio management.  
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.529 
TransUnion also offers a Fraud Victim Assistance Department (FVAD). Since its inception, 
the FVAD has helped millions of consumers resolve or prevent problems with credit fraud. 
The FVAD comprises three distinct teams: 
• The Consumer Protection Team (CPT) 
• The Fraud Investigation Response and Support Team (FIRST) 
• The Fraud Assistance and Support Team (FAST) 
 
Search Systems 
Search Systems is a public records directory with more than 55,000 searchable public record 
databases. Its search capabilities include business information, corporate filings, property 
records, deeds, mortgages, criminal and civil court filings, inmates, offenders, births, deaths, 
marriages, unclaimed property, and professional licenses. One of its many directories, the 
criminal records and offenders search, has access to more than 300 million criminal records, 
and its Search Systems Premium offers instant access to more than 100 million bankruptcy, 
judgment, and tax liens. For more information, visit http://publicrecords.searchsystems.net. 
 
Westlaw  
Westlaw is an online legal research service, and it provides access to a comprehensive and 
current collection of public records. Its People Finder database directory contains 
information on individuals compiled from numerous public sources, including telephone 
directories, publishers’ mailing lists, change of address files, real estate filings, utility records, 
public demographic and consumer household data, voter registration records, driver’s license 
data, federal and state death records, and credit header data. For more information, visit 
www.westlaw.com.  
 
Newspaper/Media Databases 
Newspapers, periodicals, and journals can be excellent sources of information in a fraud 
investigation, particularly when searching for background information on an individual or a 
business. For example, in a Texas case, a person accused of insider trading was cleared using 
materials from an media database search. Defense attorneys gathered more than 300 
published comments about the company’s financial prospects and showed that someone 
following the advice distributed freely in the press would have made more money than  
the accused.2 
                                                 
2 Bernstein, Paul. Computers for Lawyers: A Complete Guide to Law Office Automation. 2nd ed. Chicago: ATLA Press, 
1997. 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.530   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Searchable databases containing information from literally hundreds of published sources 
can usually be accessed for free at most libraries. There are also a number of online 
databases that deal specifically with news and media resources. These databases compile a 
number of different media resources and allow the user to search for a specific topic, 
returning articles or transcripts that pertain to the requested subject. Most publications allow 
users to search their archives for free; the full text of articles is available, but usually for a fee. 
Using one of the following services allows users to search many publications at once. 
 
Factiva 
Factiva, from Dow Jones, is tailored for business and financial news searches, maintaining a 
catalog of more than 28,000 of the world’s leading news and business sources from 159 
countries, 350 geographic regions, and in 23 languages. Factiva allows users to pay only for 
the articles downloaded and does not require an annual subscription. For more information, 
visit www.factiva.com. 
 
Highbeam Research  
HighBeam has an extensive archive containing millions of documents from leading 
publications that are updated daily or going back as far as 20 years. Searchable sources 
include newspapers, magazines, journals, transcripts, books, dictionaries, and almanacs. For 
more information, visit www.highbeam.com. 
 
ProQuest 
ProQuest is a data service that offers access to thousands of online journals and magazines 
covering a wide array of subjects. ProQuest’s vast content pools are available to researchers 
through libraries of all types and include the world’s largest digital newspaper archive; 
periodical databases comprising the output of thousands of titles and spanning more than 
500 years, with many in full-text, full-image format; an extensive dissertation collection; and 
various other scholarly collections. For more information, visit www.proquest.com. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.531 
Other News Database Services 
• Newspapers on the Net (www.onlinenewspapers.com) 
• Newswise (www.newswise.com) 
 
 



:


onlin public databas search
onlin public record databas ar anoth sourc of inform that can be access
onlin these databas ar numer and vari thei compil record from the feder
state and countyloc level and most can be readili access from a home comput after
subscrib to their servic the cost associ with these databas can be equal vari
there ar sever access option avail and an examin should be prepar to us ani
and all separ or in combin keep in mind howev that it mai be necessari to
spend time examin the actual document to get the whole pictur
a public record databas will tell the research whether a particular record or some of the
inform contain in that record exist howev note that such databas will not
provid a copi of the actual document for exampl an examin can conduct a properti
record search to find out that john doe own the properti at 121 main street in peoria il
howev if he need a copi of the actual deed he will have to retriev it from the counti
clerk offic
addition there is a wealth of inform now avail on the internet as a caveat
howev rememb that onlin record compani have to get their inform from
somewher often it come directli from the counti but if the inform in the counti
record wa enter into the databas incorrectli then the report you will receiv from the
access inform onlin investig
3516 2011 fraud examin manual
databas compani will also be incorrect therefor it is import to rememb that
access inform onlin is never a full substitut for an examin of the public
record itself
rememb howev that if an examin access certain type of inform through an
onlin servic he mai be subject to the fair credit report act fcra as discuss in
the previou chapter again the fcra prohibit consum report agenc from releas
person inform about an individu eg inform about the consum charact
gener reput person characterist or mode of live to third parti without
author and it limit disclosur of consum credit inform such as a subject
credit histori to third parti thu befor access such inform you should alwai
contact your attornei
limit of onlin public databas search
there ar howev limit to onlin public databas search includ
onlin coverag vari wide from state to state the fraud examin should determin
whether specif inform is avail for each investig
search ar limit in the area thei cover fortun for the crook most of hi public
record evid is gener file at the counti level if he is smart enough to know
how to conduct transact outsid hi normal local then he can be tough to track
without us multijurisdict onlin sourc make sure you ar look in the right
counti is import you can be off by on counti and miss pertin land hold
divorc record lien and so forth
all onlin public record ar brief abstract of the origin public record
the sourc of the inform compil in a vendor databas must be reliabl
inform must be check to determin if it is accur and current
the record or public that have been compil in an electron format mai not go
back veri far
also internet search engin ar notori errat in their retriev
onlin search through databas vendor
ani public record search should begin with a commerci databas vendor there ar
sever compani that provid vari level of public record inform to subscrib a
descript of some of these compani and the record thei can provid ar discuss later
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3517
these compani provid access to a wide rang of inform that is store in a central
databas allow a subscrib to access it from hi comput some inform is actual
retriev in hard copi and mail or fax to the subscrib even though the request wa
made through the onlin servic
some compani requir a yearli or monthli subscript fee in addit to the fee for each
search other oper on a pai as you go principl that allow you to pai onli for the
search you conduct therefor it is import to shop around to get the best deal for your
level of usag
for some practition it mai be more econom to enlist the aid of servic compani
inform broker and profession onlin investig these compani will conduct
research for examin typic us onlin servic and manual document retriev from
local sourc although the cost of these servic is higher than do it yourself it mai be
the best choic for occasion record search
us an onlin databas to find inform
in the past investig hot on the heel of an assethid or suspect were hamstrung by the
avail investig resourc in attempt to uncov unreport incom the
investig wa forc to travel to the courthous for the counti in which the suspect
conduct busi request the counti file avail and take a number these trek to
the middleofnowher were rare costeffect and were often fruitless in the search for
pertin inform
thi ha all chang howev and now mayb the flatfoot feet wont be so flat thank to
the advent of onlin investig servic such as lexisnexi inquiri to the farflung
reach of the unit state can be conduct from a person comput these servic
have packag a varieti of invalu investig sourc at veri reason price
access to these servic is accomplish in either on of two wai some servic allow
user to log in through an internet site other provid access to their databas through a
softwar program and a modem each user ha a user id and password to gain access
the follow is a descript of how onlin search can be us to conduct background
check and locat peopl asset and legal record
access inform onlin investig
3518 2011 fraud examin manual
locat peopl us onlin record
the first step to maxim search result is to discov a past address of the suspect search
activ should begin from that point second the user should know the most power and
us type of search which ar identifi below third it is import to keep in mind
the cost effect of the search activ and avoid order onlin search that yield
unnecessari or impract inform
the search methodolog us by most onlin servic is known as textstr match
which mean that all inform enter in the data inquiri field will seek an exact match in
the databas typic you mai us truncat techniqu partial or abbrevi entri
such as the first initi of the first name onli with first name and busi name
some common type of search us to locat peopl us onlin record ar discuss
below
credit header search
credit header search ar among the most power locat tool these search return
inform from credit report on individu thei ar a valuabl sourc becaus almost all
peopl have been involv in some credit activ either under their true name or an
assum or known as name it is appropri to keep in mind that for common name it
mai be necessari to us the social secur number or date of birth to differenti the
subject from other peopl with the same name the credit bureau header offer two search
mechan first the examin can discov a current address an address histori and
social secur number associ with the target by us a past address up to seven year
old second onc the social secur number is in hand the header can be search for
match becaus the social secur number is a nation ident number although social
secur number ar protect from disclosur by the privaci act it ha becom practic
imposs for individu to avoid disclos them on public record
current occupantnew address search
a current occupantnew address search mai be us to identifi the occup of an address
to confirm occup to uncov a forward address or to develop a list of neighbor
who mai know the suspect current whereabout
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3519
last name search
last name search can be us if the past address is unknown thi search produc better
result if the name is not common howev if the last name is common differenti
inform should be includ in the search it should also be note that some search will
return the ident of neighbor who can be contact for addit inform about the
suspect
bankruptci file tax lien and court judgment
bankruptci file tax lien and court judgment have emerg in recent year as locat
tool becaus such record contain valid social secur number the dramat increas in
individu bankruptci claim ha also particularli prompt their emerg as locat tool
depart of motor vehicl record search
depart of motor vehicl dmv record us to be good locat tool but recent
restrict on them have reduc the effect of such search befor congress
amend the driver privaci protect act in 1999 driver could opt out and ask that
their person inform eg social secur number photograph etc not be releas
under the amend law howev driver ar no longer requir to opt out instead the
amend law impos an opt in system requir that driver provid express
author for the releas of inform moreov individu state mai not updat
their record frequent enough to provid the examin with us inform search
such as driver identif can be us on a spot basi howev
voter registr record search
in a few state voter registr record ar avail but as with dmv record thei mai
not be updat frequent howev to the extent that date of birth inform is avail
such record can augment other search also note ani legal restrict attach to the us
of voter inform
busi file search
fictiti busi namedo busi as file includ owner name busi name
file date and file number as note in the previou chapter in most state individu and
corpor ar requir to file a do busi as or an assum or fictiti busi
name statement with the counti where thei conduct their busi the record of sole
proprietorship busi howev mai not be avail in the corporatelimit
partnership record that ar found at the state level nevertheless the fraud examin mai be
access inform onlin investig
3520 2011 fraud examin manual
abl to locat these record by conduct an onlin search by search an individu or
busi name the examin can gather inform from fictiti busi name file
includ owner name busi name file date and file number some counti provid
busi address inform and in these counti the examin can also conduct search
us the busi address
feder tax id search
busi can us the ir websit wwwirsgov to enter both the name and feder tax
id of a vendor or other busi to confirm that the two match
obtain financi inform and locat asset
discov whether asset exist where thei exist and whether thei ar recover can be
accomplish with a search of feder state local and proprietari record these record
can be further divid into those identifi hard asset and those regard the potenti
for asset credit capac or credit worthi
search for hard asset
the ownership of real properti mai be discover through the us of properti
search to the extent that thei ar avail at the local or counti level within individu
state
the ownership of vehicl can be infer through the us of the dmv vehicl name
index to the extent that the record within the control state agenc reflect vehicl
regist to a specif person or organ at a particular address convers the
ownership of a particular vehicl mai be infer from the dmv vehicl registr
search
an assum busi name search mai be help in identifi a sole proprietorship
busi in which attach asset ar avail
the uniform commerci code ucc is extraordinari in that it can be us in a wide
varieti of busi situat a search of ucc file can help identifi person
properti that an individu or busi ha financ ucc file can also disclos when
and where a debtor obtain person loan the type of properti that he pledg to the
lender to secur the loan and the debtor current address
the ownership of an aircraft can be determin by search the aircraft ownership
databas by busi name person name or wing number
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3521
search for asset potenti
the question of whether it is realist possibl to recov known asset mai be
partial answer by search bankruptci file tax lien and tax judgment
again the versatil of a ucc file search is seen through the identif of asset
that mai have been pledg in whole or in part to secur a loan for exampl in a case
where a bank lender ha secur a loan through some type of chattel as collater and ha
sought to perfect it lien on the chattel through a ucc file at the state level it can be
fairli assum that the debtor ha a bank account with the secur parti thu a bank
account asset mai be identifi as a recover asset
consum credit report and busi credit report search mai help develop a clearer
pictur of the target potenti for asset recoveri in term of credit capac and
creditworthi although access to consum credit report is restrict by the fair
credit report act fcra busi credit report ar not govern by the fcra
busi credit report often contain inform that is us in verifi inform
understand busi relationship and develop basic financi inform about
an organ
find legal record
the search avail to find these record can be group in three broad categori on
site court search index or broad coverag search and public file
onsit court search
onsit court record search ar perform by individu who travel to counti and municip
courthous to search for record that match the search criteria that have been provid to
them
these search ar direct by court by counti or as is the case with feder record by the
district court for the particular area accordingli the examin must carefulli consid the
potenti locat of court record such consider should take into account the
locat of the suspect current and past resid nce and hi current and past busi or
employ the result will includ ani litig in which the individu wa involv
includ civil action crimin action divorc and judgment howev it will not return
inform concern litig that ha been seal by the court or inform
concern juvenil offend
access inform onlin investig
3522 2011 fraud examin manual
the coverag for these search vari accord to the servic us addition each court
ha vari rule regard how the search is conduct the time when search mai be
conduct the repositori locat and the search method if the subscrib is interest in
a particular type of record such as a divorc record it mai be necessari to call the
compani customersupport unit to adjust the search queri type of record avail
includ
feder civil court record includ bankruptci record ar avail for all type of
civil litig conduct in feder court
feder crimin court record ar avail for feloni charg
state civil court record ar avail base on a divis of upper and lower court
record the divis is a function of the differ within each state concern the
amount in controversi
state crimin court record can be obtain on a ten or sevenyear search basi for
feloni misdemeanor or a combin of both
indexbroad coverag search
these search ar us when an examin need a search strategi broader than the by
courtbi counti method us with onsit court record search or that make us of an
index of basic inform in court record
search of defend suit ar avail in all state but provid coverag limit to
specif counti and court when search a specif state databas the examin
should review the help menu to determin the scope of the search abil
search of statewid crimin convict ar avail in some jurisdict review the
help menu for special releas requir the number of year avail if the record is
for convict onli and if the search encompass both feloni and misdemeanor
search of marriagedivorc index ar avail in some state
public file
in the unit state public compani nonprofit and some privat compani must
submit financi file and form to differ govern entiti public compani for
exampl submit variou file to the secur and exchang commiss eg the annual
report and the 10k these public file provid a wealth of inform about the file
compani includ the natur of it busi it histori it organiz structur it
auditor it balanc sheet and it incom statement similarli public file ar avail for
nonprofit which must file the form 990 to the intern revenu servic
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3523
public file ar avail for free as well as through feebas servic
conduct background check
thi type of search activ gener involv two broad area discov what the public
record reveal with respect to individu and busi with whom the subscrib mai wish
to do busi and discov inform about prospect employe in gener onlin
public record databas ar gener the best sourc of background inform
but befor conduct ani background check consult with legal counsel
due dilig
as busi organ seek to identifi vendor client or strateg partner or seek to
loan or collect monei thei frequent conduct public record inquiri focus on other
busi or individu who ar princip of busi organ thi type of public
record inquiri involv such issu as verif of applic inform debt burden
advers financi inform credit capac or worthi busi relationship the socal
famili tree litig histori and crimin background us search includ the
follow
corporatelimit partnership search ar avail in all state to verifi inform
identifi princip and develop other busi relationship
bankruptci file tax lien and judgment search respond to issu of advers
financi inform and credit capacityworthi
ucc file answer question of debt burden thi search will be help to identifi
hidden ownership or partnership interest and it will be help to locat address
inform on debtor
state and feder civil court record provid answer to question concern litig
histori past busi relationship and the potenti for debt burden either as a function
of an advers judgment or as a function of financ expens litig
state and feder crimin court record identifi the possibl of a crimin background
the us of consum credit report and busi credit report help resolv question
concern credit capac and creditworthi in addit the busi report is us
in verifi inform understand busi relationship and develop basic
financi inform about an organ
occup safeti and health administr osha search mai be us in
develop advers inform or verifi inform given by a prospect vendor
client or strateg partner
access inform onlin investig
3524 2011 fraud examin manual
aircraft mechan airmen medic licens dea control substanc and other
licens mai serv to verifi that basic profession and occup standard ar met by
a prospect vendor client or strateg partner
employ background
onlin record inquiri regard employ histori have increas significantli over the
past few year corpor downsiz ha disaffect an increas number of worker to the
point that it is easier for them to ration employe defalc fraud or embezzl
the same econom phenomenon of downsiz combin with busi pressur to
increas product and the friction of modern life have appar produc an increas
in workplac violenc liabil for employ and busi have expand through
neglig standard and the respondeat superior doctrin for such tortiou conduct as vehicl
oper assault batteri fals imprison sexual harass and discrimin
final the potenti to be held liabl for neg refer ha deter past employ
from respond to prospect employ inquiri about an employe therefor
prospect employ must increasingli reli on public inform
some of the search us in develop background inform ar list below where
permit by law
credit header search ar us in confirm address and social secur number
inform
state and feder crimin court record and statewid crimin convict mai be us
to uncov past crimin problem presag similar difficulti inde crimin
background check mai be mandat by law for exampl the violent crime control
and law enforc act of 1994 make it a feloni for insur compani as well as
person emploi anyon to conduct the busi of insur to hire ani individu
convict of a feloni involv dishonesti or a breach of trust
aircraft mechan airmen medic licens and other licens ar avail to ensur
that basic job requir ar met in the appropri circumst
consum credit report mai be obtain for purpos of employe select retent
and promot
public file such as bankruptci file tax lien and judgment mai be obtain to
identifi advers financi matter that can serv as potenti motiv for fraud
defam and embezzl
where a prospect or current employe drive a person own vehicl or an
employerown vehicl in further the interest of the employ such activ mai
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3525
expos the employ to liabil for damag therefor dmv drive record must be
check
basic inform concern job qualif can be verifi through educ
verif and employ verif search note these ar verif tool
onli thei ar not definit in term of discov past or current employ
although worker compens search mai return the subject name social secur
number date of birth employ name date and type of accid and natur and extent
of inquiri the american with disabl act mai limit usag of the search result the
act purport to prevent prospect employ from us worker compens
record in deni employ to otherwis qualifi applic
public record databas vendor
list below is inform about some of the larger commerci databas vendor you can
shop variou servic to find the on that meet your need in the most costeffect
manner and the on that fit your current case in some instanc it mai be necessari to us
more than on servic to get an accur and complet profil these compani get their
inform from variou sourc and on variou updat schedul so a search in ani on
databas mai return differ result than a search done elsewher
asset locat and busi background check by knowx
knowx is a product of the lexisnexi risk and inform analyt group and it claim
to be the most comprehens sourc of public inform on the web it offer easili
navig public record search in variou categori among them asset search advers
file properti valuat and peopl and businessloc tool on can also verifi
licens conduct background check and look up a compani histori knowx is an
altogeth userfriendli sourc of inform
most importantli user can run knowx busi background check to uncov
bankruptci judgment lawsuit lien and ucc file against a busi with on search
in addit knowx asset locat servic enabl user to locat asset such as real estat
aircraft and watercraft with on search thi softwar can also be us to verifi ownership
and assess properti valu
knowx can be found at wwwknowxcom
access inform onlin investig
3526 2011 fraud examin manual
us datalink
us datalink is an employe background check servic although it cannot retriev
inform as quickli as some other vendor us datalink is the onli compani that reli
entir on manual search for it inform us datalink exclus send it research
to the counti courthous to look up the request inform as oppos to the electron
and possibl faulti inform that other onlin investig databas us therefor if a
fraud examin ha the time to wait for hi inquiri us datalink might be the most reliabl
option us datalink also ha media resourc and it can be found at wwwusdatalinkcom
infousa
infousa compil busi and consum data and it offer a wide rang of data process
servic infousa user have access to inform on 14 million us busi 13 million
execut and profession and 210 million us consum search of infousa
databas can produc result for a broad rang of inform includ sale volum
corpor linkag contact name and titl compani histori credit rate and ani
headlin involv the busi furthermor the versatil of the search is on of
infousa better featur search can be perform accord to busi size locat
length of time in oper gender or race of owner and industri infousa is locat at
wwwinfousacom
veri
veri is a social secur valid servic it special in provid verif of social
secur number possibl mail drop address date of birth and death record veri
allow an investig to match a social secur number to a name howev thi servic is
costli cost per search begin at 115 but the actual cost depend on the type of search and
number of search be conduct but veri accur veri can be access at wwwverisssncom
csc diligenz
csc diligenz is a webbas due dilig servic it is a great databas for retriev
inform about busi with it weekli databas updat csc diligenz strength li
in the reliabl of it public record inform csc diligenz can produc a businesss
financi statement record pertain to corpor statu busi credit and licens
inform ucc file bankruptci judgment and corpor goodstand search ar
just a few of their servic diligenz is locat at wwwdiligenzcom
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3527
dialog
dialog is a proquest compani and it offer user with access to more than 1200 databas
it contain nearli 2 billion record includ refer and abstract of publish literatur
statist tabl the full text of select articl and directori busi and financi data
dialog can be access at wwwdialogcom
db
db is a busi inform servic provid the varieti of inform avail
through db is impress it is probabl on of the most comprehens and divers
sourc avail with fact on more than 130 million compani in more than 190
countri db is renown for product like busi inform report and industri norm
and kei busi ratio both excel tool it is locat at wwwdnbcom
hoover
hoover a db compani is a onestop refer for busi inform hoover
provid comprehens uptod busi inform for profession who need
intellig on us and global compani industri and profession hoover databas
consist of 65 million compani with indepth coverag of 40000 public and nonpubl
us and intern compani subscrib also have access to inform on more than
15 million small privat busi across the unit state hoover is locat at
wwwhooverscom
lexisnexi
lexisnexi is a legal and busi inform databas that provid it subscrib with
daili newspap for either a flat fee or a perus fee lexisnexi maintain a cavern
databas of us and intern media sourc includ daili newspap magazin and
televis transcript in addit lexisnexi offer a servic in which the user can request
immedi inform on difficulttofind topic lexisnexi will research the topic and give
the user the inform as quickli as possibl for more inform visit wwwlexiscom
in on form or anoth lexisnexi ha been in the inform busi for nearli 30 year
it is now on of the lead electron data firm in the world user can obtain access to
public record media public and court case and record for more inform visit
wwwlexisnexiscom
dc inform system
found in 1967 dc inform system is an establish sourc for investig
inform dc provid onlin investig solut for busi and govern
from financi institut to law enforc or investig their onlin databas
product help organ prevent and detect fraud verifi applic inform screen
potenti employe and locat debtor miss person heir or asset dc provid
inform compris public record and publicli avail inform it amerifind
onlin resourc system is separ into three area make search simpl
access inform onlin investig
3528 2011 fraud examin manual
primedata provid bank and financ inform
quickfind serv gener investig secur and fraud prevent and detect
fraudtrac serv insur fraud investig and claim
ga public record servic
ga public record servic special in onsit countylevel crimin record inform
it can usual provid a report within 24 72 hour ha access to record in thousand of
counti coast to coast ga public record servic provid search servic for
employ screen corpor due dilig fraud investig privat investig
and tenant screen for more inform visit wwwgaprscom
experian
experian is on of the major provid of consum credit inform and it provid a
varieti of other public inform experian provid servic on consum and busi
credit direct market and real estat inform servic experian maintain credit
inform on more than 210 million us consum and more than 18 million us
busi it nation consum databas is updat 65 time per year with inform
on more than 110 million us household the nation busi databas is updat
monthli ha fact on more than 18 million compani in all industri and ha more than
200 million crossindustri applic record to help detect inconsist in incom
applic
some of the servic provid by experian includ
busi snapshot report that summar credit histori includ payment pattern
and legal file of small busi or contractor
precis id with knowledg iq consist of score analyt and knowledgebas
authent and it provid realtim and onlin valid and verif and fraud
assess of name address social secur number date of birth driver licens
and telephon number
transunion
transunion is on of the big three credit report compani and it offer credit inform
and servic for consum and busi alik more specif transunion is a global
provid of busi intellig servic with technologybas intellig product
includ innov creditdecis and fraudprevent tool advanc targetmarket
product risk and profit model and portfolio manag
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3529
transunion also offer a fraud victim assist depart fvad sinc it incept
the fvad ha help million of consum resolv or prevent problem with credit fraud
the fvad compris three distinct team
the consum protect team cpt
the fraud investig respons and support team first
the fraud assist and support team fast
search system
search system is a public record directori with more than 55000 searchabl public record
databas it search capabl includ busi inform corpor file properti
record deed mortgag crimin and civil court file inmat offend birth death
marriag unclaim properti and profession licens on of it mani directori the
crimin record and offend search ha access to more than 300 million crimin record
and it search system premium offer instant access to more than 100 million bankruptci
judgment and tax lien for more inform visit httppublicrecordssearchsystemsnet
westlaw
westlaw is an onlin legal research servic and it provid access to a comprehens and
current collect of public record it peopl finder databas directori contain
inform on individu compil from numer public sourc includ telephon
directori publish mail list chang of address file real estat file util record
public demograph and consum household data voter registr record driver licens
data feder and state death record and credit header data for more inform visit
wwwwestlawcom
newspapermedia databas
newspap period and journal can be excel sourc of inform in a fraud
investig particularli when search for background inform on an individu or a
busi for exampl in a texa case a person accus of insid trade wa clear us
materi from an media databas search defens attornei gather more than 300
publish comment about the compani financi prospect and show that someon
follow the advic distribut freeli in the press would have made more monei than
the accused2
2 bernstein paul comput for lawyer a complet guid to law offic autom 2nd ed chicago atla press
1997
access inform onlin investig
3530 2011 fraud examin manual
searchabl databas contain inform from liter hundr of publish sourc
can usual be access for free at most librari there ar also a number of onlin
databas that deal specif with new and media resourc these databas compil a
number of differ media resourc and allow the user to search for a specif topic
return articl or transcript that pertain to the request subject most public allow
user to search their archiv for free the full text of articl is avail but usual for a fee
us on of the follow servic allow user to search mani public at onc
factiva
factiva from dow jone is tailor for busi and financi new search maintain a
catalog of more than 28000 of the world lead new and busi sourc from 159
countri 350 geograph region and in 23 languag factiva allow user to pai onli for
the articl download and doe not requir an annual subscript for more inform
visit wwwfactivacom
highbeam research
highbeam ha an extens archiv contain million of document from lead
public that ar updat daili or go back as far as 20 year searchabl sourc
includ newspap magazin journal transcript book dictionari and almanac for
more inform visit wwwhighbeamcom
proquest
proquest is a data servic that offer access to thousand of onlin journal and magazin
cover a wide arrai of subject proquest vast content pool ar avail to research
through librari of all type and includ the world largest digit newspap archiv
period databas compris the output of thousand of titl and span more than
500 year with mani in fulltext fullimag format an extens dissert collect and
variou other scholarli collect for more inform visit wwwproquestcom
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3531
other new databas servic
newspap on the net wwwonlinenewspaperscom
newswis wwwnewswisecom
