2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Online Public Database Searches/Online Searches Through Database Vendors


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Online Searches Through Database Vendors 
Any public records search should begin with a commercial database vendor. There are 
several companies that provide varying levels of public record information to subscribers. A 
description of some of these companies and the records they can provide are discussed later. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.517 
These companies provide access to a wide range of information that is stored in a central 
database, allowing a subscriber to access it from his computer. Some information is actually 
retrieved in hard copy and mailed or faxed to the subscriber, even though the request was 
made through the online service. 
 
Some companies require a yearly or monthly subscription fee in addition to the fee for each 
search. Others operate on a “pay as you go” principle that allows you to pay only for the 
searches you conduct. Therefore, it is important to shop around to get the best deal for your 
level of usage. 
 
For some practitioners, it may be more economical to enlist the aid of service companies, 
information brokers, and professional online investigators. These companies will conduct 
research for examiners, typically using online services and manual document retrieval from 
local sources. Although the cost of these services is higher than doing it yourself, it may be 
the best choice for occasional records searches.  
 



:


onlin search through databas vendor
ani public record search should begin with a commerci databas vendor there ar
sever compani that provid vari level of public record inform to subscrib a
descript of some of these compani and the record thei can provid ar discuss later
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3517
these compani provid access to a wide rang of inform that is store in a central
databas allow a subscrib to access it from hi comput some inform is actual
retriev in hard copi and mail or fax to the subscrib even though the request wa
made through the onlin servic
some compani requir a yearli or monthli subscript fee in addit to the fee for each
search other oper on a pai as you go principl that allow you to pai onli for the
search you conduct therefor it is import to shop around to get the best deal for your
level of usag
for some practition it mai be more econom to enlist the aid of servic compani
inform broker and profession onlin investig these compani will conduct
research for examin typic us onlin servic and manual document retriev from
local sourc although the cost of these servic is higher than do it yourself it mai be
the best choic for occasion record search
