2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Online Public Database Searches/Locating People Using Online Records


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Locating People Using Online Records 
The first step to maximize search results is to discover a past address of the suspect; search 
activities should begin from that point. Second, the user should know the most powerful and 
useful types of searches, which are identified below. Third, it is important to keep in mind 
the cost effectiveness of the search activity and avoid ordering online searches that yield 
unnecessary or impractical information. 
 
The search methodology used by most online services is known as “text-string matching,” 
which means that all information entered in the data inquiry field will seek an exact match in 
the database. Typically, you may use truncation techniques (partial or abbreviated entries 
such as the first initial of the first name) only with first names and business names.  
 
Some common types of searches used to locate people using online records are discussed 
below. 
 
CREDIT HEADER SEARCHES 
Credit header searches are among the most powerful locator tools. These searches return 
information from credit reports on individuals. They are a valuable source because almost all 
people have been involved in some credit activity either under their true names or an 
assumed (or known as) name. It is appropriate to keep in mind that for common names, it 
may be necessary to use the Social Security number or date of birth to differentiate the 
subject from other people with the same name. The credit bureau headers offer two search 
mechanisms. First, the examiner can discover a current address, an address history, and 
Social Security number(s) associated with the target by using a past address up to seven years 
old. Second, once the Social Security number is in hand, the headers can be searched for 
matches, because the Social Security number is a national identity number. Although Social 
Security numbers are protected from disclosure by the Privacy Act, it has become practically 
impossible for individuals to avoid disclosing them on public records. 
 
CURRENT OCCUPANT/NEW ADDRESS SEARCHES 
A current occupant/new address search may be used to identify the occupant of an address, 
to confirm occupancy, to uncover a forwarding address, or to develop a list of neighbors 
who may know the suspect’s current whereabouts. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.519 
LAST NAME SEARCHES 
Last name searches can be used if the past address is unknown. This search produces better 
results if the name is not common; however, if  the last name is common, differentiating 
information should be included in the search. It should also be noted that some searches will 
return the identities of neighbors, who can be contacted for additional information about the 
suspect. 
 
BANKRUPTCY FILINGS, TAX LIENS, AND COURT JUDGMENTS 
Bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and court judgments have emerged in recent years as locator 
tools because such records contain valid Social Security numbers. The dramatic increase in 
individual bankruptcy claims has also particularly prompted their emergence as locator tools.  
 
DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES RECORDS SEARCHES 
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) records used to be good locator tools, but recent 
restrictions on them have reduced the effectiveness of such searches. Before Congress 
amended the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act in 1999, drivers could “opt out” and ask that 
their personal information (e.g., Social Security numbers, photographs, etc.) not be released. 
Under the amended law, however, drivers are no longer required to opt out; instead, the 
amended law imposes an “opt in” system requiring that drivers provide express 
authorization for the release of information. Moreover, individual states may not update 
their records frequently enough to provide the examiner with useful information. Searches 
such as Driver Identification can be useful on a spot basis, however. 
 
VOTER REGISTRATION RECORD SEARCHES 
In a few states, voter registration records are available, but as with DMV records, they may 
not be updated frequently. However, to the extent that date of birth information is available, 
such records can augment other searches. Also note any legal restrictions attached to the use 
of voter information. 
 
BUSINESS FILINGS SEARCHES  
Fictitious business name/doing business as filings include owner name(s), business name(s), 
file date, and file number. As noted in the previous chapter, in most states, individuals and 
corporations are required to file a doing business as (or an assumed or fictitious business 
name) statement with the county where they conduct their business. The records of sole 
proprietorship businesses, however, may not be available in the corporate/limited 
partnership records that are found at the state level. Nevertheless, the fraud examiner may be 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.520   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
able to locate these records by conducting an online search. By searching an individual or 
business name, the examiner can gather information from fictitious business name filings, 
including owner name, business name, file date, and file number. Some counties provide 
business address information, and in these counties, the examiner can also conduct searches 
using the business address.  
 
FEDERAL TAX ID SEARCHES 
Businesses can use the IRS website (www.irs.gov) to enter both the name and Federal Tax 
ID of a vendor or other business to confirm that the two match. 
 



:


locat peopl us onlin record
the first step to maxim search result is to discov a past address of the suspect search
activ should begin from that point second the user should know the most power and
us type of search which ar identifi below third it is import to keep in mind
the cost effect of the search activ and avoid order onlin search that yield
unnecessari or impract inform
the search methodolog us by most onlin servic is known as textstr match
which mean that all inform enter in the data inquiri field will seek an exact match in
the databas typic you mai us truncat techniqu partial or abbrevi entri
such as the first initi of the first name onli with first name and busi name
some common type of search us to locat peopl us onlin record ar discuss
below
credit header search
credit header search ar among the most power locat tool these search return
inform from credit report on individu thei ar a valuabl sourc becaus almost all
peopl have been involv in some credit activ either under their true name or an
assum or known as name it is appropri to keep in mind that for common name it
mai be necessari to us the social secur number or date of birth to differenti the
subject from other peopl with the same name the credit bureau header offer two search
mechan first the examin can discov a current address an address histori and
social secur number associ with the target by us a past address up to seven year
old second onc the social secur number is in hand the header can be search for
match becaus the social secur number is a nation ident number although social
secur number ar protect from disclosur by the privaci act it ha becom practic
imposs for individu to avoid disclos them on public record
current occupantnew address search
a current occupantnew address search mai be us to identifi the occup of an address
to confirm occup to uncov a forward address or to develop a list of neighbor
who mai know the suspect current whereabout
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3519
last name search
last name search can be us if the past address is unknown thi search produc better
result if the name is not common howev if the last name is common differenti
inform should be includ in the search it should also be note that some search will
return the ident of neighbor who can be contact for addit inform about the
suspect
bankruptci file tax lien and court judgment
bankruptci file tax lien and court judgment have emerg in recent year as locat
tool becaus such record contain valid social secur number the dramat increas in
individu bankruptci claim ha also particularli prompt their emerg as locat tool
depart of motor vehicl record search
depart of motor vehicl dmv record us to be good locat tool but recent
restrict on them have reduc the effect of such search befor congress
amend the driver privaci protect act in 1999 driver could opt out and ask that
their person inform eg social secur number photograph etc not be releas
under the amend law howev driver ar no longer requir to opt out instead the
amend law impos an opt in system requir that driver provid express
author for the releas of inform moreov individu state mai not updat
their record frequent enough to provid the examin with us inform search
such as driver identif can be us on a spot basi howev
voter registr record search
in a few state voter registr record ar avail but as with dmv record thei mai
not be updat frequent howev to the extent that date of birth inform is avail
such record can augment other search also note ani legal restrict attach to the us
of voter inform
busi file search
fictiti busi namedo busi as file includ owner name busi name
file date and file number as note in the previou chapter in most state individu and
corpor ar requir to file a do busi as or an assum or fictiti busi
name statement with the counti where thei conduct their busi the record of sole
proprietorship busi howev mai not be avail in the corporatelimit
partnership record that ar found at the state level nevertheless the fraud examin mai be
access inform onlin investig
3520 2011 fraud examin manual
abl to locat these record by conduct an onlin search by search an individu or
busi name the examin can gather inform from fictiti busi name file
includ owner name busi name file date and file number some counti provid
busi address inform and in these counti the examin can also conduct search
us the busi address
feder tax id search
busi can us the ir websit wwwirsgov to enter both the name and feder tax
id of a vendor or other busi to confirm that the two match
