2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ETHICS FOR FRAUD EXAMINERS


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


ETHICS FOR FRAUD EXAMINERS 
 
In this section, we have discussed a number of behavioral and ethical principles applicable to 
both organizations and individuals. As a fraud examiner, the decisions you make will be 
extremely important to your client or company as well as to the individuals you may be 
called upon to investigate. Therefore, Certified Fraud Examiners are held to a very high 
ethical standard. The following material is designed to accomplish more than a mere 
recitation of rules of professional ethics for fraud examiners. It also contains discussion and 
explanation of many features of ethics in general. The first portion deals with principles of 
moral philosophy. These represent the “high road” in the study of ethics for fraud 
examiners. The latter portion deals more specifically with rules of behavior in situations that 
characterize fraud examiners’ work. The applications of the Certified Fraud Examiner Code 
of Professional Ethics are discussed.  
 
 
What Is Ethics? 
In A Critical Introduction to Ethics, Philip Wheelwright defined ethics as: 
 
that branch of philosophy which is the systematic study of reflective choice, of the standards 
of right and wrong by which it is to be guided, and of the goods toward which it may 
ultimately be directed. 
 
This definition contains three key elements: 
• Ethics involves questions requiring reflective choice (decision problems). 
• Ethics involves guides of right and wrong (moral principles). 
• Ethics is concerned with values (goods) inherent in ethical decisions.  
 
Why does an individual or a group need a code of ethical conduct? While it has been said 
that a person should be upright and not be kept  upright, a code of conduct serves a useful 
purpose as a reference and a benchmark. A code makes explicit some of the criteria for 
conduct particular to a profession. In this way, codes of professional ethics are able to 
provide some direct solutions that might not be available from general ethics theories.  
 
Furthermore, an individual is better able to know what the profession expects when a code 
of ethical conduct is in place. From the viewpoint of an organized profession, a code is a 
public declaration of principled conduct and a means of facilitating enforcement of 
Ethics for Fraud Examiners  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.902   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
standards of conduct. Practical enforcement and profession-wide internal discipline would 
be much more difficult if members were not first put on notice of the standards.  
 
An Ethical Decision Maker’s Role 
While one of the main purposes of ethics is to guide the actions of individual decision 
makers, the role of decision maker does not fully describe a professional person’s entire 
obligation. Each person acts not only as an individual but also as a member of a profession 
and as a member of society. Hence, fraud examiners also are spectators  (observing the 
decisions of colleagues), advisors  (counseling with co-workers), instructors  (teaching students or 
new employees on the job), judges (serving on disciplinary committees), and critics  
(commenting on the ethical decisions of others). All of these roles are important in the 
practice of professional ethics.  
 
In considering general ethics, your primary goal is to arrive at a set of acceptable methods 
for making ethical decisions to fulfill all your roles. Consequently, an understanding of some 
of the general principles of ethics can serve as background in understanding the ethical 
decisions faced by CFEs, as well as the ethical guidelines provided in the Certified Fraud 
Examiner Code of Professional Ethics.  
 
Ethical Decisions 
One of the key elements in ethics is reflective choice. Ethical problems almost always involve 
projecting yourself in a future in which you have to live with your decisions. Professional 
ethics decisions usually turn on these questions: “What written and unwritten rules govern 
my behavior?” and “What are the possible consequences of my choices?”  
 
We could dispense with any discussion of ethical theories and rules if we were willing to 
accept a simple proposition: “Let conscience be  your guide.” Such a rule is appealing 
because it calls upon an individual’s own judgment, which might be based on wisdom, 
insight, adherence to custom, or an authoritative code. However, it might also be based on 
caprice, immaturity, ignorance, stubbornness, or misunderstanding. 
 
In a similar manner, reliance on the opinions of others or on the weight of opinion of a 
particular social group is not always enough. Another person or a group of people might 
perpetuate a custom or habit that is wrong. (Think about the signboard that proclaimed: 
“Wrong is wrong, even if everybody is doing it.”) To adhere blindly to custom or group 
habits is to abdicate individual responsibility. Titus and Keeton summarized this point 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.903 
succinctly: “Each person capable of making moral decisions is responsible for making his 
own decisions. The ultimate locus of moral responsibility is in the individual.” Thus, the 
function of ethical principles and rules is not to provide a simple and sure answer to all your 
problems but to provide some guides for individual decisions and actions.  
 
 
Morality, Ethics, and Legality 
Is it all right to lie to catch a crook? Consider the following story about a fraud examinati on.  
 
Abel, a fraud examiner, was hired by Megacorp, Inc. to discover the method stockroom 
employees were using to steal electronic parts from the inventory. Abel was given a cover 
identity known only to the president of Me gacorp. His application was processed through 
the personnel department in the normal manne r, and he was hired as a stockroom clerk. 
On the job, Abel preserved his false identity, infiltrated the gr oup responsible for the thefts, 
and produced sufficient evidence to have  three people arrested and indicted. 
 
While this story involves only one type of fraud (embezzlement) and one investigation 
method (undercover work), it can serve as a simple example of the moral, ethical, and legal 
issues facing fraud examiners. These issues involve principles of moral philosophy, rules of 
ethics, legal considerations, values, and above all, the problem of distinguishing right 
from wrong. One executive, upon taking office, to ld the board of directors that his would be 
an ethical administration, saying: “It is very simple. All it takes is knowing the difference 
between right and wrong.” But knowing that  difference is often the hardest part.  
 
The High Road 
Most public and many private discussions of ethics quickly become philosophical, reaching 
toward lofty principles and broad generalizations about desirable behavior. People easily cite 
well-known guides and believe the ideas in them should never be violated. Such discussions 
often take place in a vacuum, apart from real-world situations. People generally exhort 
themselves and others to observe the highest principles of moral behavior.  
 
Such considerations—the high road —are necessary if we desire to lift the discussion above 
the nitty-gritty facts of everyday problems. However, the idealistic nature of this level of 
discussion is often not sufficient to help people cope with a problem immediately at hand.  
 
Ethics for Fraud Examiners  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.904   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The high road is the realm of moral philosophy where philosophical principles guide the 
process of thinking about problems and distinguishing right from wrong. Such principles are 
necessary in the process of everyday life. Even though an individual might not know them in 
all the twists and turns familiar to philosophers, their fundamental precepts are well 
understood in our concept of common sense.  
 
Philosophy, Ethics, and Law 
Moral philosophy exists at a global level, permeating all facets of the problems of 
distinguishing right from wrong. The field deals with human judgments based on standards 
that identify good  and evil. These words mean more than just right  and wrong, but they convey 
essentially the same idea. There are two aspects of moral philosophy that are important for 
fraud examiners to consider. The first is the human judgment process, which deals with ways 
of performing analyses of (i.e., thinking about) problems. The second is the standards or 
values — such as honesty, faithfulness, and unse lfishness—that people can use to make moral 
principles useful.  
 
Ethics can be distinguished from moral philosophy by its roots in society. People are usually 
more comfortable talking about ethics than moral philosophy because ethics seems practical 
while moral philosophy seems intellectual and impractical. Ethics generally refers to a 
specific setting — a society, culture, nation, profession, or small group. In this context, ethics 
refers to behavior that conforms to some societal norms or to a written code of ethics, such 
as the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics.  
 
When faced with an ethics-related problem, it is appropriate to begin the analysis of a 
possible action by asking: “Is it legal?” Such analys is is at the most practical level. Ethics is 
somewhat less global and is connected to the setting. The law deals very specifically with 
actions that are permitted and actions that are prohibited. With all due respect to the law, it 
is the lowest reference level for moral decisions. It happens, though not frequently, that a 
law might permit an action that is prohibited by a profession’s code of ethics. Going one 
step further, a profession’s code of ethics might permit actions that a moral philosopher 
would abhor. Likewise, laws and codes of eth ics might prohibit actions that present no 
problem in moral philosophy.  
 
For example, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants had rules of ethics that 
prohibited advertising, with the exception of broad-based institutional advertising. The 
profession believed that professional dignity and objectivity were enhanced by keeping 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.905 
practitioners out of this aspect of the commercial world. The U.S. Federal Trade 
Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice, however, reached a different conclusion. 
They decided that the prohibitions against advertising were against the laws barring restraint 
of trade. The government forced the profession to eliminate the rules against advertising. 
This example illustrates the triumph of one set of values (the government’s belief that 
competition through advertising would benefit consumers) over another set (the professions’ 
belief that professional dignity should be preserved).  
 
All three areas—morality, ethics, and legality—are important for everyday decisions. It might 
not be enough to know that a contemplated action is legal or that it is permitted or 
prohibited by a group’s written code of ethics. And, while helpful, it might also not be 
enough to know that reasoning based on moral philosophy seems to identify that action as 
right or wrong. The important things to know are the distinctions between morality, ethics, 
and legality (i.e., between the philosophy, the rules, and the law). Only with this knowledge 
can a fraud examiner know where he stands when deciding upon and justifying a course  
of action.  
 
This material observes one important limitation. It confines its consideration of ethics for 
fraud examiners to matters of moral philosophy, rules of ethics, and general values. It does 
not deal with detailed matters of the law or with questions about the legality or illegality of 
actions a fraud examiner might take. This is not to say that the law is unimportant; it is just 
beyond the scope of this part of the materials.  
 
Means and Ends 
Everyone knows some saying like: “The ends j ustify the means,” or “Fight fire with fire.” 
Fraud examiners can be particularly influenced by this idea because they need to deal with 
people who do not exercise moral reasoning, follow ethical rules, or keep within the law. 
These sayings have the purpose of justifying actions that could otherwise be considered 
immoral, unethical, or illegal. (After all, the American colonists openly defied British law, 
fomented a rebellion, and fought a war. We now regard them as heroes.)  
 
 Is it all right to lie? No, except … 
 
When a moral rule appears to be inflexible, people can always think of situations in which 
they want to justify breaking the rule. For example, some people would easily conclude that 
it is all right to lie to catch a crook. After all, if the moral rules were followed by everyone, 
Ethics for Fraud Examiners  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.906   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
then there would be no crooks; thus, the fraudster’s dishonesty made it necessary for the 
fraud examiner to lie in return. The ends (catching crooks and upholding justice) justify the 
means (lying).  
 
The problem with means-ends analyses is that they are often superficial, ending with the 
needed justification but failing to consider other aspects and consequences of the actions. 
The justification of the undercover role of the fraud examiner must be carefully considered. 
In the previous example, the president of Mega corp must think about the moral, ethical, and 
legal climate of the company once it becomes known that an undercover agent was 
employed. (How many more are around? What happened to trust?)  
 
 
Some Concluding Remarks 
This brief discussion of ethics provides some guide to the ways many people approach 
difficult decision problems. The greatest task is to take general principles of moral 
philosophy and apply them to a real decision. Their application through codes of 
professional ethics is where the challenge lies.  
 
Codes of professional ethics and statutory law have two things in common. They are both 
based, more or less, on pervasive moral principles and values, and they both represent the 
aspects of behavior that a committee or legislature has chosen to put in writing. In both 
professional ethics and law, not every relevant guide for behavior has been written. 
Therefore, professional people, including fraud examiners, might find themselves on their 
own when they have to decide a proper course of conduct in a particular fact situation.  
 
Two types of ethics operate in the professional environment — general ethics (the spirit) 
and professional ethics (the rules). In their book The Philosophy of Auditing, Robert K. Mautz 
and Hussein A. Sharaf contributed the following thoughts to the association of general 
ethics and professional ethics:  
 
The theory of ethics has been a subject of interest to philosophers since the beginnings of 
recorded thought. Because philosophers are concerned with the good of all mankind, their 
discussions have been concerned with that we might call general ethics rather than the ethics 
of small groups such as the members of a given profession. We cannot look, therefore, to 
their philosophical theories for direct solutions to our special problems. Nevertheless, their 
work with general ethics is of primary impo rtance to the developm ent of an appropriate 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.907 
concept in any special field. Ethical behavior in auditing or in any other activity is no more 
than a special application of the general notion  of ethical conduct devised by philosophers for 
people generally. Ethical conduct in auditing draws its justification and basic nature from 
the general theory of ethics. Thus, we are well- advised to give some attention to the ideas 
and reasoning of some of the great philosophers on this subject.  
 
We have attended to the ideas and reasoning of philosophers, and now we turn to the 
Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics and its particular rules. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1001 



:


ethic for fraud examin
in thi section we have discuss a number of behavior and ethic principl applic to
both organ and individu as a fraud examin the decis you make will be
extrem import to your client or compani as well as to the individu you mai be
call upon to investig therefor certifi fraud examin ar held to a veri high
ethic standard the follow materi is design to accomplish more than a mere
recit of rule of profession ethic for fraud examin it also contain discuss and
explan of mani featur of ethic in gener the first portion deal with principl of
moral philosophi these repres the high road in the studi of ethic for fraud
examin the latter portion deal more specif with rule of behavior in situat that
character fraud examin work the applic of the certifi fraud examin code
of profession ethic ar discuss
what is ethic
in a critic introduct to ethic philip wheelwright defin ethic as
that branch of philosophi which is the systemat studi of reflect choic of the standard
of right and wrong by which it is to be guid and of the good toward which it mai
ultim be direct
thi definit contain three kei element
ethic involv question requir reflect choic decis problem
ethic involv guid of right and wrong moral principl
ethic is concern with valu good inher in ethic decis
why doe an individu or a group need a code of ethic conduct while it ha been said
that a person should be upright and not be kept upright a code of conduct serv a us
purpos as a refer and a benchmark a code make explicit some of the criteria for
conduct particular to a profess in thi wai code of profession ethic ar abl to
provid some direct solut that might not be avail from gener ethic theori
furthermor an individu is better abl to know what the profess expect when a code
of ethic conduct is in place from the viewpoint of an organ profess a code is a
public declar of principl conduct and a mean of facilit enforc of
ethic for fraud examin fraud prevent and deterr
4902 2011 fraud examin manual
standard of conduct practic enforc and professionwid intern disciplin would
be much more difficult if member were not first put on notic of the standard
an ethic decis maker role
while on of the main purpos of ethic is to guid the action of individu decis
maker the role of decis maker doe not fulli describ a profession person entir
oblig each person act not onli as an individu but also as a member of a profess
and as a member of societi henc fraud examin also ar spectat observ the
decis of colleagu advisor counsel with cowork instructor teach student or
new employe on the job judg serv on disciplinari committe and critic
comment on the ethic decis of other all of these role ar import in the
practic of profession ethic
in consid gener ethic your primari goal is to arriv at a set of accept method
for make ethic decis to fulfil all your role consequ an understand of some
of the gener principl of ethic can serv as background in understand the ethic
decis face by cfe as well as the ethic guidelin provid in the certifi fraud
examin code of profession ethic
ethic decis
on of the kei element in ethic is reflect choic ethic problem almost alwai involv
project yourself in a futur in which you have to live with your decis profession
ethic decis usual turn on these question what written and unwritten rule govern
my behavior and what ar the possibl consequ of my choic
we could dispens with ani discuss of ethic theori and rule if we were will to
accept a simpl proposit let conscienc be your guid such a rule is appeal
becaus it call upon an individu own judgment which might be base on wisdom
insight adher to custom or an authorit code howev it might also be base on
capric immatur ignor stubborn or misunderstand
in a similar manner relianc on the opinion of other or on the weight of opinion of a
particular social group is not alwai enough anoth person or a group of peopl might
perpetu a custom or habit that is wrong think about the signboard that proclaim
wrong is wrong even if everybodi is do it to adher blindli to custom or group
habit is to abdic individu respons titu and keeton summar thi point
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4903
succinctli each person capabl of make moral decis is respons for make hi
own decis the ultim locu of moral respons is in the individu thu the
function of ethic principl and rule is not to provid a simpl and sure answer to all your
problem but to provid some guid for individu decis and action
moral ethic and legal
is it all right to lie to catch a crook consid the follow stori about a fraud examinati on
abel a fraud examin wa hire by megacorp inc to discov the method stockroom
employe were us to steal electron part from the inventori abel wa given a cover
ident known onli to the presid of me gacorp hi applic wa process through
the personnel depart in the normal mann r and he wa hire as a stockroom clerk
on the job abel preserv hi fals ident infiltr the gr oup respons for the theft
and produc suffici evid to have three peopl arrest and indict
while thi stori involv onli on type of fraud embezzl and on investig
method undercov work it can serv as a simpl exampl of the moral ethic and legal
issu face fraud examin these issu involv principl of moral philosophi rule of
ethic legal consider valu and abov all the problem of distinguish right
from wrong on execut upon take offic to ld the board of director that hi would be
an ethic administr sai it is veri simpl all it take is know the differ
between right and wrong but know that differ is often the hardest part
the high road
most public and mani privat discuss of ethic quickli becom philosoph reach
toward lofti principl and broad gener about desir behavior peopl easili cite
wellknown guid and believ the idea in them should never be violat such discuss
often take place in a vacuum apart from realworld situat peopl gener exhort
themselv and other to observ the highest principl of moral behavior
such considerationsth high road ar necessari if we desir to lift the discuss abov
the nittygritti fact of everydai problem howev the idealist natur of thi level of
discuss is often not suffici to help peopl cope with a problem immedi at hand
ethic for fraud examin fraud prevent and deterr
4904 2011 fraud examin manual
the high road is the realm of moral philosophi where philosoph principl guid the
process of think about problem and distinguish right from wrong such principl ar
necessari in the process of everydai life even though an individu might not know them in
all the twist and turn familiar to philosoph their fundament precept ar well
understood in our concept of common sens
philosophi ethic and law
moral philosophi exist at a global level permeat all facet of the problem of
distinguish right from wrong the field deal with human judgment base on standard
that identifi good and evil these word mean more than just right and wrong but thei convei
essenti the same idea there ar two aspect of moral philosophi that ar import for
fraud examin to consid the first is the human judgment process which deal with wai
of perform analys of ie think about problem the second is the standard or
valu such as honesti faith and uns lfishnessthat peopl can us to make moral
principl us
ethic can be distinguish from moral philosophi by it root in societi peopl ar usual
more comfort talk about ethic than moral philosophi becaus ethic seem practic
while moral philosophi seem intellectu and impract ethic gener refer to a
specif set a societi cultur nation profess or small group in thi context ethic
refer to behavior that conform to some societ norm or to a written code of ethic such
as the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic
when face with an ethicsrel problem it is appropri to begin the analysi of a
possibl action by ask is it legal such anali is is at the most practic level ethic is
somewhat less global and is connect to the set the law deal veri specif with
action that ar permit and action that ar prohibit with all due respect to the law it
is the lowest refer level for moral decis it happen though not frequent that a
law might permit an action that is prohibit by a profess code of ethic go on
step further a profess code of ethic might permit action that a moral philosoph
would abhor likewis law and code of eth ic might prohibit action that present no
problem in moral philosophi
for exampl the american institut of certifi public account had rule of ethic that
prohibit advertis with the except of broadbas institut advertis the
profess believ that profession digniti and object were enhanc by keep
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4905
practition out of thi aspect of the commerci world the us feder trade
commiss and the us depart of justic howev reach a differ conclus
thei decid that the prohibit against advertis were against the law bar restraint
of trade the govern forc the profess to elimin the rule against advertis
thi exampl illustr the triumph of on set of valu the govern belief that
competit through advertis would benefit consum over anoth set the profess
belief that profession digniti should be preserv
all three areasmor ethic and legalityar import for everydai decis it might
not be enough to know that a contempl action is legal or that it is permit or
prohibit by a group written code of ethic and while help it might also not be
enough to know that reason base on moral philosophi seem to identifi that action as
right or wrong the import thing to know ar the distinct between moral ethic
and legal ie between the philosophi the rule and the law onli with thi knowledg
can a fraud examin know where he stand when decid upon and justifi a cours
of action
thi materi observ on import limit it confin it consider of ethic for
fraud examin to matter of moral philosophi rule of ethic and gener valu it doe
not deal with detail matter of the law or with question about the legal or illeg of
action a fraud examin might take thi is not to sai that the law is unimport it is just
beyond the scope of thi part of the materi
mean and end
everyon know some sai like the end j ustifi the mean or fight fire with fire
fraud examin can be particularli influenc by thi idea becaus thei need to deal with
peopl who do not exercis moral reason follow ethic rule or keep within the law
these sai have the purpos of justifi action that could otherwis be consid
immor uneth or illeg after all the american colonist openli defi british law
foment a rebellion and fought a war we now regard them as hero
is it all right to lie no except
when a moral rule appear to be inflex peopl can alwai think of situat in which
thei want to justifi break the rule for exampl some peopl would easili conclud that
it is all right to lie to catch a crook after all if the moral rule were follow by everyon
ethic for fraud examin fraud prevent and deterr
4906 2011 fraud examin manual
then there would be no crook thu the fraudster dishonesti made it necessari for the
fraud examin to lie in return the end catch crook and uphold justic justifi the
mean ly
the problem with meansend analys is that thei ar often superfici end with the
need justif but fail to consid other aspect and consequ of the action
the justif of the undercov role of the fraud examin must be carefulli consid
in the previou exampl the presid of mega corp must think about the moral ethic and
legal climat of the compani onc it becom known that an undercov agent wa
emploi how mani more ar around what happen to trust
some conclud remark
thi brief discuss of ethic provid some guid to the wai mani peopl approach
difficult decis problem the greatest task is to take gener principl of moral
philosophi and appli them to a real decis their applic through code of
profession ethic is where the challeng li
code of profession ethic and statutori law have two thing in common thei ar both
base more or less on pervas moral principl and valu and thei both repres the
aspect of behavior that a committe or legislatur ha chosen to put in write in both
profession ethic and law not everi relev guid for behavior ha been written
therefor profession peopl includ fraud examin might find themselv on their
own when thei have to decid a proper cours of conduct in a particular fact situat
two type of ethic oper in the profession environ gener ethic the spirit
and profession ethic the rule in their book the philosophi of audit robert k mautz
and hussein a sharaf contribut the follow thought to the associ of gener
ethic and profession ethic
the theori of ethic ha been a subject of interest to philosoph sinc the begin of
record thought becaus philosoph ar concern with the good of all mankind their
discuss have been concern with that we might call gener ethic rather than the ethic
of small group such as the member of a given profess we cannot look therefor to
their philosoph theori for direct solut to our special problem nevertheless their
work with gener ethic is of primari impo rtanc to the developm ent of an appropri
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4907
concept in ani special field ethic behavior in audit or in ani other activ is no more
than a special applic of the gener notion of ethic conduct devis by philosoph for
peopl gener ethic conduct in audit draw it justif and basic natur from
the gener theori of ethic thu we ar well advis to give some attent to the idea
and reason of some of the great philosoph on thi subject
we have attend to the idea and reason of philosoph and now we turn to the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic and it particular rule
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41001
