2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ETHICS FOR FRAUD EXAMINERS/What Is Ethics?


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


What Is Ethics? 
In A Critical Introduction to Ethics, Philip Wheelwright defined ethics as: 
 
that branch of philosophy which is the systematic study of reflective choice, of the standards 
of right and wrong by which it is to be guided, and of the goods toward which it may 
ultimately be directed. 
 
This definition contains three key elements: 
• Ethics involves questions requiring reflective choice (decision problems). 
• Ethics involves guides of right and wrong (moral principles). 
• Ethics is concerned with values (goods) inherent in ethical decisions.  
 
Why does an individual or a group need a code of ethical conduct? While it has been said 
that a person should be upright and not be kept  upright, a code of conduct serves a useful 
purpose as a reference and a benchmark. A code makes explicit some of the criteria for 
conduct particular to a profession. In this way, codes of professional ethics are able to 
provide some direct solutions that might not be available from general ethics theories.  
 
Furthermore, an individual is better able to know what the profession expects when a code 
of ethical conduct is in place. From the viewpoint of an organized profession, a code is a 
public declaration of principled conduct and a means of facilitating enforcement of 
Ethics for Fraud Examiners  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.902   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
standards of conduct. Practical enforcement and profession-wide internal discipline would 
be much more difficult if members were not first put on notice of the standards.  
 
An Ethical Decision Maker’s Role 
While one of the main purposes of ethics is to guide the actions of individual decision 
makers, the role of decision maker does not fully describe a professional person’s entire 
obligation. Each person acts not only as an individual but also as a member of a profession 
and as a member of society. Hence, fraud examiners also are spectators  (observing the 
decisions of colleagues), advisors  (counseling with co-workers), instructors  (teaching students or 
new employees on the job), judges (serving on disciplinary committees), and critics  
(commenting on the ethical decisions of others). All of these roles are important in the 
practice of professional ethics.  
 
In considering general ethics, your primary goal is to arrive at a set of acceptable methods 
for making ethical decisions to fulfill all your roles. Consequently, an understanding of some 
of the general principles of ethics can serve as background in understanding the ethical 
decisions faced by CFEs, as well as the ethical guidelines provided in the Certified Fraud 
Examiner Code of Professional Ethics.  
 
Ethical Decisions 
One of the key elements in ethics is reflective choice. Ethical problems almost always involve 
projecting yourself in a future in which you have to live with your decisions. Professional 
ethics decisions usually turn on these questions: “What written and unwritten rules govern 
my behavior?” and “What are the possible consequences of my choices?”  
 
We could dispense with any discussion of ethical theories and rules if we were willing to 
accept a simple proposition: “Let conscience be  your guide.” Such a rule is appealing 
because it calls upon an individual’s own judgment, which might be based on wisdom, 
insight, adherence to custom, or an authoritative code. However, it might also be based on 
caprice, immaturity, ignorance, stubbornness, or misunderstanding. 
 
In a similar manner, reliance on the opinions of others or on the weight of opinion of a 
particular social group is not always enough. Another person or a group of people might 
perpetuate a custom or habit that is wrong. (Think about the signboard that proclaimed: 
“Wrong is wrong, even if everybody is doing it.”) To adhere blindly to custom or group 
habits is to abdicate individual responsibility. Titus and Keeton summarized this point 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.903 
succinctly: “Each person capable of making moral decisions is responsible for making his 
own decisions. The ultimate locus of moral responsibility is in the individual.” Thus, the 
function of ethical principles and rules is not to provide a simple and sure answer to all your 
problems but to provide some guides for individual decisions and actions.  
 
 



:


what is ethic
in a critic introduct to ethic philip wheelwright defin ethic as
that branch of philosophi which is the systemat studi of reflect choic of the standard
of right and wrong by which it is to be guid and of the good toward which it mai
ultim be direct
thi definit contain three kei element
ethic involv question requir reflect choic decis problem
ethic involv guid of right and wrong moral principl
ethic is concern with valu good inher in ethic decis
why doe an individu or a group need a code of ethic conduct while it ha been said
that a person should be upright and not be kept upright a code of conduct serv a us
purpos as a refer and a benchmark a code make explicit some of the criteria for
conduct particular to a profess in thi wai code of profession ethic ar abl to
provid some direct solut that might not be avail from gener ethic theori
furthermor an individu is better abl to know what the profess expect when a code
of ethic conduct is in place from the viewpoint of an organ profess a code is a
public declar of principl conduct and a mean of facilit enforc of
ethic for fraud examin fraud prevent and deterr
4902 2011 fraud examin manual
standard of conduct practic enforc and professionwid intern disciplin would
be much more difficult if member were not first put on notic of the standard
an ethic decis maker role
while on of the main purpos of ethic is to guid the action of individu decis
maker the role of decis maker doe not fulli describ a profession person entir
oblig each person act not onli as an individu but also as a member of a profess
and as a member of societi henc fraud examin also ar spectat observ the
decis of colleagu advisor counsel with cowork instructor teach student or
new employe on the job judg serv on disciplinari committe and critic
comment on the ethic decis of other all of these role ar import in the
practic of profession ethic
in consid gener ethic your primari goal is to arriv at a set of accept method
for make ethic decis to fulfil all your role consequ an understand of some
of the gener principl of ethic can serv as background in understand the ethic
decis face by cfe as well as the ethic guidelin provid in the certifi fraud
examin code of profession ethic
ethic decis
on of the kei element in ethic is reflect choic ethic problem almost alwai involv
project yourself in a futur in which you have to live with your decis profession
ethic decis usual turn on these question what written and unwritten rule govern
my behavior and what ar the possibl consequ of my choic
we could dispens with ani discuss of ethic theori and rule if we were will to
accept a simpl proposit let conscienc be your guid such a rule is appeal
becaus it call upon an individu own judgment which might be base on wisdom
insight adher to custom or an authorit code howev it might also be base on
capric immatur ignor stubborn or misunderstand
in a similar manner relianc on the opinion of other or on the weight of opinion of a
particular social group is not alwai enough anoth person or a group of peopl might
perpetu a custom or habit that is wrong think about the signboard that proclaim
wrong is wrong even if everybodi is do it to adher blindli to custom or group
habit is to abdic individu respons titu and keeton summar thi point
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4903
succinctli each person capabl of make moral decis is respons for make hi
own decis the ultim locu of moral respons is in the individu thu the
function of ethic principl and rule is not to provid a simpl and sure answer to all your
problem but to provid some guid for individu decis and action
