2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ETHICS FOR FRAUD EXAMINERS/What Is Ethics?/Ethical Decisions


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Ethical Decisions 
One of the key elements in ethics is reflective choice. Ethical problems almost always involve 
projecting yourself in a future in which you have to live with your decisions. Professional 
ethics decisions usually turn on these questions: “What written and unwritten rules govern 
my behavior?” and “What are the possible consequences of my choices?”  
 
We could dispense with any discussion of ethical theories and rules if we were willing to 
accept a simple proposition: “Let conscience be  your guide.” Such a rule is appealing 
because it calls upon an individual’s own judgment, which might be based on wisdom, 
insight, adherence to custom, or an authoritative code. However, it might also be based on 
caprice, immaturity, ignorance, stubbornness, or misunderstanding. 
 
In a similar manner, reliance on the opinions of others or on the weight of opinion of a 
particular social group is not always enough. Another person or a group of people might 
perpetuate a custom or habit that is wrong. (Think about the signboard that proclaimed: 
“Wrong is wrong, even if everybody is doing it.”) To adhere blindly to custom or group 
habits is to abdicate individual responsibility. Titus and Keeton summarized this point 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.903 
succinctly: “Each person capable of making moral decisions is responsible for making his 
own decisions. The ultimate locus of moral responsibility is in the individual.” Thus, the 
function of ethical principles and rules is not to provide a simple and sure answer to all your 
problems but to provide some guides for individual decisions and actions.  
 
 



:


ethic decis
on of the kei element in ethic is reflect choic ethic problem almost alwai involv
project yourself in a futur in which you have to live with your decis profession
ethic decis usual turn on these question what written and unwritten rule govern
my behavior and what ar the possibl consequ of my choic
we could dispens with ani discuss of ethic theori and rule if we were will to
accept a simpl proposit let conscienc be your guid such a rule is appeal
becaus it call upon an individu own judgment which might be base on wisdom
insight adher to custom or an authorit code howev it might also be base on
capric immatur ignor stubborn or misunderstand
in a similar manner relianc on the opinion of other or on the weight of opinion of a
particular social group is not alwai enough anoth person or a group of peopl might
perpetu a custom or habit that is wrong think about the signboard that proclaim
wrong is wrong even if everybodi is do it to adher blindli to custom or group
habit is to abdic individu respons titu and keeton summar thi point
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4903
succinctli each person capabl of make moral decis is respons for make hi
own decis the ultim locu of moral respons is in the individu thu the
function of ethic principl and rule is not to provid a simpl and sure answer to all your
problem but to provid some guid for individu decis and action
