2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ETHICS FOR FRAUD EXAMINERS/Morality, Ethics, and Legality


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Morality, Ethics, and Legality 
Is it all right to lie to catch a crook? Consider the following story about a fraud examinati on.  
 
Abel, a fraud examiner, was hired by Megacorp, Inc. to discover the method stockroom 
employees were using to steal electronic parts from the inventory. Abel was given a cover 
identity known only to the president of Me gacorp. His application was processed through 
the personnel department in the normal manne r, and he was hired as a stockroom clerk. 
On the job, Abel preserved his false identity, infiltrated the gr oup responsible for the thefts, 
and produced sufficient evidence to have  three people arrested and indicted. 
 
While this story involves only one type of fraud (embezzlement) and one investigation 
method (undercover work), it can serve as a simple example of the moral, ethical, and legal 
issues facing fraud examiners. These issues involve principles of moral philosophy, rules of 
ethics, legal considerations, values, and above all, the problem of distinguishing right 
from wrong. One executive, upon taking office, to ld the board of directors that his would be 
an ethical administration, saying: “It is very simple. All it takes is knowing the difference 
between right and wrong.” But knowing that  difference is often the hardest part.  
 
The High Road 
Most public and many private discussions of ethics quickly become philosophical, reaching 
toward lofty principles and broad generalizations about desirable behavior. People easily cite 
well-known guides and believe the ideas in them should never be violated. Such discussions 
often take place in a vacuum, apart from real-world situations. People generally exhort 
themselves and others to observe the highest principles of moral behavior.  
 
Such considerations—the high road —are necessary if we desire to lift the discussion above 
the nitty-gritty facts of everyday problems. However, the idealistic nature of this level of 
discussion is often not sufficient to help people cope with a problem immediately at hand.  
 
Ethics for Fraud Examiners  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.904   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The high road is the realm of moral philosophy where philosophical principles guide the 
process of thinking about problems and distinguishing right from wrong. Such principles are 
necessary in the process of everyday life. Even though an individual might not know them in 
all the twists and turns familiar to philosophers, their fundamental precepts are well 
understood in our concept of common sense.  
 
Philosophy, Ethics, and Law 
Moral philosophy exists at a global level, permeating all facets of the problems of 
distinguishing right from wrong. The field deals with human judgments based on standards 
that identify good  and evil. These words mean more than just right  and wrong, but they convey 
essentially the same idea. There are two aspects of moral philosophy that are important for 
fraud examiners to consider. The first is the human judgment process, which deals with ways 
of performing analyses of (i.e., thinking about) problems. The second is the standards or 
values — such as honesty, faithfulness, and unse lfishness—that people can use to make moral 
principles useful.  
 
Ethics can be distinguished from moral philosophy by its roots in society. People are usually 
more comfortable talking about ethics than moral philosophy because ethics seems practical 
while moral philosophy seems intellectual and impractical. Ethics generally refers to a 
specific setting — a society, culture, nation, profession, or small group. In this context, ethics 
refers to behavior that conforms to some societal norms or to a written code of ethics, such 
as the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics.  
 
When faced with an ethics-related problem, it is appropriate to begin the analysis of a 
possible action by asking: “Is it legal?” Such analys is is at the most practical level. Ethics is 
somewhat less global and is connected to the setting. The law deals very specifically with 
actions that are permitted and actions that are prohibited. With all due respect to the law, it 
is the lowest reference level for moral decisions. It happens, though not frequently, that a 
law might permit an action that is prohibited by a profession’s code of ethics. Going one 
step further, a profession’s code of ethics might permit actions that a moral philosopher 
would abhor. Likewise, laws and codes of eth ics might prohibit actions that present no 
problem in moral philosophy.  
 
For example, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants had rules of ethics that 
prohibited advertising, with the exception of broad-based institutional advertising. The 
profession believed that professional dignity and objectivity were enhanced by keeping 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.905 
practitioners out of this aspect of the commercial world. The U.S. Federal Trade 
Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice, however, reached a different conclusion. 
They decided that the prohibitions against advertising were against the laws barring restraint 
of trade. The government forced the profession to eliminate the rules against advertising. 
This example illustrates the triumph of one set of values (the government’s belief that 
competition through advertising would benefit consumers) over another set (the professions’ 
belief that professional dignity should be preserved).  
 
All three areas—morality, ethics, and legality—are important for everyday decisions. It might 
not be enough to know that a contemplated action is legal or that it is permitted or 
prohibited by a group’s written code of ethics. And, while helpful, it might also not be 
enough to know that reasoning based on moral philosophy seems to identify that action as 
right or wrong. The important things to know are the distinctions between morality, ethics, 
and legality (i.e., between the philosophy, the rules, and the law). Only with this knowledge 
can a fraud examiner know where he stands when deciding upon and justifying a course  
of action.  
 
This material observes one important limitation. It confines its consideration of ethics for 
fraud examiners to matters of moral philosophy, rules of ethics, and general values. It does 
not deal with detailed matters of the law or with questions about the legality or illegality of 
actions a fraud examiner might take. This is not to say that the law is unimportant; it is just 
beyond the scope of this part of the materials.  
 
Means and Ends 
Everyone knows some saying like: “The ends j ustify the means,” or “Fight fire with fire.” 
Fraud examiners can be particularly influenced by this idea because they need to deal with 
people who do not exercise moral reasoning, follow ethical rules, or keep within the law. 
These sayings have the purpose of justifying actions that could otherwise be considered 
immoral, unethical, or illegal. (After all, the American colonists openly defied British law, 
fomented a rebellion, and fought a war. We now regard them as heroes.)  
 
 Is it all right to lie? No, except … 
 
When a moral rule appears to be inflexible, people can always think of situations in which 
they want to justify breaking the rule. For example, some people would easily conclude that 
it is all right to lie to catch a crook. After all, if the moral rules were followed by everyone, 
Ethics for Fraud Examiners  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.906   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
then there would be no crooks; thus, the fraudster’s dishonesty made it necessary for the 
fraud examiner to lie in return. The ends (catching crooks and upholding justice) justify the 
means (lying).  
 
The problem with means-ends analyses is that they are often superficial, ending with the 
needed justification but failing to consider other aspects and consequences of the actions. 
The justification of the undercover role of the fraud examiner must be carefully considered. 
In the previous example, the president of Mega corp must think about the moral, ethical, and 
legal climate of the company once it becomes known that an undercover agent was 
employed. (How many more are around? What happened to trust?)  
 
 



:


moral ethic and legal
is it all right to lie to catch a crook consid the follow stori about a fraud examinati on
abel a fraud examin wa hire by megacorp inc to discov the method stockroom
employe were us to steal electron part from the inventori abel wa given a cover
ident known onli to the presid of me gacorp hi applic wa process through
the personnel depart in the normal mann r and he wa hire as a stockroom clerk
on the job abel preserv hi fals ident infiltr the gr oup respons for the theft
and produc suffici evid to have three peopl arrest and indict
while thi stori involv onli on type of fraud embezzl and on investig
method undercov work it can serv as a simpl exampl of the moral ethic and legal
issu face fraud examin these issu involv principl of moral philosophi rule of
ethic legal consider valu and abov all the problem of distinguish right
from wrong on execut upon take offic to ld the board of director that hi would be
an ethic administr sai it is veri simpl all it take is know the differ
between right and wrong but know that differ is often the hardest part
the high road
most public and mani privat discuss of ethic quickli becom philosoph reach
toward lofti principl and broad gener about desir behavior peopl easili cite
wellknown guid and believ the idea in them should never be violat such discuss
often take place in a vacuum apart from realworld situat peopl gener exhort
themselv and other to observ the highest principl of moral behavior
such considerationsth high road ar necessari if we desir to lift the discuss abov
the nittygritti fact of everydai problem howev the idealist natur of thi level of
discuss is often not suffici to help peopl cope with a problem immedi at hand
ethic for fraud examin fraud prevent and deterr
4904 2011 fraud examin manual
the high road is the realm of moral philosophi where philosoph principl guid the
process of think about problem and distinguish right from wrong such principl ar
necessari in the process of everydai life even though an individu might not know them in
all the twist and turn familiar to philosoph their fundament precept ar well
understood in our concept of common sens
philosophi ethic and law
moral philosophi exist at a global level permeat all facet of the problem of
distinguish right from wrong the field deal with human judgment base on standard
that identifi good and evil these word mean more than just right and wrong but thei convei
essenti the same idea there ar two aspect of moral philosophi that ar import for
fraud examin to consid the first is the human judgment process which deal with wai
of perform analys of ie think about problem the second is the standard or
valu such as honesti faith and uns lfishnessthat peopl can us to make moral
principl us
ethic can be distinguish from moral philosophi by it root in societi peopl ar usual
more comfort talk about ethic than moral philosophi becaus ethic seem practic
while moral philosophi seem intellectu and impract ethic gener refer to a
specif set a societi cultur nation profess or small group in thi context ethic
refer to behavior that conform to some societ norm or to a written code of ethic such
as the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic
when face with an ethicsrel problem it is appropri to begin the analysi of a
possibl action by ask is it legal such anali is is at the most practic level ethic is
somewhat less global and is connect to the set the law deal veri specif with
action that ar permit and action that ar prohibit with all due respect to the law it
is the lowest refer level for moral decis it happen though not frequent that a
law might permit an action that is prohibit by a profess code of ethic go on
step further a profess code of ethic might permit action that a moral philosoph
would abhor likewis law and code of eth ic might prohibit action that present no
problem in moral philosophi
for exampl the american institut of certifi public account had rule of ethic that
prohibit advertis with the except of broadbas institut advertis the
profess believ that profession digniti and object were enhanc by keep
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4905
practition out of thi aspect of the commerci world the us feder trade
commiss and the us depart of justic howev reach a differ conclus
thei decid that the prohibit against advertis were against the law bar restraint
of trade the govern forc the profess to elimin the rule against advertis
thi exampl illustr the triumph of on set of valu the govern belief that
competit through advertis would benefit consum over anoth set the profess
belief that profession digniti should be preserv
all three areasmor ethic and legalityar import for everydai decis it might
not be enough to know that a contempl action is legal or that it is permit or
prohibit by a group written code of ethic and while help it might also not be
enough to know that reason base on moral philosophi seem to identifi that action as
right or wrong the import thing to know ar the distinct between moral ethic
and legal ie between the philosophi the rule and the law onli with thi knowledg
can a fraud examin know where he stand when decid upon and justifi a cours
of action
thi materi observ on import limit it confin it consider of ethic for
fraud examin to matter of moral philosophi rule of ethic and gener valu it doe
not deal with detail matter of the law or with question about the legal or illeg of
action a fraud examin might take thi is not to sai that the law is unimport it is just
beyond the scope of thi part of the materi
mean and end
everyon know some sai like the end j ustifi the mean or fight fire with fire
fraud examin can be particularli influenc by thi idea becaus thei need to deal with
peopl who do not exercis moral reason follow ethic rule or keep within the law
these sai have the purpos of justifi action that could otherwis be consid
immor uneth or illeg after all the american colonist openli defi british law
foment a rebellion and fought a war we now regard them as hero
is it all right to lie no except
when a moral rule appear to be inflex peopl can alwai think of situat in which
thei want to justifi break the rule for exampl some peopl would easili conclud that
it is all right to lie to catch a crook after all if the moral rule were follow by everyon
ethic for fraud examin fraud prevent and deterr
4906 2011 fraud examin manual
then there would be no crook thu the fraudster dishonesti made it necessari for the
fraud examin to lie in return the end catch crook and uphold justic justifi the
mean ly
the problem with meansend analys is that thei ar often superfici end with the
need justif but fail to consid other aspect and consequ of the action
the justif of the undercov role of the fraud examin must be carefulli consid
in the previou exampl the presid of mega corp must think about the moral ethic and
legal climat of the compani onc it becom known that an undercov agent wa
emploi how mani more ar around what happen to trust
