2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS 
 
I.  A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, demonstrate a commitment to 
professionalism and diligence in the performance of his or her duties. 
 
II.  A Certified Fraud Examiner shall not engage in any illegal or unethical 
conduct, or any activity which would constitute a conflict of interest. 
 
III. A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, exhibit the highest level of 
integrity in the performance of all professional assignments, and will accept 
only assignments for which there is  reasonable expectation that the 
assignment will be completed with professional competence. 
 
IV.  A Certified Fraud Examiner will comply with lawful orders of the courts, and 
will testify to matters truthfully and without bias or prejudice. 
 
 V.  A Certified Fraud Examiner, in conducting examinations, will obtain evidence 
or other documentation to establish a reasonable basis for any opinion 
rendered. No opinion shall be expressed regarding the guilt or innocence of 
any person or party. 
 
VI.  A Certified Fraud Examiner sha ll not reveal any confidential information 
obtained during a professional engagement without proper authorization. 
 
VII. A Certified Fraud Examiner shall reveal all material matters discovered during 
the course of an examination, which, if omitted, could cause a distortion of the 
facts. 
 
VIII. A Certified Fraud Examiner shall continually strive to increase the 
competence and effectiveness of professional services performed under his or 
her direction. 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1002   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics was created by the Board of 
Regents of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners and adopted January 1, 1989.  
 
 
Commitment to Professionalism and Diligence 
  
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, demonstrate commitment to  
professionalism and diligence in the performance of his or her duties. 
 
Professionalism 
Professionalism is a quality desired by most people, but it is obtained at a price. 
Professionalism exists on two basic levels: (1) for the professional group as a whole and (2) 
for the individual Certified Fraud Examiner. Consider first the professional group as  
a whole.  
 
People frequently refer to professions, professional men and women, and professional 
activities without defining the meaning of the concept “professionalism.” Some fraud 
examiners say: “I might not know how to define it, but I know it when I see it.” The U.S. 
Supreme Court once said the same thing about pornography. The five principal 
characteristics that help differentiate professional fields of endeavor from other  
vocations are:  
• A body of specialized knowledge acquired by formal education. 
• Admission to the profession governed by standards of professional qualifications. 
• Recognition and acceptance by society of professional status, and concurrent recognition 
and acceptance of social responsibility by the professional. 
• Standards of conduct governing relationships of the professional with clients, colleagues, 
and the public. 
• A national organization devoted to the advancement of the obligations of the 
professional group. 
 
Specialized Knowledge and Formal Education  
A fraud examiner’s work involves specialized knowledge derived from several other fields, 
such as accounting, auditing, criminology, investigation, and law. A profession might not 
have a body of knowledge truly unique unto itself, but it should have one that has a 
“mystique,” requiring study, comprehension,  and practice, and be over and above the 
everyday abilities other people might possess.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1003 
Continuing professional education is becoming a hallmark of professionalism. In recent 
years, ongoing efforts to increase competence and effectiveness have become required by 
some professions. The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has led the way 
with the requirements for 120 hours of extra training every three years to maintain and 
increase professional competence. A majority of the state boards of accountancy now 
require continuing education as a prerequisite for renewing CPAs’ licenses. The Association 
of Certified Fraud Examiners requires 20 hours of continuing professional education every 
12-month period, half of which must be directly related to fraud detection or deterrence.  
 
Professional Admission Standards  
The most highly esteemed professions, and some occupations that are merely regulated, 
govern admission to their ranks by qualifications contained in state law. If legal recognition 
is considered a requisite of a profession, then the number of “professions” is quite large, 
ranging from doctors of medicine to barbers. Some professions (such as Certified Internal 
Auditor or Certified Fraud Examiner) are not regulated by state or federal statutes. Many 
groups have the status of “profession” without the benefit of licensing laws, and the fraud 
examiner profession is one of these.  
 
Certification examinations are offered in many professions, such as law, medicine, real  
estate, insurance, finance, accounting management, public accounting, and internal auditing. 
The Uniform CFE Examination and certification is part of professional recognition for 
fraud examiners.  
 
Experience is required for many, but not all, professional licenses and certifications. 
Experience of one or two years is required in most states for the CPA certificate. Experience 
is required to obtain the Certified Internal Auditor designation. Designation as a Certified 
Fraud Examiner requires at least two years of experience in combination with other 
qualifications. 
 
Social Recognition: A Reciprocal Relationship  
No group of practitioners can become a “profession” merely by declaring itself to be one. 
Society must acknowledge the group as a professional body. At present, fraud examiners are 
at the stage of becoming a self-declared profession. Historically, other professions had the 
same starting point. Modern medicine overcame  its roots in magic. Accountants rose from 
the level of bookkeepers. Internal auditors advanced social goals by presenting a responsible 
front to Congress and other public bodies. The list goes on.  
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1004   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Social recognition, however, is not necessarily permanent. Society will not continue to  
honor as professional any group that fails to serve a broad-based social and public interest. 
Thus the other side to the coin of recognition is: Certified Fraud Examiners must 
reciprocate and accept the social responsibility inherent in a professional status that serves 
the public interest.  
 
Standards of Conduct 
One way to achieve the social recognition that goes with professionalism is to adhere to the 
Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics. Other professions have such codes. 
They are the written versions of moral philosophy and values especially relevant to the 
group. Fraud examiners and other professionals must observe their codes with an awareness 
of the society around them. Care must be taken that rules are not created and followed in a 
self-serving manner, inimical to behavior expected by the public.  
 
Possessing and following a set of behavior rules is one thing, possessing and following a set 
that meets public expectations is another. Other professions (law, architecture, and 
accounting, to name three) have found themselves under attack from the U.S. Federal Trade 
Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice when their rules were perceived to have 
introduced unwarranted restraints of trade. While the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of 
Professional Ethics might not seem to contain such rules, they might come under attack in 
some future, different setting. Certified Fraud Examiners must be prepared to experience 
change, when appropriate change is necessary.  
 
Individual Fraud Examiners 
When the focus of professionalism is turned to the individual Certified Fraud Examiner, its 
features for the group as a whole should not be forgotten. The individual member is 
presumed to possess a body of knowledge on his admission to the group and attainment of 
the Certified Fraud Examiner certificate. The individual is expected to adhere to the code of 
ethics and maintain membership in the national organization. Along with these features, the 
individual Certified Fraud Examiner exhibits professionalism by continually striving to 
honor the recognition granted by the public. In day-to-day life, this is accomplished by 
exercising diligence in performing Certified Fraud Examiner work.  
 
Diligence 
The “diligence in performing his or her duties” phrase in the rule refers to several activities 
that collectively define high-quality fraud examination work. They include planning 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1005 
assignments and supervising assistants and colleagues, avoiding conflicts of interest, 
performing with competence, obtaining sufficient evidence to establish a basis for opinions, 
maintaining confidential relations, and avoiding distortion of facts. These activities are the 
subjects of other rules in the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics, and 
they will be discussed in more detail later.  
 
 
Legal and Ethical Conduct and Conflict of Interest 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall not engage in any illegal or unethical conduct, or any 
activity which would constitute a conflict of interest. 
 
This rule is a composite of three prohibitions: illegal conduct, unethical conduct, and conflict 
of interest.  
 
Illegal Conduct 
The prohibition of illegal conduct seems straightforward. Some activities might be obviously 
illegal, but the legal status of others might not be so clear. A fraud examiner is always well 
advised to consult an attorney when questionable situations arise. At the same time, 
however, it might be difficult to know ahead of time whether such a consultation is 
necessary. Consider the following legal-related problems (but remember that this chapter on 
ethics is not intended to be your primary guide to legal matters).  
 
Libel and Slander 
Libel and slander can cause personal injury and subject a fraud examiner to a lawsuit for 
damages. Libel is a written defamation of so meone else’s character. Slander is a spoken 
defamation. The content of a libelous or slanderous message must: 
• Contain words that injure another person’s character or reputation or hold him up  
to ridicule. 
• Be communicated orally or in writing to other people. 
• Cause an actual damage to the person who is the subject of the communication. 
 
The risks involved in libel and slander are reasons for having the rule in the Certified Fraud 
Examiner code that prohibits expression of opinions on the guilt or innocence of people. 
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1006   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
False Imprisonment 
False imprisonment can mean more than putting a person behind bars. Courts have found 
many means of detainment to be false imprisonment, including locking an employee in a 
store, removing a distributor from a car, and detaining a witness by force. Even though 
drastic action might be essential, a fraud examiner must accomplish his task legally.  
 
Compounding a Felony 
The criminal act of compounding a felony can result from participating in a trade for 
restitution for agreeing to forgo prosecution. While plea bargains might be acceptable under 
the supervision of a court, Certified Fraud Examiners should be very careful and should 
obtain legal advice when negotiating private deals. 
 
Some rules for professionals insert the word “knowingly” in relation to illegal activities, 
saying: “One should not knowingly  be a party to an illegal activity.” The Certified Fraud 
Examiner Code does not include this way out. Certified Fraud Examiners are generally not 
entitled to claim ignorance of the law. They are expected to know a considerable amount 
of law in connection with investigations, and they are expected to know when to consult  
a lawyer.  
 
Unethical Conduct 
The prohibition of unethical conduct is complicated. These materials have presented an 
array of issues in moral philosophy and ethical thinking — intertwining considerations of 
principles and values. This latter part is set forth in the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of 
Professional Ethics. Legitimate questions ar e: “What manner of unethical conduct is 
meant by this rule? Does it refer to general matters of moral philosophy and ethics, or is its 
applicability limited only to the rules in this code?”  
 
A narrow focus on fraud examiners’ professionalism would center attention only on the 
rules in the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics. A broader social-responsibility 
focus would go beyond the code to the interaction of the fraud examiner 
with other people affected by his choices. The broader focus is more consistent with the 
concept of professionalism because the code itself is a limited set of rules. A fraud 
examiner must take personal responsibility for decisions, and be aware that other 
professionals are often criticized for adhering too rigidly to their codes. Lawyers face harsh 
criticisms when they seem to hide knowledge of criminal acts in their privileged 
communications. Doctors are often criticized for the things they tell their patients about 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1007 
terminal illnesses. Professions are criticized for having specialized rules that seem to permit 
their members to act contrary to social expectations.  
 
Conflict of Interest and “Independence” Considerations  
The term conflict of interest in the rule begs for definition. Try to enumerate the parties 
whose “interests” might conflict: The Certified Fraud Examiner, the Certified Fraud 
Examiner’s clients (for example, Client A may conflict with Client B or with Client C), the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s employer, the public (“innocent bystanders”), and law 
enforcement agencies are the first to come to mind. These parties are involved in almost 
every investigation. The lines that connect these with each other and with the fraud 
examiner could look like a spaghetti bowl of multiple relationships. Deciding  
whether a conflict or a community of interests exists depends on the facts of each 
particular situation.  
 
Nevertheless, some conflicts to avoid are clear enough. A Certified Fraud Examiner 
employed full-time by a company should not engage in other jobs that create a hardship or 
loss to the employer. A fraud examiner should not be a “double agent” employed by one 
company, but retained by another company or person to infiltrate the employer and 
transmit inside information (unless, of course, the employing company agrees to the 
arrangement in order to apprehend other parties employed by the company). A Certified 
Fraud Examiner should not accept engagements from both sides to a controversy—just 
like lawyers are prohibited from representing both parties in a transaction, lawsuit, or trial.  
 
“Conflict of interest” and “independence” are related. The American Institute of Certified 
Public Accountants (AICPA) includes independence (and avoidance of conflict of interest) 
in its Code of Professional Conduct. Some particulars from the AICPA may be relevant, in 
part, for the Certified Fraud Examiner. Consider the following from the AICPA Code of 
Professional Conduct:  
 
Independence will be considered to be im paired for audit engagements if an AICPA 
member had any of the following transa ctions, interests, or relationships: 
? Any direct or material indirect financ ial interest in the enterprise under audit 
? Any joint, closely held business investment with the enterprise under audit or with any 
officer, director, or principal stockholder thereof that was material in relation to the 
member’s net worth to the net worth of the member’s firm 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1008   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
? Any loan to or from the enterprise under audit or any officer, director, or principal 
stockholder of the enterprise  (except immaterial loans, home mortgages, and loans 
secured by property) 
? Any managerial-type connection with the enterprise under audit, such as a promoter, 
underwriter, or voting trustee, director or officer, or in any capacity equivalent to that of 
a member of management or of an employee. 
 
These rules for auditors exist specifically to convey to the public a perception of 
independence. Independence and conflict avoidance are enhanced by refraining from having 
financial and managerial interests in clients or in joint co-operation with clients’ managers 
and directors. After all, they might be a suspect in an investigation. When a Certified Fraud 
Examiner works as an employee of a company, the prohibitions about employment are not 
relevant because the employer-employee relationship is known to the employer, who is the 
client and recipient of any reports. In such cases, independence and conflict should be 
considered in relation to all the other parties involved. Certainly, a mental condition of 
objectivity and honesty then governs the relation between the Certified Fraud Examiner and 
his employer. If the CFE does have a perceived conflict, it can usually be avoided through 
adequate disclosure. 
 
 
Integrity and Competence 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, exhibit the highest level of integrity in the 
performa nce of all professional assignments, and will accept only assignments for which there 
is reasonable expectation that the assignment will be completed with professional 
competence. 
 
This rule contains two parts. The first deals with integrity and the second with competence. 
Competence here is related to diligence, as discussed previously in relation to the first rule in 
the Certified Fraud Examiner Code.  
 
Integrity 
If you were asked to name a desirable personal characteristic, integrity is one that would 
rank high on the scale, along with honesty, truthfulness, trustworthiness, and loyalty. 
Outside observers of Certified Fraud Examiners’ activity will look for signs of integrity as a 
signal that trust is warranted. However, integrity hardly exists apart from other 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1009 
characteristics well-known in moral philosophy and recognized in the Certified Fraud 
Examiner Code of Professional Ethics.  
 
Integrity requires honesty, truthfulness, trustworthiness, and confidentiality. It requires 
subordination of desires for personal gain to the interests of clients, employers, and the 
public. It requires independence of mental attitude and avoidance of conflicts of interest. 
Integrity is all these things wrapped up into one word.  
 
In addition, integrity means that a Certified Fraud Examiner ought to have a well- 
developed sense of moral philosophy—an ability to analyze situations where no rules of 
the Certified Fraud Examiner Code are specifically applicable and to be able to distinguish 
right from wrong. It does not mean, however, that a Certified Fraud Examiner must be 
perfect in all technical matters, nor does it mean that Certified Fraud Examiners and 
others cannot have honest differences of opinion. In the course of a fraud examination, 
inadvertent errors, mistakes of judgment, and other problems might cause conflict. In such 
cases, a Certified Fraud Examiner can preserve integrity either by admitting error or by 
convincingly justifying a difference of perception or opinion.  
 
Professional Competence 
Professional competence refers to how well Certified Fraud Examiners do their job. 
Determination of competence always depends on the specific facts and circumstances of the 
assignment. Competence is best understood in the context of the prudent practitioner. The idea 
of a prudent professional practitioner is present in other social science theories, for example, 
the “economic man” of economic theory and the “reasonable man” of law. This concept can 
be summarized for fraud examiners as follows:  
 
A prudent practitioner is assumed to have a knowledge of the philosophy and practice of 
fraud examinations, to have the degree of tr aining, experience, and skill common to the 
average fraud examiner, to have the ability to recognize indications of frauds, and to keep 
abreast of developments in the perpetration and detection of fraud. Competence requires the 
CFE to be acquainted with the company, activity, function, or program under 
investigation; to review the methods of control in operation; to obtain  sufficient evidence 
pertinent to the suspected fraud or illegal acti vity; to be responsive to unusual events and 
unfamiliar circumstances; to persist until any reasonable doubts about the evidence have 
been eliminated; and to exercise caution in instructing assistants and reviewing their work. 
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1010   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Professional competence also demands attention to three kinds of interference that can 
damage the independence and quality of a Certified Fraud Examiner’s work. Fraud 
examiners who permit these conditions to interfere with the assignment demonstrate less 
than the desired level of professional competence. The three types of interference are 
programming, investigation, and reporting.  
 
Programming  
Fraud examiners must remain free from interference by managers who try to restrict, specify, 
or modify the procedures they need to perform, including any attempts to assign personnel 
or otherwise to control the examination work. Occasionally, client or employer managers try 
to limit access to information or to other personnel or to limit the amount of time available 
for the assignment.  
 
Investigation  
When appropriate, Certified Fraud Examiners must have free access to books, records, 
correspondence, and other evidence. They must have the cooperation of managers or other 
employees without any attempt to interpret or screen evidence.  
 
Reporting  
Client or employer managers should not be allowed to overrule the Certified Fraud 
Examiner’s judgments on the appropriate content of a report. Integrity is destroyed and 
judgment is subordinated when the Certified Fraud Examiner is compelled to alter a report 
or to omit important information or to misstate facts. Certified Fraud Examiners must not 
let any feelings of misguided loyalty to the client, employer, or other sources of conflicts of 
interest interfere with their obligation to report fully and fairly.  
 
Professional Skepticism  
Fraud examiners must always perform their work with an attitude of skepticism, and begin 
with the belief that something is wrong or someone is committing a fraud (depending, of 
course, on the nature of the assignment and the preliminary information available). This 
attitude may make fraud examinations extensive and expensive. Relaxation of this initial 
attitude of skepticism occurs only when the evidence shows no signs of fraudulent activity. 
At no time is a Certified Fraud Examiner entitled to “assume” a fraud problem does not 
exist. Professional skepticism can be dispelled only by evidence. As a result, opinions or 
attestations about a fraud-free environment are absolutely prohibited for Certified  
Fraud Examiners. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1011 
Court Orders and Testimony 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner will comply with lawful orders of the courts, and will testify 
to matters truthfully and wi thout bias or prejudice. 
 
The essence of this rule is truth-telling. The part about complying with lawful orders of the 
courts is a direction not to flee from a summons or subpoena issued by a court. Even 
though the rule specifies “courts,” it is reasonable to extend it to other agencies that have 
the legal power to issue such orders (such as Congressional committees, grand juries, 
special prosecutors, and quasi-judicial administrative agencies). Sometimes, legal counsel 
might devise stratagems to avoid immediate service of (or attention to) a summons. Fraud 
examiners can listen to such legal advice, but they also must weigh it against their own 
knowledge of proper and legal behavior. In some cases, a second legal opinion might be 
advisable. The fraud examiner could be on shaky grounds with a defense of “my lawyer 
told me to hide” when accused of obstruction of justice. (The lawyer might be in the cell 
next door.)  
 
Truthful testimony often presents strategic problems. A fraud examiner, even one who is an 
attorney, should always be represented by counsel in a courtroom, deposition, or other 
testimony setting. The lawyer’s own saying is : “An attorney who represents himself has a 
fool for a client.” Counsel is invaluable for protecting a fraud examiner witness from 
improper questioning.  
 
When testimony is sought in examination or cross-examination, a Certified Fraud Examiner 
should always respond to the questions that are asked—no more and no less. The attorney 
conducting the examination has the responsibility to ask the right questions, and the fraud 
examiner’s counsel has the responsibility to object to misleading, improper, or irrelevant 
questions. The fraud examiner’s counsel also has the obligation to correct any problems with 
the cross-examination. A “helpful” fraud exam iner who tries to embellish the answers with 
additional material might offend the court or do unintentional harm to the case being made 
for one party or the other. Of course, a fraud examiner may invoke his own Constitutional 
rights, upon the advice of counsel.  
 
Answers should always be delivered without bias or prejudice. It is the lawyer’s job to be 
biased and prejudiced—in the context of the ad versary judicial system—establishing the case 
for his own client or for the government. The greatest danger for delivering biased or 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1012   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
prejudicial testimony exists when the broad question is: “Tell the court about your findings 
in your fraud examination.” This is an open- ended invitation to spill the beans. If counsel 
does not object, the Certified Fraud Examiner is in the spotlight. However, responding to 
such an invitation amounts to delivering a report, and the next rule in the Certified Fraud 
Examiner Code of Professional Ethics can be used as a guide.  
 
 
Reasonable Evidential Basis for Opinions   
 
A fraud examiner, in conducting examinations, will obtain evidence or other 
documentation to establish a reasonable basis for any opinion render ed. No opinion shall 
be expressed regarding the guilt or innocence of any person or party.  
 
Evidential Basis for Opinions 
The accounting profession has similar rules, some of which are in its codes of ethics, some 
in its technical practice standards. Here is a sample of its provisions:  
 
Sufficient competent evidential matter is to be obtained through in spection, observation, 
inquiries and confirmations to afford a reasonable basis for an opinion regarding the 
financial statements under examination. [AICPA Generally Accepted Auditing 
Standards] 
 
Internal auditors should collect, analyze, inte rpret, and document information to support 
audit results. [The Institute of Internal Auditors, Inc., Standards for the 
Practice of Internal Auditing]  
 
A member shall obtain sufficient relevant data to afford a re asonable basis for conclusions 
or recommendations in relation to any professional services performed. [AICPA Code of 
Professional Conduct] 
 
A practitioner should obtain sufficient relevant data to afford a reasonable basis for 
conclusions or recommendations. [AICPA Management Advisory Services 
Standards]  
 
Sufficient evidence shall be obta ined to provide a reasonable ba sis for the conclusion that is 
expressed in the report. [AICPA Attestation Standards] 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1013 
Sufficient competent evidence should be obta ined to provide a reasonable basis for the 
examination report. [AICPA Standards for Examinations of Prospective 
Financial Information]  
 
Clearly, the accounting profession considers “sufficient relevant data (evidence)” a 
compelling standard of practice, if not a matter of professional ethics. Evidence can be 
defined as all the information that influences a decision maker in reaching decisions that can 
take the form of a report, a set of recommendations, or similar products.  
 
Evidence might be quantitative or qualitative; it may be objective or it may have subjective 
qualities; it may be absolutely compelling to a decision or it may be only mildly persuasive. 
The Certified Fraud Examiner’s task is to  collect and evaluate a sufficient amount of 
relevant evidence to afford a reasonable and logical basis for decisions.  
 
Auditors sometimes say they gather evidence to show that financial statements are 
presented properly or that control procedures are operating effectively. They are following 
a time-tested method of investigation that consists of three parts:  
• Recognize the problem or issue subject to investigation. 
• Gather sufficient relevant evidence about it. 
• Analyze the evidence and reach a conclusion about the problem or issue. 
 
Most auditors’ propositions are expressed positively, such as: “The cash balance is 
accurately stated.” However, an auditor will actu ally seek evidence to show that the cash 
balance is not  properly stated. Imagine a cash balance that is the sum of 110 separate bank 
accounts. An audit team will probably sample these accounts instead of looking at all of 
them. The auditors look for evidence that some of these cash balances are misstated. If 
they fail to find any misstatements in a sufficiently large sample, they have not proved that 
the total is proper, but they have no reason to believe that it is materially misstated. 
 
A literal report on this kind of work would be called “negative assurance,” in which an auditor 
would say: “Nothing came to my attention to make me believe the cash balance is materially 
misstated.” This statement of negative assurance is an accurate report of the audit process. As 
long as the “attention” consists of sufficient re levant evidence, the report is useful. Auditors 
might not know without any doubt that the balance is proper, but they are entitled to act as 
though it is because they have analyzed sufficient relevant evidence.  
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1014   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Some fraud examinations can take on this same character. Certified Fraud Examiners will be 
assigned to seek the truth about some business records or to try to determine whether some 
control procedures have failed. The Certified Fraud Examiner will seek evidence of 
misstatement or failure, and, if none is found, will report the positive results.  
 
In other cases, a client or employer might already know that fraud, thefts, shortages, control 
failures, or other such events have occurred. The Certified Fraud Examiner’s assignment is 
to then determine how the improper activity is being carried out, by whom, and to what 
extent. This kind of fraud investigation demands sufficient evidence, examples, and suitable 
documentation to prove the how/whom/extent findings. In these cases, the “negative 
assurance” type of conclusion is not appropria te. Certified Fraud Examiners must obtain the 
evidence to show the actual how/whom/extent conclusions.  
 
Guilt and Innocence 
The rule that prohibits opinions regarding the guilt or innocence of any person or party is a 
rule of prudence. The AICPA had a rule that prohibited CPAs from attesting that a 
company’s financial forecast would be achieved. Most CPAs’ reaction to the rule was: “Why 
would anyone want to do something so dumb?” The general answer was that without the 
explicit rule, someone might give an achievability attestation, the actual events would fall 
short, and the CPA (and all other CPAs) would suffer criticism. The rule was a rule of 
prudence. Clearly, it is prudent for a Certified Fraud Examiner to refrain from usurping the 
role of jury. In a courtroom, no good attorney would ask a Certified Fraud Examiner for 
such a conclusion, and no alert judge would allow such testimony.  
 
In most situations, the fraud examiner’s job is to present the evidence in his report. Such 
evidence might constitute a convincing case pointing to the guilt or innocence of a person. 
But a clear line should be drawn between a report that essentially says, “Here is the evidence 
and the reasonable conclusions that can be drawn from it,” and one that steps over the line 
and says, “This person is guilty of the crime of fraud.” 
 
Whether or not a person is guilty (or innocent) of a crime is not a decision for the fraud 
examiner to make. The fraud examiner may draw reasonable conclusions based on the 
evidence. One of those conclusions may be that the suspected individual stole money, 
misrepresented a transaction, or concealed funds. There is no prohibition in the Code of 
Professional Ethics on expressing such a conclusion provided it has a reasonable basis in 
fact. The prohibition involves the next step, “The suspect took the money without 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1015 
permission and is therefore guilty of the crime of theft.” The individual may have taken the 
money without permission, but whether or not the individual is guilty of a crime is a 
determination for the judicial system, not the fraud examiner. 
 
 
Confidential Information 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall not reveal any confidential information obtained during 
a professional engagement without proper authorization. 
 
Confidential information rules in professional codes of ethics have the potential to create 
enormous conflicts — conflicts of principles and conflicts of values. Consider this possible 
exchange between a lawyer and client:  
 
 Client: 
Because you have taken my case on this fraud charge, I think you should know more about 
my background. 
 
 Lawyer: 
Go ahead. 
 
 Client: 
Three years ago, I participated  in an armed robbery and was never caught. My gun went off 
and killed the storekeeper. One of my buddies was accused and convicted. He’s had all his 
appeals and is scheduled to be executed tomorrow. What can you do? 
 
 Lawyer: 
Nothing. 
 
“Nothing” may be oversimplifying the situation, but the point is that lawyers have a keen 
awareness of the privileged information rights of their clients. Most lawyers will stoutly 
defend their duty not to endanger this client, even at the cost of a life. Most laymen are 
shocked at this particular. One commentator responded to a lawyer defending the position 
with a sharp retort: “Do you mean you will sa crifice an innocent man to a rule?” This 
incredulity is well aimed. It brings into sharp focus two conflicting values: the benefits of a 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1016   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
long-standing rule of legal practice and the sanctity of life itself. Not all situations are this 
dramatic, but Certified Fraud Examiners can nevertheless get into similar conflicts.  
 
Confidential information, for all practical purposes, is any and all information a Certified Fraud 
Examiner might obtain in the course of work, whether it be from the company or client for 
whom an investigation is performed or from any other source consulted during the work. 
The rules of confidential and privileged information are based on the belief that they 
facilitate a free flow of information between parties to the relationship. The nature of a fraud 
examination might make it necessary for Certified Fraud Examiners to have access to 
sensitive information. Clients and employers would be less likely to reveal such information 
or to provide access to sources if they could not trust a Certified Fraud Examiner to keep  
it confidential.  
 
Privileged information  is information that cannot be demanded, even by a court. Common law 
privilege exists for husband-wife and attorney-client relationships, and physician-patient and 
priest-penitent relationships have obtained the privilege through state statutes. The attorney-client 
privilege is statutory in some jurisdictions. Certified Fraud Examiners do not have any 
such privilege in common law or by statute. In all the recognized privilege relationships, the 
professional person is obligated to observe the privilege; it can be waived only by the client, 
patient, or penitent. (These people are said to be the holders of the privilege.) Likewise, a 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s client or employer is the holder of the confidence. (The Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  contains additional information on this subject.) 
 
The Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics does not assume a privileged 
status for the fraud examiner client/employer relationship. However, the examiner’s client or 
employer holds the key known as “proper authorization” in the rule. If the client or 
employer consents to disclosure of information otherwise considered confidential, then the 
Certified Fraud Examiner can transmit it to others. Sometimes consent is given when the 
consenter does not know exactly what information will be conveyed. Even with consent, 
therefore, a Certified Fraud Examiner should be careful to let the client/employer know 
what the consent covers. The best rule of prudence is to let the client/employer make the 
actual disclosure by transmitting the Certified Fraud Examiner’s report, working papers, or 
other documentation. Then the client not only knows what is being disclosed but is the one 
making the disclosure.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1017 
Confidential information relationships do not die with the severance of the Certified Fraud 
Examiner-client or Certified Fraud Examiner-employer relationship. The confidentiality rule 
does not permit disclosure after the assignment is finished, or there is no clause permitting 
disclosure after a Certified Fraud Examiner is fired, resigns, or retires from an employing 
organization. Examiners who write “kiss and te ll” memoirs about the inner secrets of an 
organization violate the confidentiality rule in the most blatant manner.  
 
Proper Authorization 
As just mentioned, one form of “proper author ization” is the consent given by a Certified 
Fraud Examiner’s client or employer. Additional forms of authorization are possible. Other 
professions have exceptions that void the confidentiality or privilege rules. Lawyers can 
reveal client confidences if doing so is necessary to prevent a future crime. CPAs are  
not bound by confidentiality when responding to a court subpoena or summons,  
when participating in quality control reviews, or when initiating complaints to their 
disciplinary bodies.  
 
Likewise, Certified Fraud Examiners are not bound by confidentiality when doing so would 
make them parties to a violation of the law. Care must be taken about remaining silent when 
silence could be construed as obstructing justice or engaging in a conspiracy. The advice of 
an attorney should be sought in such cases.  
 
Questions may arise over information received from someone being investigated. Suppose 
an employee being questioned tells the Certified Fraud Examiner something “in confidence” 
concerning his role in a theft. Fraud examiners must remember that the confidentiality 
relationship runs first to the client or employer, and that this promise of confidentiality is 
understood to exist without being spoken. In the case of the employee-informant, the fraud 
examiner does not have an understood or unspoken promise of confidentiality and is not 
bound by the rule with respect to the informant. If the fraud examiner promises the 
employee-informant “confidentiality,” the promise will probably turn out to be a lie, because 
the examiner has also promised the client/employer a report on all the relevant evidence. A 
Certified Fraud Examiner should not promise confidentiality or leniency to an informant for 
the purpose of extracting testimony. A Certified Fraud Examiner’s reputation and 
effectiveness depends upon the integrity of the Certified Fraud Examiner’s word.  
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1018   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Relation to Conflict of Interest 
Another aspect of the confidentiality rule concerns the possibility that a fraud examiner 
might use information that is part of a conflict of interest with the client/employer. The 
Institute of Internal Auditors’ Code of Ethics c ontains language that makes this relation very 
clear: “Members and Certified Internal Auditors shall be prudent in the use of information 
acquired in the course of their duties. They shall not use confidential information for any 
personal gain nor in any manner which would be contrary to law or detrimental to the 
welfare of their organization.” Clearly, using information for personal gain or using 
information to the detriment of the client/employer is a close kin to lying and stealing. The 
lie comes from the Certified Fraud Examiner’s breaking a pledge to maintain confidentiality, 
and the stealing comes from harming the client or employer.  
 
When a Certified Fraud Examiner faces the potential for personal gain from confidential 
client information, a conflict of interest exists—the Certified Fraud Examiner’s desire for 
wealth vs. the client/employer’s desire for and trust in confidential services. One of the 
worst kinds of ethical breaches would be to break the promise of confidentiality for personal 
gain. It is mere greed at work.  
 
Public Information 
It is tempting to consider confidential information to be “nonpublic information” instead of 
“all information” on the grounds that public information is available to everyone anyway. 
Such an interpretation is not appropriate. Public information might be hard to find and/or 
expensive to obtain and analyze. After all, the client or company paid the Certified Fraud 
Examiner a fee or salary to find and use public information, and a Certified Fraud 
Examiner’s disclosure of it would give others a “free ride.” When information is public, let 
others find it for themselves.  
 
Some might argue that no confidence is abused if a Certified Fraud Examiner points others 
to public information that is published and widely distributed, such as financial statements in 
annual reports or stories in national newspapers such as the Wall Street Journal. The next step 
is to consider public information that is not published, such as real estate deed restrictions, 
liens on property, and credit records. Defending a breach of confidence on the grounds “It 
was public anyway” is a weak excuse. Mere revelation of the source of information imparts 
signals of importance that are not public and that may guide others to information a client or 
employer believes is confidential.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1019 
Blowing the Whistle 
Difficult problems arise over Certified Fraud Examiners’ obligations to “blow the whistle” 
about clients’ or employers’ shady or illegal practices. The problem exists at two levels. The 
first is the managerial level, where the Certified Fraud Examiner might be employed or 
engaged by high-level managers who turn out to be involved in fraudulent practices. A 
Certified Fraud Examiner should always arrange to have a pipeline to levels of management 
above the operations under investigation. Thus, for example, evidence of managerial-level 
complicity can be reported to the board of directors and its audit committee without 
trampling on the confidentiality rule.  
 
The other level — involvement by the directors  or the highest level of management or 
ownership—presents the hard problems. In such cases, the only higher levels exist outside 
the organization, such as the police or similar agencies, the U.S. Department of Justice, 
Department of Defense contract officers, and the like. These and other agencies are 
concerned with law or contract violations. A board of directors may withhold evidence of 
criminal acts, price fixing, or contract overcharges from them.  
 
In general, examiners are not legally obligated to blow the whistle on clients or employers. 
However, circumstances might exist where they are morally and legally justified in making 
disclosures to appropriate outside parties. Such circumstances include those in which a client 
or employer has intentionally involved a Certified Fraud Examiner in its illegal or unethical 
conduct, or when a client or employer has distributed misleading reports based on the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s work. The confidentiality rule should not be viewed as a license 
or excuse for inaction where action may be appropriate to right a wrongful act committed or 
about to be committed by a client or employer. A Certified Fraud Examiner is under no 
obligation to go to jail with wrongdoers. When in doubt, consult legal counsel. 
 
 
Complete Reporting of Material Matters 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall reveal all ma terial matters discovered during the course 
of an examination which, if omitted, could cause a distortion of the facts. 
 
In its simplicity, this rule demands full and fair reporting of the findings made in 
investigations. The two words — material and distortion — are key concepts.  
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1020   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Evidence and conclusions are material if knowledge of them would affect clients’ decisions 
based on a Certified Fraud Examiner’s report. Materiality  is a user-oriented concept. If 
matters omitted from a report were known to the users, and their own perceptions and 
conclusions would be different in light of this knowledge, the omitted information is 
material. Certified Fraud Examiners are placed in the difficult position of determining not 
what they themselves consider important and material, but rather what they think users will 
consider important and material. They need to project a decision-making process onto the 
users instead of simply being introspective.  
 
Therefore, it is very important for Certified Fraud Examiners to learn directly from clients 
and employers the type of information they consider important. Nothing is gained by playing 
a guessing game. A Certified Fraud Examiner should obtain as good an understanding as 
possible of the users’ interests, the information desired, the level of detail needed, and other 
aspects of the users’ needs.  
 
The “distortion of facts” in the rule is cited in reference to omissions. Distortion is clearly 
related to the concept of materiality and users’ decisions. It could likewise refer to the 
matters included in a report. A subtle stretching of the facts to make them look as if they 
support a preconceived conclusion would be a distortion that could cause users to undertake 
inappropriate actions. Sometimes the evidence to support a definitive conclusion or 
recommendation is simply not obtainable—the evidence is missing or depends upon future 
events, for example. The Certified Fraud Examiner’s obligation is to avoid rushing to 
judgment. When matters are not clear, the Certified Fraud Examiner’s report should stress 
the tentative nature of the evidence and withhold judgment. To jump to conclusions could 
be considered a distortion of facts.  
 
 
Professional Improvement 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall continually strive to increase the competence and 
effectiveness of professional services pe rformed under his or her direction. 
 
This rule contains both good advice and a specific directive for behavior. It is an admonition 
to progress toward greater expertise and thus better serve clients and employers.  
The state of the “fraud arts” changes continually. Years ago, investigators needed to learn 
how to cope with computer fraud. Today, Certified Fraud Examiners are faced with a 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1021 
growing array of ways and means for perpetrating frauds. While many of these might not be 
new, or might be variations on old themes, it is still a challenge for Certified Fraud 
Examiners to know about all of them. A continuing learning process is necessary for 
Certified Fraud Examiners to increase their competence and effectiveness in conducting 
fraud examinations.  
 
People who become Certified Fraud Examiners agree to complete 20 hours of continuing 
professional education each year. Course content is not specified in detail, but the 
requirement is that at least ten hours will be spent on technical subjects that contribute 
directly to fraud examination expertise. Certified Fraud Examiners who also are CPAs, CIAs, 
or who hold other professional designations can double-count continuing education hours 
obtained in connection with the other certifications, as long as they meet the criteria for 
fraud examination continuing education. Further details about policies and procedures are 
available from the Association.  
 
Professional ethics for Certified Fraud Examiners is not simply a matter covered by a few 
rules in a formal Code of Professional Ethics. Concepts of proper professional conduct 
permeate all areas of practice. Ethics are the foundation of Certified Fraud Examiners’ self-regulatory 
efforts.  
 
 The principled approach to thoughtful decisions is important in fraud examination work in 
all settings, such as private practice, industrial, government and foreign employment, and 
other working arrangements. The ethics rules might appear to be restrictive, but they are  
for the benefit of the public as well as for the discipline, use, and protection of Certified 
Fraud Examiners. 
 
 
Professional Standards and Practices 
 
General Standards 
Independence and Objectivity 
Certified Fraud Examiners are responsible for maintaining independence in attitude and 
appearance, approaching and conducting fraud examinations in an objective and unbiased 
manner, and ensuring that examining organizations they direct are free from impairments  
to independence. 
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1022   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Qualifications 
Certified Fraud Examiners must possess the skills, knowledge, abilities, and appearance 
needed to perform examinations proficiently and effectively. Certified Fraud Examiners who 
are responsible for directing fraud examinations must ensure they are performed by 
personnel who collectively possess the skills and knowledge necessary to complete 
examinations in accordance with these Standards. Certified Fraud Examiners must maintain 
their qualifications by fulfilling continuing education requirements and adhering to the Code 
of Ethics of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. 
 
Fraud Examinations 
Certified Fraud Examiners must conduct fraud examinations using due professional care, 
with adequate planning and supervision to provide assurance that the objectives are achieved 
within the framework of these standards. Evidence is to be obtained in an efficient, 
thorough, and legal manner. Reports of the results of fraud examinations must be accurate, 
objective, and thorough. 
 
Confidentiality 
Certified Fraud Examiners are responsible for ensuring that they, and examining 
organizations they direct, exercise due care to prevent improper disclosure of confidential or 
privileged information. 
 
Specific Standards 
Independence and Objectivity 
ATTITUDE AND APPEARANCE 
Independence of attitude requires impartiality and fairness in conducting examinations and 
in reaching resulting conclusions and judgments. Certified Fraud Examiners must also be 
sensitive to the appearance of independence so that conclusions and judgments will be 
accepted as impartial by knowledgeable third parties. Certified Fraud Examiners who 
become aware of a situation or relationship that could be perceived to impair independence, 
whether or not actual impairments exist, should inform management immediately and take 
steps to eliminate the perceived impairment, including withdrawing from the examination  
if necessary. 
 
OBJECTIVITY 
To ensure objectivity in performing examinations, Certified Fraud Examiners must maintain 
an independent mental attitude, reach judgments on examination matters without undue 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1023 
influence from others, and avoid being placed in positions where they would be unable  
to work in an objective professional manner. All possible conflicts of interest should  
be disclosed. 
 
ORGANIZATIONAL RELATIONSHIP 
The Certified Fraud Examiner’s reporting relationship should be such that the attitude and 
appearance of independence and objectivity are not jeopardized. Organizational 
independence is achieved when the Certified Fraud Examiner’s function has a mandate to 
conduct independent examinations throughout the organization, or by a reporting 
relationship high enough in the organization to ensure independence of action. 
 
Qualifications
SKILLS, KNOWLEDGE, ABILITIES, AND EXPERIENCE 
Certified Fraud Examiners cannot be expected to have an expert level of skill and knowledge 
for every circumstance that might be encountered in a fraud examination. Nevertheless, 
Certified Fraud Examiners must have sufficient skill and knowledge to recognize when 
additional training or expert guidance is required. It is the responsibility of a Certified Fraud 
Examiner to ensure that necessary skills, knowledge, ability, and experience are acquired or 
available before going forward with a fraud examination.  
 
Certified Fraud Examiners must be skilled in obtaining information from records, 
documents, and people; in analyzing and evaluating information and drawing sound 
conclusions; in communicating the results of fraud examinations, both orally and in writing; 
and in serving as an expert witness when appropriate. 
 
Certified Fraud Examiners must be knowledgeable in investigative techniques, applicable 
laws and rules of evidence, fraud auditing, criminology, and ethics. 
 
CONTINUING EDUCATION 
Certified Fraud Examiners are required to fulfill continuing education requirements 
established by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. Additionally, Certified Fraud 
Examiners are responsible for securing other education necessary for specific fraud 
examination and related fields in which they are individually involved.  
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1024   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
CODE OF ETHICS 
Certified Fraud Examiners are to adhere to the Code of Professional Ethics of the 
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. 
 
Fraud Examination 
DUE PROFESSIONAL CARE 
Due professional care is defined as exercising the care and skill expected of a prudent 
professional in similar circumstances. Certified Fraud Examiners are responsible for ensuring 
that there is sufficient predication for beginning a fraud examination; that said examinations 
are conducted with diligence and thoroughness; that all applicable laws and regulations are 
observed; that appropriate methods and techniques are used; and that said examinations are 
conducted in accordance with these standards. 
 
PLANNING AND SUPERVISION 
Certified Fraud Examiners must plan and supervise fraud examinations in a manner to 
ensure that objectives are achieved within the framework of these standards. 
 
EVIDENCE 
Certified Fraud Examiners must collect evidence, whether exculpatory or incriminating, that 
supports fraud examination results and will be admissible in subsequent proceedings, by 
obtaining and documenting evidence in a manner to ensure that all necessary evidence is 
obtained, and the chain of custody is preserved. 
 
REPORTING 
Reports of the results of a fraud examination, whether written or verbal, must address all 
relevant aspects of the examination and be accurate, objective, and understandable. 
 
In rendering reports to management, clients, or others, Certified Fraud Examiners shall not 
express judgments on the guilt or innocence of any person or persons, regardless of the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s opinion of the preponderance of evidence. Certified Fraud 
Examiners must exercise due professional care when expressing other opinions related to an 
examination, such as the likelihood that a fraud has or has not occurred, and whether or not 
internal controls are adequate. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1025 
Confidentiality 
Certified Fraud Examiners, during fraud examinations, are often privy to highly sensitive and 
confidential information about organizations and individuals. Certified Fraud Examiners 
must exercise due care so as not to purposefully or inadvertently disclose such information 
except as necessary to conduct the examination as required by law. 
 
Predication Standards 
Knowing when to initiate an examination will largely be driven by the source of the 
information. Information can be derived from a number of sources — a complaint, an 
anonymous tip, by accident, or through some proactive effort, such as an audit or survey. 
The value of the information has to be weighed and the creditability evaluated.  
 
The purpose of a preliminary inquiry is to determine if there is some creditable information 
that a fraudulent act has or will occur (a red flag). If so, what is the examiner’s responsibility?  
 
Preliminary inquiries should be conducted expeditiously and not used as a means of holding 
in abeyance a decision of initiating a formal fraud examination. If a sufficient number of 
fraud indicators exist, a fraud examination should be initiated. 
 
Because business activities/transactions are susceptible to fraudulent acts, all examinations 
should be approached with professional skepticism. That is, assume neither dishonesty nor 
unquestioned honesty of management/personnel. 
 
Bribery 
Bribery  is the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting of something of value for the purpose of 
influencing the action of an individual in the discharge of his duties. It can also include the 
securing of advantage over competitors by secret and corrupt dealing with employees or 
agents of prospective purchasers. 
 
Any indication (through audit, tip, complaint, or accidental discovery) that such action 
(bribery) has occurred, may have occurred, or could occur should be investigated until the 
Certified Fraud Examiner has established that it has occurred, or, within reasonable 
certainty, that it did not occur. 
 
In the example given, the fact that there is a major control weakness is the only predication 
needed to investigate the situation further to determine whether there was fraud. 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1026   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Conflicts of Interest 
This generally refers to a clash between public or corporate interest and the private 
pecuniary interest of an individual or individuals. It arises when an officer’s or employee’s 
personal or financial interest conflicts or appears to conflict with his official duties. 
 
Any indication that there may be a conflict of interest or that there appears to be a conflict 
of interest should be reviewed/investigated. This is particularly important if the 
agency/company does not require employees to sign conflict of interest statements annually, 
and there is no active prevention program such as a computer cross check of employee 
phone numbers and addresses with those of contractors and vendors. 
 
Embezzlement 
Embezzlement  is generally the fraudulent appropriation of property by one lawfully entrusted 
with its possession. It is the willful taking or conversion to one’s own use, another’s money 
or property of which the wrongdoer acquired possession lawfully by reason of some office, 
employment, or position of trust. 
 
Any indication that embezzlement has occurred or could be occurring should be 
investigated. If financial statements, inventory, or other documents appear out of order, no 
matter how innocuous or nonmaterial, a preliminary review should be made to determine if 
it is accidental or if a full scale investigation should be conducted. Again, the Certified Fraud 
Examiner should follow the situation until he is reasonably assured that there is no active 
fraud taking place. 
 
False Financial Statements 
This includes any false statement with regard to a corporation’s financial condition. It means 
something more than merely untrue or erroneous information. It also implies that the 
statement is decidedly untrue and deceitful, and made with the intention to deceive a person 
to whom the false statement is made or exhibited. 
 
Any indication that financial statements are not accurate requires further review to determine 
the reasons for their inaccuracy. While there may be legitimate reasons for the apparent 
inaccuracies, it is incumbent on the Certified Fraud Examiner to review the situation enough 
to determine those reasons and document his inquiry. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1027 
False Statements 
False statements  include oral or written statements made knowingly false, or made recklessly 
without honest belief in their truth, and with the purpose to mislead or deceive. 
 
Any apparent inaccurate statements should be reviewed and the reasons for the inaccuracies 
documented, including the individuals responsible for the statements and the rationale 
behind them. If the inaccuracies seem more than minor discrepancies, or the reasons for the 
discrepancies appear unjustifiable, a full review may be necessary. 
 
Theft 
Theft  is the taking of personal property belonging to another from his possession, or from 
the possession of some person holding the same for him without his consent, with the intent 
to deprive the owner of the value of the same, and appropriating it to the use and benefit of 
the person taking it. 
 
Larceny 
Larceny  includes obtaining possession of property by fraud, trick, or device with a 
preconceived design or intent to appropriate, convert, or steal. 
 
For larceny and theft, if there is any indication or pattern that property is missing, it is 
important that the Certified Fraud Examiner review the situation to determine if a full- scale 
investigation is warranted.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  CFE Code of Professional Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1101




:


acf code of profession ethic
i a certifi fraud examin shall at all time demonstr a commit to
profession and dilig in the perform of hi or her duti
ii a certifi fraud examin shall not engag in ani illeg or uneth
conduct or ani activ which would constitut a conflict of interest
iii a certifi fraud examin shall at all time exhibit the highest level of
integr in the perform of all profession assign and will accept
onli assign for which there is reason expect that the
assign will be complet with profession compet
iv a certifi fraud examin will compli with law order of the court and
will testifi to matter truthfulli and without bia or prejudic
v a certifi fraud examin in conduct examin will obtain evid
or other document to establish a reason basi for ani opinion
render no opinion shall be express regard the guilt or innoc of
ani person or parti
vi a certifi fraud examin sha ll not reveal ani confidenti inform
obtain dure a profession engag without proper author
vii a certifi fraud examin shall reveal all materi matter discov dure
the cours of an examin which if omit could caus a distort of the
fact
viii a certifi fraud examin shall continu strive to increas the
compet and effect of profession servic perform under hi or
her direct
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41002 2011 fraud examin manual
the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic wa creat by the board of
regent of the associ of certifi fraud examin and adopt januari 1 1989
commit to profession and dilig
a certifi fraud examin shall at all time demonstr commit to
profession and dilig in the perform of hi or her duti
profession
profession is a qualiti desir by most peopl but it is obtain at a price
profession exist on two basic level 1 for the profession group as a whole and 2
for the individu certifi fraud examin consid first the profession group as
a whole
peopl frequent refer to profess profession men and women and profession
activ without defin the mean of the concept profession some fraud
examin sai i might not know how to defin it but i know it when i see it the us
suprem court onc said the same thing about pornographi the five princip
characterist that help differenti profession field of endeavor from other
vocat ar
a bodi of special knowledg acquir by formal educ
admiss to the profess govern by standard of profession qualif
recognit and accept by societi of profession statu and concurr recognit
and accept of social respons by the profession
standard of conduct govern relationship of the profession with client colleagu
and the public
a nation organ devot to the advanc of the oblig of the
profession group
special knowledg and formal educ
a fraud examin work involv special knowledg deriv from sever other field
such as account audit criminolog investig and law a profess might not
have a bodi of knowledg truli uniqu unto itself but it should have on that ha a
mystiqu requir studi comprehens and practic and be over and abov the
everydai abil other peopl might possess
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41003
continu profession educ is becom a hallmark of profession in recent
year ongo effort to increas compet and effect have becom requir by
some profess the american institut of certifi public account ha led the wai
with the requir for 120 hour of extra train everi three year to maintain and
increas profession compet a major of the state board of account now
requir continu educ as a prerequisit for renew cpa licens the associ
of certifi fraud examin requir 20 hour of continu profession educ everi
12month period half of which must be directli relat to fraud detect or deterr
profession admiss standard
the most highli esteem profess and some occup that ar mere regul
govern admiss to their rank by qualif contain in state law if legal recognit
is consid a requisit of a profess then the number of profess is quit larg
rang from doctor of medicin to barber some profess such as certifi intern
auditor or certifi fraud examin ar not regul by state or feder statut mani
group have the statu of profess without the benefit of licens law and the fraud
examin profess is on of these
certif examin ar offer in mani profess such as law medicin real
estat insur financ account manag public account and intern audit
the uniform cfe examin and certif is part of profession recognit for
fraud examin
experi is requir for mani but not all profession licens and certif
experi of on or two year is requir in most state for the cpa certif experi
is requir to obtain the certifi intern auditor design design as a certifi
fraud examin requir at least two year of experi in combin with other
qualif
social recognit a reciproc relationship
no group of practition can becom a profess mere by declar itself to be on
societi must acknowledg the group as a profession bodi at present fraud examin ar
at the stage of becom a selfdeclar profess histor other profess had the
same start point modern medicin overcam it root in magic account rose from
the level of bookkeep intern auditor advanc social goal by present a respons
front to congress and other public bodi the list goe on
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41004 2011 fraud examin manual
social recognit howev is not necessarili perman societi will not continu to
honor as profession ani group that fail to serv a broadbas social and public interest
thu the other side to the coin of recognit is certifi fraud examin must
reciproc and accept the social respons inher in a profession statu that serv
the public interest
standard of conduct
on wai to achiev the social recognit that goe with profession is to adher to the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic other profess have such code
thei ar the written version of moral philosophi and valu especi relev to the
group fraud examin and other profession must observ their code with an awar
of the societi around them care must be taken that rule ar not creat and follow in a
selfserv manner inim to behavior expect by the public
possess and follow a set of behavior rule is on thing possess and follow a set
that meet public expect is anoth other profess law architectur and
account to name three have found themselv under attack from the us feder trade
commiss and the us depart of justic when their rule were perceiv to have
introduc unwarr restraint of trade while the certifi fraud examin code of
profession ethic might not seem to contain such rule thei might come under attack in
some futur differ set certifi fraud examin must be prepar to experi
chang when appropri chang is necessari
individu fraud examin
when the focu of profession is turn to the individu certifi fraud examin it
featur for the group as a whole should not be forgotten the individu member is
presum to possess a bodi of knowledg on hi admiss to the group and attain of
the certifi fraud examin certif the individu is expect to adher to the code of
ethic and maintain membership in the nation organ along with these featur the
individu certifi fraud examin exhibit profession by continu strive to
honor the recognit grant by the public in daytodai life thi is accomplish by
exercis dilig in perform certifi fraud examin work
dilig
the dilig in perform hi or her duti phrase in the rule refer to sever activ
that collect defin highqual fraud examin work thei includ plan
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41005
assign and supervis assist and colleagu avoid conflict of interest
perform with compet obtain suffici evid to establish a basi for opinion
maintain confidenti relat and avoid distort of fact these activ ar the
subject of other rule in the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic and
thei will be discuss in more detail later
legal and ethic conduct and conflict of interest
a certifi fraud examin shall not engag in ani illeg or uneth conduct or ani
activ which would constitut a conflict of interest
thi rule is a composit of three prohibit illeg conduct uneth conduct and conflict
of interest
illeg conduct
the prohibit of illeg conduct seem straightforward some activ might be obvious
illeg but the legal statu of other might not be so clear a fraud examin is alwai well
advis to consult an attornei when question situat aris at the same time
howev it might be difficult to know ahead of time whether such a consult is
necessari consid the follow legalrel problem but rememb that thi chapter on
ethic is not intend to be your primari guid to legal matter
libel and slander
libel and slander can caus person injuri and subject a fraud examin to a lawsuit for
damag libel is a written defam of so meon els charact slander is a spoken
defam the content of a libel or slander messag must
contain word that injur anoth person charact or reput or hold him up
to ridicul
be commun oral or in write to other peopl
caus an actual damag to the person who is the subject of the commun
the risk involv in libel and slander ar reason for have the rule in the certifi fraud
examin code that prohibit express of opinion on the guilt or innoc of peopl
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41006 2011 fraud examin manual
fals imprison
fals imprison can mean more than put a person behind bar court have found
mani mean of detain to be fals imprison includ lock an employe in a
store remov a distributor from a car and detain a wit by forc even though
drastic action might be essenti a fraud examin must accomplish hi task legal
compound a feloni
the crimin act of compound a feloni can result from particip in a trade for
restitut for agre to forgo prosecut while plea bargain might be accept under
the supervis of a court certifi fraud examin should be veri care and should
obtain legal advic when negoti privat deal
some rule for profession insert the word knowingli in relat to illeg activ
sai on should not knowingli be a parti to an illeg activ the certifi fraud
examin code doe not includ thi wai out certifi fraud examin ar gener not
entitl to claim ignor of the law thei ar expect to know a consider amount
of law in connect with investig and thei ar expect to know when to consult
a lawyer
uneth conduct
the prohibit of uneth conduct is complic these materi have present an
arrai of issu in moral philosophi and ethic think intertwin consider of
principl and valu thi latter part is set forth in the certifi fraud examin code of
profession ethic legitim question ar e what manner of uneth conduct is
meant by thi rule doe it refer to gener matter of moral philosophi and ethic or is it
applic limit onli to the rule in thi code
a narrow focu on fraud examin profession would center attent onli on the
rule in the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic a broader socialrespons
focu would go beyond the code to the interact of the fraud examin
with other peopl affect by hi choic the broader focu is more consist with the
concept of profession becaus the code itself is a limit set of rule a fraud
examin must take person respons for decis and be awar that other
profession ar often critic for adher too rigidli to their code lawyer face harsh
critic when thei seem to hide knowledg of crimin act in their privileg
commun doctor ar often critic for the thing thei tell their patient about
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41007
termin ill profess ar critic for have special rule that seem to permit
their member to act contrari to social expect
conflict of interest and independ consider
the term conflict of interest in the rule beg for definit try to enumer the parti
whose interest might conflict the certifi fraud examin the certifi fraud
examin client for exampl client a mai conflict with client b or with client c the
certifi fraud examin employ the public innoc bystand and law
enforc agenc ar the first to come to mind these parti ar involv in almost
everi investig the line that connect these with each other and with the fraud
examin could look like a spaghetti bowl of multipl relationship decid
whether a conflict or a commun of interest exist depend on the fact of each
particular situat
nevertheless some conflict to avoid ar clear enough a certifi fraud examin
emploi fulltim by a compani should not engag in other job that creat a hardship or
loss to the employ a fraud examin should not be a doubl agent emploi by on
compani but retain by anoth compani or person to infiltr the employ and
transmit insid inform unless of cours the emploi compani agre to the
arrang in order to apprehend other parti emploi by the compani a certifi
fraud examin should not accept engag from both side to a controversyjust
like lawyer ar prohibit from repres both parti in a transact lawsuit or trial
conflict of interest and independ ar relat the american institut of certifi
public account aicpa includ independ and avoid of conflict of interest
in it code of profession conduct some particular from the aicpa mai be relev in
part for the certifi fraud examin consid the follow from the aicpa code of
profession conduct
independ will be consid to be im pair for audit engag if an aicpa
member had ani of the follow transa ction interest or relationship
ani direct or materi indirect financ ial interest in the enterpris under audit
ani joint close held busi invest with the enterpris under audit or with ani
offic director or princip stockhold thereof that wa materi in relat to the
member net worth to the net worth of the member firm
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41008 2011 fraud examin manual
ani loan to or from the enterpris under audit or ani offic director or princip
stockhold of the enterpris except immateri loan home mortgag and loan
secur by properti
ani managerialtyp connect with the enterpris under audit such as a promot
underwrit or vote truste director or offic or in ani capac equival to that of
a member of manag or of an employe
these rule for auditor exist specif to convei to the public a percept of
independ independ and conflict avoid ar enhanc by refrain from have
financi and manageri interest in client or in joint cooper with client manag
and director after all thei might be a suspect in an investig when a certifi fraud
examin work as an employe of a compani the prohibit about employ ar not
relev becaus the employeremploye relationship is known to the employ who is the
client and recipi of ani report in such case independ and conflict should be
consid in relat to all the other parti involv certainli a mental condit of
object and honesti then govern the relat between the certifi fraud examin and
hi employ if the cfe doe have a perceiv conflict it can usual be avoid through
adequ disclosur
integr and compet
a certifi fraud examin shall at all time exhibit the highest level of integr in the
performa nce of all profession assign and will accept onli assign for which there
is reason expect that the assign will be complet with profession
compet
thi rule contain two part the first deal with integr and the second with compet
compet here is relat to dilig as discuss previous in relat to the first rule in
the certifi fraud examin code
integr
if you were ask to name a desir person characterist integr is on that would
rank high on the scale along with honesti truth trustworthi and loyalti
outsid observ of certifi fraud examin activ will look for sign of integr as a
signal that trust is warrant howev integr hardli exist apart from other
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41009
characterist wellknown in moral philosophi and recogn in the certifi fraud
examin code of profession ethic
integr requir honesti truth trustworthi and confidenti it requir
subordin of desir for person gain to the interest of client employ and the
public it requir independ of mental attitud and avoid of conflict of interest
integr is all these thing wrap up into on word
in addit integr mean that a certifi fraud examin ought to have a well
develop sens of moral philosophyan abil to analyz situat where no rule of
the certifi fraud examin code ar specif applic and to be abl to distinguish
right from wrong it doe not mean howev that a certifi fraud examin must be
perfect in all technic matter nor doe it mean that certifi fraud examin and
other cannot have honest differ of opinion in the cours of a fraud examin
inadvert error mistak of judgment and other problem might caus conflict in such
case a certifi fraud examin can preserv integr either by admit error or by
convincingli justifi a differ of percept or opinion
profession compet
profession compet refer to how well certifi fraud examin do their job
determin of compet alwai depend on the specif fact and circumst of the
assign compet is best understood in the context of the prudent practition the idea
of a prudent profession practition is present in other social scienc theori for exampl
the econom man of econom theori and the reason man of law thi concept can
be summar for fraud examin as follow
a prudent practition is assum to have a knowledg of the philosophi and practic of
fraud examin to have the degre of tr ain experi and skill common to the
averag fraud examin to have the abil to recogn indic of fraud and to keep
abreast of develop in the perpetr and detect of fraud compet requir the
cfe to be acquaint with the compani activ function or program under
investig to review the method of control in oper to obtain suffici evid
pertin to the suspect fraud or illeg acti viti to be respons to unusu event and
unfamiliar circumst to persist until ani reason doubt about the evid have
been elimin and to exercis caution in instruct assist and review their work
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41010 2011 fraud examin manual
profession compet also demand attent to three kind of interfer that can
damag the independ and qualiti of a certifi fraud examin work fraud
examin who permit these condit to interfer with the assign demonstr less
than the desir level of profession compet the three type of interfer ar
program investig and report
program
fraud examin must remain free from interfer by manag who try to restrict specifi
or modifi the procedur thei need to perform includ ani attempt to assign personnel
or otherwis to control the examin work occasion client or employ manag try
to limit access to inform or to other personnel or to limit the amount of time avail
for the assign
investig
when appropri certifi fraud examin must have free access to book record
correspond and other evid thei must have the cooper of manag or other
employe without ani attempt to interpret or screen evid
report
client or employ manag should not be allow to overrul the certifi fraud
examin judgment on the appropri content of a report integr is destroi and
judgment is subordin when the certifi fraud examin is compel to alter a report
or to omit import inform or to misstat fact certifi fraud examin must not
let ani feel of misguid loyalti to the client employ or other sourc of conflict of
interest interfer with their oblig to report fulli and fairli
profession skeptic
fraud examin must alwai perform their work with an attitud of skeptic and begin
with the belief that someth is wrong or someon is commit a fraud depend of
cours on the natur of the assign and the preliminari inform avail thi
attitud mai make fraud examin extens and expens relax of thi initi
attitud of skeptic occur onli when the evid show no sign of fraudul activ
at no time is a certifi fraud examin entitl to assum a fraud problem doe not
exist profession skeptic can be dispel onli by evid as a result opinion or
attest about a fraudfre environ ar absolut prohibit for certifi
fraud examin
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41011
court order and testimoni
a certifi fraud examin will compli with law order of the court and will testifi
to matter truthfulli and wi thout bia or prejudic
the essenc of thi rule is truthtel the part about compli with law order of the
court is a direct not to flee from a summon or subpoena issu by a court even
though the rule specifi court it is reason to extend it to other agenc that have
the legal power to issu such order such as congression committe grand juri
special prosecutor and quasijudici administr agenc sometim legal counsel
might devis stratagem to avoid immedi servic of or attent to a summon fraud
examin can listen to such legal advic but thei also must weigh it against their own
knowledg of proper and legal behavior in some case a second legal opinion might be
advis the fraud examin could be on shaki ground with a defens of my lawyer
told me to hide when accus of obstruct of justic the lawyer might be in the cell
next door
truth testimoni often present strateg problem a fraud examin even on who is an
attornei should alwai be repres by counsel in a courtroom deposit or other
testimoni set the lawyer own sai is an attornei who repres himself ha a
fool for a client counsel is invalu for protect a fraud examin wit from
improp question
when testimoni is sought in examin or crossexamin a certifi fraud examin
should alwai respond to the question that ar askedno more and no less the attornei
conduct the examin ha the respons to ask the right question and the fraud
examin counsel ha the respons to object to mislead improp or irrelev
question the fraud examin counsel also ha the oblig to correct ani problem with
the crossexamin a help fraud exam iner who tri to embellish the answer with
addit materi might offend the court or do unintent harm to the case be made
for on parti or the other of cours a fraud examin mai invok hi own constitut
right upon the advic of counsel
answer should alwai be deliv without bia or prejudic it is the lawyer job to be
bias and prejudicedin the context of the ad versari judici systemestablish the case
for hi own client or for the govern the greatest danger for deliv bias or
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41012 2011 fraud examin manual
prejudici testimoni exist when the broad question is tell the court about your find
in your fraud examin thi is an open end invit to spill the bean if counsel
doe not object the certifi fraud examin is in the spotlight howev respond to
such an invit amount to deliv a report and the next rule in the certifi fraud
examin code of profession ethic can be us as a guid
reason evidenti basi for opinion
a fraud examin in conduct examin will obtain evid or other
document to establish a reason basi for ani opinion render ed no opinion shall
be express regard the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti
evidenti basi for opinion
the account profess ha similar rule some of which ar in it code of ethic some
in it technic practic standard here is a sampl of it provis
suffici compet evidenti matter is to be obtain through in spection observ
inquiri and confirm to afford a reason basi for an opinion regard the
financi statement under examin aicpa gener accept audit
standard
intern auditor should collect analyz int rpret and document inform to support
audit result the institut of intern auditor inc standard for the
practic of intern audit
a member shall obtain suffici relev data to afford a re ason basi for conclus
or recommend in relat to ani profession servic perform aicpa code of
profession conduct
a practition should obtain suffici relev data to afford a reason basi for
conclus or recommend aicpa manag advisori servic
standard
suffici evid shall be obta in to provid a reason ba si for the conclus that is
express in the report aicpa attest standard
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41013
suffici compet evid should be obta in to provid a reason basi for the
examin report aicpa standard for examin of prospect
financi inform
clearli the account profess consid suffici relev data evid a
compel standard of practic if not a matter of profession ethic evid can be
defin as all the inform that influenc a decis maker in reach decis that can
take the form of a report a set of recommend or similar product
evid might be quantit or qualit it mai be object or it mai have subject
qualiti it mai be absolut compel to a decis or it mai be onli mildli persuas
the certifi fraud examin task is to collect and evalu a suffici amount of
relev evid to afford a reason and logic basi for decis
auditor sometim sai thei gather evid to show that financi statement ar
present properli or that control procedur ar oper effect thei ar follow
a timetest method of investig that consist of three part
recogn the problem or issu subject to investig
gather suffici relev evid about it
analyz the evid and reach a conclus about the problem or issu
most auditor proposit ar express posit such as the cash balanc is
accur state howev an auditor will actu alli seek evid to show that the cash
balanc is not properli state imagin a cash balanc that is the sum of 110 separ bank
account an audit team will probabl sampl these account instead of look at all of
them the auditor look for evid that some of these cash balanc ar misstat if
thei fail to find ani misstat in a suffici larg sampl thei have not prove that
the total is proper but thei have no reason to believ that it is materi misstat
a liter report on thi kind of work would be call neg assur in which an auditor
would sai noth came to my attent to make me believ the cash balanc is materi
misstat thi statement of neg assur is an accur report of the audit process as
long as the attent consist of suffici re levant evid the report is us auditor
might not know without ani doubt that the balanc is proper but thei ar entitl to act as
though it is becaus thei have analyz suffici relev evid
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41014 2011 fraud examin manual
some fraud examin can take on thi same charact certifi fraud examin will be
assign to seek the truth about some busi record or to try to determin whether some
control procedur have fail the certifi fraud examin will seek evid of
misstat or failur and if none is found will report the posit result
in other case a client or employ might alreadi know that fraud theft shortag control
failur or other such event have occur the certifi fraud examin assign is
to then determin how the improp activ is be carri out by whom and to what
extent thi kind of fraud investig demand suffici evid exampl and suitabl
document to prove the howwhomext find in these case the neg
assur type of conclus is not appropria te certifi fraud examin must obtain the
evid to show the actual howwhomext conclus
guilt and innoc
the rule that prohibit opinion regard the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti is a
rule of prudenc the aicpa had a rule that prohibit cpa from attest that a
compani financi forecast would be achiev most cpa reaction to the rule wa why
would anyon want to do someth so dumb the gener answer wa that without the
explicit rule someon might give an achiev attest the actual event would fall
short and the cpa and all other cpa would suffer critic the rule wa a rule of
prudenc clearli it is prudent for a certifi fraud examin to refrain from usurp the
role of juri in a courtroom no good attornei would ask a certifi fraud examin for
such a conclus and no alert judg would allow such testimoni
in most situat the fraud examin job is to present the evid in hi report such
evid might constitut a convinc case point to the guilt or innoc of a person
but a clear line should be drawn between a report that essenti sai here is the evid
and the reason conclus that can be drawn from it and on that step over the line
and sai thi person is guilti of the crime of fraud
whether or not a person is guilti or innoc of a crime is not a decis for the fraud
examin to make the fraud examin mai draw reason conclus base on the
evid on of those conclus mai be that the suspect individu stole monei
misrepres a transact or conceal fund there is no prohibit in the code of
profession ethic on express such a conclus provid it ha a reason basi in
fact the prohibit involv the next step the suspect took the monei without
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41015
permiss and is therefor guilti of the crime of theft the individu mai have taken the
monei without permiss but whether or not the individu is guilti of a crime is a
determin for the judici system not the fraud examin
confidenti inform
a certifi fraud examin shall not reveal ani confidenti inform obtain dure
a profession engag without proper author
confidenti inform rule in profession code of ethic have the potenti to creat
enorm conflict conflict of principl and conflict of valu consid thi possibl
exchang between a lawyer and client
client
becaus you have taken my case on thi fraud charg i think you should know more about
my background
lawyer
go ahead
client
three year ago i particip in an arm robberi and wa never caught my gun went off
and kill the storekeep on of my buddi wa accus and convict he had all hi
appeal and is schedul to be execut tomorrow what can you do
lawyer
noth
noth mai be oversimplifi the situat but the point is that lawyer have a keen
awar of the privileg inform right of their client most lawyer will stoutli
defend their duti not to endang thi client even at the cost of a life most laymen ar
shock at thi particular on comment respond to a lawyer defend the posit
with a sharp retort do you mean you will sa crific an innoc man to a rule thi
incredul is well aim it bring into sharp focu two conflict valu the benefit of a
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41016 2011 fraud examin manual
longstand rule of legal practic and the sanctiti of life itself not all situat ar thi
dramat but certifi fraud examin can nevertheless get into similar conflict
confidenti inform for all practic purpos is ani and all inform a certifi fraud
examin might obtain in the cours of work whether it be from the compani or client for
whom an investig is perform or from ani other sourc consult dure the work
the rule of confidenti and privileg inform ar base on the belief that thei
facilit a free flow of inform between parti to the relationship the natur of a fraud
examin might make it necessari for certifi fraud examin to have access to
sensit inform client and employ would be less like to reveal such inform
or to provid access to sourc if thei could not trust a certifi fraud examin to keep
it confidenti
privileg inform is inform that cannot be demand even by a court common law
privileg exist for husbandwif and attorneycli relationship and physicianpati and
priestpenit relationship have obtain the privileg through state statut the attorneycli
privileg is statutori in some jurisdict certifi fraud examin do not have ani
such privileg in common law or by statut in all the recogn privileg relationship the
profession person is oblig to observ the privileg it can be waiv onli by the client
patient or penit these peopl ar said to be the holder of the privileg likewis a
certifi fraud examin client or employ is the holder of the confid the law
section of the fraud examin manual contain addit inform on thi subject
the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic doe not assum a privileg
statu for the fraud examin clientemploy relationship howev the examin client or
employ hold the kei known as proper author in the rule if the client or
employ consent to disclosur of inform otherwis consid confidenti then the
certifi fraud examin can transmit it to other sometim consent is given when the
consent doe not know exactli what inform will be convei even with consent
therefor a certifi fraud examin should be care to let the clientemploy know
what the consent cover the best rule of prudenc is to let the clientemploy make the
actual disclosur by transmit the certifi fraud examin report work paper or
other document then the client not onli know what is be disclos but is the on
make the disclosur
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41017
confidenti inform relationship do not die with the sever of the certifi fraud
examinercli or certifi fraud examineremploy relationship the confidenti rule
doe not permit disclosur after the assign is finish or there is no claus permit
disclosur after a certifi fraud examin is fire resign or retir from an emploi
organ examin who write kiss and te ll memoir about the inner secret of an
organ violat the confidenti rule in the most blatant manner
proper author
as just mention on form of proper author izat is the consent given by a certifi
fraud examin client or employ addit form of author ar possibl other
profess have except that void the confidenti or privileg rule lawyer can
reveal client confid if do so is necessari to prevent a futur crime cpa ar
not bound by confidenti when respond to a court subpoena or summon
when particip in qualiti control review or when initi complaint to their
disciplinari bodi
likewis certifi fraud examin ar not bound by confidenti when do so would
make them parti to a violat of the law care must be taken about remain silent when
silenc could be constru as obstruct justic or engag in a conspiraci the advic of
an attornei should be sought in such case
question mai aris over inform receiv from someon be investig suppos
an employe be question tell the certifi fraud examin someth in confid
concern hi role in a theft fraud examin must rememb that the confidenti
relationship run first to the client or employ and that thi promis of confidenti is
understood to exist without be spoken in the case of the employeeinform the fraud
examin doe not have an understood or unspoken promis of confidenti and is not
bound by the rule with respect to the inform if the fraud examin promis the
employeeinform confidenti the promis will probabl turn out to be a lie becaus
the examin ha also promis the clientemploy a report on all the relev evid a
certifi fraud examin should not promis confidenti or lenienc to an inform for
the purpos of extract testimoni a certifi fraud examin reput and
effect depend upon the integr of the certifi fraud examin word
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41018 2011 fraud examin manual
relat to conflict of interest
anoth aspect of the confidenti rule concern the possibl that a fraud examin
might us inform that is part of a conflict of interest with the clientemploy the
institut of intern auditor code of ethic c ontain languag that make thi relat veri
clear member and certifi intern auditor shall be prudent in the us of inform
acquir in the cours of their duti thei shall not us confidenti inform for ani
person gain nor in ani manner which would be contrari to law or detriment to the
welfar of their organ clearli us inform for person gain or us
inform to the detriment of the clientemploy is a close kin to ly and steal the
lie come from the certifi fraud examin break a pledg to maintain confidenti
and the steal come from harm the client or employ
when a certifi fraud examin face the potenti for person gain from confidenti
client inform a conflict of interest existsth certifi fraud examin desir for
wealth vs the clientemploy desir for and trust in confidenti servic on of the
worst kind of ethic breach would be to break the promis of confidenti for person
gain it is mere greed at work
public inform
it is tempt to consid confidenti inform to be nonpubl inform instead of
all inform on the ground that public inform is avail to everyon anywai
such an interpret is not appropri public inform might be hard to find andor
expens to obtain and analyz after all the client or compani paid the certifi fraud
examin a fee or salari to find and us public inform and a certifi fraud
examin disclosur of it would give other a free ride when inform is public let
other find it for themselv
some might argu that no confid is abus if a certifi fraud examin point other
to public inform that is publish and wide distribut such as financi statement in
annual report or stori in nation newspap such as the wall street journal the next step
is to consid public inform that is not publish such as real estat deed restrict
lien on properti and credit record defend a breach of confid on the ground it
wa public anywai is a weak excus mere revel of the sourc of inform impart
signal of import that ar not public and that mai guid other to inform a client or
employ believ is confidenti
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41019
blow the whistl
difficult problem aris over certifi fraud examin oblig to blow the whistl
about client or employ shadi or illeg practic the problem exist at two level the
first is the manageri level where the certifi fraud examin might be emploi or
engag by highlevel manag who turn out to be involv in fraudul practic a
certifi fraud examin should alwai arrang to have a pipelin to level of manag
abov the oper under investig thu for exampl evid of manageriallevel
complic can be report to the board of director and it audit committe without
trampl on the confidenti rule
the other level involv by the director or the highest level of manag or
ownershippres the hard problem in such case the onli higher level exist outsid
the organ such as the polic or similar agenc the us depart of justic
depart of defens contract offic and the like these and other agenc ar
concern with law or contract violat a board of director mai withhold evid of
crimin act price fix or contract overcharg from them
in gener examin ar not legal oblig to blow the whistl on client or employ
howev circumst might exist where thei ar moral and legal justifi in make
disclosur to appropri outsid parti such circumst includ those in which a client
or employ ha intention involv a certifi fraud examin in it illeg or uneth
conduct or when a client or employ ha distribut mislead report base on the
certifi fraud examin work the confidenti rule should not be view as a licens
or excus for inact where action mai be appropri to right a wrong act commit or
about to be commit by a client or employ a certifi fraud examin is under no
oblig to go to jail with wrongdoer when in doubt consult legal counsel
complet report of materi matter
a certifi fraud examin shall reveal all ma terial matter discov dure the cours
of an examin which if omit could caus a distort of the fact
in it simplic thi rule demand full and fair report of the find made in
investig the two word materi and distort ar kei concept
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41020 2011 fraud examin manual
evid and conclus ar materi if knowledg of them would affect client decis
base on a certifi fraud examin report materi is a userori concept if
matter omit from a report were known to the user and their own percept and
conclus would be differ in light of thi knowledg the omit inform is
materi certifi fraud examin ar place in the difficult posit of determin not
what thei themselv consid import and materi but rather what thei think user will
consid import and materi thei need to project a decisionmak process onto the
user instead of simpli be introspect
therefor it is veri import for certifi fraud examin to learn directli from client
and employ the type of inform thei consid import noth is gain by plai
a guess game a certifi fraud examin should obtain as good an understand as
possibl of the user interest the inform desir the level of detail need and other
aspect of the user need
the distort of fact in the rule is cite in refer to omiss distort is clearli
relat to the concept of materi and user decis it could likewis refer to the
matter includ in a report a subtl stretch of the fact to make them look as if thei
support a preconceiv conclus would be a distort that could caus user to undertak
inappropri action sometim the evid to support a definit conclus or
recommend is simpli not obtainableth evid is miss or depend upon futur
event for exampl the certifi fraud examin oblig is to avoid rush to
judgment when matter ar not clear the certifi fraud examin report should stress
the tent natur of the evid and withhold judgment to jump to conclus could
be consid a distort of fact
profession improv
a certifi fraud examin shall continu strive to increas the compet and
effect of profession servic pe rform under hi or her direct
thi rule contain both good advic and a specif direct for behavior it is an admonit
to progress toward greater expertis and thu better serv client and employ
the state of the fraud art chang continu year ago investig need to learn
how to cope with comput fraud todai certifi fraud examin ar face with a
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41021
grow arrai of wai and mean for perpetr fraud while mani of these might not be
new or might be variat on old theme it is still a challeng for certifi fraud
examin to know about all of them a continu learn process is necessari for
certifi fraud examin to increas their compet and effect in conduct
fraud examin
peopl who becom certifi fraud examin agre to complet 20 hour of continu
profession educ each year cours content is not specifi in detail but the
requir is that at least ten hour will be spent on technic subject that contribut
directli to fraud examin expertis certifi fraud examin who also ar cpa cia
or who hold other profession design can doublecount continu educ hour
obtain in connect with the other certif as long as thei meet the criteria for
fraud examin continu educ further detail about polici and procedur ar
avail from the associ
profession ethic for certifi fraud examin is not simpli a matter cover by a few
rule in a formal code of profession ethic concept of proper profession conduct
permeat all area of practic ethic ar the foundat of certifi fraud examin selfregulatori
effort
the principl approach to thought decis is import in fraud examin work in
all set such as privat practic industri govern and foreign employ and
other work arrang the ethic rule might appear to be restrict but thei ar
for the benefit of the public as well as for the disciplin us and protect of certifi
fraud examin
profession standard and practic
gener standard
independ and object
certifi fraud examin ar respons for maintain independ in attitud and
appear approach and conduct fraud examin in an object and unbias
manner and ensur that examin organ thei direct ar free from impair
to independ
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41022 2011 fraud examin manual
qualif
certifi fraud examin must possess the skill knowledg abil and appear
need to perform examin profici and effect certifi fraud examin who
ar respons for direct fraud examin must ensur thei ar perform by
personnel who collect possess the skill and knowledg necessari to complet
examin in accord with these standard certifi fraud examin must maintain
their qualif by fulfil continu educ requir and adher to the code
of ethic of the associ of certifi fraud examin
fraud examin
certifi fraud examin must conduct fraud examin us due profession care
with adequ plan and supervis to provid assur that the object ar achiev
within the framework of these standard evid is to be obtain in an effici
thorough and legal manner report of the result of fraud examin must be accur
object and thorough
confidenti
certifi fraud examin ar respons for ensur that thei and examin
organ thei direct exercis due care to prevent improp disclosur of confidenti or
privileg inform
specif standard
independ and object
attitud and appear
independ of attitud requir imparti and fair in conduct examin and
in reach result conclus and judgment certifi fraud examin must also be
sensit to the appear of independ so that conclus and judgment will be
accept as imparti by knowledg third parti certifi fraud examin who
becom awar of a situat or relationship that could be perceiv to impair independ
whether or not actual impair exist should inform manag immedi and take
step to elimin the perceiv impair includ withdraw from the examin
if necessari
object
to ensur object in perform examin certifi fraud examin must maintain
an independ mental attitud reach judgment on examin matter without undu
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41023
influenc from other and avoid be place in posit where thei would be unabl
to work in an object profession manner all possibl conflict of interest should
be disclos
organiz relationship
the certifi fraud examin report relationship should be such that the attitud and
appear of independ and object ar not jeopard organiz
independ is achiev when the certifi fraud examin function ha a mandat to
conduct independ examin throughout the organ or by a report
relationship high enough in the organ to ensur independ of action
qualif
skill knowledg abil and experi
certifi fraud examin cannot be expect to have an expert level of skill and knowledg
for everi circumst that might be encount in a fraud examin nevertheless
certifi fraud examin must have suffici skill and knowledg to recogn when
addit train or expert guidanc is requir it is the respons of a certifi fraud
examin to ensur that necessari skill knowledg abil and experi ar acquir or
avail befor go forward with a fraud examin
certifi fraud examin must be skill in obtain inform from record
document and peopl in analyz and evalu inform and draw sound
conclus in commun the result of fraud examin both oral and in write
and in serv as an expert wit when appropri
certifi fraud examin must be knowledg in investig techniqu applic
law and rule of evid fraud audit criminolog and ethic
continu educ
certifi fraud examin ar requir to fulfil continu educ requir
establish by the associ of certifi fraud examin addition certifi fraud
examin ar respons for secur other educ necessari for specif fraud
examin and relat field in which thei ar individu involv
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41024 2011 fraud examin manual
code of ethic
certifi fraud examin ar to adher to the code of profession ethic of the
associ of certifi fraud examin
fraud examin
due profession care
due profession care is defin as exercis the care and skill expect of a prudent
profession in similar circumst certifi fraud examin ar respons for ensur
that there is suffici predic for begin a fraud examin that said examin
ar conduct with dilig and thorough that all applic law and regul ar
observ that appropri method and techniqu ar us and that said examin ar
conduct in accord with these standard
plan and supervis
certifi fraud examin must plan and supervis fraud examin in a manner to
ensur that object ar achiev within the framework of these standard
evid
certifi fraud examin must collect evid whether exculpatori or incrimin that
support fraud examin result and will be admiss in subsequ proceed by
obtain and document evid in a manner to ensur that all necessari evid is
obtain and the chain of custodi is preserv
report
report of the result of a fraud examin whether written or verbal must address all
relev aspect of the examin and be accur object and understand
in render report to manag client or other certifi fraud examin shall not
express judgment on the guilt or innoc of ani person or person regardless of the
certifi fraud examin opinion of the preponder of evid certifi fraud
examin must exercis due profession care when express other opinion relat to an
examin such as the likelihood that a fraud ha or ha not occur and whether or not
intern control ar adequ
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41025
confidenti
certifi fraud examin dure fraud examin ar often privi to highli sensit and
confidenti inform about organ and individu certifi fraud examin
must exercis due care so as not to purposefulli or inadvert disclos such inform
except as necessari to conduct the examin as requir by law
predic standard
know when to initi an examin will larg be driven by the sourc of the
inform inform can be deriv from a number of sourc a complaint an
anonym tip by accid or through some proactiv effort such as an audit or survei
the valu of the inform ha to be weigh and the credit evalu
the purpos of a preliminari inquiri is to determin if there is some credit inform
that a fraudul act ha or will occur a red flag if so what is the examin respons
preliminari inquiri should be conduct expediti and not us as a mean of hold
in abey a decis of initi a formal fraud examin if a suffici number of
fraud indic exist a fraud examin should be initi
becaus busi activitiestransact ar suscept to fraudul act all examin
should be approach with profession skeptic that is assum neither dishonesti nor
unquest honesti of managementpersonnel
briberi
briberi is the offer give receiv or solicit of someth of valu for the purpos of
influenc the action of an individu in the discharg of hi duti it can also includ the
secur of advantag over competitor by secret and corrupt deal with employe or
agent of prospect purchas
ani indic through audit tip complaint or accident discoveri that such action
briberi ha occur mai have occur or could occur should be investig until the
certifi fraud examin ha establish that it ha occur or within reason
certainti that it did not occur
in the exampl given the fact that there is a major control weak is the onli predic
need to investig the situat further to determin whether there wa fraud
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41026 2011 fraud examin manual
conflict of interest
thi gener refer to a clash between public or corpor interest and the privat
pecuniari interest of an individu or individu it aris when an offic or employe
person or financi interest conflict or appear to conflict with hi offici duti
ani indic that there mai be a conflict of interest or that there appear to be a conflict
of interest should be reviewedinvestig thi is particularli import if the
agencycompani doe not requir employe to sign conflict of interest statement annual
and there is no activ prevent program such as a comput cross check of employe
phone number and address with those of contractor and vendor
embezzl
embezzl is gener the fraudul appropri of properti by on lawfulli entrust
with it possess it is the will take or convers to on own us anoth monei
or properti of which the wrongdoer acquir possess lawfulli by reason of some offic
employ or posit of trust
ani indic that embezzl ha occur or could be occur should be
investig if financi statement inventori or other document appear out of order no
matter how innocu or nonmateri a preliminari review should be made to determin if
it is accident or if a full scale investig should be conduct again the certifi fraud
examin should follow the situat until he is reason assur that there is no activ
fraud take place
fals financi statement
thi includ ani fals statement with regard to a corpor financi condit it mean
someth more than mere untru or erron inform it also impli that the
statement is decidedli untru and deceit and made with the intent to deceiv a person
to whom the fals statement is made or exhibit
ani indic that financi statement ar not accur requir further review to determin
the reason for their inaccuraci while there mai be legitim reason for the appar
inaccuraci it is incumb on the certifi fraud examin to review the situat enough
to determin those reason and document hi inquiri
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41027
fals statement
fals statement includ oral or written statement made knowingli fals or made recklessli
without honest belief in their truth and with the purpos to mislead or deceiv
ani appar inaccur statement should be review and the reason for the inaccuraci
document includ the individu respons for the statement and the rational
behind them if the inaccuraci seem more than minor discrep or the reason for the
discrep appear unjustifi a full review mai be necessari
theft
theft is the take of person properti belong to anoth from hi possess or from
the possess of some person hold the same for him without hi consent with the intent
to depriv the owner of the valu of the same and appropri it to the us and benefit of
the person take it
larceni
larceni includ obtain possess of properti by fraud trick or devic with a
preconceiv design or intent to appropri convert or steal
for larceni and theft if there is ani indic or pattern that properti is miss it is
import that the certifi fraud examin review the situat to determin if a full scale
investig is warrant
fraud prevent and deterr cfe code of profession standard
2011 fraud examin manual 41101
