2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Commitment to Professionalism and Diligence


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Commitment to Professionalism and Diligence 
  
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, demonstrate commitment to  
professionalism and diligence in the performance of his or her duties. 
 
Professionalism 
Professionalism is a quality desired by most people, but it is obtained at a price. 
Professionalism exists on two basic levels: (1) for the professional group as a whole and (2) 
for the individual Certified Fraud Examiner. Consider first the professional group as  
a whole.  
 
People frequently refer to professions, professional men and women, and professional 
activities without defining the meaning of the concept “professionalism.” Some fraud 
examiners say: “I might not know how to define it, but I know it when I see it.” The U.S. 
Supreme Court once said the same thing about pornography. The five principal 
characteristics that help differentiate professional fields of endeavor from other  
vocations are:  
• A body of specialized knowledge acquired by formal education. 
• Admission to the profession governed by standards of professional qualifications. 
• Recognition and acceptance by society of professional status, and concurrent recognition 
and acceptance of social responsibility by the professional. 
• Standards of conduct governing relationships of the professional with clients, colleagues, 
and the public. 
• A national organization devoted to the advancement of the obligations of the 
professional group. 
 
Specialized Knowledge and Formal Education  
A fraud examiner’s work involves specialized knowledge derived from several other fields, 
such as accounting, auditing, criminology, investigation, and law. A profession might not 
have a body of knowledge truly unique unto itself, but it should have one that has a 
“mystique,” requiring study, comprehension,  and practice, and be over and above the 
everyday abilities other people might possess.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1003 
Continuing professional education is becoming a hallmark of professionalism. In recent 
years, ongoing efforts to increase competence and effectiveness have become required by 
some professions. The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has led the way 
with the requirements for 120 hours of extra training every three years to maintain and 
increase professional competence. A majority of the state boards of accountancy now 
require continuing education as a prerequisite for renewing CPAs’ licenses. The Association 
of Certified Fraud Examiners requires 20 hours of continuing professional education every 
12-month period, half of which must be directly related to fraud detection or deterrence.  
 
Professional Admission Standards  
The most highly esteemed professions, and some occupations that are merely regulated, 
govern admission to their ranks by qualifications contained in state law. If legal recognition 
is considered a requisite of a profession, then the number of “professions” is quite large, 
ranging from doctors of medicine to barbers. Some professions (such as Certified Internal 
Auditor or Certified Fraud Examiner) are not regulated by state or federal statutes. Many 
groups have the status of “profession” without the benefit of licensing laws, and the fraud 
examiner profession is one of these.  
 
Certification examinations are offered in many professions, such as law, medicine, real  
estate, insurance, finance, accounting management, public accounting, and internal auditing. 
The Uniform CFE Examination and certification is part of professional recognition for 
fraud examiners.  
 
Experience is required for many, but not all, professional licenses and certifications. 
Experience of one or two years is required in most states for the CPA certificate. Experience 
is required to obtain the Certified Internal Auditor designation. Designation as a Certified 
Fraud Examiner requires at least two years of experience in combination with other 
qualifications. 
 
Social Recognition: A Reciprocal Relationship  
No group of practitioners can become a “profession” merely by declaring itself to be one. 
Society must acknowledge the group as a professional body. At present, fraud examiners are 
at the stage of becoming a self-declared profession. Historically, other professions had the 
same starting point. Modern medicine overcame  its roots in magic. Accountants rose from 
the level of bookkeepers. Internal auditors advanced social goals by presenting a responsible 
front to Congress and other public bodies. The list goes on.  
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1004   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Social recognition, however, is not necessarily permanent. Society will not continue to  
honor as professional any group that fails to serve a broad-based social and public interest. 
Thus the other side to the coin of recognition is: Certified Fraud Examiners must 
reciprocate and accept the social responsibility inherent in a professional status that serves 
the public interest.  
 
Standards of Conduct 
One way to achieve the social recognition that goes with professionalism is to adhere to the 
Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics. Other professions have such codes. 
They are the written versions of moral philosophy and values especially relevant to the 
group. Fraud examiners and other professionals must observe their codes with an awareness 
of the society around them. Care must be taken that rules are not created and followed in a 
self-serving manner, inimical to behavior expected by the public.  
 
Possessing and following a set of behavior rules is one thing, possessing and following a set 
that meets public expectations is another. Other professions (law, architecture, and 
accounting, to name three) have found themselves under attack from the U.S. Federal Trade 
Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice when their rules were perceived to have 
introduced unwarranted restraints of trade. While the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of 
Professional Ethics might not seem to contain such rules, they might come under attack in 
some future, different setting. Certified Fraud Examiners must be prepared to experience 
change, when appropriate change is necessary.  
 
Individual Fraud Examiners 
When the focus of professionalism is turned to the individual Certified Fraud Examiner, its 
features for the group as a whole should not be forgotten. The individual member is 
presumed to possess a body of knowledge on his admission to the group and attainment of 
the Certified Fraud Examiner certificate. The individual is expected to adhere to the code of 
ethics and maintain membership in the national organization. Along with these features, the 
individual Certified Fraud Examiner exhibits professionalism by continually striving to 
honor the recognition granted by the public. In day-to-day life, this is accomplished by 
exercising diligence in performing Certified Fraud Examiner work.  
 
Diligence 
The “diligence in performing his or her duties” phrase in the rule refers to several activities 
that collectively define high-quality fraud examination work. They include planning 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1005 
assignments and supervising assistants and colleagues, avoiding conflicts of interest, 
performing with competence, obtaining sufficient evidence to establish a basis for opinions, 
maintaining confidential relations, and avoiding distortion of facts. These activities are the 
subjects of other rules in the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics, and 
they will be discussed in more detail later.  
 
 



:


commit to profession and dilig
a certifi fraud examin shall at all time demonstr commit to
profession and dilig in the perform of hi or her duti
profession
profession is a qualiti desir by most peopl but it is obtain at a price
profession exist on two basic level 1 for the profession group as a whole and 2
for the individu certifi fraud examin consid first the profession group as
a whole
peopl frequent refer to profess profession men and women and profession
activ without defin the mean of the concept profession some fraud
examin sai i might not know how to defin it but i know it when i see it the us
suprem court onc said the same thing about pornographi the five princip
characterist that help differenti profession field of endeavor from other
vocat ar
a bodi of special knowledg acquir by formal educ
admiss to the profess govern by standard of profession qualif
recognit and accept by societi of profession statu and concurr recognit
and accept of social respons by the profession
standard of conduct govern relationship of the profession with client colleagu
and the public
a nation organ devot to the advanc of the oblig of the
profession group
special knowledg and formal educ
a fraud examin work involv special knowledg deriv from sever other field
such as account audit criminolog investig and law a profess might not
have a bodi of knowledg truli uniqu unto itself but it should have on that ha a
mystiqu requir studi comprehens and practic and be over and abov the
everydai abil other peopl might possess
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41003
continu profession educ is becom a hallmark of profession in recent
year ongo effort to increas compet and effect have becom requir by
some profess the american institut of certifi public account ha led the wai
with the requir for 120 hour of extra train everi three year to maintain and
increas profession compet a major of the state board of account now
requir continu educ as a prerequisit for renew cpa licens the associ
of certifi fraud examin requir 20 hour of continu profession educ everi
12month period half of which must be directli relat to fraud detect or deterr
profession admiss standard
the most highli esteem profess and some occup that ar mere regul
govern admiss to their rank by qualif contain in state law if legal recognit
is consid a requisit of a profess then the number of profess is quit larg
rang from doctor of medicin to barber some profess such as certifi intern
auditor or certifi fraud examin ar not regul by state or feder statut mani
group have the statu of profess without the benefit of licens law and the fraud
examin profess is on of these
certif examin ar offer in mani profess such as law medicin real
estat insur financ account manag public account and intern audit
the uniform cfe examin and certif is part of profession recognit for
fraud examin
experi is requir for mani but not all profession licens and certif
experi of on or two year is requir in most state for the cpa certif experi
is requir to obtain the certifi intern auditor design design as a certifi
fraud examin requir at least two year of experi in combin with other
qualif
social recognit a reciproc relationship
no group of practition can becom a profess mere by declar itself to be on
societi must acknowledg the group as a profession bodi at present fraud examin ar
at the stage of becom a selfdeclar profess histor other profess had the
same start point modern medicin overcam it root in magic account rose from
the level of bookkeep intern auditor advanc social goal by present a respons
front to congress and other public bodi the list goe on
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41004 2011 fraud examin manual
social recognit howev is not necessarili perman societi will not continu to
honor as profession ani group that fail to serv a broadbas social and public interest
thu the other side to the coin of recognit is certifi fraud examin must
reciproc and accept the social respons inher in a profession statu that serv
the public interest
standard of conduct
on wai to achiev the social recognit that goe with profession is to adher to the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic other profess have such code
thei ar the written version of moral philosophi and valu especi relev to the
group fraud examin and other profession must observ their code with an awar
of the societi around them care must be taken that rule ar not creat and follow in a
selfserv manner inim to behavior expect by the public
possess and follow a set of behavior rule is on thing possess and follow a set
that meet public expect is anoth other profess law architectur and
account to name three have found themselv under attack from the us feder trade
commiss and the us depart of justic when their rule were perceiv to have
introduc unwarr restraint of trade while the certifi fraud examin code of
profession ethic might not seem to contain such rule thei might come under attack in
some futur differ set certifi fraud examin must be prepar to experi
chang when appropri chang is necessari
individu fraud examin
when the focu of profession is turn to the individu certifi fraud examin it
featur for the group as a whole should not be forgotten the individu member is
presum to possess a bodi of knowledg on hi admiss to the group and attain of
the certifi fraud examin certif the individu is expect to adher to the code of
ethic and maintain membership in the nation organ along with these featur the
individu certifi fraud examin exhibit profession by continu strive to
honor the recognit grant by the public in daytodai life thi is accomplish by
exercis dilig in perform certifi fraud examin work
dilig
the dilig in perform hi or her duti phrase in the rule refer to sever activ
that collect defin highqual fraud examin work thei includ plan
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41005
assign and supervis assist and colleagu avoid conflict of interest
perform with compet obtain suffici evid to establish a basi for opinion
maintain confidenti relat and avoid distort of fact these activ ar the
subject of other rule in the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic and
thei will be discuss in more detail later
