2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Legal and Ethical Conduct and Conflict of Interest


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Legal and Ethical Conduct and Conflict of Interest 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall not engage in any illegal or unethical conduct, or any 
activity which would constitute a conflict of interest. 
 
This rule is a composite of three prohibitions: illegal conduct, unethical conduct, and conflict 
of interest.  
 
Illegal Conduct 
The prohibition of illegal conduct seems straightforward. Some activities might be obviously 
illegal, but the legal status of others might not be so clear. A fraud examiner is always well 
advised to consult an attorney when questionable situations arise. At the same time, 
however, it might be difficult to know ahead of time whether such a consultation is 
necessary. Consider the following legal-related problems (but remember that this chapter on 
ethics is not intended to be your primary guide to legal matters).  
 
Libel and Slander 
Libel and slander can cause personal injury and subject a fraud examiner to a lawsuit for 
damages. Libel is a written defamation of so meone else’s character. Slander is a spoken 
defamation. The content of a libelous or slanderous message must: 
• Contain words that injure another person’s character or reputation or hold him up  
to ridicule. 
• Be communicated orally or in writing to other people. 
• Cause an actual damage to the person who is the subject of the communication. 
 
The risks involved in libel and slander are reasons for having the rule in the Certified Fraud 
Examiner code that prohibits expression of opinions on the guilt or innocence of people. 
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1006   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
False Imprisonment 
False imprisonment can mean more than putting a person behind bars. Courts have found 
many means of detainment to be false imprisonment, including locking an employee in a 
store, removing a distributor from a car, and detaining a witness by force. Even though 
drastic action might be essential, a fraud examiner must accomplish his task legally.  
 
Compounding a Felony 
The criminal act of compounding a felony can result from participating in a trade for 
restitution for agreeing to forgo prosecution. While plea bargains might be acceptable under 
the supervision of a court, Certified Fraud Examiners should be very careful and should 
obtain legal advice when negotiating private deals. 
 
Some rules for professionals insert the word “knowingly” in relation to illegal activities, 
saying: “One should not knowingly  be a party to an illegal activity.” The Certified Fraud 
Examiner Code does not include this way out. Certified Fraud Examiners are generally not 
entitled to claim ignorance of the law. They are expected to know a considerable amount 
of law in connection with investigations, and they are expected to know when to consult  
a lawyer.  
 
Unethical Conduct 
The prohibition of unethical conduct is complicated. These materials have presented an 
array of issues in moral philosophy and ethical thinking — intertwining considerations of 
principles and values. This latter part is set forth in the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of 
Professional Ethics. Legitimate questions ar e: “What manner of unethical conduct is 
meant by this rule? Does it refer to general matters of moral philosophy and ethics, or is its 
applicability limited only to the rules in this code?”  
 
A narrow focus on fraud examiners’ professionalism would center attention only on the 
rules in the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics. A broader social-responsibility 
focus would go beyond the code to the interaction of the fraud examiner 
with other people affected by his choices. The broader focus is more consistent with the 
concept of professionalism because the code itself is a limited set of rules. A fraud 
examiner must take personal responsibility for decisions, and be aware that other 
professionals are often criticized for adhering too rigidly to their codes. Lawyers face harsh 
criticisms when they seem to hide knowledge of criminal acts in their privileged 
communications. Doctors are often criticized for the things they tell their patients about 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1007 
terminal illnesses. Professions are criticized for having specialized rules that seem to permit 
their members to act contrary to social expectations.  
 
Conflict of Interest and “Independence” Considerations  
The term conflict of interest in the rule begs for definition. Try to enumerate the parties 
whose “interests” might conflict: The Certified Fraud Examiner, the Certified Fraud 
Examiner’s clients (for example, Client A may conflict with Client B or with Client C), the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s employer, the public (“innocent bystanders”), and law 
enforcement agencies are the first to come to mind. These parties are involved in almost 
every investigation. The lines that connect these with each other and with the fraud 
examiner could look like a spaghetti bowl of multiple relationships. Deciding  
whether a conflict or a community of interests exists depends on the facts of each 
particular situation.  
 
Nevertheless, some conflicts to avoid are clear enough. A Certified Fraud Examiner 
employed full-time by a company should not engage in other jobs that create a hardship or 
loss to the employer. A fraud examiner should not be a “double agent” employed by one 
company, but retained by another company or person to infiltrate the employer and 
transmit inside information (unless, of course, the employing company agrees to the 
arrangement in order to apprehend other parties employed by the company). A Certified 
Fraud Examiner should not accept engagements from both sides to a controversy—just 
like lawyers are prohibited from representing both parties in a transaction, lawsuit, or trial.  
 
“Conflict of interest” and “independence” are related. The American Institute of Certified 
Public Accountants (AICPA) includes independence (and avoidance of conflict of interest) 
in its Code of Professional Conduct. Some particulars from the AICPA may be relevant, in 
part, for the Certified Fraud Examiner. Consider the following from the AICPA Code of 
Professional Conduct:  
 
Independence will be considered to be im paired for audit engagements if an AICPA 
member had any of the following transa ctions, interests, or relationships: 
? Any direct or material indirect financ ial interest in the enterprise under audit 
? Any joint, closely held business investment with the enterprise under audit or with any 
officer, director, or principal stockholder thereof that was material in relation to the 
member’s net worth to the net worth of the member’s firm 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1008   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
? Any loan to or from the enterprise under audit or any officer, director, or principal 
stockholder of the enterprise  (except immaterial loans, home mortgages, and loans 
secured by property) 
? Any managerial-type connection with the enterprise under audit, such as a promoter, 
underwriter, or voting trustee, director or officer, or in any capacity equivalent to that of 
a member of management or of an employee. 
 
These rules for auditors exist specifically to convey to the public a perception of 
independence. Independence and conflict avoidance are enhanced by refraining from having 
financial and managerial interests in clients or in joint co-operation with clients’ managers 
and directors. After all, they might be a suspect in an investigation. When a Certified Fraud 
Examiner works as an employee of a company, the prohibitions about employment are not 
relevant because the employer-employee relationship is known to the employer, who is the 
client and recipient of any reports. In such cases, independence and conflict should be 
considered in relation to all the other parties involved. Certainly, a mental condition of 
objectivity and honesty then governs the relation between the Certified Fraud Examiner and 
his employer. If the CFE does have a perceived conflict, it can usually be avoided through 
adequate disclosure. 
 
 



:


legal and ethic conduct and conflict of interest
a certifi fraud examin shall not engag in ani illeg or uneth conduct or ani
activ which would constitut a conflict of interest
thi rule is a composit of three prohibit illeg conduct uneth conduct and conflict
of interest
illeg conduct
the prohibit of illeg conduct seem straightforward some activ might be obvious
illeg but the legal statu of other might not be so clear a fraud examin is alwai well
advis to consult an attornei when question situat aris at the same time
howev it might be difficult to know ahead of time whether such a consult is
necessari consid the follow legalrel problem but rememb that thi chapter on
ethic is not intend to be your primari guid to legal matter
libel and slander
libel and slander can caus person injuri and subject a fraud examin to a lawsuit for
damag libel is a written defam of so meon els charact slander is a spoken
defam the content of a libel or slander messag must
contain word that injur anoth person charact or reput or hold him up
to ridicul
be commun oral or in write to other peopl
caus an actual damag to the person who is the subject of the commun
the risk involv in libel and slander ar reason for have the rule in the certifi fraud
examin code that prohibit express of opinion on the guilt or innoc of peopl
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41006 2011 fraud examin manual
fals imprison
fals imprison can mean more than put a person behind bar court have found
mani mean of detain to be fals imprison includ lock an employe in a
store remov a distributor from a car and detain a wit by forc even though
drastic action might be essenti a fraud examin must accomplish hi task legal
compound a feloni
the crimin act of compound a feloni can result from particip in a trade for
restitut for agre to forgo prosecut while plea bargain might be accept under
the supervis of a court certifi fraud examin should be veri care and should
obtain legal advic when negoti privat deal
some rule for profession insert the word knowingli in relat to illeg activ
sai on should not knowingli be a parti to an illeg activ the certifi fraud
examin code doe not includ thi wai out certifi fraud examin ar gener not
entitl to claim ignor of the law thei ar expect to know a consider amount
of law in connect with investig and thei ar expect to know when to consult
a lawyer
uneth conduct
the prohibit of uneth conduct is complic these materi have present an
arrai of issu in moral philosophi and ethic think intertwin consider of
principl and valu thi latter part is set forth in the certifi fraud examin code of
profession ethic legitim question ar e what manner of uneth conduct is
meant by thi rule doe it refer to gener matter of moral philosophi and ethic or is it
applic limit onli to the rule in thi code
a narrow focu on fraud examin profession would center attent onli on the
rule in the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic a broader socialrespons
focu would go beyond the code to the interact of the fraud examin
with other peopl affect by hi choic the broader focu is more consist with the
concept of profession becaus the code itself is a limit set of rule a fraud
examin must take person respons for decis and be awar that other
profession ar often critic for adher too rigidli to their code lawyer face harsh
critic when thei seem to hide knowledg of crimin act in their privileg
commun doctor ar often critic for the thing thei tell their patient about
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41007
termin ill profess ar critic for have special rule that seem to permit
their member to act contrari to social expect
conflict of interest and independ consider
the term conflict of interest in the rule beg for definit try to enumer the parti
whose interest might conflict the certifi fraud examin the certifi fraud
examin client for exampl client a mai conflict with client b or with client c the
certifi fraud examin employ the public innoc bystand and law
enforc agenc ar the first to come to mind these parti ar involv in almost
everi investig the line that connect these with each other and with the fraud
examin could look like a spaghetti bowl of multipl relationship decid
whether a conflict or a commun of interest exist depend on the fact of each
particular situat
nevertheless some conflict to avoid ar clear enough a certifi fraud examin
emploi fulltim by a compani should not engag in other job that creat a hardship or
loss to the employ a fraud examin should not be a doubl agent emploi by on
compani but retain by anoth compani or person to infiltr the employ and
transmit insid inform unless of cours the emploi compani agre to the
arrang in order to apprehend other parti emploi by the compani a certifi
fraud examin should not accept engag from both side to a controversyjust
like lawyer ar prohibit from repres both parti in a transact lawsuit or trial
conflict of interest and independ ar relat the american institut of certifi
public account aicpa includ independ and avoid of conflict of interest
in it code of profession conduct some particular from the aicpa mai be relev in
part for the certifi fraud examin consid the follow from the aicpa code of
profession conduct
independ will be consid to be im pair for audit engag if an aicpa
member had ani of the follow transa ction interest or relationship
ani direct or materi indirect financ ial interest in the enterpris under audit
ani joint close held busi invest with the enterpris under audit or with ani
offic director or princip stockhold thereof that wa materi in relat to the
member net worth to the net worth of the member firm
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41008 2011 fraud examin manual
ani loan to or from the enterpris under audit or ani offic director or princip
stockhold of the enterpris except immateri loan home mortgag and loan
secur by properti
ani managerialtyp connect with the enterpris under audit such as a promot
underwrit or vote truste director or offic or in ani capac equival to that of
a member of manag or of an employe
these rule for auditor exist specif to convei to the public a percept of
independ independ and conflict avoid ar enhanc by refrain from have
financi and manageri interest in client or in joint cooper with client manag
and director after all thei might be a suspect in an investig when a certifi fraud
examin work as an employe of a compani the prohibit about employ ar not
relev becaus the employeremploye relationship is known to the employ who is the
client and recipi of ani report in such case independ and conflict should be
consid in relat to all the other parti involv certainli a mental condit of
object and honesti then govern the relat between the certifi fraud examin and
hi employ if the cfe doe have a perceiv conflict it can usual be avoid through
adequ disclosur
