2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Integrity and Competence/Integrity


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Integrity and Competence 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, exhibit the highest level of integrity in the 
performa nce of all professional assignments, and will accept only assignments for which there 
is reasonable expectation that the assignment will be completed with professional 
competence. 
 
This rule contains two parts. The first deals with integrity and the second with competence. 
Competence here is related to diligence, as discussed previously in relation to the first rule in 
the Certified Fraud Examiner Code.  
 
Integrity 
If you were asked to name a desirable personal characteristic, integrity is one that would 
rank high on the scale, along with honesty, truthfulness, trustworthiness, and loyalty. 
Outside observers of Certified Fraud Examiners’ activity will look for signs of integrity as a 
signal that trust is warranted. However, integrity hardly exists apart from other 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1009 
characteristics well-known in moral philosophy and recognized in the Certified Fraud 
Examiner Code of Professional Ethics.  
 
Integrity requires honesty, truthfulness, trustworthiness, and confidentiality. It requires 
subordination of desires for personal gain to the interests of clients, employers, and the 
public. It requires independence of mental attitude and avoidance of conflicts of interest. 
Integrity is all these things wrapped up into one word.  
 
In addition, integrity means that a Certified Fraud Examiner ought to have a well- 
developed sense of moral philosophy—an ability to analyze situations where no rules of 
the Certified Fraud Examiner Code are specifically applicable and to be able to distinguish 
right from wrong. It does not mean, however, that a Certified Fraud Examiner must be 
perfect in all technical matters, nor does it mean that Certified Fraud Examiners and 
others cannot have honest differences of opinion. In the course of a fraud examination, 
inadvertent errors, mistakes of judgment, and other problems might cause conflict. In such 
cases, a Certified Fraud Examiner can preserve integrity either by admitting error or by 
convincingly justifying a difference of perception or opinion.  
 



:


integr and compet
a certifi fraud examin shall at all time exhibit the highest level of integr in the
performa nce of all profession assign and will accept onli assign for which there
is reason expect that the assign will be complet with profession
compet
thi rule contain two part the first deal with integr and the second with compet
compet here is relat to dilig as discuss previous in relat to the first rule in
the certifi fraud examin code
integr
if you were ask to name a desir person characterist integr is on that would
rank high on the scale along with honesti truth trustworthi and loyalti
outsid observ of certifi fraud examin activ will look for sign of integr as a
signal that trust is warrant howev integr hardli exist apart from other
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41009
characterist wellknown in moral philosophi and recogn in the certifi fraud
examin code of profession ethic
integr requir honesti truth trustworthi and confidenti it requir
subordin of desir for person gain to the interest of client employ and the
public it requir independ of mental attitud and avoid of conflict of interest
integr is all these thing wrap up into on word
in addit integr mean that a certifi fraud examin ought to have a well
develop sens of moral philosophyan abil to analyz situat where no rule of
the certifi fraud examin code ar specif applic and to be abl to distinguish
right from wrong it doe not mean howev that a certifi fraud examin must be
perfect in all technic matter nor doe it mean that certifi fraud examin and
other cannot have honest differ of opinion in the cours of a fraud examin
inadvert error mistak of judgment and other problem might caus conflict in such
case a certifi fraud examin can preserv integr either by admit error or by
convincingli justifi a differ of percept or opinion
