2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Reasonable Evidential Basis for Opinions


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Reasonable Evidential Basis for Opinions   
 
A fraud examiner, in conducting examinations, will obtain evidence or other 
documentation to establish a reasonable basis for any opinion render ed. No opinion shall 
be expressed regarding the guilt or innocence of any person or party.  
 
Evidential Basis for Opinions 
The accounting profession has similar rules, some of which are in its codes of ethics, some 
in its technical practice standards. Here is a sample of its provisions:  
 
Sufficient competent evidential matter is to be obtained through in spection, observation, 
inquiries and confirmations to afford a reasonable basis for an opinion regarding the 
financial statements under examination. [AICPA Generally Accepted Auditing 
Standards] 
 
Internal auditors should collect, analyze, inte rpret, and document information to support 
audit results. [The Institute of Internal Auditors, Inc., Standards for the 
Practice of Internal Auditing]  
 
A member shall obtain sufficient relevant data to afford a re asonable basis for conclusions 
or recommendations in relation to any professional services performed. [AICPA Code of 
Professional Conduct] 
 
A practitioner should obtain sufficient relevant data to afford a reasonable basis for 
conclusions or recommendations. [AICPA Management Advisory Services 
Standards]  
 
Sufficient evidence shall be obta ined to provide a reasonable ba sis for the conclusion that is 
expressed in the report. [AICPA Attestation Standards] 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1013 
Sufficient competent evidence should be obta ined to provide a reasonable basis for the 
examination report. [AICPA Standards for Examinations of Prospective 
Financial Information]  
 
Clearly, the accounting profession considers “sufficient relevant data (evidence)” a 
compelling standard of practice, if not a matter of professional ethics. Evidence can be 
defined as all the information that influences a decision maker in reaching decisions that can 
take the form of a report, a set of recommendations, or similar products.  
 
Evidence might be quantitative or qualitative; it may be objective or it may have subjective 
qualities; it may be absolutely compelling to a decision or it may be only mildly persuasive. 
The Certified Fraud Examiner’s task is to  collect and evaluate a sufficient amount of 
relevant evidence to afford a reasonable and logical basis for decisions.  
 
Auditors sometimes say they gather evidence to show that financial statements are 
presented properly or that control procedures are operating effectively. They are following 
a time-tested method of investigation that consists of three parts:  
• Recognize the problem or issue subject to investigation. 
• Gather sufficient relevant evidence about it. 
• Analyze the evidence and reach a conclusion about the problem or issue. 
 
Most auditors’ propositions are expressed positively, such as: “The cash balance is 
accurately stated.” However, an auditor will actu ally seek evidence to show that the cash 
balance is not  properly stated. Imagine a cash balance that is the sum of 110 separate bank 
accounts. An audit team will probably sample these accounts instead of looking at all of 
them. The auditors look for evidence that some of these cash balances are misstated. If 
they fail to find any misstatements in a sufficiently large sample, they have not proved that 
the total is proper, but they have no reason to believe that it is materially misstated. 
 
A literal report on this kind of work would be called “negative assurance,” in which an auditor 
would say: “Nothing came to my attention to make me believe the cash balance is materially 
misstated.” This statement of negative assurance is an accurate report of the audit process. As 
long as the “attention” consists of sufficient re levant evidence, the report is useful. Auditors 
might not know without any doubt that the balance is proper, but they are entitled to act as 
though it is because they have analyzed sufficient relevant evidence.  
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1014   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Some fraud examinations can take on this same character. Certified Fraud Examiners will be 
assigned to seek the truth about some business records or to try to determine whether some 
control procedures have failed. The Certified Fraud Examiner will seek evidence of 
misstatement or failure, and, if none is found, will report the positive results.  
 
In other cases, a client or employer might already know that fraud, thefts, shortages, control 
failures, or other such events have occurred. The Certified Fraud Examiner’s assignment is 
to then determine how the improper activity is being carried out, by whom, and to what 
extent. This kind of fraud investigation demands sufficient evidence, examples, and suitable 
documentation to prove the how/whom/extent findings. In these cases, the “negative 
assurance” type of conclusion is not appropria te. Certified Fraud Examiners must obtain the 
evidence to show the actual how/whom/extent conclusions.  
 
Guilt and Innocence 
The rule that prohibits opinions regarding the guilt or innocence of any person or party is a 
rule of prudence. The AICPA had a rule that prohibited CPAs from attesting that a 
company’s financial forecast would be achieved. Most CPAs’ reaction to the rule was: “Why 
would anyone want to do something so dumb?” The general answer was that without the 
explicit rule, someone might give an achievability attestation, the actual events would fall 
short, and the CPA (and all other CPAs) would suffer criticism. The rule was a rule of 
prudence. Clearly, it is prudent for a Certified Fraud Examiner to refrain from usurping the 
role of jury. In a courtroom, no good attorney would ask a Certified Fraud Examiner for 
such a conclusion, and no alert judge would allow such testimony.  
 
In most situations, the fraud examiner’s job is to present the evidence in his report. Such 
evidence might constitute a convincing case pointing to the guilt or innocence of a person. 
But a clear line should be drawn between a report that essentially says, “Here is the evidence 
and the reasonable conclusions that can be drawn from it,” and one that steps over the line 
and says, “This person is guilty of the crime of fraud.” 
 
Whether or not a person is guilty (or innocent) of a crime is not a decision for the fraud 
examiner to make. The fraud examiner may draw reasonable conclusions based on the 
evidence. One of those conclusions may be that the suspected individual stole money, 
misrepresented a transaction, or concealed funds. There is no prohibition in the Code of 
Professional Ethics on expressing such a conclusion provided it has a reasonable basis in 
fact. The prohibition involves the next step, “The suspect took the money without 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1015 
permission and is therefore guilty of the crime of theft.” The individual may have taken the 
money without permission, but whether or not the individual is guilty of a crime is a 
determination for the judicial system, not the fraud examiner. 
 
 



:


reason evidenti basi for opinion
a fraud examin in conduct examin will obtain evid or other
document to establish a reason basi for ani opinion render ed no opinion shall
be express regard the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti
evidenti basi for opinion
the account profess ha similar rule some of which ar in it code of ethic some
in it technic practic standard here is a sampl of it provis
suffici compet evidenti matter is to be obtain through in spection observ
inquiri and confirm to afford a reason basi for an opinion regard the
financi statement under examin aicpa gener accept audit
standard
intern auditor should collect analyz int rpret and document inform to support
audit result the institut of intern auditor inc standard for the
practic of intern audit
a member shall obtain suffici relev data to afford a re ason basi for conclus
or recommend in relat to ani profession servic perform aicpa code of
profession conduct
a practition should obtain suffici relev data to afford a reason basi for
conclus or recommend aicpa manag advisori servic
standard
suffici evid shall be obta in to provid a reason ba si for the conclus that is
express in the report aicpa attest standard
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41013
suffici compet evid should be obta in to provid a reason basi for the
examin report aicpa standard for examin of prospect
financi inform
clearli the account profess consid suffici relev data evid a
compel standard of practic if not a matter of profession ethic evid can be
defin as all the inform that influenc a decis maker in reach decis that can
take the form of a report a set of recommend or similar product
evid might be quantit or qualit it mai be object or it mai have subject
qualiti it mai be absolut compel to a decis or it mai be onli mildli persuas
the certifi fraud examin task is to collect and evalu a suffici amount of
relev evid to afford a reason and logic basi for decis
auditor sometim sai thei gather evid to show that financi statement ar
present properli or that control procedur ar oper effect thei ar follow
a timetest method of investig that consist of three part
recogn the problem or issu subject to investig
gather suffici relev evid about it
analyz the evid and reach a conclus about the problem or issu
most auditor proposit ar express posit such as the cash balanc is
accur state howev an auditor will actu alli seek evid to show that the cash
balanc is not properli state imagin a cash balanc that is the sum of 110 separ bank
account an audit team will probabl sampl these account instead of look at all of
them the auditor look for evid that some of these cash balanc ar misstat if
thei fail to find ani misstat in a suffici larg sampl thei have not prove that
the total is proper but thei have no reason to believ that it is materi misstat
a liter report on thi kind of work would be call neg assur in which an auditor
would sai noth came to my attent to make me believ the cash balanc is materi
misstat thi statement of neg assur is an accur report of the audit process as
long as the attent consist of suffici re levant evid the report is us auditor
might not know without ani doubt that the balanc is proper but thei ar entitl to act as
though it is becaus thei have analyz suffici relev evid
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41014 2011 fraud examin manual
some fraud examin can take on thi same charact certifi fraud examin will be
assign to seek the truth about some busi record or to try to determin whether some
control procedur have fail the certifi fraud examin will seek evid of
misstat or failur and if none is found will report the posit result
in other case a client or employ might alreadi know that fraud theft shortag control
failur or other such event have occur the certifi fraud examin assign is
to then determin how the improp activ is be carri out by whom and to what
extent thi kind of fraud investig demand suffici evid exampl and suitabl
document to prove the howwhomext find in these case the neg
assur type of conclus is not appropria te certifi fraud examin must obtain the
evid to show the actual howwhomext conclus
guilt and innoc
the rule that prohibit opinion regard the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti is a
rule of prudenc the aicpa had a rule that prohibit cpa from attest that a
compani financi forecast would be achiev most cpa reaction to the rule wa why
would anyon want to do someth so dumb the gener answer wa that without the
explicit rule someon might give an achiev attest the actual event would fall
short and the cpa and all other cpa would suffer critic the rule wa a rule of
prudenc clearli it is prudent for a certifi fraud examin to refrain from usurp the
role of juri in a courtroom no good attornei would ask a certifi fraud examin for
such a conclus and no alert judg would allow such testimoni
in most situat the fraud examin job is to present the evid in hi report such
evid might constitut a convinc case point to the guilt or innoc of a person
but a clear line should be drawn between a report that essenti sai here is the evid
and the reason conclus that can be drawn from it and on that step over the line
and sai thi person is guilti of the crime of fraud
whether or not a person is guilti or innoc of a crime is not a decis for the fraud
examin to make the fraud examin mai draw reason conclus base on the
evid on of those conclus mai be that the suspect individu stole monei
misrepres a transact or conceal fund there is no prohibit in the code of
profession ethic on express such a conclus provid it ha a reason basi in
fact the prohibit involv the next step the suspect took the monei without
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41015
permiss and is therefor guilti of the crime of theft the individu mai have taken the
monei without permiss but whether or not the individu is guilti of a crime is a
determin for the judici system not the fraud examin
