2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Confidential Information


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Confidential Information 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall not reveal any confidential information obtained during 
a professional engagement without proper authorization. 
 
Confidential information rules in professional codes of ethics have the potential to create 
enormous conflicts — conflicts of principles and conflicts of values. Consider this possible 
exchange between a lawyer and client:  
 
 Client: 
Because you have taken my case on this fraud charge, I think you should know more about 
my background. 
 
 Lawyer: 
Go ahead. 
 
 Client: 
Three years ago, I participated  in an armed robbery and was never caught. My gun went off 
and killed the storekeeper. One of my buddies was accused and convicted. He’s had all his 
appeals and is scheduled to be executed tomorrow. What can you do? 
 
 Lawyer: 
Nothing. 
 
“Nothing” may be oversimplifying the situation, but the point is that lawyers have a keen 
awareness of the privileged information rights of their clients. Most lawyers will stoutly 
defend their duty not to endanger this client, even at the cost of a life. Most laymen are 
shocked at this particular. One commentator responded to a lawyer defending the position 
with a sharp retort: “Do you mean you will sa crifice an innocent man to a rule?” This 
incredulity is well aimed. It brings into sharp focus two conflicting values: the benefits of a 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1016   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
long-standing rule of legal practice and the sanctity of life itself. Not all situations are this 
dramatic, but Certified Fraud Examiners can nevertheless get into similar conflicts.  
 
Confidential information, for all practical purposes, is any and all information a Certified Fraud 
Examiner might obtain in the course of work, whether it be from the company or client for 
whom an investigation is performed or from any other source consulted during the work. 
The rules of confidential and privileged information are based on the belief that they 
facilitate a free flow of information between parties to the relationship. The nature of a fraud 
examination might make it necessary for Certified Fraud Examiners to have access to 
sensitive information. Clients and employers would be less likely to reveal such information 
or to provide access to sources if they could not trust a Certified Fraud Examiner to keep  
it confidential.  
 
Privileged information  is information that cannot be demanded, even by a court. Common law 
privilege exists for husband-wife and attorney-client relationships, and physician-patient and 
priest-penitent relationships have obtained the privilege through state statutes. The attorney-client 
privilege is statutory in some jurisdictions. Certified Fraud Examiners do not have any 
such privilege in common law or by statute. In all the recognized privilege relationships, the 
professional person is obligated to observe the privilege; it can be waived only by the client, 
patient, or penitent. (These people are said to be the holders of the privilege.) Likewise, a 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s client or employer is the holder of the confidence. (The Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  contains additional information on this subject.) 
 
The Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics does not assume a privileged 
status for the fraud examiner client/employer relationship. However, the examiner’s client or 
employer holds the key known as “proper authorization” in the rule. If the client or 
employer consents to disclosure of information otherwise considered confidential, then the 
Certified Fraud Examiner can transmit it to others. Sometimes consent is given when the 
consenter does not know exactly what information will be conveyed. Even with consent, 
therefore, a Certified Fraud Examiner should be careful to let the client/employer know 
what the consent covers. The best rule of prudence is to let the client/employer make the 
actual disclosure by transmitting the Certified Fraud Examiner’s report, working papers, or 
other documentation. Then the client not only knows what is being disclosed but is the one 
making the disclosure.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1017 
Confidential information relationships do not die with the severance of the Certified Fraud 
Examiner-client or Certified Fraud Examiner-employer relationship. The confidentiality rule 
does not permit disclosure after the assignment is finished, or there is no clause permitting 
disclosure after a Certified Fraud Examiner is fired, resigns, or retires from an employing 
organization. Examiners who write “kiss and te ll” memoirs about the inner secrets of an 
organization violate the confidentiality rule in the most blatant manner.  
 
Proper Authorization 
As just mentioned, one form of “proper author ization” is the consent given by a Certified 
Fraud Examiner’s client or employer. Additional forms of authorization are possible. Other 
professions have exceptions that void the confidentiality or privilege rules. Lawyers can 
reveal client confidences if doing so is necessary to prevent a future crime. CPAs are  
not bound by confidentiality when responding to a court subpoena or summons,  
when participating in quality control reviews, or when initiating complaints to their 
disciplinary bodies.  
 
Likewise, Certified Fraud Examiners are not bound by confidentiality when doing so would 
make them parties to a violation of the law. Care must be taken about remaining silent when 
silence could be construed as obstructing justice or engaging in a conspiracy. The advice of 
an attorney should be sought in such cases.  
 
Questions may arise over information received from someone being investigated. Suppose 
an employee being questioned tells the Certified Fraud Examiner something “in confidence” 
concerning his role in a theft. Fraud examiners must remember that the confidentiality 
relationship runs first to the client or employer, and that this promise of confidentiality is 
understood to exist without being spoken. In the case of the employee-informant, the fraud 
examiner does not have an understood or unspoken promise of confidentiality and is not 
bound by the rule with respect to the informant. If the fraud examiner promises the 
employee-informant “confidentiality,” the promise will probably turn out to be a lie, because 
the examiner has also promised the client/employer a report on all the relevant evidence. A 
Certified Fraud Examiner should not promise confidentiality or leniency to an informant for 
the purpose of extracting testimony. A Certified Fraud Examiner’s reputation and 
effectiveness depends upon the integrity of the Certified Fraud Examiner’s word.  
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1018   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Relation to Conflict of Interest 
Another aspect of the confidentiality rule concerns the possibility that a fraud examiner 
might use information that is part of a conflict of interest with the client/employer. The 
Institute of Internal Auditors’ Code of Ethics c ontains language that makes this relation very 
clear: “Members and Certified Internal Auditors shall be prudent in the use of information 
acquired in the course of their duties. They shall not use confidential information for any 
personal gain nor in any manner which would be contrary to law or detrimental to the 
welfare of their organization.” Clearly, using information for personal gain or using 
information to the detriment of the client/employer is a close kin to lying and stealing. The 
lie comes from the Certified Fraud Examiner’s breaking a pledge to maintain confidentiality, 
and the stealing comes from harming the client or employer.  
 
When a Certified Fraud Examiner faces the potential for personal gain from confidential 
client information, a conflict of interest exists—the Certified Fraud Examiner’s desire for 
wealth vs. the client/employer’s desire for and trust in confidential services. One of the 
worst kinds of ethical breaches would be to break the promise of confidentiality for personal 
gain. It is mere greed at work.  
 
Public Information 
It is tempting to consider confidential information to be “nonpublic information” instead of 
“all information” on the grounds that public information is available to everyone anyway. 
Such an interpretation is not appropriate. Public information might be hard to find and/or 
expensive to obtain and analyze. After all, the client or company paid the Certified Fraud 
Examiner a fee or salary to find and use public information, and a Certified Fraud 
Examiner’s disclosure of it would give others a “free ride.” When information is public, let 
others find it for themselves.  
 
Some might argue that no confidence is abused if a Certified Fraud Examiner points others 
to public information that is published and widely distributed, such as financial statements in 
annual reports or stories in national newspapers such as the Wall Street Journal. The next step 
is to consider public information that is not published, such as real estate deed restrictions, 
liens on property, and credit records. Defending a breach of confidence on the grounds “It 
was public anyway” is a weak excuse. Mere revelation of the source of information imparts 
signals of importance that are not public and that may guide others to information a client or 
employer believes is confidential.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1019 
Blowing the Whistle 
Difficult problems arise over Certified Fraud Examiners’ obligations to “blow the whistle” 
about clients’ or employers’ shady or illegal practices. The problem exists at two levels. The 
first is the managerial level, where the Certified Fraud Examiner might be employed or 
engaged by high-level managers who turn out to be involved in fraudulent practices. A 
Certified Fraud Examiner should always arrange to have a pipeline to levels of management 
above the operations under investigation. Thus, for example, evidence of managerial-level 
complicity can be reported to the board of directors and its audit committee without 
trampling on the confidentiality rule.  
 
The other level — involvement by the directors  or the highest level of management or 
ownership—presents the hard problems. In such cases, the only higher levels exist outside 
the organization, such as the police or similar agencies, the U.S. Department of Justice, 
Department of Defense contract officers, and the like. These and other agencies are 
concerned with law or contract violations. A board of directors may withhold evidence of 
criminal acts, price fixing, or contract overcharges from them.  
 
In general, examiners are not legally obligated to blow the whistle on clients or employers. 
However, circumstances might exist where they are morally and legally justified in making 
disclosures to appropriate outside parties. Such circumstances include those in which a client 
or employer has intentionally involved a Certified Fraud Examiner in its illegal or unethical 
conduct, or when a client or employer has distributed misleading reports based on the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s work. The confidentiality rule should not be viewed as a license 
or excuse for inaction where action may be appropriate to right a wrongful act committed or 
about to be committed by a client or employer. A Certified Fraud Examiner is under no 
obligation to go to jail with wrongdoers. When in doubt, consult legal counsel. 
 
 



:


confidenti inform
a certifi fraud examin shall not reveal ani confidenti inform obtain dure
a profession engag without proper author
confidenti inform rule in profession code of ethic have the potenti to creat
enorm conflict conflict of principl and conflict of valu consid thi possibl
exchang between a lawyer and client
client
becaus you have taken my case on thi fraud charg i think you should know more about
my background
lawyer
go ahead
client
three year ago i particip in an arm robberi and wa never caught my gun went off
and kill the storekeep on of my buddi wa accus and convict he had all hi
appeal and is schedul to be execut tomorrow what can you do
lawyer
noth
noth mai be oversimplifi the situat but the point is that lawyer have a keen
awar of the privileg inform right of their client most lawyer will stoutli
defend their duti not to endang thi client even at the cost of a life most laymen ar
shock at thi particular on comment respond to a lawyer defend the posit
with a sharp retort do you mean you will sa crific an innoc man to a rule thi
incredul is well aim it bring into sharp focu two conflict valu the benefit of a
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41016 2011 fraud examin manual
longstand rule of legal practic and the sanctiti of life itself not all situat ar thi
dramat but certifi fraud examin can nevertheless get into similar conflict
confidenti inform for all practic purpos is ani and all inform a certifi fraud
examin might obtain in the cours of work whether it be from the compani or client for
whom an investig is perform or from ani other sourc consult dure the work
the rule of confidenti and privileg inform ar base on the belief that thei
facilit a free flow of inform between parti to the relationship the natur of a fraud
examin might make it necessari for certifi fraud examin to have access to
sensit inform client and employ would be less like to reveal such inform
or to provid access to sourc if thei could not trust a certifi fraud examin to keep
it confidenti
privileg inform is inform that cannot be demand even by a court common law
privileg exist for husbandwif and attorneycli relationship and physicianpati and
priestpenit relationship have obtain the privileg through state statut the attorneycli
privileg is statutori in some jurisdict certifi fraud examin do not have ani
such privileg in common law or by statut in all the recogn privileg relationship the
profession person is oblig to observ the privileg it can be waiv onli by the client
patient or penit these peopl ar said to be the holder of the privileg likewis a
certifi fraud examin client or employ is the holder of the confid the law
section of the fraud examin manual contain addit inform on thi subject
the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic doe not assum a privileg
statu for the fraud examin clientemploy relationship howev the examin client or
employ hold the kei known as proper author in the rule if the client or
employ consent to disclosur of inform otherwis consid confidenti then the
certifi fraud examin can transmit it to other sometim consent is given when the
consent doe not know exactli what inform will be convei even with consent
therefor a certifi fraud examin should be care to let the clientemploy know
what the consent cover the best rule of prudenc is to let the clientemploy make the
actual disclosur by transmit the certifi fraud examin report work paper or
other document then the client not onli know what is be disclos but is the on
make the disclosur
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41017
confidenti inform relationship do not die with the sever of the certifi fraud
examinercli or certifi fraud examineremploy relationship the confidenti rule
doe not permit disclosur after the assign is finish or there is no claus permit
disclosur after a certifi fraud examin is fire resign or retir from an emploi
organ examin who write kiss and te ll memoir about the inner secret of an
organ violat the confidenti rule in the most blatant manner
proper author
as just mention on form of proper author izat is the consent given by a certifi
fraud examin client or employ addit form of author ar possibl other
profess have except that void the confidenti or privileg rule lawyer can
reveal client confid if do so is necessari to prevent a futur crime cpa ar
not bound by confidenti when respond to a court subpoena or summon
when particip in qualiti control review or when initi complaint to their
disciplinari bodi
likewis certifi fraud examin ar not bound by confidenti when do so would
make them parti to a violat of the law care must be taken about remain silent when
silenc could be constru as obstruct justic or engag in a conspiraci the advic of
an attornei should be sought in such case
question mai aris over inform receiv from someon be investig suppos
an employe be question tell the certifi fraud examin someth in confid
concern hi role in a theft fraud examin must rememb that the confidenti
relationship run first to the client or employ and that thi promis of confidenti is
understood to exist without be spoken in the case of the employeeinform the fraud
examin doe not have an understood or unspoken promis of confidenti and is not
bound by the rule with respect to the inform if the fraud examin promis the
employeeinform confidenti the promis will probabl turn out to be a lie becaus
the examin ha also promis the clientemploy a report on all the relev evid a
certifi fraud examin should not promis confidenti or lenienc to an inform for
the purpos of extract testimoni a certifi fraud examin reput and
effect depend upon the integr of the certifi fraud examin word
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41018 2011 fraud examin manual
relat to conflict of interest
anoth aspect of the confidenti rule concern the possibl that a fraud examin
might us inform that is part of a conflict of interest with the clientemploy the
institut of intern auditor code of ethic c ontain languag that make thi relat veri
clear member and certifi intern auditor shall be prudent in the us of inform
acquir in the cours of their duti thei shall not us confidenti inform for ani
person gain nor in ani manner which would be contrari to law or detriment to the
welfar of their organ clearli us inform for person gain or us
inform to the detriment of the clientemploy is a close kin to ly and steal the
lie come from the certifi fraud examin break a pledg to maintain confidenti
and the steal come from harm the client or employ
when a certifi fraud examin face the potenti for person gain from confidenti
client inform a conflict of interest existsth certifi fraud examin desir for
wealth vs the clientemploy desir for and trust in confidenti servic on of the
worst kind of ethic breach would be to break the promis of confidenti for person
gain it is mere greed at work
public inform
it is tempt to consid confidenti inform to be nonpubl inform instead of
all inform on the ground that public inform is avail to everyon anywai
such an interpret is not appropri public inform might be hard to find andor
expens to obtain and analyz after all the client or compani paid the certifi fraud
examin a fee or salari to find and us public inform and a certifi fraud
examin disclosur of it would give other a free ride when inform is public let
other find it for themselv
some might argu that no confid is abus if a certifi fraud examin point other
to public inform that is publish and wide distribut such as financi statement in
annual report or stori in nation newspap such as the wall street journal the next step
is to consid public inform that is not publish such as real estat deed restrict
lien on properti and credit record defend a breach of confid on the ground it
wa public anywai is a weak excus mere revel of the sourc of inform impart
signal of import that ar not public and that mai guid other to inform a client or
employ believ is confidenti
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41019
blow the whistl
difficult problem aris over certifi fraud examin oblig to blow the whistl
about client or employ shadi or illeg practic the problem exist at two level the
first is the manageri level where the certifi fraud examin might be emploi or
engag by highlevel manag who turn out to be involv in fraudul practic a
certifi fraud examin should alwai arrang to have a pipelin to level of manag
abov the oper under investig thu for exampl evid of manageriallevel
complic can be report to the board of director and it audit committe without
trampl on the confidenti rule
the other level involv by the director or the highest level of manag or
ownershippres the hard problem in such case the onli higher level exist outsid
the organ such as the polic or similar agenc the us depart of justic
depart of defens contract offic and the like these and other agenc ar
concern with law or contract violat a board of director mai withhold evid of
crimin act price fix or contract overcharg from them
in gener examin ar not legal oblig to blow the whistl on client or employ
howev circumst might exist where thei ar moral and legal justifi in make
disclosur to appropri outsid parti such circumst includ those in which a client
or employ ha intention involv a certifi fraud examin in it illeg or uneth
conduct or when a client or employ ha distribut mislead report base on the
certifi fraud examin work the confidenti rule should not be view as a licens
or excus for inact where action mai be appropri to right a wrong act commit or
about to be commit by a client or employ a certifi fraud examin is under no
oblig to go to jail with wrongdoer when in doubt consult legal counsel
