2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Confidential Information/Blowing the Whistle


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Blowing the Whistle 
Difficult problems arise over Certified Fraud Examiners’ obligations to “blow the whistle” 
about clients’ or employers’ shady or illegal practices. The problem exists at two levels. The 
first is the managerial level, where the Certified Fraud Examiner might be employed or 
engaged by high-level managers who turn out to be involved in fraudulent practices. A 
Certified Fraud Examiner should always arrange to have a pipeline to levels of management 
above the operations under investigation. Thus, for example, evidence of managerial-level 
complicity can be reported to the board of directors and its audit committee without 
trampling on the confidentiality rule.  
 
The other level — involvement by the directors  or the highest level of management or 
ownership—presents the hard problems. In such cases, the only higher levels exist outside 
the organization, such as the police or similar agencies, the U.S. Department of Justice, 
Department of Defense contract officers, and the like. These and other agencies are 
concerned with law or contract violations. A board of directors may withhold evidence of 
criminal acts, price fixing, or contract overcharges from them.  
 
In general, examiners are not legally obligated to blow the whistle on clients or employers. 
However, circumstances might exist where they are morally and legally justified in making 
disclosures to appropriate outside parties. Such circumstances include those in which a client 
or employer has intentionally involved a Certified Fraud Examiner in its illegal or unethical 
conduct, or when a client or employer has distributed misleading reports based on the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s work. The confidentiality rule should not be viewed as a license 
or excuse for inaction where action may be appropriate to right a wrongful act committed or 
about to be committed by a client or employer. A Certified Fraud Examiner is under no 
obligation to go to jail with wrongdoers. When in doubt, consult legal counsel. 
 
 



:


blow the whistl
difficult problem aris over certifi fraud examin oblig to blow the whistl
about client or employ shadi or illeg practic the problem exist at two level the
first is the manageri level where the certifi fraud examin might be emploi or
engag by highlevel manag who turn out to be involv in fraudul practic a
certifi fraud examin should alwai arrang to have a pipelin to level of manag
abov the oper under investig thu for exampl evid of manageriallevel
complic can be report to the board of director and it audit committe without
trampl on the confidenti rule
the other level involv by the director or the highest level of manag or
ownershippres the hard problem in such case the onli higher level exist outsid
the organ such as the polic or similar agenc the us depart of justic
depart of defens contract offic and the like these and other agenc ar
concern with law or contract violat a board of director mai withhold evid of
crimin act price fix or contract overcharg from them
in gener examin ar not legal oblig to blow the whistl on client or employ
howev circumst might exist where thei ar moral and legal justifi in make
disclosur to appropri outsid parti such circumst includ those in which a client
or employ ha intention involv a certifi fraud examin in it illeg or uneth
conduct or when a client or employ ha distribut mislead report base on the
certifi fraud examin work the confidenti rule should not be view as a licens
or excus for inact where action mai be appropri to right a wrong act commit or
about to be commit by a client or employ a certifi fraud examin is under no
oblig to go to jail with wrongdoer when in doubt consult legal counsel
