2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/CFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


CFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS
 
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners 
 
CFE Code of Professional Standards 
 
(Adopted by the Board of Regents, February 22, 2001) 
 
[At the Board of Regents meeting in February 2001, the Board officially adopted the 
following CFE Code of Professional Standards. The standards expand on and provide 
further guidance for members on the ethical and professional duties listed in the CFE Code 
of Professional Ethics. 
 
The standards were drafted by the Professional Standards and Practices Committee. The 
Committee will, in the future, provide additional comments to supplement these standards 
and will also develop practical scenarios to assist members in the application of the 
standards.] 
 
I. Preamble 
 
The Association of Certified Fraud Examiners is an association of professionals committed 
to performing at the highest level of ethical conduct. Members of the Association pledge 
themselves to act with integrity and to perform their work in a professional manner. 
 
Members have a professional responsibility to their clients, to the public interest, and each 
other; a responsibility that requires subordinating self-interest to the interests of those 
served. 
 
These standards express basic principles of ethical behavior to guide members in the 
fulfilling of their duties and obligations. By following these standards, all Certified Fraud 
Examiners shall be expected, and all Associate members shall strive, to demonstrate their 
commitment to excellence in service and professional conduct. 
 
II. Applicability of Code 
 
The CFE Code of Professional Standards shall apply to all members and all Associate 
members of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. The use of the word “member” 
or “members” in this Code shall refer to Asso ciate members as well as regular members of 
the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. 
CFE Code of Professional Standards Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1102   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
III. Standards of Professional Conduct 
 
A. Integrity and Objectivity 
 
1. Members shall conduct themselves with integrity, knowing that public trust is 
founded on integrity. Members shall not sacrifice integrity to serve the client, their 
employer, or the public interest. 
 
2 Prior to accepting the fraud examination, members shall investigate for potential 
conflicts of interest. Members shall disclose any potential conflicts of interest to 
prospective clients who retain them or their employer. 
 
3. Members shall maintain objectivity in disc harging their professional responsibilities 
within the scope of the engagement. 
 
4. Members shall not commit discreditable acts, and shall always conduct themselves in 
the best interests of the reputation of the profession. 
 
5. Members shall not knowingly make a false statement when testifying in a court of 
law or other dispute resolution forum. Members shall comply with lawful orders of 
the courts or other dispute resolution bodies. Members shall not commit criminal 
acts or knowingly induce others to do so. 
 
B. Professional Competence 
 
1. Members shall be competent and shall not accept assignments where this 
competence is lacking. In some circumstances, it may be possible to meet the 
requirement for professional competence by use of consultation or referral. 
 
2. Members shall maintain the minimum program of continuing professional education 
required by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. A commitment to 
professionalism combining education and experience shall continue throughout the 
member’s professional career. Members shall continually strive to increase the 
competence and effectiveness of their professional services. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  CFE Code of Professional Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1103 
C. Due Professional Care 
 
1. Members shall exercise due professional care in the performance of their services. 
Due professional care requires diligence, critical analysis and professional skepticism 
in discharging professional responsibilities. 
 
2. Conclusions shall be supported with evidence that is relevant, competent,  
and sufficient. 
 
3. Members’ professional services shall be ad equately planned. Planning controls the 
performance of a fraud examination from inception through completion and 
involves developing strategies and objectives for performing the services. 
 
4. Work performed by assistants on a fraud examination shall be adequately supervised. 
The extent of supervision required varies depending on the complexities of the work 
and the qualifications of the assistants. 
 
D. Understanding with Client or Employer 
 
1. At the beginning of a fraud examination, members shall reach an understanding with 
those retaining them (client or employer) about the scope and limitations of the 
fraud examination and the responsibilities of all parties involved. 
 
2. Whenever the scope or limitations of a fraud examination or the responsibilities of 
the parties change significantly, a new understanding shall be reached with the client 
or employer. 
 
E. Communication with Client or Employer 
 
1. Members shall communicate to those who retained them (client or employer) 
significant findings made during the normal course of the fraud examination. 
 
F. Confidentiality 
 
1. Members shall not disclose confidential or privileged information obtained during 
the course of the fraud examination without the express permission of proper 
authority or order of a court. This requirement does not preclude professional 
CFE Code of Professional Standards Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1104   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
practice or investigative body reviews as long as the reviewing organization agrees to 
abide by the confidentiality restrictions. 
 
IV. Standards of Examination 
 
A.  Fraud Examinations  
  
1.    Fraud examinations shall be conducted in a legal, professional, and thorough 
manner. The fraud examiner’s objective shall be to obtain evidence and information 
that is complete, reliable, and relevant.  
  
2.  Members shall establish predication and sc ope priorities at the outset of a fraud 
examination and continuously reevaluate them as the examination proceeds. 
Members shall strive for efficiency in their examination.   
  
3.  Members shall be alert to the possibility of conjecture, unsubstantiated opinion, and 
bias of witnesses and others. Members shall consider both exculpatory and 
inculpatory evidence. 
 
B. Evidence  
 
1.  Members shall endeavor to establish effective control and management procedures 
for documents. Members shall be cognizant of the chain of custody including origin, 
possession, and disposition of relevant evidence and material. Members shall strive 
to preserve the integrity of relevant evidence and material. 
 
2.  Members’ work product may vary with the circumstances of each fraud examination. 
The extent of documentation shall be subject to the needs and objectives of the 
client or employer.  
 
V. Standards of Reporting 
 
A. General 
 
1.  Members’ reports may be oral or written, including fact witness and/or expert 
witness testimony, and may take many different forms. There is no single structure 
or format that is prescribed for a member’s report; however, the report should not 
be misleading. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  CFE Code of Professional Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1105 
B. Report Content 
 
1. Members’ reports shall contain only information based on data that are sufficient 
and relevant to support the facts, conclusions, opinions, and/or recommendations 
related to the fraud examination. The report shall be confined to subject matter, 
principles, and methodologies within the member’s area of knowledge, skill, 
experience, training, or education. 
 
2.  No opinion shall be expressed regarding the legal guilt or innocence of any person  
or party. 
 



:


cfe code of profession standard
associ of certifi fraud examin
cfe code of profession standard
adopt by the board of regent februari 22 2001
at the board of regent meet in februari 2001 the board offici adopt the
follow cfe code of profession standard the standard expand on and provid
further guidanc for member on the ethic and profession duti list in the cfe code
of profession ethic
the standard were draft by the profession standard and practic committe the
committe will in the futur provid addit comment to supplement these standard
and will also develop practic scenario to assist member in the applic of the
standard
i preambl
the associ of certifi fraud examin is an associ of profession commit
to perform at the highest level of ethic conduct member of the associ pledg
themselv to act with integr and to perform their work in a profession manner
member have a profession respons to their client to the public interest and each
other a respons that requir subordin selfinterest to the interest of those
serv
these standard express basic principl of ethic behavior to guid member in the
fulfil of their duti and oblig by follow these standard all certifi fraud
examin shall be expect and all associ member shall strive to demonstr their
commit to excel in servic and profession conduct
ii applic of code
the cfe code of profession standard shall appli to all member and all associ
member of the associ of certifi fraud examin the us of the word member
or member in thi code shall refer to asso ciat member as well as regular member of
the associ of certifi fraud examin
cfe code of profession standard fraud prevent and deterr
41102 2011 fraud examin manual
iii standard of profession conduct
a integr and object
1 member shall conduct themselv with integr know that public trust is
found on integr member shall not sacrific integr to serv the client their
employ or the public interest
2 prior to accept the fraud examin member shall investig for potenti
conflict of interest member shall disclos ani potenti conflict of interest to
prospect client who retain them or their employ
3 member shall maintain object in disc harg their profession respons
within the scope of the engag
4 member shall not commit discredit act and shall alwai conduct themselv in
the best interest of the reput of the profess
5 member shall not knowingli make a fals statement when testifi in a court of
law or other disput resolut forum member shall compli with law order of
the court or other disput resolut bodi member shall not commit crimin
act or knowingli induc other to do so
b profession compet
1 member shall be compet and shall not accept assign where thi
compet is lack in some circumst it mai be possibl to meet the
requir for profession compet by us of consult or referr
2 member shall maintain the minimum program of continu profession educ
requir by the associ of certifi fraud examin a commit to
profession combin educ and experi shall continu throughout the
member profession career member shall continu strive to increas the
compet and effect of their profession servic
fraud prevent and deterr cfe code of profession standard
2011 fraud examin manual 41103
c due profession care
1 member shall exercis due profession care in the perform of their servic
due profession care requir dilig critic analysi and profession skeptic
in discharg profession respons
2 conclus shall be support with evid that is relev compet
and suffici
3 member profession servic shall be ad equat plan plan control the
perform of a fraud examin from incept through complet and
involv develop strategi and object for perform the servic
4 work perform by assist on a fraud examin shall be adequ supervis
the extent of supervis requir vari depend on the complex of the work
and the qualif of the assist
d understand with client or employ
1 at the begin of a fraud examin member shall reach an understand with
those retain them client or employ about the scope and limit of the
fraud examin and the respons of all parti involv
2 whenev the scope or limit of a fraud examin or the respons of
the parti chang significantli a new understand shall be reach with the client
or employ
e commun with client or employ
1 member shall commun to those who retain them client or employ
signific find made dure the normal cours of the fraud examin
f confidenti
1 member shall not disclos confidenti or privileg inform obtain dure
the cours of the fraud examin without the express permiss of proper
author or order of a court thi requir doe not preclud profession
cfe code of profession standard fraud prevent and deterr
41104 2011 fraud examin manual
practic or investig bodi review as long as the review organ agre to
abid by the confidenti restrict
iv standard of examin
a fraud examin
1 fraud examin shall be conduct in a legal profession and thorough
manner the fraud examin object shall be to obtain evid and inform
that is complet reliabl and relev
2 member shall establish predic and sc op prioriti at the outset of a fraud
examin and continu reevalu them as the examin proce
member shall strive for effici in their examin
3 member shall be alert to the possibl of conjectur unsubstanti opinion and
bia of wit and other member shall consid both exculpatori and
inculpatori evid
b evid
1 member shall endeavor to establish effect control and manag procedur
for document member shall be cogniz of the chain of custodi includ origin
possess and disposit of relev evid and materi member shall strive
to preserv the integr of relev evid and materi
2 member work product mai vari with the circumst of each fraud examin
the extent of document shall be subject to the need and object of the
client or employ
v standard of report
a gener
1 member report mai be oral or written includ fact wit andor expert
wit testimoni and mai take mani differ form there is no singl structur
or format that is prescrib for a member report howev the report should not
be mislead
fraud prevent and deterr cfe code of profession standard
2011 fraud examin manual 41105
b report content
1 member report shall contain onli inform base on data that ar suffici
and relev to support the fact conclus opinion andor recommend
relat to the fraud examin the report shall be confin to subject matter
principl and methodolog within the member area of knowledg skill
experi train or educ
2 no opinion shall be express regard the legal guilt or innoc of ani person
or parti
