2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Conducting an Investigation Involving Computers/Digital Evidence


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Digital Evidence 
Digital evidence, when boiled down to its basics, is simply binary data (ones and zeroes) that 
is interpreted by the computer. Everything that is digitally stored is made up of these ones 
and zeroes, from the programs themselves to the data with which the programs interact. 
Interpreters built into the program show these ones and zeroes as hex code. This hex code is 
then translated onto the page or website seen on the computer screen. 
 
As the professional use computer technology increases, so does the criminal use. Financial 
crimes and frauds committed are probably the most common types of computer crimes 
committed. The investigation of financial crimes generally requires a level of expertise not 
commonly held by all investigators; therefore,  there is additional knowledge and experience 
required when conducting a forensic computer examination in a financial or fraud case.  
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.702   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There are three types of situations in which computer evidence is generally discovered: (1) 
computers as the target of crime, (2) computers as the instrument of crime, and (3) 
computers as the repository of evidence. 
 
Computers themselves can be the targets of crime. Crimes committed against computers 
include computer and computer-component theft, system intrusions, software piracy, and 
software theft. 
 
Computers can also be used to facilitate a crime. When this occurs, the computer is known 
as the tool or instrument  of crime. In such cases, as one would expect, examiners commonly 
encounter computers that have been used in offenses such as the solicitation of minors in 
chat rooms, check fraud, and counterfeiting. 
 
Generally speaking, in all computer investigations the examiner attempts to locate the 
storage of potential digital evidence, in one form or another, on the computer system. The 
computer system involved in the investigation is a potential repository of evidence whether 
the user intended to store an item or not. Therefore, the examiner is interested in 
incriminating evidence that the user intentionally or unintentionally stored on the computer 
system. 
 



:


digit evid
digit evid when boil down to it basic is simpli binari data on and zero that
is interpret by the comput everyth that is digit store is made up of these on
and zero from the program themselv to the data with which the program interact
interpret built into the program show these on and zero as hex code thi hex code is
then translat onto the page or websit seen on the comput screen
as the profession us comput technolog increas so doe the crimin us financi
crime and fraud commit ar probabl the most common type of comput crime
commit the investig of financi crime gener requir a level of expertis not
commonli held by all investig therefor there is addit knowledg and experi
requir when conduct a forens comput examin in a financi or fraud case
digit forens investig
3702 2011 fraud examin manual
there ar three type of situat in which comput evid is gener discov 1
comput as the target of crime 2 comput as the instrument of crime and 3
comput as the repositori of evid
comput themselv can be the target of crime crime commit against comput
includ comput and computercompon theft system intrus softwar piraci and
softwar theft
comput can also be us to facilit a crime when thi occur the comput is known
as the tool or instrument of crime in such case as on would expect examin commonli
encount comput that have been us in offens such as the solicit of minor in
chat room check fraud and counterfeit
gener speak in all comput investig the examin attempt to locat the
storag of potenti digit evid in on form or anoth on the comput system the
comput system involv in the investig is a potenti repositori of evid whether
the user intend to store an item or not therefor the examin is interest in
incrimin evid that the user intention or unintention store on the comput
system
