2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Computer Investigations and Computer Forensics/Seizing Digital Evidence


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Seizing Digital Evidence 
Perhaps the most critical step in the forensics process is how data is collected or acquired. 
Acquisition of digital evidence must be completed in such a way as to ensure that all relevant 
evidence is seized and secured in a forensically sound manner so that the evidence is not 
tainted or destroyed.  
 
In fact, there are a number of practical considerations and procedures to employ when the 
decision is made to go forward with a computer seizure. One of the primary considerations 
that is often neglected is debriefing the subject, which involves asking the subject for 
passwords and whether any encrypted data exists on the target computer. 
 
The Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence (SWGDE) from the Organization of 
American States has published a document, titled Best Practices for Computer Forensics, 
which provides a good foundation for digital forensics examiners. Although a complete 
                                                 
5  Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence of the National Center for Forensic Science. Best Practices for 
Computer Forensics V2, 2006. http://www.oas.org/juridico/s panish/cyb_best_pract.pdf.  
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.716   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
review of the entire document is beyond the scope of this course, several guidelines deserve 
review. According to the SWGDE, examiners should adhere to the following guidelines: 
• Before obtaining evidence, ensure that there is legal authority to seize evidence and 
review the data associated with the evidence. This may require obtaining a warrant in a 
criminal matter or ensuring that internal policies authorize seizure for an internal 
investigation.  
• If removing evidence from the scene is impractical, copy or image the items of evidence 
according to established procedures. 
• Remove all suspects, witnesses, and bystanders from the proximity of the digital 
evidence. Keep in mind that remote access to computers can put potential evidence at 
risk even if no person has physical access to the computer. Also, consider the wide range 
of mobile data storage devices today (e.g., USB flash drives) that can be hidden. 
• Ensure that no suspects, witnesses, and bystanders possess any items containing 
potential evidence.   
• Thoroughly and systematically search the scene for potential evidence. Once again, 
consider the wide range of data storage media and devices.  
 
Unless completely unavoidable, data should not be analyzed on the machine from which it 
was collected. Instead, the examiner should make forensically sound copies of all data 
storage devices — primarily hard drives — and analyze the data on these copies.  
 
To ensure that a machine can be fully analyzed, the examiner should take the following 
steps: 
• Examine and document the machine’s surroundings. 
• Secure the evidence. 
• Power down carefully. 
• Inspect for traps. 
• Implement a system to manage the evidence. 
 



:


seiz digit evid
perhap the most critic step in the forens process is how data is collect or acquir
acquisit of digit evid must be complet in such a wai as to ensur that all relev
evid is seiz and secur in a forens sound manner so that the evid is not
taint or destroi
in fact there ar a number of practic consider and procedur to emploi when the
decis is made to go forward with a comput seizur on of the primari consider
that is often neglect is debrief the subject which involv ask the subject for
password and whether ani encrypt data exist on the target comput
the scientif work group on digit evid swgde from the organ of
american state ha publish a document titl best practic for comput forens
which provid a good foundat for digit forens examin although a complet
5 scientif work group on digit evid of the nation center for forens scienc best practic for
comput forens v2 2006 httpwwwoasorgjuridico panishcybbestpractpdf
digit forens investig
3716 2011 fraud examin manual
review of the entir document is beyond the scope of thi cours sever guidelin deserv
review accord to the swgde examin should adher to the follow guidelin
befor obtain evid ensur that there is legal author to seiz evid and
review the data associ with the evid thi mai requir obtain a warrant in a
crimin matter or ensur that intern polici author seizur for an intern
investig
if remov evid from the scene is impract copi or imag the item of evid
accord to establish procedur
remov all suspect wit and bystand from the proxim of the digit
evid keep in mind that remot access to comput can put potenti evid at
risk even if no person ha physic access to the comput also consid the wide rang
of mobil data storag devic todai eg usb flash drive that can be hidden
ensur that no suspect wit and bystand possess ani item contain
potenti evid
thoroughli and systemat search the scene for potenti evid onc again
consid the wide rang of data storag media and devic
unless complet unavoid data should not be analyz on the machin from which it
wa collect instead the examin should make forens sound copi of all data
storag devic primarili hard drive and analyz the data on these copi
to ensur that a machin can be fulli analyz the examin should take the follow
step
examin and document the machin surround
secur the evid
power down carefulli
inspect for trap
implement a system to manag the evid
