2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Computer Investigations and Computer Forensics/Analysis


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Analysis 
The analysis phase is arguably the most time-consuming phase, especially for a financial 
crime or fraud investigation. This phase involves the use of specialized software designed to 
give the examiner the means to locate and extract artifacts that will be used as evidence in 
the investigation. The evidence can serve to incriminate the subject of the investigation or it 
can be exculpatory by disproving the subject’s involvement. 
 
The primary concern when analyzing electronically stored information (ESI) is to maintain 
its integrity. Examiners must be careful with computer equipment because a careless 
investigator may inadvertently alter important evidence. Therefore, it is helpful to develop 
procedures to prevent the opposing party from raising allegations that the methodology used 
to collect or analyze data was improper and could have damaged or altered the evidence. It 
may also be helpful to use a hardware-based write-blocking device to protect the integrity of 
digital evidence. 
 
One method to help ensure the integrity of digi tal evidence is to maintain a chain of custody 
for all evidence gathered and analyzed. The chain of custody  is both a process and a document 
that memorializes (1) who has had possession of an object, and (2) what they have done with 
it; it is simply a means of establishing that there has not been a material change or alteration 
to a piece of evidence. Gaps in the chain of custody (e.g., when it is not clear what occurred 
with a set of records) or outright mishandling (e.g., a group of questioned documents was 
not properly sealed) can harm a case.  
 
At a minimum, the following chain of custody procedures should be followed for digital 
evidence: 
• Identify each item that contains relevant information.  
• Document each item, who it was received from, who authorized its removal, the location 
of the item, and the date and time the item was received.  
• Maintain a continuous record of the item’s custody as it changes hands.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.721 



:


analysi
the analysi phase is arguabl the most timeconsum phase especi for a financi
crime or fraud investig thi phase involv the us of special softwar design to
give the examin the mean to locat and extract artifact that will be us as evid in
the investig the evid can serv to incrimin the subject of the investig or it
can be exculpatori by disprov the subject involv
the primari concern when analyz electron store inform esi is to maintain
it integr examin must be care with comput equip becaus a careless
investig mai inadvert alter import evid therefor it is help to develop
procedur to prevent the oppos parti from rais alleg that the methodolog us
to collect or analyz data wa improp and could have damag or alter the evid it
mai also be help to us a hardwarebas writeblock devic to protect the integr of
digit evid
on method to help ensur the integr of digi tal evid is to maintain a chain of custodi
for all evid gather and analyz the chain of custodi is both a process and a document
that memori 1 who ha had possess of an object and 2 what thei have done with
it it is simpli a mean of establish that there ha not been a materi chang or alter
to a piec of evid gap in the chain of custodi eg when it is not clear what occur
with a set of record or outright mishandl eg a group of question document wa
not properli seal can harm a case
at a minimum the follow chain of custodi procedur should be follow for digit
evid
identifi each item that contain relev inform
document each item who it wa receiv from who author it remov the locat
of the item and the date and time the item wa receiv
maintain a continu record of the item custodi as it chang hand
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3721
