2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Forensic Examination and Analysis


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Forensic Examination and Analysis 
While every fraud examiner should have basic knowledge of computer evidence and how to 
properly identify, collect, and store digital evidence, some fraud examiners may decide to 
pursue additional training in the area of computer forensic analysis. The process of 
developing the skill set necessary to be a computer-forensic examiner takes a considerable 
amount of time, training, and experience. Additionally, there are a number of software and 
hardware tools that are now available to conduct this type of work; the forensic examiner 
must be aware of these tools and understand how they work.  
 
Again, a forensic analysis of a computer could involve the examination of a tremendous 
volume of data. In 1993, the average hard disk was 60 megabytes (MB) in size. The standard 
size in 1999 was 8 gigabytes (GB), and currently, the average size of hard disks offered is 
between 120 GB and 1.9 terabytes. 
 
Forensic examiners will generally use at least two software tools on a project simultaneously 
to cross-validate their results. It is also important to note that many insufficiently trained 
examiners who use automated tools do not in fact understand what the automated process is 
doing. It is extremely important to understand and be able to articulate how a tool is 
conducting an automated process. This means that a forensic examiner who uses an 
automated tool should be able to explain how to conduct the same process manually.  
 
Because the primary concern when collecting and analyzing digital evidence is to maintain its 
integrity, forensic examiners must be careful with computer equipment. Therefore, it is 
helpful to develop procedures to prevent the opposing party from raising allegations that the 
methodology used to collect or analyze data was improper and could have damaged or 
altered the evidence. It may also be helpful to use a hardware or software write-blocking 
device to protect the integrity of digital evidence. These devices allow the user to acquire 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.722   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
information on a drive without damaging the drive contents by allowing read commands to 
pass and blocking write commands.  
 
A hardware write-blocking devise stops  any automated processes or incidental processes 
that an operating system or examiner may use to interact with a piece of digital media. That 
is, the devise tricks the operating system into believing that the interaction occurred so that it 
will not generate an error and thwart the acquisition process. What actually happens is that 
the write commands are intercepted and cached by the device instead of reaching the target; 
therefore, no writes to the media occur. The device allows only read permissions to the 
media.  
 
The software write blocker, however, denies access to media by prohibiting certain requests 
to the media by filtering out those requests. Only read requests are accepted and all write 
requests are denied. Software write blockers must operate at a separate level than a standard 
graphical user’s interface (GUI), such as in DOS mode. There are a number of these types of 
devices on the market today made for all applications and media types. 
 



:


forens examin and analysi
while everi fraud examin should have basic knowledg of comput evid and how to
properli identifi collect and store digit evid some fraud examin mai decid to
pursu addit train in the area of comput forens analysi the process of
develop the skill set necessari to be a computerforens examin take a consider
amount of time train and experi addition there ar a number of softwar and
hardwar tool that ar now avail to conduct thi type of work the forens examin
must be awar of these tool and understand how thei work
again a forens analysi of a comput could involv the examin of a tremend
volum of data in 1993 the averag hard disk wa 60 megabyt mb in size the standard
size in 1999 wa 8 gigabyt gb and current the averag size of hard disk offer is
between 120 gb and 19 terabyt
forens examin will gener us at least two softwar tool on a project simultan
to crossvalid their result it is also import to note that mani insuffici train
examin who us autom tool do not in fact understand what the autom process is
do it is extrem import to understand and be abl to articul how a tool is
conduct an autom process thi mean that a forens examin who us an
autom tool should be abl to explain how to conduct the same process manual
becaus the primari concern when collect and analyz digit evid is to maintain it
integr forens examin must be care with comput equip therefor it is
help to develop procedur to prevent the oppos parti from rais alleg that the
methodolog us to collect or analyz data wa improp and could have damag or
alter the evid it mai also be help to us a hardwar or softwar writeblock
devic to protect the integr of digit evid these devic allow the user to acquir
digit forens investig
3722 2011 fraud examin manual
inform on a drive without damag the drive content by allow read command to
pass and block write command
a hardwar writeblock devis stop ani autom process or incident process
that an oper system or examin mai us to interact with a piec of digit media that
is the devis trick the oper system into believ that the interact occur so that it
will not gener an error and thwart the acquisit process what actual happen is that
the write command ar intercept and cach by the devic instead of reach the target
therefor no write to the media occur the devic allow onli read permiss to the
media
the softwar write blocker howev deni access to media by prohibit certain request
to the media by filter out those request onli read request ar accept and all write
request ar deni softwar write blocker must oper at a separ level than a standard
graphic user interfac gui such as in do mode there ar a number of these type of
devic on the market todai made for all applic and media type
