2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Digital Forensics Software/Gargoyle Investigator Forensic Pro Edition


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Gargoyle Investigator Forensic Pro Edition  
Gargoyle Investigator is a software tool created by WetStone for digital investigations. It is 
used for performing incident responses, field investigations, digital forensic analysis, threat 
management, or compliance audits. Gargoyle Investigator performs a quick search on a 
stand-alone system for known contraband or hostile, or “bad,” programs. It also provides 
clues regarding the activities, motives, and intent of suspects or potential suspects. 
  
Gargoyle Investigator Forensic Pro Edition provides investigators with information 
regarding the contents of a suspect’s computer along with information about its owner’s 
computer use. Gargoyle performs searches for known bad or hostile programs, their 
associated files, and remnants of files. Once identified, Gargoyle also maps the detected files 
to the associated cyber weapons and classifies them into a category of malware.  
 
The Forensic Pro Edition is designed for forensic investigators, examiners, law enforcement 
personnel, private investigators, and forensic lab use.  
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.734   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Gargyole 
 
Gargoyle provides the investigator with the ability to gather suspect characteristics from the 
information revealed. The computer’s sophisticat ion, covert behaviors, and paranoia levels 
(has the suspect tried to delete incriminating programs?) can all be derived when searching 
for applications with a common theme. These behaviors can assist in assessing suspect 
capability, activities, intent, threat, or consciousness of guilt. 
 
For more information about Forensic Pro Edition and other products by WetStone, visit 
www.wetstonetech.com. 
 



:


gargoyl investig forens pro edit
gargoyl investig is a softwar tool creat by wetston for digit investig it is
us for perform incid respons field investig digit forens analysi threat
manag or complianc audit gargoyl investig perform a quick search on a
standalon system for known contraband or hostil or bad program it also provid
clue regard the activ motiv and intent of suspect or potenti suspect
gargoyl investig forens pro edit provid investig with inform
regard the content of a suspect comput along with inform about it owner
comput us gargoyl perform search for known bad or hostil program their
associ file and remnant of file onc identifi gargoyl also map the detect file
to the associ cyber weapon and classifi them into a categori of malwar
the forens pro edit is design for forens investig examin law enforc
personnel privat investig and forens lab us
digit forens investig
3734 2011 fraud examin manual
gargyol
gargoyl provid the investig with the abil to gather suspect characterist from the
inform reveal the comput sophisticat ion covert behavior and paranoia level
ha the suspect tri to delet incrimin program can all be deriv when search
for applic with a common theme these behavior can assist in assess suspect
capabl activ intent threat or conscious of guilt
for more inform about forens pro edit and other product by wetston visit
wwwwetstonetechcom
