2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Negotiated Checks/CHECK 21


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


CHECK 21 
“With image exchange, and the emerging fraud detection technology, banks will be able to 
know if sufficient funds are in the account … whether the customer is who he claims to be 
… and whether the check is legitimate.” 6 
 
In July 2003, Congress issued final regulations regarding the availability of funds and 
collection of checks. These regulations, known as “Check 21,” created “substitute checks,” a 
type of negotiable instrument that became the legal equivalent of paper checks. This 
provision facilitates the efficient collection and return of checks in electronic form by 
alleviating the collection requirement that depository banks actually send the original paper 
checks to collecting banks for payment.  
 
Under Check 21, a depository bank can transfer check information electronically to a 
collecting bank via a substitute check for presentment. The collecting bank is then required 
to take presentment of the substitute check as long as it meets all the legal requirements of 
the original check. Therefore, rather than actually processing and sending an original  
paper check across cities and states, the depositing bank can now collect the substitute  
check electronically. 
 
A substitute check is a paper reproduction of the original check that states, “This is a legal 
copy of your check. You can use it the same  way you would use the original check.” Upon 
transfer, presentment, or return, a bank warrants that the substitute check submitted is an 
accurate depiction of the physical check, and that no depository bank, drawee, drawer, or 
endorser will be asked or required to pay a check that has already been paid. Essentially, this 
legend on the substitute check informs consumers of their rights to expedited recrediting of 
an amount charged if there is a disputed item and the original or substituted copy is 
necessary to prove the validity of the charge on the account. Under this law, the validity of a 
charge becomes an issue when a consumer is charged twice for a check, the substitute check 
is illegible, or the original check was not properly copied during the imaging process. 
 
Furthermore, Check 21 places the risk of loss associated with substitute checks on the 
reconverting bank that first transferred, presented, or returned the substitute check. 
                                                 
6 Robertson, Bill and Ken Gahre. White-Collar Crime Fighter. Vol. 6, No. 1, Check 21: Blackjack for Check Fraud 
Fighters?   Ridgefield, CT: White Collar Crime101, LLC., 2004. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.813 
Although the reconverting banks can allocate such loss among themselves, they may remain 
liable under warranty claim, indemnity, or recrediting claims. 
 



:


check 21
with imag exchang and the emerg fraud detect technolog bank will be abl to
know if suffici fund ar in the account whether the custom is who he claim to be
and whether the check is legitim 6
in juli 2003 congress issu final regul regard the avail of fund and
collect of check these regul known as check 21 creat substitut check a
type of negoti instrument that becam the legal equival of paper check thi
provis facilit the effici collect and return of check in electron form by
allevi the collect requir that depositori bank actual send the origin paper
check to collect bank for payment
under check 21 a depositori bank can transfer check inform electron to a
collect bank via a substitut check for present the collect bank is then requir
to take present of the substitut check as long as it meet all the legal requir of
the origin check therefor rather than actual process and send an origin
paper check across citi and state the deposit bank can now collect the substitut
check electron
a substitut check is a paper reproduct of the origin check that state thi is a legal
copi of your check you can us it the same wai you would us the origin check upon
transfer present or return a bank warrant that the substitut check submit is an
accur depict of the physic check and that no depositori bank drawe drawer or
endors will be ask or requir to pai a check that ha alreadi been paid essenti thi
legend on the substitut check inform consum of their right to expedit recredit of
an amount charg if there is a disput item and the origin or substitut copi is
necessari to prove the valid of the charg on the account under thi law the valid of a
charg becom an issu when a consum is charg twice for a check the substitut check
is illeg or the origin check wa not properli copi dure the imag process
furthermor check 21 place the risk of loss associ with substitut check on the
reconvert bank that first transfer present or return the substitut check
6 robertson bill and ken gahr whitecollar crime fighter vol 6 no 1 check 21 blackjack for check fraud
fighter ridgefield ct white collar crime101 llc 2004
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3813
although the reconvert bank can alloc such loss among themselv thei mai remain
liabl under warranti claim indemn or recredit claim
