2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Deposit Tickets/ON-US ITEMS


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


ON-US ITEMS 
An on-us item  is a check or draft that is presented for payment where the depository bank is 
also the payor bank. For example, a check written by a customer of one bank is deposited by 
the payee at another branch of the same bank. The bank should be able to trace the source 
of any on-us items. The source might be loan proceeds, certificates of deposit, wire transfers, 
bank checks, or checks from other deposits at that bank. If the deposit is the proceeds from 
a loan, obtain and analyze the loan file (examination of the loan file is discussed later in this 
chapter). If the deposit came from a wire transfer, trace the wire transfer to the originating 
bank to see where the funds for the wire transfer originated. This search could lead to other 
accounts, other witnesses, co-conspirators, or offshore transactions. 
 
Bank checks (such as cashier’s checks and money orders) could be an indication of smurfing 
operations. Smurfing  is the process by which a subject structures a deposit into several 
transactions, each less than $10,000, to avoid filing a currency transaction report as required 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.817 
under the Bank Secrecy Act. As the video portion of this course makes clear, smurfing is a 
very common technique for avoiding reporting requirements. Look for large numbers of 
cashier’s checks in even amounts deposited on a regular basis.  
 



:


onu item
an onu item is a check or draft that is present for payment where the depositori bank is
also the payor bank for exampl a check written by a custom of on bank is deposit by
the paye at anoth branch of the same bank the bank should be abl to trace the sourc
of ani onu item the sourc might be loan proce certif of deposit wire transfer
bank check or check from other deposit at that bank if the deposit is the proce from
a loan obtain and analyz the loan file examin of the loan file is discuss later in thi
chapter if the deposit came from a wire transfer trace the wire transfer to the origin
bank to see where the fund for the wire transfer origin thi search could lead to other
account other wit coconspir or offshor transact
bank check such as cashier check and monei order could be an indic of smurf
oper smurf is the process by which a subject structur a deposit into sever
transact each less than 10000 to avoid file a currenc transact report as requir
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3817
under the bank secreci act as the video portion of thi cours make clear smurf is a
veri common techniqu for avoid report requir look for larg number of
cashier check in even amount deposit on a regular basi
