2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Establish a Database


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Establish a Database 
After obtaining the relevant financial records, the examiner should establish a database or 
spreadsheet for analysis. By placing the records into a standardized format, the fraud 
examiner will be more easily able to compare records, uncover patterns, and extract various 
representations of the data.  
 
Both spreadsheets and databases have benefits and drawbacks. The benefits of using 
spreadsheets include: (1) most individuals who work in the financial sector are familiar with 
spreadsheets; (2) spreadsheets allow data to be translated easily into bar, pie, and other 
graphic charts; (3) they allow data to be filtered and sorted easily; (4) and spreadsheets allow 
for the use of pivot tables to display data. Spreadsheets, however, are restricted to a limited 
number of records and may require a large amount of hard-drive space for data storage. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.826   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Conversely, databases are more effective than spreadsheets when dealing with large sets of 
records. Databases offer the following features: (1) data can be sorted and manipulated 
easily; (2) changes to records can automatically update queries and reports; and (3) relational 
tables and forms can be used to reduce data entry time. In some environments (such as 
Microsoft Office), data can be easily switched from a spreadsheet to a database, and vice 
versa, for ease of manipulation or display. 
 
Regardless of the type of program used, the information used is the same. The type of 
information retrieved from financial records is the data entered into the spreadsheet or 
database. Each column or field holds some type of information, and this information forms 
the basis for the columns used. As illustrated in the table below, there are 16 primary 
elements that can be pulled from banking records. An additional field for comments is added 
for miscellaneous data. 
 
1. Check number 9. Signatory 
2. Entity from 10. Account number from 
3. Bank from 11. Transaction type 
4. Date written 12. First endorser 
5. Payee 13. Transaction bank 
6. Amount written 14. Deposited to account 
7. Amount deposited 15. Date of transaction 
8. Memo written 16. Comments 
 17. Location 
 
Details on what goes into each of these fields are provided below: 
1. Check number : This field should contain the number of the financial instrument written on 
or deposited to the account. The following items, however, will not contain a check 
number: wire transaction, automated teller machine transaction, point-of-sale 
transaction, and debit memo. A deposited amount would include a check number unless 
the deposit was cash, an incoming wire, or a credit memo. 
2. Entity from : This field should contain the name of the company or person the check is 
from—the owner of the account on which the check is written.  
3. Bank from : This field should contain the name of the bank from which the check, debit 
memo, or wire transfer was issued. If desired, the ABA bank number can also be entered 
to identify the bank’s source of the funds. 
4. Date written : This field should contain the date the check was written, the transaction 
(e.g., wire transfer or debit memo) was generated, or the withdrawal was made. This is 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.827 
not the date shown on the bank statement; bank statements show the clearing dates—
 the dates that checks clear the bank. The clearing date can be used if no other dates are 
present (e.g., if there is no check copy provided by the bank, but the check is listed on 
the statement). 
5. Payee : This field should contain the name of the payee—the person or entity to whom 
the check was written.  
6. Amount written : This field should contain the amount written on the face of the check. If 
there is a discrepancy between the numerical and written amounts,  the bank will usually 
honor the written amount. Check the amount the bank has imprinted on the bottom 
right-hand side of the check in magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) to determine 
which amount the bank used. 
7. Deposited amount : This field should contain the amount of money credited to the bank 
account by a cash or check deposit, wire transfer, or credit memo. This amount is put 
into a field separate from the amount written for ease of separating, sorting, and adding 
the amounts. 
8. Memo : This field should contain any notation written on the “Memo” line or box on the 
check. 
9. Signatory : This field should contain the name of the person (or persons) who signed the 
check as the authorized signatory. When entering the data into this field, initials are 
sufficient if the person referenced is clear. 
10. Account number from : This field should contain the account number on which the check, 
debit memo, or wire transfer was written. 
11. Transaction type : This field should contain the type of transaction (e.g., check, transfer, 
wire, debit memo, credit memo, deposit, ATM deposit or withdrawal, or ATM 
purchase).  
12. First endorser : This field should contain the name of  the first endorser. The first endorser 
is the person or persons who endorsed the check (i.e., signed the check on the back as 
the endorser). On checks made out to a company,  the back of the check may be 
stamped with the company name, bank, and account number and no endorsing signature 
should be shown.  
13. Transaction bank : This field should contain the name of the bank the item was deposited 
to (or where the check was cashed). This could be the bank from which records have 
been subpoenaed, the bank stamped on the back of the check, or the bank at which the 
check was cashed. If the check was negotiated at a non-bank financial institution (e.g., 
check cashing agency, money transmitter, or casino), the name of that company can be 
placed here with other specifics entered in the “comments” field. 
14. Deposited to account : This field should contain the account number to which the check was 
deposited. It should be noted that some banks write the account number on the back of 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.828   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
checks when cashed; this serves as an identifier for the check casher. Therefore, a bank 
account number located on the back of a check may not mean that the check was 
deposited into that account. Remember to check the front of the check for a “cashed” 
stamp. 
15. Date of transaction : This field should contain the date the check was deposited or 
negotiated. 
16. Comments : The comments field is used for other comments about the transaction. NSF 
could be entered into the comments field to signify that there were non-sufficient funds 
to cover the check. Additional information about the endorser (e.g., driver’s license or 
alien registration number), the name of a secondary endorser, or notes written on the 
back of the check by the teller could also be placed in the comments field.  
1 7.  Location : This field should be used for transactions made at an automated teller machine 
or a point-of-sale if the location is important. 
 
There are three rules to follow when entering records into a spreadsheet or database:  
• Enter data as fully as possible 
• Be consistent in referring to entities 
• Have all records reviewed for accuracy 
 
Entering the data completely will help avoid having to enter data into the records a second 
time. In the past, some users of financial records entered the check and deposit data located 
on the statements first, and then entered the information from cancelled checks as the 
checks were obtained. This, however, should not be done. Although transactions that are 
found only on statements can be entered into the database, check and deposit data should be 
entered from the checks written and deposit slips.  
 
When inputting data, consistency is important. Even if check writers have not been 
consistent in their spelling or use of names, the entered data must be consisted. Otherwise, 
the sorting results will not be accurate. If, for example, a different version of a name is used, 
the various names can be placed in the comments field. 
 
Finally, all records entered should be double or triple-checked for accuracy. It is preferable 
that the review is conducted by someone who did not enter the data because it is hard to 
catch one’s own errors. For example, one way to check the amounts in a field is by tying 
them to the totals on the statements.  
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.829 



:


establish a databas
after obtain the relev financi record the examin should establish a databas or
spreadsheet for analysi by place the record into a standard format the fraud
examin will be more easili abl to compar record uncov pattern and extract variou
represent of the data
both spreadsheet and databas have benefit and drawback the benefit of us
spreadsheet includ 1 most individu who work in the financi sector ar familiar with
spreadsheet 2 spreadsheet allow data to be translat easili into bar pie and other
graphic chart 3 thei allow data to be filter and sort easili 4 and spreadsheet allow
for the us of pivot tabl to displai data spreadsheet howev ar restrict to a limit
number of record and mai requir a larg amount of harddriv space for data storag
trace illicit transact investig
3826 2011 fraud examin manual
convers databas ar more effect than spreadsheet when deal with larg set of
record databas offer the follow featur 1 data can be sort and manipul
easili 2 chang to record can automat updat queri and report and 3 relat
tabl and form can be us to reduc data entri time in some environ such as
microsoft offic data can be easili switch from a spreadsheet to a databas and vice
versa for eas of manipul or displai
regardless of the type of program us the inform us is the same the type of
inform retriev from financi record is the data enter into the spreadsheet or
databas each column or field hold some type of inform and thi inform form
the basi for the column us as illustr in the tabl below there ar 16 primari
element that can be pull from bank record an addit field for comment is ad
for miscellan data
1 check number 9 signatori
2 entiti from 10 account number from
3 bank from 11 transact type
4 date written 12 first endors
5 paye 13 transact bank
6 amount written 14 deposit to account
7 amount deposit 15 date of transact
8 memo written 16 comment
17 locat
detail on what goe into each of these field ar provid below
1 check number thi field should contain the number of the financi instrument written on
or deposit to the account the follow item howev will not contain a check
number wire transact autom teller machin transact pointofsal
transact and debit memo a deposit amount would includ a check number unless
the deposit wa cash an incom wire or a credit memo
2 entiti from thi field should contain the name of the compani or person the check is
fromth owner of the account on which the check is written
3 bank from thi field should contain the name of the bank from which the check debit
memo or wire transfer wa issu if desir the aba bank number can also be enter
to identifi the bank sourc of the fund
4 date written thi field should contain the date the check wa written the transact
eg wire transfer or debit memo wa gener or the withdraw wa made thi is
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3827
not the date shown on the bank statement bank statement show the clear date
the date that check clear the bank the clear date can be us if no other date ar
present eg if there is no check copi provid by the bank but the check is list on
the statement
5 paye thi field should contain the name of the payeeth person or entiti to whom
the check wa written
6 amount written thi field should contain the amount written on the face of the check if
there is a discrep between the numer and written amount the bank will usual
honor the written amount check the amount the bank ha imprint on the bottom
righthand side of the check in magnet ink charact recognit micr to determin
which amount the bank us
7 deposit amount thi field should contain the amount of monei credit to the bank
account by a cash or check deposit wire transfer or credit memo thi amount is put
into a field separ from the amount written for eas of separ sort and ad
the amount
8 memo thi field should contain ani notat written on the memo line or box on the
check
9 signatori thi field should contain the name of the person or person who sign the
check as the author signatori when enter the data into thi field initi ar
suffici if the person referenc is clear
10 account number from thi field should contain the account number on which the check
debit memo or wire transfer wa written
11 transact type thi field should contain the type of transact eg check transfer
wire debit memo credit memo deposit atm deposit or withdraw or atm
purchas
12 first endors thi field should contain the name of the first endors the first endors
is the person or person who endors the check ie sign the check on the back as
the endors on check made out to a compani the back of the check mai be
stamp with the compani name bank and account number and no endors signatur
should be shown
13 transact bank thi field should contain the name of the bank the item wa deposit
to or where the check wa cash thi could be the bank from which record have
been subpoena the bank stamp on the back of the check or the bank at which the
check wa cash if the check wa negoti at a nonbank financi institut eg
check cash agenc monei transmitt or casino the name of that compani can be
place here with other specif enter in the comment field
14 deposit to account thi field should contain the account number to which the check wa
deposit it should be note that some bank write the account number on the back of
trace illicit transact investig
3828 2011 fraud examin manual
check when cash thi serv as an identifi for the check casher therefor a bank
account number locat on the back of a check mai not mean that the check wa
deposit into that account rememb to check the front of the check for a cash
stamp
15 date of transact thi field should contain the date the check wa deposit or
negoti
16 comment the comment field is us for other comment about the transact nsf
could be enter into the comment field to signifi that there were nonsuffici fund
to cover the check addit inform about the endors eg driver licens or
alien registr number the name of a secondari endors or note written on the
back of the check by the teller could also be place in the comment field
1 7 locat thi field should be us for transact made at an autom teller machin
or a pointofsal if the locat is import
there ar three rule to follow when enter record into a spreadsheet or databas
enter data as fulli as possibl
be consist in refer to entiti
have all record review for accuraci
enter the data complet will help avoid have to enter data into the record a second
time in the past some user of financi record enter the check and deposit data locat
on the statement first and then enter the inform from cancel check as the
check were obtain thi howev should not be done although transact that ar
found onli on statement can be enter into the databas check and deposit data should be
enter from the check written and deposit slip
when input data consist is import even if check writer have not been
consist in their spell or us of name the enter data must be consist otherwis
the sort result will not be accur if for exampl a differ version of a name is us
the variou name can be place in the comment field
final all record enter should be doubl or triplecheck for accuraci it is prefer
that the review is conduct by someon who did not enter the data becaus it is hard to
catch on own error for exampl on wai to check the amount in a field is by ty
them to the total on the statement
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3829
