2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Indirect Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Various Detection Techniques


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Various Detection Techniques 
Though there are many fraud detection methods, whatever method is employed will usually 
require the examination of source documents. Many times, these source documents provide 
the evidence necessary to prove fraud in a court of law. Additionally, in many cases, the 
source documents will help establish the intent of the fraud offenders. 
 
Individual or groups of documents can be examined in several ways to detect possible fraud. 
Because most internal fraud is continuous in nature, groups of documents can be analyzed 
for exceptions and trends. Many times a large population must be sampled to determine, 
with statistical validity, if documents have been altered. Statistical sampling quantifies the risk 
of arriving at an incorrect conclusion; it is generally necessary with large populations. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Fraud examiners want to examine sales invoices for proper approvals in a company with $2 
billion in annual sales. The average sales inv oice is $15,000. By selecting a valid statistical 
sample of sales, the examiners can project the effectiveness of internal controls regarding the 
approval of the sales invoices, assuming proper interpretation of test results. If deficiencies exist 
in the controls, then those results should become apparent in the test results. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.831 



:


variou detect techniqu
though there ar mani fraud detect method whatev method is emploi will usual
requir the examin of sourc document mani time these sourc document provid
the evid necessari to prove fraud in a court of law addition in mani case the
sourc document will help establish the intent of the fraud offend
individu or group of document can be examin in sever wai to detect possibl fraud
becaus most intern fraud is continu in natur group of document can be analyz
for except and trend mani time a larg popul must be sampl to determin
with statist valid if document have been alter statist sampl quantifi the risk
of arriv at an incorrect conclus it is gener necessari with larg popul
exampl
fraud examin want to examin sale invoic for proper approv in a compani with 2
billion in annual sale the averag sale inv oic is 15000 by select a valid statist
sampl of sale the examin can project the effect of intern control regard the
approv of the sale invoic assum proper interpret of test result if defici exist
in the control then those result should becom appar in the test result
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3831
