2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Indirect Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Statistical Sampling/DOCUMENTS


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


DOCUMENTS 
Fraud will often be concealed in questionable documents. Missing or altered documents are 
some of the principal indicators of fraud, and such occurrences should be thoroughly 
investigated. Certain documents are a natural part of the accounting system. However, when 
a pattern of these documents occurs, or an unusual quantity of these documents is noted, 
further examination might be warranted. 
 
The common-sense test should be applied to any document that appears to have 
questionable features under the circumstances, such as amounts too high or too low; odd 
names, times, and places; and identical names and addresses. Fraud can often involve 
questionable journal entries in the records, such as inappropriate charges to expense 
accounts or inventory. For example, large journal entries in the inventory accounts near the 
end of the year might point to a cover-up of inventory theft. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.833 
An overabundant number of voids might mean that a fraudster is voiding legitimate sales 
and pocketing the proceeds. Excessive credit memos might also signal the reversal of 
legitimate sales and the diversion of cash. Too many late charges might indicate that an 
account receivable is delinquent because it is a fictitious account and, therefore, will never be 
paid. Stale items on any reconciliation bear watching. For example, stale outstanding checks 
may indicate attempted concealment of embezzlement losses or diverted cash. Original 
documents, such as invoices, should be used to authorize transactions because photocopied 
or duplicate documents can be subject to manipulation and alteration. 
 



:


document
fraud will often be conceal in question document miss or alter document ar
some of the princip indic of fraud and such occurr should be thoroughli
investig certain document ar a natur part of the account system howev when
a pattern of these document occur or an unusu quantiti of these document is note
further examin might be warrant
the commonsens test should be appli to ani document that appear to have
question featur under the circumst such as amount too high or too low odd
name time and place and ident name and address fraud can often involv
question journal entri in the record such as inappropri charg to expens
account or inventori for exampl larg journal entri in the inventori account near the
end of the year might point to a coverup of inventori theft
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3833
an overabund number of void might mean that a fraudster is void legitim sale
and pocket the proce excess credit memo might also signal the revers of
legitim sale and the divers of cash too mani late charg might indic that an
account receiv is delinqu becaus it is a fictiti account and therefor will never be
paid stale item on ani reconcili bear watch for exampl stale outstand check
mai indic attempt conceal of embezzl loss or divert cash origin
document such as invoic should be us to author transact becaus photocopi
or duplic document can be subject to manipul and alter
