2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Indirect Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Net-Worth Methods


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Net-Worth Methods 
Examining for fraud not only involves the examination of the entity’s books and records, it 
might also entail the estimation of the fraud suspect’s change in net worth or expenditures. 
If fraud is suspected, then using either of the net-worth methods might help in establishing 
evidence of a fraud. 
 
The net-worth method (or comparative net-worth analysis) is used to prove illicit income 
circumstantially, by showing that a person’s assets or expenditures for a given period exceed 
that which can be accounted for from known or admitted sources of income. The net-worth 
method is a reliable method for estimating a person’s ill-gotten gains. The method is used 
extensively by the Internal Revenue Service, especially in drug and money laundering cases. 
 
The net-worth method relies on the familiar balance sheet format readily recognizable in the 
business world and presents a complete financial picture of a subject. It is based on the 
theory that increases or decreases in a person’s net worth during a period, adjusted for living 
expenses, allow a determination of income. 
 
Net worth  can be defined as the difference between assets and liabilities at a particular point in 
time. By comparing the subject’s net worth at the beginning and end of a period, usually a 
calendar year, the economic crime investigator can determine the increase or decrease in net 
worth. Adjustments are then made for living expenses to arrive at income. Income includes 
receipts derived from all sources. Thus, by subtracting funds from known sources (salary, 
wages, interest, or dividends, for example), funds from unknown or illegal sources can  
be calculated. 
 
The courts approved using the net-worth method in the leading Supreme Court case of 
Holland v. United States, 348 U.S. 121 (1954), along with the three companion cases, Smith v. 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.834   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
United States, 348 U.S. 147 (1954); Friedberg v. United States, 348 142 (1954); and United States v. 
Calderon, 348 U.S. 160 (1954). These cases outlined broad principles to govern the trial and 
review of cases based on the net-worth method of proving income. 
 
The net-worth method is often used when several of the subject’s assets or liabilities have 
changed during the period under examination and when the target’s financial records are not 
available. 
 
An individual’s assets, liabilities, and living expenses can be determined from a variety of 
sources, such as: 
• The subject 
• Informants or sources 
• Real estate records 
• Judgment and lien records 
• Bankruptcy records 
• State motor vehicle records 
• Loan applications 
• Financial statements 
• Accountant’s work papers 
• Lawsuits and depositions 
• Surveillance 
• Credit card applications or statements 
• Tax returns 
• Insurance records 
• Child support and divorce records 
• Employment applications and salary checks 
• Companions or associates 
• Canceled checks and deposited items 
 
The question might arise regarding why items that do not change should be included in the 
net-worth statement, particularly since they have no bearing on the final result. The answer is 
that a net-worth statement gives a complete financial picture of the subject and therefore 
should be as complete as possible so that the target will not be able to contest it on the 
grounds that items were omitted. Additionally, the net-worth statement can be the 
foundation for examination of the subject, and a complete statement will prove extremely 
valuable at that time. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.835 
There are two basic methods of net-worth computation: The asset method and the expenditures  
or sources and applications of funds method. They are discussed in detail herein. 
 
The asset method should be used when the subject has invested illegal funds to accumulate 
wealth and acquire assets, causing net worth (value of assets over liabilities) to increase from 
year to year. The expenditures method  is best used when the subject spends illicit income on 
consumables (such as travel and entertainment) that would not cause an increase in  
net worth. 
 
Each method has similar steps. Begin both methods by assembling the financial and 
behavioral profile. Identify all major assets and liabilities, sources of income, and major 
expenses during the relevant period. The increase, if any, in the subject’s net worth or the 
level of expenditures is then compared to the legitimate funds available. Unaccounted funds 
might be inferred to come from illicit or hidden sources. 
 



:


networth method
examin for fraud not onli involv the examin of the entiti book and record it
might also entail the estim of the fraud suspect chang in net worth or expenditur
if fraud is suspect then us either of the networth method might help in establish
evid of a fraud
the networth method or compar networth analysi is us to prove illicit incom
circumstanti by show that a person asset or expenditur for a given period exce
that which can be account for from known or admit sourc of incom the networth
method is a reliabl method for estim a person illgotten gain the method is us
extens by the intern revenu servic especi in drug and monei launder case
the networth method reli on the familiar balanc sheet format readili recogniz in the
busi world and present a complet financi pictur of a subject it is base on the
theori that increas or decreas in a person net worth dure a period adjust for live
expens allow a determin of incom
net worth can be defin as the differ between asset and liabil at a particular point in
time by compar the subject net worth at the begin and end of a period usual a
calendar year the econom crime investig can determin the increas or decreas in net
worth adjust ar then made for live expens to arriv at incom incom includ
receipt deriv from all sourc thu by subtract fund from known sourc salari
wage interest or dividend for exampl fund from unknown or illeg sourc can
be calcul
the court approv us the networth method in the lead suprem court case of
holland v unit state 348 us 121 1954 along with the three companion case smith v
trace illicit transact investig
3834 2011 fraud examin manual
unit state 348 us 147 1954 friedberg v unit state 348 142 1954 and unit state v
calderon 348 us 160 1954 these case outlin broad principl to govern the trial and
review of case base on the networth method of prove incom
the networth method is often us when sever of the subject asset or liabil have
chang dure the period under examin and when the target financi record ar not
avail
an individu asset liabil and live expens can be determin from a varieti of
sourc such as
the subject
inform or sourc
real estat record
judgment and lien record
bankruptci record
state motor vehicl record
loan applic
financi statement
account work paper
lawsuit and deposit
surveil
credit card applic or statement
tax return
insur record
child support and divorc record
employ applic and salari check
companion or associ
cancel check and deposit item
the question might aris regard why item that do not chang should be includ in the
networth statement particularli sinc thei have no bear on the final result the answer is
that a networth statement give a complet financi pictur of the subject and therefor
should be as complet as possibl so that the target will not be abl to contest it on the
ground that item were omit addition the networth statement can be the
foundat for examin of the subject and a complet statement will prove extrem
valuabl at that time
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3835
there ar two basic method of networth comput the asset method and the expenditur
or sourc and applic of fund method thei ar discuss in detail herein
the asset method should be us when the subject ha invest illeg fund to accumul
wealth and acquir asset caus net worth valu of asset over liabil to increas from
year to year the expenditur method is best us when the subject spend illicit incom on
consum such as travel and entertain that would not caus an increas in
net worth
each method ha similar step begin both method by assembl the financi and
behavior profil identifi all major asset and liabil sourc of incom and major
expens dure the relev period the increas if ani in the subject net worth or the
level of expenditur is then compar to the legitim fund avail unaccount fund
might be infer to come from illicit or hidden sourc
