2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/PUNISHMENT AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Sentencing Options/Shaming


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Punishment


:


Shaming 
Criminologists lately have been paying a great deal of attention to the concept of reintegrative 
shaming  as a punishment that might deter an offender from further wrongdoing. Put forward 
by an Australian, John Braithwaite, (who was the first winner of the Association of Certified 
                                                 
3David Weisburd, Stanton Wheeler, Elin Waring, and Nancy Bode, Crimes of the Middle Classes: White-Collar 
Offenders in the Federal Courts (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991). 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.307  
Fraud Examiners’ Cressey Award), shaming invo lves two subtle and delicate practices. First, 
pressure is put on the offender by those closest to him, those he respects, and, sometimes, 
those he has victimized to acknowledge that what he did is wrong and to feel truly contrite 
about his deed. Second, the offender is reassured that those important to him continue to 
regard him with affection and welcome him, as a reformed person, back into the fold. 
 
Critics believe that Braithwaite’s ideas, mode led on Chinese and Japanese customs, might in 
theory be extremely effective, but that in cynical societies, such as the United States, they are 
not very likely to have much impact on hardened lawbreakers. 
 
In America, shaming has tended to take a much harsher approach. The tactic was made 
famous by Nathaniel Hawthorne in The Scarlet Letter, in which an adulterer is forced to wear 
the letter “A” sewn into her cloak. Branding on the hand or forehead was used in 
seventeenth century England for thieves and other offenders who were spared the more 
common punishment of death by hanging.  
 
Today, a form of branding characterizes responses to certain criminal offenses. Some states 
require that when an offender is released from prison after serving time for sexual assault on 
a child, members of the community where he will live must be notified of his presence 
among them. Jurisdictions increasingly are resorting to such “shaming” approaches to isolate 
offenders and warn those they presumably might harm. In l996, as a condition of probation, 
a farmer in Pittsfield, Illinois, was required to place a large sign at the entrance of his 
driveway reading: “Warning: A Violent Felon Li ves Here. Travel at Your Own Risk.” The 
offender had hit another farmer in the face with a fuel pump.  
 
Similarly, individuals convicted of drunk driving sometimes have to put special license plates 
on their cars. Shoplifters may be required to take out advertisements in their local papers 
showing their pictures and announcing their offense. 
 
Opponents of such penalties point out that there is little scientific evidence of their value 
and that their legal justification is arguable. They say that the aim of justice is not vengeance 
and humiliation, but to restore what was destroyed and to prevent an illegal act from 
recurring. They do not believe that the shaming approach that is becoming fashionable in 
the United States achieves such ends. 
  
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.308   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     



:


shame
criminologist late have been pai a great deal of attent to the concept of reintegr
shame as a punish that might deter an offend from further wrongdo put forward
by an australian john braithwait who wa the first winner of the associ of certifi
3david weisburd stanton wheeler elin ware and nanci bode crime of the middl class whitecollar
offend in the feder court new haven yale univers press 1991
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4307
fraud examin cressei award shame invo lve two subtl and delic practic first
pressur is put on the offend by those closest to him those he respect and sometim
those he ha victim to acknowledg that what he did is wrong and to feel truli contrit
about hi deed second the offend is reassur that those import to him continu to
regard him with affect and welcom him as a reform person back into the fold
critic believ that braithwait idea mode led on chines and japanes custom might in
theori be extrem effect but that in cynic societi such as the unit state thei ar
not veri like to have much impact on harden lawbreak
in america shame ha tend to take a much harsher approach the tactic wa made
famou by nathaniel hawthorn in the scarlet letter in which an adulter is forc to wear
the letter a sewn into her cloak brand on the hand or forehead wa us in
seventeenth centuri england for thiev and other offend who were spare the more
common punish of death by hang
todai a form of brand character respons to certain crimin offens some state
requir that when an offend is releas from prison after serv time for sexual assault on
a child member of the commun where he will live must be notifi of hi presenc
among them jurisdict increasingli ar resort to such shame approach to isol
offend and warn those thei presum might harm in l996 as a condit of probat
a farmer in pittsfield illinoi wa requir to place a larg sign at the entranc of hi
drivewai read warn a violent felon li ve here travel at your own risk the
offend had hit anoth farmer in the face with a fuel pump
similarli individu convict of drunk drive sometim have to put special licens plate
on their car shoplift mai be requir to take out advertis in their local paper
show their pictur and announc their offens
oppon of such penalti point out that there is littl scientif evid of their valu
and that their legal justif is arguabl thei sai that the aim of justic is not vengeanc
and humili but to restor what wa destroi and to prevent an illeg act from
recur thei do not believ that the shame approach that is becom fashion in
the unit state achiev such end
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4308 2011 fraud examin manual
