2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/PUNISHMENT AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Corrections/Mandatory Sentences and Three-Strikes Law


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Punishment


:


Mandatory Sentences and Three-Strikes Law 
Legislatures began adopting mandatory sentences for crimes out of dissatisfaction with what 
they regarded as too-soft judges. The move has been led by the work of the U.S. Sentencing 
Commission. A typical mandatory sentence will disallow parole in the case of certain violent 
crimes or repeat offenses. Similarly, judges will not be permitted to place certain kinds of 
offenders on probation or to suspend their sentence. Most judges, of course, regard this 
inroad against their discretionary powers and autonomy unfavorably. 
 
In one of its more controversial actions, the U.S. Sentencing Commission in November l991 
established rules for sentencing corporations for diverse white-collar offenses. The purpose 
of the rules was to “provide just punishment, adequate deterrence, and incentives for 
organizations to maintain internal mechanisms for preventing, detecting, and reporting 
criminal conduct.” The Commission’s rules reflect the following principles: First, the Court 
must, whenever practicable, order the organization to remedy any harm caused by the 
offenses. The resources expended to remedy the harm should not be viewed as punishment, 
but rather as a means of making victims whole for the harm caused. Second, if the 
organization operated primarily for a criminal purpose or primarily by criminal means, the 
fine should be set sufficiently high to divest the organization of all of its assets. Third, the 
fine range for any organization should be based upon the seriousness of the offense and the 
culpability of the organization. The seriousness of the offense generally will be reflected by 
                                                 
4See further James M. Byrne, Arthur J. Lurigio, and Joan Petersilia, eds., Smart Sentencing: The Emergence of 
Indeterminate Sentences. (Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1992) 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.311  
the highest of (a) the monetary gain, (b) the monetary loss, or (c) the amount noted in a 
guideline offense fine table. Culpability will generally be determined by the steps taken by the 
organization prior to the offense to prevent and detect criminal conduct, the level and extent 
of involvement in or tolerance of the offense by certain personnel, and the organization’s 
actions since an offense has been committed. 
 
The sentence schedule permits a court to place conditions on the way a business is run if the 
court believes that these changes are important to prevent further offending. Establishing 
more effective accounting procedures, hiring a waste control specialist, or expanding the 
board of directors beyond a group of intimates can be some of the conditions placed upon a 
corporation. On the other hand, if a company has established an internal regimen that seeks 
to control illegal actions, it can receive credit from the court for this in regard to reduction of 
a fine or other stipulated penalties. The sentencing guidelines provide, however, that a 
corporation generally is not eligible for a fine mitigation if the crime was committed by a 
more senior employee with managerial authority.5  
 



:


mandatori sentenc and threestrik law
legislatur began adopt mandatori sentenc for crime out of dissatisfact with what
thei regard as toosoft judg the move ha been led by the work of the us sentenc
commiss a typic mandatori sentenc will disallow parol in the case of certain violent
crime or repeat offens similarli judg will not be permit to place certain kind of
offend on probat or to suspend their sentenc most judg of cours regard thi
inroad against their discretionari power and autonomi unfavor
in on of it more controversi action the us sentenc commiss in novemb l991
establish rule for sentenc corpor for divers whitecollar offens the purpos
of the rule wa to provid just punish adequ deterr and incent for
organ to maintain intern mechan for prevent detect and report
crimin conduct the commiss rule reflect the follow principl first the court
must whenev practic order the organ to remedi ani harm caus by the
offens the resourc expend to remedi the harm should not be view as punish
but rather as a mean of make victim whole for the harm caus second if the
organ oper primarili for a crimin purpos or primarili by crimin mean the
fine should be set suffici high to divest the organ of all of it asset third the
fine rang for ani organ should be base upon the serious of the offens and the
culpabl of the organ the serious of the offens gener will be reflect by
4see further jame m byrn arthur j lurigio and joan petersilia ed smart sentenc the emerg of
indetermin sentenc newburi park ca sage 1992
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4311
the highest of a the monetari gain b the monetari loss or c the amount note in a
guidelin offens fine tabl culpabl will gener be determin by the step taken by the
organ prior to the offens to prevent and detect crimin conduct the level and extent
of involv in or toler of the offens by certain personnel and the organ
action sinc an offens ha been commit
the sentenc schedul permit a court to place condit on the wai a busi is run if the
court believ that these chang ar import to prevent further offend establish
more effect account procedur hire a wast control specialist or expand the
board of director beyond a group of intim can be some of the condit place upon a
corpor on the other hand if a compani ha establish an intern regimen that seek
to control illeg action it can receiv credit from the court for thi in regard to reduct of
a fine or other stipul penalti the sentenc guidelin provid howev that a
corpor gener is not elig for a fine mitig if the crime wa commit by a
more senior employe with manageri authority5
