2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/THEORIES OF CRIME CAUSATION/Social Process Theories/Differential Reinforcement Theory


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Differential Reinforcement Theory 
Differential rei nforcement theory  is another attempt to explain crime as a type of learned behavior. 
It is a revision of Sutherland’s work that in corporates elements of psychological learning 
theory popularized by B. F. Skinner and the social learning theory discussed above. The 
theory was summarized by Ronald Akers in his 1977 work, Deviant Behavior: A Social Learning 
Approach. 
 
According to these behavioral theorists, people learn social behavior by operant conditioning —
 behavior controlled by stimuli that follow the behavior. Behavior is reinforced when positive 
rewards are gained or punishment is avoided (negative reinforcement). It is weakened by 
negative stimuli (punishment) and loss of reward (negative punishment). Whether deviant or 
criminal behavior is begun or persists depends on the degree to which it has been rewarded 
or punished and the rewards or punishments attached to its alternatives. This is the theory of 
differential reinforcement. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.301  



:


differenti reinforc theori
differenti rei nforcement theori is anoth attempt to explain crime as a type of learn behavior
it is a revis of sutherland work that in corpor element of psycholog learn
theori popular by b f skinner and the social learn theori discuss abov the
theori wa summar by ronald aker in hi 1977 work deviant behavior a social learn
approach
accord to these behavior theorist peopl learn social behavior by oper condit
behavior control by stimuli that follow the behavior behavior is reinforc when posit
reward ar gain or punish is avoid neg reinforc it is weaken by
neg stimuli punish and loss of reward neg punish whether deviant or
crimin behavior is begun or persist depend on the degre to which it ha been reward
or punish and the reward or punish attach to it altern thi is the theori of
differenti reinforc
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4301
