2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Non-shareable Financial Problems


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


Non-shareable Financial Problems 
That which is considered “non-shareable” is whol ly in the eyes of the potential occupational 
offender, Cressey said. “Thus a man could lose  considerable money at the race track daily 
but the loss, even if it construed a problem for the individual, might not constitute a non-
 shareable problem for him. Another man might define the problem as one which must be 
                                                 
2 Cressey, p. 33. 
3 Cressey, p. 34. 
 
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.604   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
kept secret and private, that is, as one which is non-shareable. Similarly, a failing bank or 
business might be considered by one person as presenting problems which must be shared 
with business associates and members of the community, while another person might 
conceive these problems as non-shareable.” 4 
 
In addition to being non-shareable, the problem that drives the fraudster is described as 
“financial” because these are problems that can generally be solved by the theft of cash or 
other assets. A person with large gambling debts, for instance, would need cash to pay those 
debts. Cressey did note, however, that there are some non-financial problems that could be 
solved by misappropriating funds through a violation of trust. For example, a person who 
embezzles in order to get revenge on his employer for perceived “unfair” treatment uses 
financial means to solve what is essentially a non-financial problem.  
 
Through his research, Cressey also found that the non-shareable problems encountered by 
the people he interviewed arose from situations that could be divided into six basic 
categories: violation of ascribed obligations, problems resulting from personal failure, 
business reversals, physical isolation, status gaining, and employer-employee relations. All of 
these situations dealt in some way with status-seeking or status-maintaining activities by the 
subjects. In other words, the non-shareable problems threatened the status of the subjects, 
or threatened to prevent them from achieving a higher status than the one they occupied at 
the time of their violation. 
 



:


nonshar financi problem
that which is consid nonshar is whol ly in the ey of the potenti occup
offend cressei said thu a man could lose consider monei at the race track daili
but the loss even if it constru a problem for the individu might not constitut a non
shareabl problem for him anoth man might defin the problem as on which must be
2 cressei p 33
3 cressei p 34
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4604 2011 fraud examin manual
kept secret and privat that is as on which is nonshar similarli a fail bank or
busi might be consid by on person as present problem which must be share
with busi associ and member of the commun while anoth person might
conceiv these problem as nonshar 4
in addit to be nonshar the problem that drive the fraudster is describ as
financi becaus these ar problem that can gener be solv by the theft of cash or
other asset a person with larg gambl debt for instanc would need cash to pai those
debt cressei did note howev that there ar some nonfinanci problem that could be
solv by misappropri fund through a violat of trust for exampl a person who
embezzl in order to get reveng on hi employ for perceiv unfair treatment us
financi mean to solv what is essenti a nonfinanci problem
through hi research cressei also found that the nonshar problem encount by
the peopl he interview aros from situat that could be divid into six basic
categori violat of ascrib oblig problem result from person failur
busi revers physic isol statu gain and employeremploye relat all of
these situat dealt in some wai with statusseek or statusmaintain activ by the
subject in other word the nonshar problem threaten the statu of the subject
or threaten to prevent them from achiev a higher statu than the on thei occupi at
the time of their violat
