2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Hypotheses of Employee Theft/EMPLOYEE DEVIANCE


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


EMPLOYEE DEVIANCE 
Employee theft is at one extreme of employee deviance, which can be defined as conduct 
detrimental to the organization and to the employee. At the other extreme is 
counterproductive employee behavior such as goldbricking and abuse of sick leave. 
Hollinger and Clark defined two basic categories of employee deviant behavior: (1) acts by 
employees against property, and (2) violations of the norms regulating acceptable levels of 
production. The former includes misuse and theft of company property such as cash or 
inventory. The latter involves acts of employee deviance that affect productivity. 
 
Hollinger and Clark developed a written questionnaire that was sent to employees in three 
different sectors: retail, hospital, and manufacturing. The employees were presented with 
lists of category 1 and category 2 offenses and were asked which offenses they had been 
involved in, and with what frequency. The researchers eventually received 9,175 valid 
employee questionnaires, representing about 54 percent of those sampled. Below are the 
results of the questionnaires. The first table represents category 1 offenses?acts against 
property.35 Hollinger and Clark found that approximately one-third of employees in each 
sector admitted to committing some form of property deviance.  
 
                                                 
35 Hollinger and Clark, p. 6. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.615  
 
The following is a summary of the Hollinger and Clark research with respect to production 
deviance. Not surprisingly, they found that this form of employee misconduct was two to 
three times more common than property violations.36 
 
                                                 
36 Hollinger and Clark, p. 42. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.616   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
 



:


employe devianc
employe theft is at on extrem of employe devianc which can be defin as conduct
detriment to the organ and to the employe at the other extrem is
counterproduct employe behavior such as goldbrick and abus of sick leav
holling and clark defin two basic categori of employe deviant behavior 1 act by
employe against properti and 2 violat of the norm regul accept level of
product the former includ misus and theft of compani properti such as cash or
inventori the latter involv act of employe devianc that affect product
holling and clark develop a written questionnair that wa sent to employe in three
differ sector retail hospit and manufactur the employe were present with
list of categori 1 and categori 2 offens and were ask which offens thei had been
involv in and with what frequenc the research eventu receiv 9175 valid
employe questionnair repres about 54 percent of those sampl below ar the
result of the questionnair the first tabl repres categori 1 offensesact against
property35 holling and clark found that approxim onethird of employe in each
sector admit to commit some form of properti devianc
35 holling and clark p 6
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4615
the follow is a summari of the holling and clark research with respect to product
devianc not surprisingli thei found that thi form of employe misconduct wa two to
three time more common than properti violations36
36 holling and clark p 42
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4616 2011 fraud examin manual
