2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/2010 Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


2010 Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse 
Occupational fraud and abuse is a widespre ad problem that affects practically every 
organization, regardless of size, location, or industry. In 1996, the ACFE released the first 
Report to the Nation on O cc upational Fraud and Abuse, which was intended to shed light on the 
immense and largely undefined costs that occupational fraud imposes on organizations. The 
stated goals of the first Report  were to:  
• Summarize the opinions of experts on the percentage and amount of organizational 
revenue lost to all forms of occupational fraud and abuse. 
• Examine the characteristics of the employees who commit occupational fraud and abuse. 
                                                 
42 Hollinger and Clark, p. 144. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.620   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Determine what kinds of organizations are victims of occupational fraud and abuse. 
• Categorize the ways in which serious fraud and abuse occurs. 
 
All of the enumerated goals of the first Report  fell under one larger and more all-
 encompassing mission: to better educate the public and anti-fraud professionals about the 
threat of occupational fraud. Since that time, with each subsequent edition of the Report to the 
Nation, that has remained our primary goal.  
 
We released updated editions of the Report  in even years between 2002and 2008. Like the 
first study, each subsequent edition has been based on detailed case information about 
specific frauds provided by the CFEs who investigated those cases. Each Report  has been 
structured along the same lines, focusing on the methods used by employees, managers, and 
executives to defraud their organizations; the losses caused by those frauds; and the 
characteristics of both the perpetrators and the victims of these crimes.  
 
The 2010 edition of our Report  is based on 1,843 actual cases of occupational fraud. For the 
first time ever, we have widened our study to include cases from countries outside the 
United States; thus, the study is now titled Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse. 
This expansion allows us to more fully explore the truly global nature of occupational fraud 
and provides an enhanced view into the severity and impact of these crimes. 
 
The following is an excerpt containing some of the more significant findings of our study. 
Copies of the entire Report to the Nations can be downloaded or viewed at no charge on the 
ACFE’s website, www.ACFE.com.  
 



:


2010 report to the nation on occup fraud and abus
occup fraud and abus is a widespr ad problem that affect practic everi
organ regardless of size locat or industri in 1996 the acf releas the first
report to the nation on o cc upat fraud and abus which wa intend to shed light on the
immens and larg undefin cost that occup fraud impos on organ the
state goal of the first report were to
summar the opinion of expert on the percentag and amount of organiz
revenu lost to all form of occup fraud and abus
examin the characterist of the employe who commit occup fraud and abus
42 holling and clark p 144
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4620 2011 fraud examin manual
determin what kind of organ ar victim of occup fraud and abus
categor the wai in which seriou fraud and abus occur
all of the enumer goal of the first report fell under on larger and more all
encompass mission to better educ the public and antifraud profession about the
threat of occup fraud sinc that time with each subsequ edit of the report to the
nation that ha remain our primari goal
we releas updat edit of the report in even year between 2002and 2008 like the
first studi each subsequ edit ha been base on detail case inform about
specif fraud provid by the cfe who investig those case each report ha been
structur along the same line focus on the method us by employe manag and
execut to defraud their organ the loss caus by those fraud and the
characterist of both the perpetr and the victim of these crime
the 2010 edit of our report is base on 1843 actual case of occup fraud for the
first time ever we have widen our studi to includ case from countri outsid the
unit state thu the studi is now titl report to the nation on occup fraud and abus
thi expans allow us to more fulli explor the truli global natur of occup fraud
and provid an enhanc view into the sever and impact of these crime
the follow is an excerpt contain some of the more signific find of our studi
copi of the entir report to the nation can be download or view at no charg on the
acf websit wwwacfecom
