2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Geographic Location of Organizations


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


Geographic Location of Organizations 
As mentioned previously, for the first time in the history of our research on occupational 
fraud, we opened up our study to include fraud cases investigated by CFEs outside the 
United States. As a result, the cases discussed in this Report  represent frauds perpetrated in 
106 countries around the world. We received information on the location of 1,797 of the 
cases that were reported to us. Of these, 43% occurred outside the United States, providing 
us with a true insight into the global plague of occupational fraud.  
 
The chart below shows the number and median loss of the cases reported to us, broken 
down by region. For victim organizations with locations in more than one country, we asked 
survey participants to choose the location where the primary perpetrator was located. For 
example, a fraud perpetrated at a European arm of a Japanese company would be classified 
as occurring in Europe. Similarly, a case involving fraud perpetrated at the Canadian office 
of a South American company would be considered a fraud that occurred in Canada. The 
regional breakdowns on case data throughout this Report  should consequently be read within 
this framework. Additionally, due to the large number of U.S. cases reported, we separated 
North America into the United States and Canada, and grouped the remaining countries by 
continent.  
 
 
                                                 
46 The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because in some cases respondents identified more than 
the source of the initial tip. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.630   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Geographical Location of Victim Organizations  
 



:


geograph locat of organ
as mention previous for the first time in the histori of our research on occup
fraud we open up our studi to includ fraud case investig by cfe outsid the
unit state as a result the case discuss in thi report repres fraud perpetr in
106 countri around the world we receiv inform on the locat of 1797 of the
case that were report to us of these 43 occur outsid the unit state provid
us with a true insight into the global plagu of occup fraud
the chart below show the number and median loss of the case report to us broken
down by region for victim organ with locat in more than on countri we ask
survei particip to choos the locat where the primari perpetr wa locat for
exampl a fraud perpetr at a european arm of a japanes compani would be classifi
as occur in europ similarli a case involv fraud perpetr at the canadian offic
of a south american compani would be consid a fraud that occur in canada the
region breakdown on case data throughout thi report should consequ be read within
thi framework addition due to the larg number of us case report we separ
north america into the unit state and canada and group the remain countri by
contin
46 the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus in some case respond identifi more than
the sourc of the initi tip
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4630 2011 fraud examin manual
geograph locat of victim organ
