2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Charging Process/Motion to Dismiss/A MOTION CHALLENGING THE SUFFICIENCY OF THE INDICTMENT


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


A MOTION CHALLENGING THE SUFFICIENCY OF THE INDICTMENT 
Rule 7 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure requires the indictment to contain a plain, 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.513 
concise, and definite statement of the essential facts constituting the charge(s) against the 
defendant. As discussed previously, the indictment must, therefore, allege all of the essential 
elements of the crimes charged, including the requisite criminal intent where required by 
statute. If the indictment is deficient, then the defense can challenge it. The defense may 
challenge the indictment if the prosecution failed to plead an essential element of the fraud 
offense or plead the necessary facts. But even if an indictment is dismissed for insufficiency, 
the prosecution is usually free to re-file the indictment.   
 
EXAMPLE  
If a defendant is charged with mail fraud, the indictment must specifically describe the details of 
the fraudulent scheme perpetrated through the use of the mail and must set forth the false 
representations. (See United States v. Hess, 124 U.S. 483 [1888].) If the indictment fails 
to do this, the court will dismiss the indictment. However, the victory might be short-lived. Even 
though the indictment is dismissed, the prosecution usually is free to re-file the indictment.  
 



:


a motion challeng the suffici of the indict
rule 7 of the feder rule of crimin procedur requir the indict to contain a plain
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2513
concis and definit statement of the essenti fact constitut the charg against the
defend as discuss previous the indict must therefor alleg all of the essenti
element of the crime charg includ the requisit crimin intent where requir by
statut if the indict is defici then the defens can challeng it the defens mai
challeng the indict if the prosecut fail to plead an essenti element of the fraud
offens or plead the necessari fact but even if an indict is dismiss for insuffici
the prosecut is usual free to refil the indict
exampl
if a defend is charg with mail fraud the indict must specif describ the detail of
the fraudul scheme perpetr through the us of the mail and must set forth the fals
represent see unit state v hess 124 us 483 1888 if the indict fail
to do thi the court will dismiss the indict howev the victori might be shortliv even
though the indict is dismiss the prosecut usual is free to refil the indict
