2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Charging Process/Discovery Under Rule 16/SUMMARY OF RULE 16 DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


SUMMARY OF RULE 16 DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 
• Statements of the defendant. Upon the defendant’s request, the government must disclose 
any relevant written or recorded statements made by the defendant. This includes written 
records of any relevant statements made by the defendant to a government agent, either 
before or after arrest, as well as any recorded testimony of the defendant made before a 
grand jury, which relates to the offense charged.  
• The defendant’s prior record. Upon the defendant’s request, the government must furnish a 
copy of the defendant’s prior criminal record, if it exists.  
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.515 
• Documents and tangible objects. Upon the defendant’s request, the government must allow 
the defendant to inspect and copy or photograph any books, papers, documents, 
photographs, tangible objects, buildings, or places which (1) are material to the 
preparation of the defendant’s case; (2) are intended for use as evidence at trial by the 
government; or (3) were obtained from the defendant or belong to the defendant. 
• Reports of examinations and tests.  Upon the defendant’s request, the government must allow 
the defendant to inspect and copy any results or reports of physical or mental 
examinations, scientific tests, or experiments that are material to the preparation of the 
defense or that the government plans to use as evidence at trial.  
• Expert witnesses.  Upon the defendant’s request, the government must provide a written 
summary of the testimony to be given by its expert witnesses. This summary must 
include the expert’s opinions, the basis of those opinions, and the qualifications of the 
expert.  
 
While the state has a broad duty to disclose evidence in criminal cases, there are limits to 
what it must turn over to the defense. The defendant does not have a right to the work 
product of the state, which includes reports, memoranda, and other internal documents 
made by the government attorney in preparing for and prosecuting the case. In addition, the 
defendant does not have a right to inspect statements made by government witnesses prior 
to the time the witness actually testifies.  
 



:


summari of rule 16 disclosur requir
statement of the defend upon the defend request the govern must disclos
ani relev written or record statement made by the defend thi includ written
record of ani relev statement made by the defend to a govern agent either
befor or after arrest as well as ani record testimoni of the defend made befor a
grand juri which relat to the offens charg
the defend prior record upon the defend request the govern must furnish a
copi of the defend prior crimin record if it exist
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2515
document and tangibl object upon the defend request the govern must allow
the defend to inspect and copi or photograph ani book paper document
photograph tangibl object build or place which 1 ar materi to the
prepar of the defend case 2 ar intend for us as evid at trial by the
govern or 3 were obtain from the defend or belong to the defend
report of examin and test upon the defend request the govern must allow
the defend to inspect and copi ani result or report of physic or mental
examin scientif test or experi that ar materi to the prepar of the
defens or that the govern plan to us as evid at trial
expert wit upon the defend request the govern must provid a written
summari of the testimoni to be given by it expert wit thi summari must
includ the expert opinion the basi of those opinion and the qualif of the
expert
while the state ha a broad duti to disclos evid in crimin case there ar limit to
what it must turn over to the defens the defend doe not have a right to the work
product of the state which includ report memoranda and other intern document
made by the govern attornei in prepar for and prosecut the case in addit the
defend doe not have a right to inspect statement made by govern wit prior
to the time the wit actual testifi
