2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


BANKRUPTCY FRAUD 
 
Introduction 
 
The Bankruptcy System and Players 
Bankruptcy Court 
All bankruptcy cases are filed in the local district of the United States Bankruptcy Court. 
Although bankruptcy courts are federal courts, they are not Article III courts, which derive 
their power from Article III of the Constitution. Article III states that judicial power of the 
United States rests with the Supreme Court and in inferior courts established by Congress. 
Article III courts include the U.S. District Courts, the U.S. Circuit Courts of Appeal, and the 
U.S. Supreme Court.  
 
Bankruptcy courts are not contemplated within this scheme as “inferior” courts, but they are 
considered as an adjunct to “inferior” U.S. District Courts. 
 
Likewise, bankruptcy judges are not Article III judges, which derive their power from Article 
III of the Constitution. Bankruptcy judges hear all cases involving debtors’ and creditors’ 
rights, approve plans of reorganization, award fees to professionals, and conduct hearings 
and trials when necessary to resolve disputes. 
 
Office of the United States Trustee  
The Office of the United States Trustee is a Department of Justice agency that is responsible 
for administering bankruptcy cases; appointing trustees, examiners, and Chapter 11 
committees; overseeing and monitoring trustees; reviewing employment and fee applications; 
and appearing in court on matters of interest to the estate and creditors.  
 
There are 21 regions in the Office of the U.S. Trustee comprising one or more federal 
districts. Each region consists of a U.S. Trustee (or an Assistant Trustee in several regions). 
The Office of the UST in each region principally is comprised of staff attorneys, bankruptcy 
analysts (including accountants) and, in some instances, special investigative units. 
 
Staff attorneys review pleadings (e.g., fee applications and motions to appoint trustees and 
examiners) and represent the UST on these matters.  
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1302                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bankruptcy analysts analyze and review operating reports and other relevant financial 
information and, in general, oversee the debtor’s case to ensure compliance with the 
Bankruptcy Code and to protect the assets of the estate.  
 
Special investigative units investigate criminal referrals (complaints) in bankruptcy cases. In some 
cases they work with criminal investigative agencies, such as the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation and the Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigative Division. 
 
Panel Trustees 
Panel trustees are independent professionals (usually attorneys) who serve in Chapter 7 cases 
in each federal district in the country. Trustees also might serve in Chapter 11 cases where 
operation of the debtor’s business is considered appropriate. Trustees or others might 
develop a plan of reorganization to conclude the Chapter 11 proceedings. If the business 
cannot be reorganized, the trustee might petition the court to convert the case to Chapter 7 
or develop a plan of liquidation under Chapter 11. The duties of a trustee are specifically 
enumerated in Title 11, U.S.C., section 704 (in Chapter 7 cases) and Title 11, U.S.C., section 
1106 (in Chapter 11 cases). The duties of a trustee are as follows: administer assets, liquidate 
assets, pay creditors, litigate matters where necessary, have the right to sue and be sued, 
conduct hearings, conduct investigations of financial affairs of the debtor, file reports as 
required by the Office of the UST and, where a ppropriate, file criminal referrals with the 
United States Attorney’s Office. A trustee’s compensation is statutorily defined under the 
bankruptcy code. 
 
Examiners 
An examiner is normally appointed in a Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceeding to investigate 
certain allegations of fraud and misconduct on the part of the debtor (or principals of the 
debtor). In a typical motion for the appointment of a trustee or examiner, allegations of 
fraud or misconduct are raised by creditors, the Office of the UST, or other interested 
parties. A bankruptcy judge hears evidence submitted by all parties (creditors et al.), as well 
as the debtor’s response to the allegations. After hearing the evidence, the judge has the 
option either to appoint a trustee or an examiner, or leave the debtor in possession of the 
business. If an examiner is appointed, the sole responsibility is to “investigate and report” 
the results of the investigation to the court and other parties in interest as quickly as possible. 
Examiners have the power to subpoena records and depose witnesses. They do not have the 
power to run businesses, make business decisions, or propose plans of reorganizations 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1303 
(generally speaking). Courts might expand the examiner’s powers to perform certain duties 
of trustees or debtors-in-possession.  
 
Debtors 
A debtor is defined in Title 11, U.S.C., section 101(13) as a “person” or “municipality” who is 
the subject of a filing under Title 11. “Person” is  defined as an individual, partnership, or 
corporation. “Municipality” is defined as a political subdivision, public agency, or 
instrumentality of a state. An individual debtor’s objective in a Chapter 7 case is to be 
relieved of all dischargeable debts and to obtain a fresh start. This is accomplished by the 
court granting the individual debtor a discharge. The debtor’s primary objective in a Chapter 
11 should be to have a plan of reorganization confirmed by the court and preserve the 
business operations. 
 
Creditors 
A creditor is defined by the code as one who holds a claim. Creditors can be either secured or 
unsecured.  
 
SECURED CREDITORS  
A secured creditor  holds a claim for which there is a properly perfected security interest. It will 
be considered a secured claim to the extent of the value of the property. When the debt is 
undersecured (amount of note is greater than the value of the security interest), the debt will 
be considered both unsecured and secured. For example, if a note for $500 is secured by 
property having a value of $400, there will be a secured claim for $400 and an unsecured 
claim for $100. If the debtor and the credit or cannot agree on the value of the collateral, 
there will be a hearing under section 506 of the Bankruptcy Code and the court will 
determine the value of the collateral. The bankruptcy court will rely on state law where the 
property is located to determine if a secured claim exists. A security interest generally is 
obtained in personal property by a UCC filing and in real property by filing a lien with the 
county clerk in the county where the property is located. 
 
At the time of the filing of the bankruptcy petition, an automatic stay precludes the creditor 
from taking any action to repossess the property, unless relief from the stay is granted. In a 
Chapter 11 case, the court generally will grant relief only if it can be shown that there is no 
equity in the property and that the property is not needed for reorganizing the business. The 
stay also might be removed if the property is declining in value and the debtor fails to 
compensate the creditor for this decline (referred to as “adequate protection payments”). If 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1304                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the stay is removed, the creditor then can proceed under state law to obtain possession of 
the property (often through a foreclosure) to satisfy the claim. 
 
Holders of secured claims have priority over unsecured creditors and normally get paid first 
in the distributions to creditors made by the trustee or debtor-in-possession. In the 
development of a Chapter 11 plan, the rights of holders of secured claims normally are 
provided for before the unsecured claim holders will receive material consideration.  
 
UNSECURED CREDITORS  
Unsecured creditors  are those that have a claim against the debtor that arose before the 
bankruptcy petition was filed and do not have a perfected security interest. Title 11, U.S.C., 
section 507 gives some of the holders of unsecured claims priority over other unsecured 
claim holders. Among those claims that have priority are administrative expenses (costs 
associated with the operation of the business and professional fees while the business or 
individual is in bankruptcy), selected pre-petition unpaid wages, pre-petition contributions 
required but not made to employees benefit plans, pre-petition unpaid alimony and support 
payments, and selected pre-petition tax claims. 
 
Adjusters 
Adjusters, or operations agents as they are frequently called, are the “right hand” to trustees 
and debtors. An adjuster or operations agent is an individual who handles the peripheral 
duties of a trustee. Such duties include securing the business location, changing locks, 
locating assets of the estate, locating business records, opening new bank accounts, 
investigating thefts of assets in conjunction with the trustee, storing assets of the estate, and 
arranging sales of assets. Adjusters also can assist debtors and trustees in operating the 
debtor’s business and in helping to prepare bankruptcy schedules, as well as interim 
statements and operating reports.  
 
 
The Bankruptcy Code (Title 11, United States Code)   
The Bankruptcy Code is broken down into eight chapters (1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 12, and 13) under 
Title 11 of the United States Code. In addition, there are two other sources of information 
dealing with bankruptcy issues that are found in the United States Code. They can be found 
at Title 18, U.S.C., Chapter 9 (which deals with crimes and criminal procedure) and Title 28 
(which deals with the judiciary and judicial procedure). Some of the provisions of the 
Bankruptcy Code, as amended by the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1994, are outlined below. 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1305 
Chapter 1 — General Provisions  
Chapter 1 contains definitions, rules of construction, powers of the court, who can be a 
debtor, and other miscellaneous information. Chapter 1 has been amended to reflect issues 
dealing with persons who negligently or fraudulently prepare bankruptcy petitions. Section 
101 of this chapter is particularly important as it deals with definitions of terms used in 
bankruptcy proceedings. Section 110 deals with the penalty for persons who negligently or 
fraudulently prepare bankruptcy petitions (see later section on criminal conduct). 
 
Chapter 3 — Case Administration  
Part 1 of Chapter 3 deals with the commencement of cases, filing requirements, and court 
appearances. Part 2 deals with officers, the qualifications of the trustee, the role of the 
trustee, and the compensation of trustees and other officers. Part 3 deals with 
administration, involving meetings of creditors, noticing requirements, property of the 
estate, and other administrative requirements. Part 4 deals with administrative powers, 
including the power of the trustee to protect property of the estate; use, lease or sell the 
property and obtaining credit on behalf of the estate.  
  
Chapter 5 — Creditors, Debtors, and the Estate  
Part 1 of Chapter 5 deals with creditors’ clai ms, their priority, and their allowance. This 
section contains the prioritization of claims and the distribution of estate assets. Part 2 deals 
with specific duties of the debtor, the exemptions debtors can claim, and dischargeability of 
debts. Part 3 deals with property of the estate, recovery of voidable transfers, and contractual 
rights of the estate. 
 
Chapter 7 — Liquidation of Debtor’s Assets  
Part 1 of Chapter 7 deals with officers and the administration of Chapter 7 cases and spells 
out duties of the trustee. Part 2 deals with the collection, liquidation, and distribution of the 
estate’s assets. Part 3 deals with stockbroker liquidations. Part 4 deals with commodity 
broker liquidations. 
 
Chapter 7 is the most common type of bankruptcy; it involves liquidation of the debtors 
assets by a trustee to pay the creditor’s claims. This allows the debtor to get a court order 
under which some or all of his debts may be eliminated. It involves the liquidation of assets 
that are not exempt by state law. Personal bankruptcy does not eliminate taxes, fines, 
alimony, child support, and certain student loans. 
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1306                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A petition for liquidation under Chapter 7 may be filed by any entity (e.g., any individual, 
corporation, partnership, business trust, etc.), but a Chapter 7 case filed by an individual 
debtor may be dismissed (or converted to a case under Chapter 11 or 13 with the debtor’s 
consent) if granting relief under Chapter 7 would constitute an abuse. The means test is used 
to determine whether the Chapter 7 filing is presumptively abusive. Under this test, the 
trustee or any creditor can bring a motion to dismiss a Chapter 7 filing if the debtor’s income 
is greater than the state median income. 
 
Also, a Chapter 7 debtor cannot receive a discharge if a prior discharge was received within 8 
years of the new filing. 
 
Chapter 11 — Reorganization  
Often, debtors want to avoid liquidation, and Chapter 11 provides a type of bankruptcy that 
is designed to help the debtor by reorganizing the business. The code allows for debtors to 
restructure their debt, pay their creditors, and emerge from bankruptcy. Part 1 of the chapter 
deals with officers and administration. Part 2 deals with the plan of reorganization. Part 3 
deals with postconfirmation matters. Part 4 deals with railroad reorganization. 
 
The purpose of the Chapter 11 filing is to allow the debtor breathing room from the 
creditors so that the debtor can reorganize its financial affairs and continue as a going 
concern. If the court is provided with sufficient probable cause regarding the financial affairs 
of the debtor, a trustee or examiner can be appointed by the court. 
 
Chapter 13 — Adjustments of Debts 
Chapter 13 provides another type of bankruptcy that allows a debtor pay off his debts over 
time in accordance with a court approved plan. Under this type of case, the debtor may keep 
certain property that he would not be allowed to retain in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Because 
of changes to the bankruptcy law in 2005, many people are no longer eligible to file for 
bankruptcy under Chapter 7; some have their Chapter 7 case converted to a Chapter 13 case, 
but Chapter 13 is not granted if the debtor received a discharge under Chapters 7, 11, or 12 
within the previous 4 years, or a discharge under Chapter 13 in the previous 2 years. 
 
Also, the court many not grant a Chapter 13 discharge unless the debtor has completed an 
education course in personal financial management. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1307 
The Bankruptcy Case 
A bankruptcy case begins with the filing of a bankruptcy petition, but to be eligible to file a 
bankruptcy petition, an individual debtor must have received credit counseling from an 
approved counseling agency within 180 days before filing. 
 
When a petition is filed, the debtor must file the following documents:  
• A list of creditors 
• A schedule of assets and liabilities 
• A schedule of current income and current expenditures 
• A statement of the debtor’s financial affairs 
• Evidence of payment from employers, if any, received 60 days before the filing date 
• An itemized statement of monthly net income 
• A statement disclosing any reasonably anticipated increase in income or expenditures for 
the 12 months after the filing 
• A record of any interest in an qualified state tuition program or an education individual 
retirement account 
• A certificate of credit counseling from the approved counseling agency (if the petitioner 
is an individual) 
• A statement of the debtor’s intention with respect to his property that secured debt (if 
the petitioner is an individual) 
• A copy of the debtor’s tax return for the most recent tax year 
 
Generally, if an individual debtor in a Chapter 7 case fails to file the documents within 45 
days of the original filing date, the case is automatically dismissed. 
 
Once the bankruptcy case has been commenced, the debtor is protected by an automatic 
stay, which prevents creditors from continuing attempts to collect debts from the petitioner. 
There are, however, exceptions where the automatic stay does not apply (e.g., prosecution of 
criminal cases, paternity cases, domestic support obligation cases, child custody cases, etc.). 
Also, if the bankruptcy petition was filed as part of a scheme to delay, hinder, or defraud 
creditors, a creditor whose claim is securted by a real property interest is entitled to relief 
from the stay.  
 
Additionally, after filing, the debtor will be appointed a trustee who will oversee the case. In 
a Chapter 7 case, the trustee is responsible for collecting, selling, and reduceing the estate’s 
assets to cash; temporarily continuing to operate the debtor’s business; making a final report; 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1308                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
and filing a final account. In a Chapter 11 case, however, the debtor remains in possession of 
his assets and generally retains the same authority as the trustee, except for the duty to 
investigate the debtor and the right to compensation. A trustee is appointed in a Chapter 13 
case, but the trustee’s duties generally involve in vestigating the debtor’s financial affairs.  
 
Provisions Affecting Individuals 
Nondischargeable Debts  
Although a bankruptcy proceeding may result in the discharge of a debtor’s debts, certain 
debts are not discharged in Chapter 7 cases: 
• Taxes: In general, tax claims are not discharged.  
• Debts incurred by fraud, embezzlement, and larceny: Generally, liabilities arising from fraud, 
embezzlement, and larceny are not dischargeable.  
• Luxury goods: Debts owed to a single creditor totaling more than $500 for luxury goods 
incurred within 90 days of filing are preseumed non-dischargeable. 
• Cash advances: Cash advances of $750 that are made within 70 days of filing are presumed 
non-dischargeable.  
• Unscheduled debts: In general, debts that are not listed or are not scheduled are not 
dischargeable.  
• Domestic support obligations: Debts for domestic support obligations are not dischargeable. 
• Property settlements arising from divorce or separation : Debts for property settlements arising 
from divorce or separation are not dischargeable. 
• Certain liabilities: Liabilities arising from willful and malicious injury and liability for death 
or personal injury incurred when operating a vehicle are not dischargeable.  
• Fines and penalties: Obligations to pay a fine, penalty, or forfeiture owed to the 
government are not dischargeable. 
• Student loans: Student loans are not dischargeable, unless it would impose an undue 
hardship for the debt’s survival.  
 
Homestead Exemption 
To prevent individuals who are likely to file for bankruptcy from moving their assets to 
states with more favorable laws, the debtor must satisfy certain holding period requirements. 
To qualify for a state’s homestead exemption, whic h allow filers to exempt the value of their 
homes from creditors, for property worth more than $125,000, the debtor must own that 
property for 1,215 days before filing. Also, before qualifying for a state’s homestead 
exemption, the debtor must have lived in that state for 730 days prior to filing.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1309 
Retirement Plan Exemptions 
Debtors can exempt retiremet funds from the bankruptcy estate if they are in a fund or 
account that is exempt from taxes under the Internal Revenue Code.  
 
Education Account Exemptions 
Debtors can exempt education accounts under Sections 529 and 530 from the bankruptcy 
estate if the beneficiary of the account is a child, stepchild, grandchild, or step-grandchild of 
the debtor for the taxable year during which funds were placed in the account.  
 
Privacy Provisions 
Under the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act, the bankruptcy 
court is permitted to honor the privacy policies of business debtors. The Act creates a 
consumer privacy ombudsman to protect personal privacy in bankruptcy proceedings. 
Measures may be implemented to prevent identity theft and to guide what information is 
readily accessible to the public. Debtors are permitted to request that courts protect sensitive 
information before it is placed in public records.  
 
The Role of the Trustee in Bankruptcy Fraud Matters 
The trustee in bankruptcy matters is often confronted with allegations of fraud and 
misconduct on the part of the debtor and its principals. In Chapter 11 cases, it is often the 
primary reason the court appointed a trustee. Creditors, representatives of the creditors’ 
committee, or private investigators might be interacting with a bankruptcy trustee. For this 
reason, it is important to know how the trustee operates, what the role of the trustee is, and 
how to make the most of the opportunity to work with the trustee. The trustee’s authority to 
investigate fraud is found in the Bankruptcy Code. The following is a brief outline of the 
Chapter 7 and Chapter 11 trustee’s authority to investigate fraud. 
  
Statutory Authority 
In Chapter 7 cases, section 704 of the code spells out all duties of the trustee, which include 
investigating claims filed by creditors, and the code provides that the trustee “shall 
investigate the financial affairs of the debtor.”  
 
Although generally, trustees in Chapter 11 cases do not operate the debtor’s business, 
Chapter 11 trustees has the duty to investigate the debtor’s financial affairs. 
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1310                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Investigation by the Trustee 
The trustee’s powers enable him to gather financial information from various sources 
including the debtor’s attorneys and accountants. A trustee steps into the shoes of the 
debtor, which allows him the opportunity to break the attorney-client privilege. Attorneys 
might attempt to raise the attorney-client privilege as a defense to providing information, but 
they are usually unsuccessful in this regard. Since the trustee is now the client, he must be 
able to understand what legal actions need to be taken. Therefore, it is imperative that the 
debtor’s attorney cooperate with the trustee. The trustee also should have access to the 
accountant’s work papers, tax returns, and client documents in their possession, which might 
provide the trustee and creditors with the opportunity to locate and recover hidden assets. 
Another useful tool in the trustee’s arsenal is the power to have access to debtor’s records 
that are in the possession of the criminal authorities. Since the trustee steps into the shoes of 
the debtor, he has the right to inspect and use these records to conduct the business affairs 
of the debtor. 
 
If the investigation uncovers sufficient evidence of fraud, the trustee should file a report 
detailing the results of the investigation with the United States Attorney. This duty is spelled 
out in Title 18, United States Code, section 3057. 
 
Sources of Information 
The trustee should obtain the various documents or information listed below in the course 
of an investigation. If any of this information is unavailable, the trustee can subpoena these 
documents. The subpoenaed documents could either be the original documents, certified 
copies of these documents, or other information that could be used to reconstruct the 
missing documents.  
  
Type of Information Location 
Debtor’s petition, schedules, statement of 
financial affairs 
Bankruptcy Court’s Office and UST 
Interim and operating statements Bankruptcy Court and UST 
Adversary proceedings, claims registers, 
transcripts of hearings, 2004 examinations 
Bankruptcy Court 
Fee applications Bankruptcy Court and UST 
Real property records County Clerk, County Assessor 
Personal property records County Clerk 
UCC filings Secretary of State 
Financial statements Lending institutions, debtor’s counsel, 
accountants, Chapter 7 or Chapter 11 filings 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1311 
Forwarding address Post Office 
DBAs County recorder; Secretary of State 
Partnerships Secretary of State 
Officers of corporations Secretary of State 
Addresses of individuals Voting records 
Insurance policies Insurance company providing coverage 
Current or prior business activities Interviews conducted of creditors, former 
employees, former spouses, former business 
activities 
Criminal history, current or prior litigation Police records, local court records 
Tapes and transcripts of sworn testimony 
[341(a) and 2004 examinations] 
UST - 341(a) exams 
Bankruptcy Court - 2004 exams 
 
Investigative Procedures 
To fulfill their fiduciary investigative responsibilities, trustees need to gather financial 
information. If debtor’s books and records are missing, incomplete or unreliable, they should 
be obtained from third parties such as banks, customers, related parties, and so on. If the 
third-party resists the trustee’s request, the trustee can subpoena records or testimony under 
Bankruptcy Rule 2004. After receiving third-party records and testimony, the trustee might 
then: 
• Reconstruct cash receipts and cash disbursements journals, and general ledgers. 
• Identify new bank accounts, related-party transactions, and hidden or concealed assets. 
• Take 2004 exams (depositions) of uncooperative witnesses. 
• Take 2004 exams of third-party witnesses and others who can authenticate documents, 
records, etc.  
• Obtain declaration testimony from cooperative witnesses. 
• Interview witnesses — Determine direct versus indirect knowledge of facts. Bookkeepers 
are good sources of information who can provide information regarding cash receipts 
and disbursements, related-parties transactions, and evidence regarding destruction of 
records. 
• After documentary and other evidence has been gathered and analyzed, the trustee 
should prepare an investigative report. 
• If allegations of fraud are present, file a separate report pursuant to Title 18, section 3057 
(filed with United States Attorney’s Office).   
 
 
Creditors’ Rights and Remedies 
Normally when businesses or individuals are not paid, they attempt to collect amounts owed 
to them. When normal collection efforts fail, they resort to legal action. But if, after a 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1312                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
creditor files a legal action, the debtor files a petition for bankruptcy, the creditor can take 
the following steps:  
• Investigate the reasons why payment has not been made. 
? Check with other creditors to see if they have not been paid. 
? Check with credit bureaus for credit history. 
• File a motion for the appointment of a trustee; other creditors and the office of the UST 
might join in with the petitioning creditor. 
• To succeed, the moving party must demonstrate that fraud is suspected, and, therefore, a 
trustee should be appointed to oversee the operations of the debtor. 
• The creditor should have sufficient documentary and other evidence of fraudulent 
conduct, including declarations provided by knowledgeable witnesses. 
• A hearing is held where the judge hears evidence supporting and refuting the fraud 
allegations. Thereafter, the judge issues a ruling regarding the appointment of a trustee. 
• In some cases, the judge might appoint an examiner instead of a trustee because it is less 
intrusive. An examiner’s role is only to investigate and report back to the judge whether 
the allegations of fraud are supported by the independent examiner’s own evidence. 
• If the debtor does not file bankruptcy, the creditor might join other creditors and file an 
involuntary petition against the debtor. 
 
Creditors’ Committees  
After filing a Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition, the UST normally appoints a committee of 
creditors holding unsecured claims. This committee is referred to as a creditors’ committee. 
Title 11, U.S.C., section 1102 provides guidance in the formation of creditors’ committees. 
 
Title 11, U.S.C., section 1103 details the powers of creditors’ committees. They can employ 
attorneys, accountants, or other agents to assist them in the performance of their duties 
under the code. In carrying out their duties, creditors’ committees are authorized to consult 
with the trustee or debtor-in-possession concerning the administration of the case; to 
investigate the acts, conduct, assets, liabilities, and financial condition of the debtor and the 
operation of the debtor’s business; to participate in the formation of a plan of 
reorganization; to request the appointment of a trustee or examiner; and to perform such 
other services as are in the interest of those represented. 
 
Involuntary Petitions (Title 11, U.S.C., Section 303)  
Most bankruptcy cases are voluntary (i.e., voluntarily filed by the debtor). As we have 
described above, debtors have specific reasons for filing bankruptcy. Individuals, 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1313 
partnerships, and corporations have the statutory right to file bankruptcy as a protection 
from their creditors. In exchange for exercising their privilege of filing bankruptcy, debtors 
give up their right to financial privacy and must do other things required under the code. 
 
Most creditors, however, do not want their de btors to file for bankruptcy because it might 
make recovering a claim more difficult, and it might diminish the amount they receive on 
their claim.  
 
To collect amounts owed to them or to obtain a judgment against the debtor, some creditors 
might sue the debtor in state court before any bankruptcy petition is filed. Numerous 
collection actions can be brought against the debtor, which might lead to an increase in 
competition for the debtor’s remaining assets. When this occurs, the debtor normally files 
bankruptcy to prevent these creditors from seizing its assets. In some rare instances, 
however, the creditors might involuntary petition the debtor into bankruptcy, although 
doing so runs contrary to their normal inclination to do everything they can to keep debtors 
out of bankruptcy. 
 
That being said, involuntary petitions serve very important purposes; they can be used to 
stop the financial hemorrhaging that usually takes place in fraudulently operated businesses, 
and they allow the creditors to control the debtor and protect the value of the business while 
investigating the financial affairs of the debtor.  
 
An involuntary petition can only be filed under Chapters 7 and 11. Creditors who have not 
been paid by the debtor can file a petition forcing the company into bankruptcy. Generally, 
the creditors must be able to demonstrate in court that the debtor is not paying debts as they 
mature. 
 
To commence the filing of an involuntary proceeding, creditors must satisfy the following 
criteria: 
• The debts must not be subject to a bona fide dispute and must be noncontingent. 
• The creditor(s) must be owed at least $14,425 more than the value of the lien or 
collateral. 
• If there are 12 or more creditors, then three creditors are needed to file. 
• If there are fewer than 12 creditors, only one creditor is needed to file. 
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1314                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
After the involuntary petition is filed, a court hearing is held. The court might dismiss the 
petition or enter an order for relief. But if the court deems it necessary, an interim trustee 
might be appointed to preserve the property of the estate. At the hearing on the involuntary 
petition, the creditors are required to demonstrate, through direct testimony, that the alleged 
debtor is not paying debts as they come due. 
 
Creditors must be careful when filing an involuntary petition. If the creditors are not 
successful in court and the judge dismisses the petition, they might be sued by the debtor. 
Damages for lost profits and goodwill could be assessed against the creditors who filed the 
involuntary petition. Occasionally, in egregious circumstances, courts have awarded punitive 
damages against creditors who filed an involuntary petition. 
 
Investigations by Creditors  
Individual creditors might conduct their own investigations and assist Chapter 7 and Chapter 
11 trustees in performing their investigations. Trustees are normally very appreciative of 
creditors who can provide information regarding the financial affairs of the debtor. Creditors 
also can attend the 341(a) examination of the debtor and ask pertinent questions. Creditors 
who bring copies of documents, such as prior loan applications or pictures of particular 
assets, to the 341(a) examination are of great interest to trustees. Creditors can ask the 
debtor what happened to the various assets listed on the loan applications or assets shown in 
photographs. 
 
 
Bankruptcy Crime Statutes 
Bankruptcy crimes that are committed during the course of a bankruptcy proceeding, or in 
contemplation of a bankruptcy proceeding, are contained in federal statutes. They are carried 
out through the filing of a bankruptcy petition either to accomplish the purpose of the crime 
or to cover up another crime that has already been perpetrated.  
 
Although the Bankruptcy Code is contained within Title 11, U.S. Code, bankruptcy crimes 
appear within Title 18, U.S. Code, sections 151 through 155. Section 152 is the most 
comprehensive of the individual bankruptcy crime statutes. To constitute and be proved as a 
federal crime, bankruptcy crimes must have been committed during the pendency of a bankruptcy 
proceeding, with the defendant’s knowledge, and with a fraudulent intent to defeat the bankruptcy laws. 
The FBI investigates bankruptcy crimes and the U.S. Attorney’s office prosecutes them.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1315 
It is no defense to these crimes that the creditors have actual knowledge of concealed assets 
or that the concealment was not from all creditors, and it is no defense that the defendant 
returned the estate’s assets, though such facts might mitigate damages. 
 
Generally, the penalty for each bankruptcy offense is a fine (of up to $500,000 in the case of 
bankruptcy fraud committed by an organization) or imprisonment for not more than five 
years, or both. The statute of limitations does not run until the fraud is detected or the 
debtor receives a discharge or is denied a discharge pursuant to the Bankruptcy Code.  
 
The following sections set out the bankruptcy crime statutes as well as related criminal 
statutes that frequently arise in bankruptcy cases.  
 
Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 151 
This section contains the definition of the term debtor, a party who has filed a petition under 
Title 11 of the U.S. Code. 
 
Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 152  
This is the most comprehensive criminal bankruptcy fraud statute; it serves as the primary 
bankruptcy crime statute for prosecuting bankruptcy fraud. Under section 158, the FBI and 
the US Attorneys are charged with enforcement of section 152. There are nine paragraphs in 
section 152 that define various offenses against the bankruptcy laws. The following is a brief 
overview of each of the nine offenses.  
 
Paragraph 1 — Concealment of Property  
 
A person who knowingly and fraudulently conceals from a custodian, trustee, marshal, or other 
officer of the court charged with the control or custody of property, or, in connection with a case 
under Title 11, from creditors or  the United States Trustee, any property belonging to the estate 
of a debtor; 
 
For purposes of this paragraph, estate property consists of assets, records, and anything  
of value.  
 
Paragraph 2 — False Oath or Account  
False oaths apply to oral testimony that might be given in 341(a) examinations, 2004 
examinations (depositions), and testimony provided at hearings and trials.  
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1316                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A person who knowingly and fraudulently makes a false oath or account in or in relation to 
any case under Title 11. 
 
Paragraph 3 — False Declarations 
 
A person who knowingly and fraudulently makes a false declaration, certificate, verification or 
statement under penalty of perjury as permitted under section 1746 of Title 28, in or in relation 
to any case under Title 11.  
 
Written documents filed with the court under penalty of perjury consist of the debtor’s 
petition, schedules and statements of financial affairs, interim statements and operating 
reports, as well as declarations filed with the court. Declarations are made in petitions, 
schedules and in other court filings (motions). This section gives the same weight to 
unsworn declarations as to those sworn under penalty of perjury.  
 
Paragraph 4 — False Claims 
 
A person who knowingly and fraudulently presents any false claim for proof against the estate of 
a debtor, or uses any such claim in any case under  Title 11, in a personal capacity or as or 
through an agent, proxy, or attorney. 
 
This paragraph is designed to prevent fictitious or inflated claims from being filed by 
creditors or others in a bankruptcy case. 
 
Paragraph 5 — Fraudulent Receipt of Property 
 
A person who knowingly and fraudulently receiv es any material amount of property from a 
debtor after the filing of a case under Title 11 with intent to defeat the provisions of Title 11 
 
This paragraph relates back to paragraph 1, above, and it implicates those who work in 
concert with the debtor. This could be a creditor or any other interested party. 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1317 
Paragraph 6 — Extortion and Bribery 
 
A person who knowingly and fraudulently gives, offers, receives or attempts to obtain any 
money or property, remuneration, compensation, reward, advantage, or promise thereof, for 
acting or forbearing to act in any case under Title 11. 
  
This paragraph covers bribery, which also is spelled out in Title 18, principally sections 210 
and 1503. Both Sections discuss the attempt to bribe judicial officers and to unlawfully 
corrupt or influence any officer of the court. Section 1503 also covers threats intended to 
influence, intimidate, or impede an officer in the performance of his duties. 
 
Paragraph 7 — Fraudulent Transfer or Concealment 
 
A person who in a personal capacity or as agent or officer of any person or corporation, in 
contemplation of a case under Title 11 by or against him or any other person or corporation, 
or with intent to defeat the provisions of Title 11, knowingly and fraudulently transfers or 
conceals any of his property or the property of such other person or corporation.  
 
This paragraph is the only paragraph under section 152 that deals with pre-bankruptcy 
conduct. The section addresses situations where a bankruptcy petition filing is imminent. It 
is intended to cover actions by individuals who transfer property rightfully belonging to the 
creditors of the prospective bankruptcy estate. 
 
Paragraph 8 — Fraudulent Destruction or Alteration of Documents 
 
A person who, after the filing of a case under Title 11 or in contemplation thereof, knowingly 
and fraudulently conceals, destroys, mutilates, falsifies, or makes a false entry in any recorded 
information (including books, documents, records, and papers) relating to the property or 
financial affairs of a debtor. 
 
Paragraph 9 — Fraudulent Withholding of Documents 
 
A person who, after the filing of a case under Title 11, knowingly and fraudulently withholds 
from a custodian, trustee, marshal, or other officer of the court or a United States Trustee 
entitled to its possession, any recorded information (including books, documents, records, and 
papers) relating to the property or financial affairs of a debtor. 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1318                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
This section is particularly useful in cases where the debtor does not turn over estate records 
after being compelled to do so by the court, and the records are later discovered by federal 
authorities during the execution of search warrants. 
 
Embezzlement Against the Estate, Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 153 
  
 (a) Offense. A person described in subsection (b) who knowingly and fraudulently appropriates to the 
person’s own use, embezzles, spends, or transfers any property or secretes or destroys any document 
belonging to the estate of a debtor. 
 
 (b) Person to Whom Section Applies. A person described in this subsection is one who has access to 
property or documents belonging to an estate by virtue of the person’s participation in the administration 
of the estate as a trustee, custodian, marshal, attorney, or other officer of the court or as an agent, 
employee, or other person engaged by such an officer to perform a service with respect to the estate.  
  
This statute deals with all property and the records or documents that the court officer 
receives during the tenure of the trustee or officer.  
 
Adverse Interest and Conduct of Officers, Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 154 
 
A person who, being a custodian, trustee,  marshal, or other officer of the court — 
(1)  knowingly purc hases, directly or indirectly, any property of the estate of which the person is such 
an officer in a case under Title 11;  
 
(2)  knowingly refuses to permit a reasonable opportunity for the inspection by parties in interest of 
the documents and accounts relating to the affairs of estates in the person’s charge by parties 
when directed by the court to do so; or  
(3)  knowingly refuses to permit a reasonable opport unity for the inspection by the United States 
Trustee of the documents and accounts relating to the affairs of any estate in the person’s  
charge. 
 
Bankruptcy trustees are in a position of trust and, therefore, should be held to a higher 
standard of conduct than other interested parties. But one critical aspect is the sale of estate 
property. Trustees can influence the sale of property and can make significant profits if they 
directly or indirectly purchase assets of the estate. It would be similar to insider trading by 
individuals in the securities industry. This statute is unlike the others listed above in that a 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1319 
violation of this statute is only a misdemeanor, whereas all of the above are felonies. 
Conviction under this Section carries a fine, as well as forfeiture of the person’s office. 
 
Knowing Disregard of Bankruptcy Law or Rule, Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 156 
 
(a)  Definitions. In this section — 
(1) the term “bankruptcy petition preparer” means a person, other than the debtor’s attorney or an 
employee of such an attorney, who prepares for compensation a document for filing, and 
 
(2) the term “document for filing” means a petition or any other document prepared for filing by a 
debtor in a United States bankruptcy court or a United States district court in connection with a case 
under Title 11. 
 
(b) Offense. If a bankruptcy case or related proceeding is dismissed because of a knowing attempt by a 
bankruptcy petition preparer in any manner to disregard the requirements of Title 11, United States 
Code, or the Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure. 
 
This section is the criminal version of the Title 11, U.S.C., section 110, which deals with 
“petition mills” and petition preparers who de liberately disregard the Bankruptcy Code or 
any of its rules and procedures. Petition mills and preparers who fall under this section might 
file false documents for debtors with deliberately wrong Social Security numbers or other 
incorrect information. In some cases, debtors might not even be aware they are filing 
bankruptcy or the effect of a bankruptcy on their credit rating. 
 
Bankruptcy Fraud, Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 157  
 
A perso n who, having devised or in tending to devise a scheme or artifice to defraud and for the purpose 
of executing or concealing such a scheme or artifice or attempting to do so — 
 
(1) files a petition under Title 11, including a fraudulent involuntary bankruptcy petition under 
section 303 of such title;  
 
(2) files a document in a proceeding under Title 11, including a fraudulent  involuntary bankruptcy 
petition under section 303 of such title; or  
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1320                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
(3) makes a false or fraudulent re presentation, claim, or promise concerning or in relation to a 
proceeding under Title 11, including a fraudulent in voluntary bankruptcy petition under section 303 of 
such title, at any time before or after the filing of  the petition, or in relation to a proceeding falsely 
asserted to be pending under such Title. 
 
This section is very similar to mail and wire fraud statutes both in wording and in concept. 
This section applies to insiders who perpetrate bustout schemes, as well as those who 
attempt to obtain credit immediately prior to filing bankruptcy. Under section 158, the FBI 
and the U.S. Attorneys are charged with enforcement of section 157. 
 
Falsifying, Altering, or Destroying Documents, Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1519 
 
Whoever knowingly alters, destroys, mutilates, conceals, covers up, falsifies, or makes a false entry in 
any record, document, or tangible object with the intent to impede, obstruct, or influence the 
investigation or proper administration of any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency 
of the United States or any case filed under Title 11, or in relation to or contemplation of any such 
matter or case, shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 20 years, or both. 
 
This section was added as part of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in 2002. It specifically provides 
that altering, falsifying, or destroying documents filed under Title 11 (the Bankruptcy Code) 
is a criminal violation subject to imprisonment of up to 20 years. 
 
Bankruptcy-Related Violations  
Although bankruptcy crimes are the focus of this section, there are other crimes that are 
usually perpetrated prior to the filing of a bankruptcy petition. In some cases, the bankruptcy 
process is the culmination of a pattern of prior criminal activity. There are many other crimes 
frequently associated with bankruptcy including mail fraud, wire fraud, bank fraud, interstate 
transportation of stolen goods or property, aiding or abetting, false statements, conspiracy, tax 
evasion, and money laundering. Bankruptcy fraud is also a predicate offense under RICO. For 
more information on these offenses, see the “Law Related to Fraud” chapter in the Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
Although the criminal aspects of bankruptcy crimes are heard in District Court, the 
underlying facts dealing with a debtor’s misc onduct also are heard in the form of civil 
proceedings before the United States Bankruptcy Court. Parallel proceedings occur in cases 
where bankruptcy fraud allegations have been made. Several examples of civil proceedings 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1321 
that ensue as a result of fraud allegations against the debtor are motions for the appointment 
of trustees and examiners, lawsuits for recovery of fraudulently transferred property, and 
objections to the debtor’s discharge.  
 
 
Bankruptcy Schemes 
 
Concealed Assets 
The most common crime is the concealment of assets rightfully belonging to the debtor 
estate. Assets might consist of cash, consumer property, houses, and interests in partnerships 
and corporations, as well as lawsuits in which the debtor is a plaintiff. Assets also include 
books and records of the debtor. Concealments vary from little or no monetary value to tens 
of millions of dollars. The various concealment offenses are described in more detail under 
the bankruptcy crime statutes. 
 
The Planned Bustout 
A bustout is a planned bankruptcy. It can take many different forms. The basic approach is 
for an apparently legitimate business to order large quantities of goods on credit, then 
dispose of those goods through legitimate or illegitimate channels. The perpetrators then 
close shop, absconding with the proceeds, and leaving the suppliers unpaid. 
 
Bustout schemes are planned and perpetrated by individuals both prior to and subsequent to 
the formation of the new business entity. Other characteristics of bustout schemes follow: 
• They are planned from the beginning. 
• Sometimes organized crime is involved. 
• Credit is established with numerous vendors; prompt payments are made to all vendors; 
vendors feel comfortable in dealings, thereby extending existing credit lines. 
• Perpetrators build inventory by ordering everything they can from vendors; they promise 
to pay soon and order more merchandise. 
• Sell out inventory at deep discount or move it before vendors can take possession of it. 
• Business fails or closes up, files bankruptcy, or creditors beat them to it with involuntary 
bankruptcy. 
  
Detection  
Some red flags that signal that a bustout scheme might be in process include: 
• A business relationship based principally on trust. Creditors are willing to offer extended 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1322                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
terms for payment, hold checks, or take post-dated checks. This makes them vulnerable. 
• Buyers with a history of purchasing goods for an unreasonable discount. 
• A large number of bank accounts, indicating a possible kiting scheme. The perpetrator 
occasionally pays some of his creditors with funds generated by floating checks between 
bank accounts. 
 
Prevention 
Lenders and suppliers should evaluate potential customers carefully prior to extending credit 
by performing due diligence and obtaining detailed background information. Lenders  
and suppliers should at times visit their customers’ locations to verify the legitimacy of  
the businesses. 
 
Multiple Filings 
This scheme involves repeated bankruptcy filings by the same debtor in order to obtain the 
benefit of the automatic stay. Usually each petition is dismissed for failure to file the required 
statements or to appear for examination. False statements on petitions are common, 
including a denial that the debtor has filed any previous petition. 
 
Credit Card Bustout 
The debtor intentionally runs up a number of credit cards to their limit and files bankruptcy 
with no intent to repay. Credit card debts might include purchases for jewelry, luxury items, 
or other personal property that are not disclosed on the schedules. Credit card debt also 
might include large cash advances taken prior to filing bankruptcy. 
 
Forged Filings 
Bankruptcy petitions are sometimes filed in another (uninvolved) person’s name, usually as 
part of a larger scheme using an assumed identity. It can take years to correct the credit 
records of the person whose identity has been stolen. Sometimes the debtor’s name is 
obtained from obituary notices. 
 
Typing Services or Petition Mills 
This scheme involves companies that file bankruptcy petitions typically on behalf of low-
 income and often unsuspecting clients. The petitions often contain numerous false 
statements. The debtor usually has no idea a bankruptcy has been filed, as the service has 
held itself out to be a renter’s rights group and has not told the client how it will accomplish 
what it has promised.   
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1401 



:


bankruptci fraud
introduct
the bankruptci system and player
bankruptci court
all bankruptci case ar file in the local district of the unit state bankruptci court
although bankruptci court ar feder court thei ar not articl iii court which deriv
their power from articl iii of the constitut articl iii state that judici power of the
unit state rest with the suprem court and in inferior court establish by congress
articl iii court includ the us district court the us circuit court of appeal and the
us suprem court
bankruptci court ar not contempl within thi scheme as inferior court but thei ar
consid as an adjunct to inferior us district court
likewis bankruptci judg ar not articl iii judg which deriv their power from articl
iii of the constitut bankruptci judg hear all case involv debtor and creditor
right approv plan of reorgan award fee to profession and conduct hear
and trial when necessari to resolv disput
offic of the unit state truste
the offic of the unit state truste is a depart of justic agenc that is respons
for administ bankruptci case appoint truste examin and chapter 11
committe overse and monitor truste review employ and fee applic
and appear in court on matter of interest to the estat and creditor
there ar 21 region in the offic of the us truste compris on or more feder
district each region consist of a us truste or an assist truste in sever region
the offic of the ust in each region princip is compris of staff attornei bankruptci
analyst includ account and in some instanc special investig unit
staff attornei review plead eg fee applic and motion to appoint truste and
examin and repres the ust on these matter
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11302 2011 fraud examin manual
bankruptci analyst analyz and review oper report and other relev financi
inform and in gener overse the debtor case to ensur complianc with the
bankruptci code and to protect the asset of the estat
special investig unit investig crimin referr complaint in bankruptci case in some
case thei work with crimin investig agenc such as the feder bureau of
investig and the intern revenu servic crimin investig divis
panel truste
panel truste ar independ profession usual attornei who serv in chapter 7 case
in each feder district in the countri truste also might serv in chapter 11 case where
oper of the debtor busi is consid appropri truste or other might
develop a plan of reorgan to conclud the chapter 11 proceed if the busi
cannot be reorgan the truste might petit the court to convert the case to chapter 7
or develop a plan of liquid under chapter 11 the duti of a truste ar specif
enumer in titl 11 usc section 704 in chapter 7 case and titl 11 usc section
1106 in chapter 11 case the duti of a truste ar as follow administ asset liquid
asset pai creditor litig matter where necessari have the right to sue and be su
conduct hear conduct investig of financi affair of the debtor file report as
requir by the offic of the ust and where a ppropriat file crimin referr with the
unit state attornei offic a truste compens is statutorili defin under the
bankruptci code
examin
an examin is normal appoint in a chapter 11 bankruptci proceed to investig
certain alleg of fraud and misconduct on the part of the debtor or princip of the
debtor in a typic motion for the appoint of a truste or examin alleg of
fraud or misconduct ar rais by creditor the offic of the ust or other interest
parti a bankruptci judg hear evid submit by all parti creditor et al as well
as the debtor respons to the alleg after hear the evid the judg ha the
option either to appoint a truste or an examin or leav the debtor in possess of the
busi if an examin is appoint the sole respons is to investig and report
the result of the investig to the court and other parti in interest as quickli as possibl
examin have the power to subpoena record and depos wit thei do not have the
power to run busi make busi decis or propos plan of reorgan
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11303
gener speak court might expand the examin power to perform certain duti
of truste or debtorsinpossess
debtor
a debtor is defin in titl 11 usc section 10113 as a person or municip who is
the subject of a file under titl 11 person is defin as an individu partnership or
corpor municip is defin as a polit subdivis public agenc or
instrument of a state an individu debtor object in a chapter 7 case is to be
reliev of all discharg debt and to obtain a fresh start thi is accomplish by the
court grant the individu debtor a discharg the debtor primari object in a chapter
11 should be to have a plan of reorgan confirm by the court and preserv the
busi oper
creditor
a creditor is defin by the code as on who hold a claim creditor can be either secur or
unsecur
secur creditor
a secur creditor hold a claim for which there is a properli perfect secur interest it will
be consid a secur claim to the extent of the valu of the properti when the debt is
undersecur amount of note is greater than the valu of the secur interest the debt will
be consid both unsecur and secur for exampl if a note for 500 is secur by
properti have a valu of 400 there will be a secur claim for 400 and an unsecur
claim for 100 if the debtor and the credit or cannot agre on the valu of the collater
there will be a hear under section 506 of the bankruptci code and the court will
determin the valu of the collater the bankruptci court will reli on state law where the
properti is locat to determin if a secur claim exist a secur interest gener is
obtain in person properti by a ucc file and in real properti by file a lien with the
counti clerk in the counti where the properti is locat
at the time of the file of the bankruptci petit an automat stai preclud the creditor
from take ani action to repossess the properti unless relief from the stai is grant in a
chapter 11 case the court gener will grant relief onli if it can be shown that there is no
equiti in the properti and that the properti is not need for reorgan the busi the
stai also might be remov if the properti is declin in valu and the debtor fail to
compens the creditor for thi declin refer to as adequ protect payment if
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11304 2011 fraud examin manual
the stai is remov the creditor then can proce under state law to obtain possess of
the properti often through a foreclosur to satisfi the claim
holder of secur claim have prioriti over unsecur creditor and normal get paid first
in the distribut to creditor made by the truste or debtorinpossess in the
develop of a chapter 11 plan the right of holder of secur claim normal ar
provid for befor the unsecur claim holder will receiv materi consider
unsecur creditor
unsecur creditor ar those that have a claim against the debtor that aros befor the
bankruptci petit wa file and do not have a perfect secur interest titl 11 usc
section 507 give some of the holder of unsecur claim prioriti over other unsecur
claim holder among those claim that have prioriti ar administr expens cost
associ with the oper of the busi and profession fee while the busi or
individu is in bankruptci select prepetit unpaid wage prepetit contribut
requir but not made to employe benefit plan prepetit unpaid alimoni and support
payment and select prepetit tax claim
adjust
adjust or oper agent as thei ar frequent call ar the right hand to truste
and debtor an adjust or oper agent is an individu who handl the peripher
duti of a truste such duti includ secur the busi locat chang lock
locat asset of the estat locat busi record open new bank account
investig theft of asset in conjunct with the truste store asset of the estat and
arrang sale of asset adjust also can assist debtor and truste in oper the
debtor busi and in help to prepar bankruptci schedul as well as interim
statement and oper report
the bankruptci code titl 11 unit state code
the bankruptci code is broken down into eight chapter 1 3 5 7 9 11 12 and 13 under
titl 11 of the unit state code in addit there ar two other sourc of inform
deal with bankruptci issu that ar found in the unit state code thei can be found
at titl 18 usc chapter 9 which deal with crime and crimin procedur and titl 28
which deal with the judiciari and judici procedur some of the provis of the
bankruptci code as amend by the bankruptci reform act of 1994 ar outlin below
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11305
chapter 1 gener provis
chapter 1 contain definit rule of construct power of the court who can be a
debtor and other miscellan inform chapter 1 ha been amend to reflect issu
deal with person who neglig or fraudul prepar bankruptci petit section
101 of thi chapter is particularli import as it deal with definit of term us in
bankruptci proceed section 110 deal with the penalti for person who neglig or
fraudul prepar bankruptci petit see later section on crimin conduct
chapter 3 case administr
part 1 of chapter 3 deal with the commenc of case file requir and court
appear part 2 deal with offic the qualif of the truste the role of the
truste and the compens of truste and other offic part 3 deal with
administr involv meet of creditor notic requir properti of the
estat and other administr requir part 4 deal with administr power
includ the power of the truste to protect properti of the estat us leas or sell the
properti and obtain credit on behalf of the estat
chapter 5 creditor debtor and the estat
part 1 of chapter 5 deal with creditor clai ms their prioriti and their allow thi
section contain the priorit of claim and the distribut of estat asset part 2 deal
with specif duti of the debtor the exempt debtor can claim and discharg of
debt part 3 deal with properti of the estat recoveri of voidabl transfer and contractu
right of the estat
chapter 7 liquid of debtor asset
part 1 of chapter 7 deal with offic and the administr of chapter 7 case and spell
out duti of the truste part 2 deal with the collect liquid and distribut of the
estat asset part 3 deal with stockbrok liquid part 4 deal with commod
broker liquid
chapter 7 is the most common type of bankruptci it involv liquid of the debtor
asset by a truste to pai the creditor claim thi allow the debtor to get a court order
under which some or all of hi debt mai be elimin it involv the liquid of asset
that ar not exempt by state law person bankruptci doe not elimin tax fine
alimoni child support and certain student loan
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11306 2011 fraud examin manual
a petit for liquid under chapter 7 mai be file by ani entiti eg ani individu
corpor partnership busi trust etc but a chapter 7 case file by an individu
debtor mai be dismiss or convert to a case under chapter 11 or 13 with the debtor
consent if grant relief under chapter 7 would constitut an abus the mean test is us
to determin whether the chapter 7 file is presumpt abus under thi test the
truste or ani creditor can bring a motion to dismiss a chapter 7 file if the debtor incom
is greater than the state median incom
also a chapter 7 debtor cannot receiv a discharg if a prior discharg wa receiv within 8
year of the new file
chapter 11 reorgan
often debtor want to avoid liquid and chapter 11 provid a type of bankruptci that
is design to help the debtor by reorgan the busi the code allow for debtor to
restructur their debt pai their creditor and emerg from bankruptci part 1 of the chapter
deal with offic and administr part 2 deal with the plan of reorgan part 3
deal with postconfirm matter part 4 deal with railroad reorgan
the purpos of the chapter 11 file is to allow the debtor breath room from the
creditor so that the debtor can reorgan it financi affair and continu as a go
concern if the court is provid with suffici probabl caus regard the financi affair
of the debtor a truste or examin can be appoint by the court
chapter 13 adjust of debt
chapter 13 provid anoth type of bankruptci that allow a debtor pai off hi debt over
time in accord with a court approv plan under thi type of case the debtor mai keep
certain properti that he would not be allow to retain in a chapter 7 bankruptci becaus
of chang to the bankruptci law in 2005 mani peopl ar no longer elig to file for
bankruptci under chapter 7 some have their chapter 7 case convert to a chapter 13 case
but chapter 13 is not grant if the debtor receiv a discharg under chapter 7 11 or 12
within the previou 4 year or a discharg under chapter 13 in the previou 2 year
also the court mani not grant a chapter 13 discharg unless the debtor ha complet an
educ cours in person financi manag
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11307
the bankruptci case
a bankruptci case begin with the file of a bankruptci petit but to be elig to file a
bankruptci petit an individu debtor must have receiv credit counsel from an
approv counsel agenc within 180 dai befor file
when a petit is file the debtor must file the follow document
a list of creditor
a schedul of asset and liabil
a schedul of current incom and current expenditur
a statement of the debtor financi affair
evid of payment from employ if ani receiv 60 dai befor the file date
an item statement of monthli net incom
a statement disclos ani reason anticip increas in incom or expenditur for
the 12 month after the file
a record of ani interest in an qualifi state tuition program or an educ individu
retir account
a certif of credit counsel from the approv counsel agenc if the petition
is an individu
a statement of the debtor intent with respect to hi properti that secur debt if
the petition is an individu
a copi of the debtor tax return for the most recent tax year
gener if an individu debtor in a chapter 7 case fail to file the document within 45
dai of the origin file date the case is automat dismiss
onc the bankruptci case ha been commenc the debtor is protect by an automat
stai which prevent creditor from continu attempt to collect debt from the petition
there ar howev except where the automat stai doe not appli eg prosecut of
crimin case patern case domest support oblig case child custodi case etc
also if the bankruptci petit wa file as part of a scheme to delai hinder or defraud
creditor a creditor whose claim is securt by a real properti interest is entitl to relief
from the stai
addition after file the debtor will be appoint a truste who will overse the case in
a chapter 7 case the truste is respons for collect sell and reduc the estat
asset to cash temporarili continu to oper the debtor busi make a final report
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11308 2011 fraud examin manual
and file a final account in a chapter 11 case howev the debtor remain in possess of
hi asset and gener retain the same author as the truste except for the duti to
investig the debtor and the right to compens a truste is appoint in a chapter 13
case but the truste duti gener involv in vestig the debtor financi affair
provis affect individu
nondischarg debt
although a bankruptci proceed mai result in the discharg of a debtor debt certain
debt ar not discharg in chapter 7 case
tax in gener tax claim ar not discharg
debt incur by fraud embezzl and larceni gener liabil aris from fraud
embezzl and larceni ar not discharg
luxuri good debt ow to a singl creditor total more than 500 for luxuri good
incur within 90 dai of file ar preseum nondischarg
cash advanc cash advanc of 750 that ar made within 70 dai of file ar presum
nondischarg
unschedul debt in gener debt that ar not list or ar not schedul ar not
discharg
domest support oblig debt for domest support oblig ar not discharg
properti settlement aris from divorc or separ debt for properti settlement aris
from divorc or separ ar not discharg
certain liabil liabil aris from will and malici injuri and liabil for death
or person injuri incur when oper a vehicl ar not discharg
fine and penalti oblig to pai a fine penalti or forfeitur ow to the
govern ar not discharg
student loan student loan ar not discharg unless it would impos an undu
hardship for the debt surviv
homestead exempt
to prevent individu who ar like to file for bankruptci from move their asset to
state with more favor law the debtor must satisfi certain hold period requir
to qualifi for a state homestead exempt whic h allow filer to exempt the valu of their
home from creditor for properti worth more than 125000 the debtor must own that
properti for 1215 dai befor file also befor qualifi for a state homestead
exempt the debtor must have live in that state for 730 dai prior to file
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11309
retir plan exempt
debtor can exempt retiremet fund from the bankruptci estat if thei ar in a fund or
account that is exempt from tax under the intern revenu code
educ account exempt
debtor can exempt educ account under section 529 and 530 from the bankruptci
estat if the beneficiari of the account is a child stepchild grandchild or stepgrandchild of
the debtor for the taxabl year dure which fund were place in the account
privaci provis
under the bankruptci abus prevent and consum protect act the bankruptci
court is permit to honor the privaci polici of busi debtor the act creat a
consum privaci ombudsman to protect person privaci in bankruptci proceed
measur mai be implement to prevent ident theft and to guid what inform is
readili access to the public debtor ar permit to request that court protect sensit
inform befor it is place in public record
the role of the truste in bankruptci fraud matter
the truste in bankruptci matter is often confront with alleg of fraud and
misconduct on the part of the debtor and it princip in chapter 11 case it is often the
primari reason the court appoint a truste creditor repres of the creditor
committe or privat investig might be interact with a bankruptci truste for thi
reason it is import to know how the truste oper what the role of the truste is and
how to make the most of the opportun to work with the truste the truste author to
investig fraud is found in the bankruptci code the follow is a brief outlin of the
chapter 7 and chapter 11 truste author to investig fraud
statutori author
in chapter 7 case section 704 of the code spell out all duti of the truste which includ
investig claim file by creditor and the code provid that the truste shall
investig the financi affair of the debtor
although gener truste in chapter 11 case do not oper the debtor busi
chapter 11 truste ha the duti to investig the debtor financi affair
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11310 2011 fraud examin manual
investig by the truste
the truste power enabl him to gather financi inform from variou sourc
includ the debtor attornei and account a truste step into the shoe of the
debtor which allow him the opportun to break the attorneycli privileg attornei
might attempt to rais the attorneycli privileg as a defens to provid inform but
thei ar usual unsuccess in thi regard sinc the truste is now the client he must be
abl to understand what legal action need to be taken therefor it is imper that the
debtor attornei cooper with the truste the truste also should have access to the
account work paper tax return and client document in their possess which might
provid the truste and creditor with the opportun to locat and recov hidden asset
anoth us tool in the truste arsen is the power to have access to debtor record
that ar in the possess of the crimin author sinc the truste step into the shoe of
the debtor he ha the right to inspect and us these record to conduct the busi affair
of the debtor
if the investig uncov suffici evid of fraud the truste should file a report
detail the result of the investig with the unit state attornei thi duti is spell
out in titl 18 unit state code section 3057
sourc of inform
the truste should obtain the variou document or inform list below in the cours
of an investig if ani of thi inform is unavail the truste can subpoena these
document the subpoena document could either be the origin document certifi
copi of these document or other inform that could be us to reconstruct the
miss document
type of inform locat
debtor petit schedul statement of
financi affair
bankruptci court offic and ust
interim and oper statement bankruptci court and ust
adversari proceed claim regist
transcript of hear 2004 examin
bankruptci court
fee applic bankruptci court and ust
real properti record counti clerk counti assessor
person properti record counti clerk
ucc file secretari of state
financi statement lend institut debtor counsel
account chapter 7 or chapter 11 file
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11311
forward address post offic
dba counti record secretari of state
partnership secretari of state
offic of corpor secretari of state
address of individu vote record
insur polici insur compani provid coverag
current or prior busi activ interview conduct of creditor former
employe former spous former busi
activ
crimin histori current or prior litig polic record local court record
tape and transcript of sworn testimoni
341a and 2004 examin
ust 341a exam
bankruptci court 2004 exam
investig procedur
to fulfil their fiduciari investig respons truste need to gather financi
inform if debtor book and record ar miss incomplet or unreli thei should
be obtain from third parti such as bank custom relat parti and so on if the
thirdparti resist the truste request the truste can subpoena record or testimoni under
bankruptci rule 2004 after receiv thirdparti record and testimoni the truste might
then
reconstruct cash receipt and cash disburs journal and gener ledger
identifi new bank account relatedparti transact and hidden or conceal asset
take 2004 exam deposit of uncoop wit
take 2004 exam of thirdparti wit and other who can authent document
record etc
obtain declar testimoni from cooper wit
interview wit determin direct versu indirect knowledg of fact bookkeep
ar good sourc of inform who can provid inform regard cash receipt
and disburs relatedparti transact and evid regard destruct of
record
after documentari and other evid ha been gather and analyz the truste
should prepar an investig report
if alleg of fraud ar present file a separ report pursuant to titl 18 section 3057
file with unit state attornei offic
creditor right and remedi
normal when busi or individu ar not paid thei attempt to collect amount ow
to them when normal collect effort fail thei resort to legal action but if after a
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11312 2011 fraud examin manual
creditor file a legal action the debtor file a petit for bankruptci the creditor can take
the follow step
investig the reason why payment ha not been made
check with other creditor to see if thei have not been paid
check with credit bureau for credit histori
file a motion for the appoint of a truste other creditor and the offic of the ust
might join in with the petit creditor
to succe the move parti must demonstr that fraud is suspect and therefor a
truste should be appoint to overse the oper of the debtor
the creditor should have suffici documentari and other evid of fraudul
conduct includ declar provid by knowledg wit
a hear is held where the judg hear evid support and refut the fraud
alleg thereaft the judg issu a rule regard the appoint of a truste
in some case the judg might appoint an examin instead of a truste becaus it is less
intrus an examin role is onli to investig and report back to the judg whether
the alleg of fraud ar support by the independ examin own evid
if the debtor doe not file bankruptci the creditor might join other creditor and file an
involuntari petit against the debtor
creditor committe
after file a chapter 11 bankruptci petit the ust normal appoint a committe of
creditor hold unsecur claim thi committe is refer to as a creditor committe
titl 11 usc section 1102 provid guidanc in the format of creditor committe
titl 11 usc section 1103 detail the power of creditor committe thei can emploi
attornei account or other agent to assist them in the perform of their duti
under the code in carri out their duti creditor committe ar author to consult
with the truste or debtorinpossess concern the administr of the case to
investig the act conduct asset liabil and financi condit of the debtor and the
oper of the debtor busi to particip in the format of a plan of
reorgan to request the appoint of a truste or examin and to perform such
other servic as ar in the interest of those repres
involuntari petit titl 11 usc section 303
most bankruptci case ar voluntari ie voluntarili file by the debtor as we have
describ abov debtor have specif reason for file bankruptci individu
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11313
partnership and corpor have the statutori right to file bankruptci as a protect
from their creditor in exchang for exercis their privileg of file bankruptci debtor
give up their right to financi privaci and must do other thing requir under the code
most creditor howev do not want their de btor to file for bankruptci becaus it might
make recov a claim more difficult and it might diminish the amount thei receiv on
their claim
to collect amount ow to them or to obtain a judgment against the debtor some creditor
might sue the debtor in state court befor ani bankruptci petit is file numer
collect action can be brought against the debtor which might lead to an increas in
competit for the debtor remain asset when thi occur the debtor normal file
bankruptci to prevent these creditor from seiz it asset in some rare instanc
howev the creditor might involuntari petit the debtor into bankruptci although
do so run contrari to their normal inclin to do everyth thei can to keep debtor
out of bankruptci
that be said involuntari petit serv veri import purpos thei can be us to
stop the financi hemorrhag that usual take place in fraudul oper busi
and thei allow the creditor to control the debtor and protect the valu of the busi while
investig the financi affair of the debtor
an involuntari petit can onli be file under chapter 7 and 11 creditor who have not
been paid by the debtor can file a petit forc the compani into bankruptci gener
the creditor must be abl to demonstr in court that the debtor is not pai debt as thei
matur
to commenc the file of an involuntari proceed creditor must satisfi the follow
criteria
the debt must not be subject to a bona fide disput and must be nonconting
the creditor must be ow at least 14425 more than the valu of the lien or
collater
if there ar 12 or more creditor then three creditor ar need to file
if there ar fewer than 12 creditor onli on creditor is need to file
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11314 2011 fraud examin manual
after the involuntari petit is file a court hear is held the court might dismiss the
petit or enter an order for relief but if the court deem it necessari an interim truste
might be appoint to preserv the properti of the estat at the hear on the involuntari
petit the creditor ar requir to demonstr through direct testimoni that the alleg
debtor is not pai debt as thei come due
creditor must be care when file an involuntari petit if the creditor ar not
success in court and the judg dismiss the petit thei might be su by the debtor
damag for lost profit and goodwil could be assess against the creditor who file the
involuntari petit occasion in egregi circumst court have award punit
damag against creditor who file an involuntari petit
investig by creditor
individu creditor might conduct their own investig and assist chapter 7 and chapter
11 truste in perform their investig truste ar normal veri appreci of
creditor who can provid inform regard the financi affair of the debtor creditor
also can attend the 341a examin of the debtor and ask pertin question creditor
who bring copi of document such as prior loan applic or pictur of particular
asset to the 341a examin ar of great interest to truste creditor can ask the
debtor what happen to the variou asset list on the loan applic or asset shown in
photograph
bankruptci crime statut
bankruptci crime that ar commit dure the cours of a bankruptci proceed or in
contempl of a bankruptci proceed ar contain in feder statut thei ar carri
out through the file of a bankruptci petit either to accomplish the purpos of the crime
or to cover up anoth crime that ha alreadi been perpetr
although the bankruptci code is contain within titl 11 us code bankruptci crime
appear within titl 18 us code section 151 through 155 section 152 is the most
comprehens of the individu bankruptci crime statut to constitut and be prove as a
feder crime bankruptci crime must have been commit dure the pendenc of a bankruptci
proceed with the defend knowledg and with a fraudul intent to defeat the bankruptci law
the fbi investig bankruptci crime and the us attornei offic prosecut them
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11315
it is no defens to these crime that the creditor have actual knowledg of conceal asset
or that the conceal wa not from all creditor and it is no defens that the defend
return the estat asset though such fact might mitig damag
gener the penalti for each bankruptci offens is a fine of up to 500000 in the case of
bankruptci fraud commit by an organ or imprison for not more than five
year or both the statut of limit doe not run until the fraud is detect or the
debtor receiv a discharg or is deni a discharg pursuant to the bankruptci code
the follow section set out the bankruptci crime statut as well as relat crimin
statut that frequent aris in bankruptci case
titl 18 us code section 151
thi section contain the definit of the term debtor a parti who ha file a petit under
titl 11 of the us code
titl 18 us code section 152
thi is the most comprehens crimin bankruptci fraud statut it serv as the primari
bankruptci crime statut for prosecut bankruptci fraud under section 158 the fbi and
the us attornei ar charg with enforc of section 152 there ar nine paragraph in
section 152 that defin variou offens against the bankruptci law the follow is a brief
overview of each of the nine offens
paragraph 1 conceal of properti
a person who knowingli and fraudul conceal from a custodian truste marshal or other
offic of the court charg with the control or custodi of properti or in connect with a case
under titl 11 from creditor or the unit state truste ani properti belong to the estat
of a debtor
for purpos of thi paragraph estat properti consist of asset record and anyth
of valu
paragraph 2 fals oath or account
fals oath appli to oral testimoni that might be given in 341a examin 2004
examin deposit and testimoni provid at hear and trial
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11316 2011 fraud examin manual
a person who knowingli and fraudul make a fals oath or account in or in relat to
ani case under titl 11
paragraph 3 fals declar
a person who knowingli and fraudul make a fals declar certif verif or
statement under penalti of perjuri as permit under section 1746 of titl 28 in or in relat
to ani case under titl 11
written document file with the court under penalti of perjuri consist of the debtor
petit schedul and statement of financi affair interim statement and oper
report as well as declar file with the court declar ar made in petit
schedul and in other court file motion thi section give the same weight to
unsworn declar as to those sworn under penalti of perjuri
paragraph 4 fals claim
a person who knowingli and fraudul present ani fals claim for proof against the estat of
a debtor or us ani such claim in ani case under titl 11 in a person capac or as or
through an agent proxi or attornei
thi paragraph is design to prevent fictiti or inflat claim from be file by
creditor or other in a bankruptci case
paragraph 5 fraudul receipt of properti
a person who knowingli and fraudul receiv es ani materi amount of properti from a
debtor after the file of a case under titl 11 with intent to defeat the provis of titl 11
thi paragraph relat back to paragraph 1 abov and it implic those who work in
concert with the debtor thi could be a creditor or ani other interest parti
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11317
paragraph 6 extort and briberi
a person who knowingli and fraudul give offer receiv or attempt to obtain ani
monei or properti remuner compens reward advantag or promis thereof for
act or forbear to act in ani case under titl 11
thi paragraph cover briberi which also is spell out in titl 18 princip section 210
and 1503 both section discuss the attempt to bribe judici offic and to unlawfulli
corrupt or influenc ani offic of the court section 1503 also cover threat intend to
influenc intimid or imped an offic in the perform of hi duti
paragraph 7 fraudul transfer or conceal
a person who in a person capac or as agent or offic of ani person or corpor in
contempl of a case under titl 11 by or against him or ani other person or corpor
or with intent to defeat the provis of titl 11 knowingli and fraudul transfer or
conceal ani of hi properti or the properti of such other person or corpor
thi paragraph is the onli paragraph under section 152 that deal with prebankruptci
conduct the section address situat where a bankruptci petit file is immin it
is intend to cover action by individu who transfer properti rightfulli belong to the
creditor of the prospect bankruptci estat
paragraph 8 fraudul destruct or alter of document
a person who after the file of a case under titl 11 or in contempl thereof knowingli
and fraudul conceal destroi mutil falsifi or make a fals entri in ani record
inform includ book document record and paper relat to the properti or
financi affair of a debtor
paragraph 9 fraudul withhold of document
a person who after the file of a case under titl 11 knowingli and fraudul withhold
from a custodian truste marshal or other offic of the court or a unit state truste
entitl to it possess ani record inform includ book document record and
paper relat to the properti or financi affair of a debtor
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11318 2011 fraud examin manual
thi section is particularli us in case where the debtor doe not turn over estat record
after be compel to do so by the court and the record ar later discov by feder
author dure the execut of search warrant
embezzl against the estat titl 18 us code section 153
a offens a person describ in subsect b who knowingli and fraudul appropri to the
person own us embezzl spend or transfer ani properti or secret or destroi ani document
belong to the estat of a debtor
b person to whom section appli a person describ in thi subsect is on who ha access to
properti or document belong to an estat by virtu of the person particip in the administr
of the estat as a truste custodian marshal attornei or other offic of the court or as an agent
employe or other person engag by such an offic to perform a servic with respect to the estat
thi statut deal with all properti and the record or document that the court offic
receiv dure the tenur of the truste or offic
advers interest and conduct of offic titl 18 us code section 154
a person who be a custodian truste marshal or other offic of the court
1 knowingli purc hase directli or indirectli ani properti of the estat of which the person is such
an offic in a case under titl 11
2 knowingli refus to permit a reason opportun for the inspect by parti in interest of
the document and account relat to the affair of estat in the person charg by parti
when direct by the court to do so or
3 knowingli refus to permit a reason opport uniti for the inspect by the unit state
truste of the document and account relat to the affair of ani estat in the person
charg
bankruptci truste ar in a posit of trust and therefor should be held to a higher
standard of conduct than other interest parti but on critic aspect is the sale of estat
properti truste can influenc the sale of properti and can make signific profit if thei
directli or indirectli purchas asset of the estat it would be similar to insid trade by
individu in the secur industri thi statut is unlik the other list abov in that a
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11319
violat of thi statut is onli a misdemeanor wherea all of the abov ar feloni
convict under thi section carri a fine as well as forfeitur of the person offic
know disregard of bankruptci law or rule titl 18 us code section 156
a definit in thi section
1 the term bankruptci petit prepar mean a person other than the debtor attornei or an
employe of such an attornei who prepar for compens a document for file and
2 the term document for file mean a petit or ani other document prepar for file by a
debtor in a unit state bankruptci court or a unit state district court in connect with a case
under titl 11
b offens if a bankruptci case or relat proceed is dismiss becaus of a know attempt by a
bankruptci petit prepar in ani manner to disregard the requir of titl 11 unit state
code or the feder rule of bankruptci procedur
thi section is the crimin version of the titl 11 usc section 110 which deal with
petit mill and petit prepar who de liber disregard the bankruptci code or
ani of it rule and procedur petit mill and prepar who fall under thi section might
file fals document for debtor with deliber wrong social secur number or other
incorrect inform in some case debtor might not even be awar thei ar file
bankruptci or the effect of a bankruptci on their credit rate
bankruptci fraud titl 18 us code section 157
a perso n who have devis or in tend to devis a scheme or artific to defraud and for the purpos
of execut or conceal such a scheme or artific or attempt to do so
1 file a petit under titl 11 includ a fraudul involuntari bankruptci petit under
section 303 of such titl
2 file a document in a proceed under titl 11 includ a fraudul involuntari bankruptci
petit under section 303 of such titl or
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11320 2011 fraud examin manual
3 make a fals or fraudul re present claim or promis concern or in relat to a
proceed under titl 11 includ a fraudul in voluntari bankruptci petit under section 303 of
such titl at ani time befor or after the file of the petit or in relat to a proceed fals
assert to be pend under such titl
thi section is veri similar to mail and wire fraud statut both in word and in concept
thi section appli to insid who perpetr bustout scheme as well as those who
attempt to obtain credit immedi prior to file bankruptci under section 158 the fbi
and the us attornei ar charg with enforc of section 157
falsifi alter or destroi document titl 18 us code section 1519
whoever knowingli alter destroi mutil conceal cover up falsifi or make a fals entri in
ani record document or tangibl object with the intent to imped obstruct or influenc the
investig or proper administr of ani matter within the jurisdict of ani depart or agenc
of the unit state or ani case file under titl 11 or in relat to or contempl of ani such
matter or case shall be fine under thi titl imprison not more than 20 year or both
thi section wa ad as part of the sarbanesoxlei act in 2002 it specif provid
that alter falsifi or destroi document file under titl 11 the bankruptci code
is a crimin violat subject to imprison of up to 20 year
bankruptcyrel violat
although bankruptci crime ar the focu of thi section there ar other crime that ar
usual perpetr prior to the file of a bankruptci petit in some case the bankruptci
process is the culmin of a pattern of prior crimin activ there ar mani other crime
frequent associ with bankruptci includ mail fraud wire fraud bank fraud interst
transport of stolen good or properti aid or abet fals statement conspiraci tax
evas and monei launder bankruptci fraud is also a predic offens under rico for
more inform on these offens see the law relat to fraud chapter in the law
section of the fraud examin manual
although the crimin aspect of bankruptci crime ar heard in district court the
underli fact deal with a debtor misc onduct also ar heard in the form of civil
proceed befor the unit state bankruptci court parallel proceed occur in case
where bankruptci fraud alleg have been made sever exampl of civil proceed
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11321
that ensu as a result of fraud alleg against the debtor ar motion for the appoint
of truste and examin lawsuit for recoveri of fraudul transfer properti and
object to the debtor discharg
bankruptci scheme
conceal asset
the most common crime is the conceal of asset rightfulli belong to the debtor
estat asset might consist of cash consum properti hous and interest in partnership
and corpor as well as lawsuit in which the debtor is a plaintiff asset also includ
book and record of the debtor conceal vari from littl or no monetari valu to ten
of million of dollar the variou conceal offens ar describ in more detail under
the bankruptci crime statut
the plan bustout
a bustout is a plan bankruptci it can take mani differ form the basic approach is
for an appar legitim busi to order larg quantiti of good on credit then
dispos of those good through legitim or illegitim channel the perpetr then
close shop abscond with the proce and leav the supplier unpaid
bustout scheme ar plan and perpetr by individu both prior to and subsequ to
the format of the new busi entiti other characterist of bustout scheme follow
thei ar plan from the begin
sometim organ crime is involv
credit is establish with numer vendor prompt payment ar made to all vendor
vendor feel comfort in deal therebi extend exist credit line
perpetr build inventori by order everyth thei can from vendor thei promis
to pai soon and order more merchandis
sell out inventori at deep discount or move it befor vendor can take possess of it
busi fail or close up file bankruptci or creditor beat them to it with involuntari
bankruptci
detect
some red flag that signal that a bustout scheme might be in process includ
a busi relationship base princip on trust creditor ar will to offer extend
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11322 2011 fraud examin manual
term for payment hold check or take postdat check thi make them vulner
buyer with a histori of purchas good for an unreason discount
a larg number of bank account indic a possibl kite scheme the perpetr
occasion pai some of hi creditor with fund gener by float check between
bank account
prevent
lender and supplier should evalu potenti custom carefulli prior to extend credit
by perform due dilig and obtain detail background inform lender
and supplier should at time visit their custom locat to verifi the legitimaci of
the busi
multipl file
thi scheme involv repeat bankruptci file by the same debtor in order to obtain the
benefit of the automat stai usual each petit is dismiss for failur to file the requir
statement or to appear for examin fals statement on petit ar common
includ a denial that the debtor ha file ani previou petit
credit card bustout
the debtor intention run up a number of credit card to their limit and file bankruptci
with no intent to repai credit card debt might includ purchas for jewelri luxuri item
or other person properti that ar not disclos on the schedul credit card debt also
might includ larg cash advanc taken prior to file bankruptci
forg file
bankruptci petit ar sometim file in anoth uninvolv person name usual as
part of a larger scheme us an assum ident it can take year to correct the credit
record of the person whose ident ha been stolen sometim the debtor name is
obtain from obituari notic
type servic or petit mill
thi scheme involv compani that file bankruptci petit typic on behalf of low
incom and often unsuspect client the petit often contain numer fals
statement the debtor usual ha no idea a bankruptci ha been file as the servic ha
held itself out to be a renter right group and ha not told the client how it will accomplish
what it ha promis
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11401
