2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/Introduction


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


Introduction 
 
The Bankruptcy System and Players 
Bankruptcy Court 
All bankruptcy cases are filed in the local district of the United States Bankruptcy Court. 
Although bankruptcy courts are federal courts, they are not Article III courts, which derive 
their power from Article III of the Constitution. Article III states that judicial power of the 
United States rests with the Supreme Court and in inferior courts established by Congress. 
Article III courts include the U.S. District Courts, the U.S. Circuit Courts of Appeal, and the 
U.S. Supreme Court.  
 
Bankruptcy courts are not contemplated within this scheme as “inferior” courts, but they are 
considered as an adjunct to “inferior” U.S. District Courts. 
 
Likewise, bankruptcy judges are not Article III judges, which derive their power from Article 
III of the Constitution. Bankruptcy judges hear all cases involving debtors’ and creditors’ 
rights, approve plans of reorganization, award fees to professionals, and conduct hearings 
and trials when necessary to resolve disputes. 
 
Office of the United States Trustee  
The Office of the United States Trustee is a Department of Justice agency that is responsible 
for administering bankruptcy cases; appointing trustees, examiners, and Chapter 11 
committees; overseeing and monitoring trustees; reviewing employment and fee applications; 
and appearing in court on matters of interest to the estate and creditors.  
 
There are 21 regions in the Office of the U.S. Trustee comprising one or more federal 
districts. Each region consists of a U.S. Trustee (or an Assistant Trustee in several regions). 
The Office of the UST in each region principally is comprised of staff attorneys, bankruptcy 
analysts (including accountants) and, in some instances, special investigative units. 
 
Staff attorneys review pleadings (e.g., fee applications and motions to appoint trustees and 
examiners) and represent the UST on these matters.  
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1302                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bankruptcy analysts analyze and review operating reports and other relevant financial 
information and, in general, oversee the debtor’s case to ensure compliance with the 
Bankruptcy Code and to protect the assets of the estate.  
 
Special investigative units investigate criminal referrals (complaints) in bankruptcy cases. In some 
cases they work with criminal investigative agencies, such as the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation and the Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigative Division. 
 
Panel Trustees 
Panel trustees are independent professionals (usually attorneys) who serve in Chapter 7 cases 
in each federal district in the country. Trustees also might serve in Chapter 11 cases where 
operation of the debtor’s business is considered appropriate. Trustees or others might 
develop a plan of reorganization to conclude the Chapter 11 proceedings. If the business 
cannot be reorganized, the trustee might petition the court to convert the case to Chapter 7 
or develop a plan of liquidation under Chapter 11. The duties of a trustee are specifically 
enumerated in Title 11, U.S.C., section 704 (in Chapter 7 cases) and Title 11, U.S.C., section 
1106 (in Chapter 11 cases). The duties of a trustee are as follows: administer assets, liquidate 
assets, pay creditors, litigate matters where necessary, have the right to sue and be sued, 
conduct hearings, conduct investigations of financial affairs of the debtor, file reports as 
required by the Office of the UST and, where a ppropriate, file criminal referrals with the 
United States Attorney’s Office. A trustee’s compensation is statutorily defined under the 
bankruptcy code. 
 
Examiners 
An examiner is normally appointed in a Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceeding to investigate 
certain allegations of fraud and misconduct on the part of the debtor (or principals of the 
debtor). In a typical motion for the appointment of a trustee or examiner, allegations of 
fraud or misconduct are raised by creditors, the Office of the UST, or other interested 
parties. A bankruptcy judge hears evidence submitted by all parties (creditors et al.), as well 
as the debtor’s response to the allegations. After hearing the evidence, the judge has the 
option either to appoint a trustee or an examiner, or leave the debtor in possession of the 
business. If an examiner is appointed, the sole responsibility is to “investigate and report” 
the results of the investigation to the court and other parties in interest as quickly as possible. 
Examiners have the power to subpoena records and depose witnesses. They do not have the 
power to run businesses, make business decisions, or propose plans of reorganizations 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1303 
(generally speaking). Courts might expand the examiner’s powers to perform certain duties 
of trustees or debtors-in-possession.  
 
Debtors 
A debtor is defined in Title 11, U.S.C., section 101(13) as a “person” or “municipality” who is 
the subject of a filing under Title 11. “Person” is  defined as an individual, partnership, or 
corporation. “Municipality” is defined as a political subdivision, public agency, or 
instrumentality of a state. An individual debtor’s objective in a Chapter 7 case is to be 
relieved of all dischargeable debts and to obtain a fresh start. This is accomplished by the 
court granting the individual debtor a discharge. The debtor’s primary objective in a Chapter 
11 should be to have a plan of reorganization confirmed by the court and preserve the 
business operations. 
 
Creditors 
A creditor is defined by the code as one who holds a claim. Creditors can be either secured or 
unsecured.  
 
SECURED CREDITORS  
A secured creditor  holds a claim for which there is a properly perfected security interest. It will 
be considered a secured claim to the extent of the value of the property. When the debt is 
undersecured (amount of note is greater than the value of the security interest), the debt will 
be considered both unsecured and secured. For example, if a note for $500 is secured by 
property having a value of $400, there will be a secured claim for $400 and an unsecured 
claim for $100. If the debtor and the credit or cannot agree on the value of the collateral, 
there will be a hearing under section 506 of the Bankruptcy Code and the court will 
determine the value of the collateral. The bankruptcy court will rely on state law where the 
property is located to determine if a secured claim exists. A security interest generally is 
obtained in personal property by a UCC filing and in real property by filing a lien with the 
county clerk in the county where the property is located. 
 
At the time of the filing of the bankruptcy petition, an automatic stay precludes the creditor 
from taking any action to repossess the property, unless relief from the stay is granted. In a 
Chapter 11 case, the court generally will grant relief only if it can be shown that there is no 
equity in the property and that the property is not needed for reorganizing the business. The 
stay also might be removed if the property is declining in value and the debtor fails to 
compensate the creditor for this decline (referred to as “adequate protection payments”). If 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1304                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the stay is removed, the creditor then can proceed under state law to obtain possession of 
the property (often through a foreclosure) to satisfy the claim. 
 
Holders of secured claims have priority over unsecured creditors and normally get paid first 
in the distributions to creditors made by the trustee or debtor-in-possession. In the 
development of a Chapter 11 plan, the rights of holders of secured claims normally are 
provided for before the unsecured claim holders will receive material consideration.  
 
UNSECURED CREDITORS  
Unsecured creditors  are those that have a claim against the debtor that arose before the 
bankruptcy petition was filed and do not have a perfected security interest. Title 11, U.S.C., 
section 507 gives some of the holders of unsecured claims priority over other unsecured 
claim holders. Among those claims that have priority are administrative expenses (costs 
associated with the operation of the business and professional fees while the business or 
individual is in bankruptcy), selected pre-petition unpaid wages, pre-petition contributions 
required but not made to employees benefit plans, pre-petition unpaid alimony and support 
payments, and selected pre-petition tax claims. 
 
Adjusters 
Adjusters, or operations agents as they are frequently called, are the “right hand” to trustees 
and debtors. An adjuster or operations agent is an individual who handles the peripheral 
duties of a trustee. Such duties include securing the business location, changing locks, 
locating assets of the estate, locating business records, opening new bank accounts, 
investigating thefts of assets in conjunction with the trustee, storing assets of the estate, and 
arranging sales of assets. Adjusters also can assist debtors and trustees in operating the 
debtor’s business and in helping to prepare bankruptcy schedules, as well as interim 
statements and operating reports.  
 
 



:


introduct
the bankruptci system and player
bankruptci court
all bankruptci case ar file in the local district of the unit state bankruptci court
although bankruptci court ar feder court thei ar not articl iii court which deriv
their power from articl iii of the constitut articl iii state that judici power of the
unit state rest with the suprem court and in inferior court establish by congress
articl iii court includ the us district court the us circuit court of appeal and the
us suprem court
bankruptci court ar not contempl within thi scheme as inferior court but thei ar
consid as an adjunct to inferior us district court
likewis bankruptci judg ar not articl iii judg which deriv their power from articl
iii of the constitut bankruptci judg hear all case involv debtor and creditor
right approv plan of reorgan award fee to profession and conduct hear
and trial when necessari to resolv disput
offic of the unit state truste
the offic of the unit state truste is a depart of justic agenc that is respons
for administ bankruptci case appoint truste examin and chapter 11
committe overse and monitor truste review employ and fee applic
and appear in court on matter of interest to the estat and creditor
there ar 21 region in the offic of the us truste compris on or more feder
district each region consist of a us truste or an assist truste in sever region
the offic of the ust in each region princip is compris of staff attornei bankruptci
analyst includ account and in some instanc special investig unit
staff attornei review plead eg fee applic and motion to appoint truste and
examin and repres the ust on these matter
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11302 2011 fraud examin manual
bankruptci analyst analyz and review oper report and other relev financi
inform and in gener overse the debtor case to ensur complianc with the
bankruptci code and to protect the asset of the estat
special investig unit investig crimin referr complaint in bankruptci case in some
case thei work with crimin investig agenc such as the feder bureau of
investig and the intern revenu servic crimin investig divis
panel truste
panel truste ar independ profession usual attornei who serv in chapter 7 case
in each feder district in the countri truste also might serv in chapter 11 case where
oper of the debtor busi is consid appropri truste or other might
develop a plan of reorgan to conclud the chapter 11 proceed if the busi
cannot be reorgan the truste might petit the court to convert the case to chapter 7
or develop a plan of liquid under chapter 11 the duti of a truste ar specif
enumer in titl 11 usc section 704 in chapter 7 case and titl 11 usc section
1106 in chapter 11 case the duti of a truste ar as follow administ asset liquid
asset pai creditor litig matter where necessari have the right to sue and be su
conduct hear conduct investig of financi affair of the debtor file report as
requir by the offic of the ust and where a ppropriat file crimin referr with the
unit state attornei offic a truste compens is statutorili defin under the
bankruptci code
examin
an examin is normal appoint in a chapter 11 bankruptci proceed to investig
certain alleg of fraud and misconduct on the part of the debtor or princip of the
debtor in a typic motion for the appoint of a truste or examin alleg of
fraud or misconduct ar rais by creditor the offic of the ust or other interest
parti a bankruptci judg hear evid submit by all parti creditor et al as well
as the debtor respons to the alleg after hear the evid the judg ha the
option either to appoint a truste or an examin or leav the debtor in possess of the
busi if an examin is appoint the sole respons is to investig and report
the result of the investig to the court and other parti in interest as quickli as possibl
examin have the power to subpoena record and depos wit thei do not have the
power to run busi make busi decis or propos plan of reorgan
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11303
gener speak court might expand the examin power to perform certain duti
of truste or debtorsinpossess
debtor
a debtor is defin in titl 11 usc section 10113 as a person or municip who is
the subject of a file under titl 11 person is defin as an individu partnership or
corpor municip is defin as a polit subdivis public agenc or
instrument of a state an individu debtor object in a chapter 7 case is to be
reliev of all discharg debt and to obtain a fresh start thi is accomplish by the
court grant the individu debtor a discharg the debtor primari object in a chapter
11 should be to have a plan of reorgan confirm by the court and preserv the
busi oper
creditor
a creditor is defin by the code as on who hold a claim creditor can be either secur or
unsecur
secur creditor
a secur creditor hold a claim for which there is a properli perfect secur interest it will
be consid a secur claim to the extent of the valu of the properti when the debt is
undersecur amount of note is greater than the valu of the secur interest the debt will
be consid both unsecur and secur for exampl if a note for 500 is secur by
properti have a valu of 400 there will be a secur claim for 400 and an unsecur
claim for 100 if the debtor and the credit or cannot agre on the valu of the collater
there will be a hear under section 506 of the bankruptci code and the court will
determin the valu of the collater the bankruptci court will reli on state law where the
properti is locat to determin if a secur claim exist a secur interest gener is
obtain in person properti by a ucc file and in real properti by file a lien with the
counti clerk in the counti where the properti is locat
at the time of the file of the bankruptci petit an automat stai preclud the creditor
from take ani action to repossess the properti unless relief from the stai is grant in a
chapter 11 case the court gener will grant relief onli if it can be shown that there is no
equiti in the properti and that the properti is not need for reorgan the busi the
stai also might be remov if the properti is declin in valu and the debtor fail to
compens the creditor for thi declin refer to as adequ protect payment if
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11304 2011 fraud examin manual
the stai is remov the creditor then can proce under state law to obtain possess of
the properti often through a foreclosur to satisfi the claim
holder of secur claim have prioriti over unsecur creditor and normal get paid first
in the distribut to creditor made by the truste or debtorinpossess in the
develop of a chapter 11 plan the right of holder of secur claim normal ar
provid for befor the unsecur claim holder will receiv materi consider
unsecur creditor
unsecur creditor ar those that have a claim against the debtor that aros befor the
bankruptci petit wa file and do not have a perfect secur interest titl 11 usc
section 507 give some of the holder of unsecur claim prioriti over other unsecur
claim holder among those claim that have prioriti ar administr expens cost
associ with the oper of the busi and profession fee while the busi or
individu is in bankruptci select prepetit unpaid wage prepetit contribut
requir but not made to employe benefit plan prepetit unpaid alimoni and support
payment and select prepetit tax claim
adjust
adjust or oper agent as thei ar frequent call ar the right hand to truste
and debtor an adjust or oper agent is an individu who handl the peripher
duti of a truste such duti includ secur the busi locat chang lock
locat asset of the estat locat busi record open new bank account
investig theft of asset in conjunct with the truste store asset of the estat and
arrang sale of asset adjust also can assist debtor and truste in oper the
debtor busi and in help to prepar bankruptci schedul as well as interim
statement and oper report
