2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/The Bankruptcy Code (Title 11, United States Code)


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


The Bankruptcy Code (Title 11, United States Code)   
The Bankruptcy Code is broken down into eight chapters (1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 12, and 13) under 
Title 11 of the United States Code. In addition, there are two other sources of information 
dealing with bankruptcy issues that are found in the United States Code. They can be found 
at Title 18, U.S.C., Chapter 9 (which deals with crimes and criminal procedure) and Title 28 
(which deals with the judiciary and judicial procedure). Some of the provisions of the 
Bankruptcy Code, as amended by the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1994, are outlined below. 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1305 
Chapter 1 — General Provisions  
Chapter 1 contains definitions, rules of construction, powers of the court, who can be a 
debtor, and other miscellaneous information. Chapter 1 has been amended to reflect issues 
dealing with persons who negligently or fraudulently prepare bankruptcy petitions. Section 
101 of this chapter is particularly important as it deals with definitions of terms used in 
bankruptcy proceedings. Section 110 deals with the penalty for persons who negligently or 
fraudulently prepare bankruptcy petitions (see later section on criminal conduct). 
 
Chapter 3 — Case Administration  
Part 1 of Chapter 3 deals with the commencement of cases, filing requirements, and court 
appearances. Part 2 deals with officers, the qualifications of the trustee, the role of the 
trustee, and the compensation of trustees and other officers. Part 3 deals with 
administration, involving meetings of creditors, noticing requirements, property of the 
estate, and other administrative requirements. Part 4 deals with administrative powers, 
including the power of the trustee to protect property of the estate; use, lease or sell the 
property and obtaining credit on behalf of the estate.  
  
Chapter 5 — Creditors, Debtors, and the Estate  
Part 1 of Chapter 5 deals with creditors’ clai ms, their priority, and their allowance. This 
section contains the prioritization of claims and the distribution of estate assets. Part 2 deals 
with specific duties of the debtor, the exemptions debtors can claim, and dischargeability of 
debts. Part 3 deals with property of the estate, recovery of voidable transfers, and contractual 
rights of the estate. 
 
Chapter 7 — Liquidation of Debtor’s Assets  
Part 1 of Chapter 7 deals with officers and the administration of Chapter 7 cases and spells 
out duties of the trustee. Part 2 deals with the collection, liquidation, and distribution of the 
estate’s assets. Part 3 deals with stockbroker liquidations. Part 4 deals with commodity 
broker liquidations. 
 
Chapter 7 is the most common type of bankruptcy; it involves liquidation of the debtors 
assets by a trustee to pay the creditor’s claims. This allows the debtor to get a court order 
under which some or all of his debts may be eliminated. It involves the liquidation of assets 
that are not exempt by state law. Personal bankruptcy does not eliminate taxes, fines, 
alimony, child support, and certain student loans. 
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1306                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A petition for liquidation under Chapter 7 may be filed by any entity (e.g., any individual, 
corporation, partnership, business trust, etc.), but a Chapter 7 case filed by an individual 
debtor may be dismissed (or converted to a case under Chapter 11 or 13 with the debtor’s 
consent) if granting relief under Chapter 7 would constitute an abuse. The means test is used 
to determine whether the Chapter 7 filing is presumptively abusive. Under this test, the 
trustee or any creditor can bring a motion to dismiss a Chapter 7 filing if the debtor’s income 
is greater than the state median income. 
 
Also, a Chapter 7 debtor cannot receive a discharge if a prior discharge was received within 8 
years of the new filing. 
 
Chapter 11 — Reorganization  
Often, debtors want to avoid liquidation, and Chapter 11 provides a type of bankruptcy that 
is designed to help the debtor by reorganizing the business. The code allows for debtors to 
restructure their debt, pay their creditors, and emerge from bankruptcy. Part 1 of the chapter 
deals with officers and administration. Part 2 deals with the plan of reorganization. Part 3 
deals with postconfirmation matters. Part 4 deals with railroad reorganization. 
 
The purpose of the Chapter 11 filing is to allow the debtor breathing room from the 
creditors so that the debtor can reorganize its financial affairs and continue as a going 
concern. If the court is provided with sufficient probable cause regarding the financial affairs 
of the debtor, a trustee or examiner can be appointed by the court. 
 
Chapter 13 — Adjustments of Debts 
Chapter 13 provides another type of bankruptcy that allows a debtor pay off his debts over 
time in accordance with a court approved plan. Under this type of case, the debtor may keep 
certain property that he would not be allowed to retain in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Because 
of changes to the bankruptcy law in 2005, many people are no longer eligible to file for 
bankruptcy under Chapter 7; some have their Chapter 7 case converted to a Chapter 13 case, 
but Chapter 13 is not granted if the debtor received a discharge under Chapters 7, 11, or 12 
within the previous 4 years, or a discharge under Chapter 13 in the previous 2 years. 
 
Also, the court many not grant a Chapter 13 discharge unless the debtor has completed an 
education course in personal financial management. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1307 
The Bankruptcy Case 
A bankruptcy case begins with the filing of a bankruptcy petition, but to be eligible to file a 
bankruptcy petition, an individual debtor must have received credit counseling from an 
approved counseling agency within 180 days before filing. 
 
When a petition is filed, the debtor must file the following documents:  
• A list of creditors 
• A schedule of assets and liabilities 
• A schedule of current income and current expenditures 
• A statement of the debtor’s financial affairs 
• Evidence of payment from employers, if any, received 60 days before the filing date 
• An itemized statement of monthly net income 
• A statement disclosing any reasonably anticipated increase in income or expenditures for 
the 12 months after the filing 
• A record of any interest in an qualified state tuition program or an education individual 
retirement account 
• A certificate of credit counseling from the approved counseling agency (if the petitioner 
is an individual) 
• A statement of the debtor’s intention with respect to his property that secured debt (if 
the petitioner is an individual) 
• A copy of the debtor’s tax return for the most recent tax year 
 
Generally, if an individual debtor in a Chapter 7 case fails to file the documents within 45 
days of the original filing date, the case is automatically dismissed. 
 
Once the bankruptcy case has been commenced, the debtor is protected by an automatic 
stay, which prevents creditors from continuing attempts to collect debts from the petitioner. 
There are, however, exceptions where the automatic stay does not apply (e.g., prosecution of 
criminal cases, paternity cases, domestic support obligation cases, child custody cases, etc.). 
Also, if the bankruptcy petition was filed as part of a scheme to delay, hinder, or defraud 
creditors, a creditor whose claim is securted by a real property interest is entitled to relief 
from the stay.  
 
Additionally, after filing, the debtor will be appointed a trustee who will oversee the case. In 
a Chapter 7 case, the trustee is responsible for collecting, selling, and reduceing the estate’s 
assets to cash; temporarily continuing to operate the debtor’s business; making a final report; 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1308                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
and filing a final account. In a Chapter 11 case, however, the debtor remains in possession of 
his assets and generally retains the same authority as the trustee, except for the duty to 
investigate the debtor and the right to compensation. A trustee is appointed in a Chapter 13 
case, but the trustee’s duties generally involve in vestigating the debtor’s financial affairs.  
 
Provisions Affecting Individuals 
Nondischargeable Debts  
Although a bankruptcy proceeding may result in the discharge of a debtor’s debts, certain 
debts are not discharged in Chapter 7 cases: 
• Taxes: In general, tax claims are not discharged.  
• Debts incurred by fraud, embezzlement, and larceny: Generally, liabilities arising from fraud, 
embezzlement, and larceny are not dischargeable.  
• Luxury goods: Debts owed to a single creditor totaling more than $500 for luxury goods 
incurred within 90 days of filing are preseumed non-dischargeable. 
• Cash advances: Cash advances of $750 that are made within 70 days of filing are presumed 
non-dischargeable.  
• Unscheduled debts: In general, debts that are not listed or are not scheduled are not 
dischargeable.  
• Domestic support obligations: Debts for domestic support obligations are not dischargeable. 
• Property settlements arising from divorce or separation : Debts for property settlements arising 
from divorce or separation are not dischargeable. 
• Certain liabilities: Liabilities arising from willful and malicious injury and liability for death 
or personal injury incurred when operating a vehicle are not dischargeable.  
• Fines and penalties: Obligations to pay a fine, penalty, or forfeiture owed to the 
government are not dischargeable. 
• Student loans: Student loans are not dischargeable, unless it would impose an undue 
hardship for the debt’s survival.  
 
Homestead Exemption 
To prevent individuals who are likely to file for bankruptcy from moving their assets to 
states with more favorable laws, the debtor must satisfy certain holding period requirements. 
To qualify for a state’s homestead exemption, whic h allow filers to exempt the value of their 
homes from creditors, for property worth more than $125,000, the debtor must own that 
property for 1,215 days before filing. Also, before qualifying for a state’s homestead 
exemption, the debtor must have lived in that state for 730 days prior to filing.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1309 
Retirement Plan Exemptions 
Debtors can exempt retiremet funds from the bankruptcy estate if they are in a fund or 
account that is exempt from taxes under the Internal Revenue Code.  
 
Education Account Exemptions 
Debtors can exempt education accounts under Sections 529 and 530 from the bankruptcy 
estate if the beneficiary of the account is a child, stepchild, grandchild, or step-grandchild of 
the debtor for the taxable year during which funds were placed in the account.  
 
Privacy Provisions 
Under the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act, the bankruptcy 
court is permitted to honor the privacy policies of business debtors. The Act creates a 
consumer privacy ombudsman to protect personal privacy in bankruptcy proceedings. 
Measures may be implemented to prevent identity theft and to guide what information is 
readily accessible to the public. Debtors are permitted to request that courts protect sensitive 
information before it is placed in public records.  
 
The Role of the Trustee in Bankruptcy Fraud Matters 
The trustee in bankruptcy matters is often confronted with allegations of fraud and 
misconduct on the part of the debtor and its principals. In Chapter 11 cases, it is often the 
primary reason the court appointed a trustee. Creditors, representatives of the creditors’ 
committee, or private investigators might be interacting with a bankruptcy trustee. For this 
reason, it is important to know how the trustee operates, what the role of the trustee is, and 
how to make the most of the opportunity to work with the trustee. The trustee’s authority to 
investigate fraud is found in the Bankruptcy Code. The following is a brief outline of the 
Chapter 7 and Chapter 11 trustee’s authority to investigate fraud. 
  
Statutory Authority 
In Chapter 7 cases, section 704 of the code spells out all duties of the trustee, which include 
investigating claims filed by creditors, and the code provides that the trustee “shall 
investigate the financial affairs of the debtor.”  
 
Although generally, trustees in Chapter 11 cases do not operate the debtor’s business, 
Chapter 11 trustees has the duty to investigate the debtor’s financial affairs. 
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1310                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Investigation by the Trustee 
The trustee’s powers enable him to gather financial information from various sources 
including the debtor’s attorneys and accountants. A trustee steps into the shoes of the 
debtor, which allows him the opportunity to break the attorney-client privilege. Attorneys 
might attempt to raise the attorney-client privilege as a defense to providing information, but 
they are usually unsuccessful in this regard. Since the trustee is now the client, he must be 
able to understand what legal actions need to be taken. Therefore, it is imperative that the 
debtor’s attorney cooperate with the trustee. The trustee also should have access to the 
accountant’s work papers, tax returns, and client documents in their possession, which might 
provide the trustee and creditors with the opportunity to locate and recover hidden assets. 
Another useful tool in the trustee’s arsenal is the power to have access to debtor’s records 
that are in the possession of the criminal authorities. Since the trustee steps into the shoes of 
the debtor, he has the right to inspect and use these records to conduct the business affairs 
of the debtor. 
 
If the investigation uncovers sufficient evidence of fraud, the trustee should file a report 
detailing the results of the investigation with the United States Attorney. This duty is spelled 
out in Title 18, United States Code, section 3057. 
 
Sources of Information 
The trustee should obtain the various documents or information listed below in the course 
of an investigation. If any of this information is unavailable, the trustee can subpoena these 
documents. The subpoenaed documents could either be the original documents, certified 
copies of these documents, or other information that could be used to reconstruct the 
missing documents.  
  
Type of Information Location 
Debtor’s petition, schedules, statement of 
financial affairs 
Bankruptcy Court’s Office and UST 
Interim and operating statements Bankruptcy Court and UST 
Adversary proceedings, claims registers, 
transcripts of hearings, 2004 examinations 
Bankruptcy Court 
Fee applications Bankruptcy Court and UST 
Real property records County Clerk, County Assessor 
Personal property records County Clerk 
UCC filings Secretary of State 
Financial statements Lending institutions, debtor’s counsel, 
accountants, Chapter 7 or Chapter 11 filings 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1311 
Forwarding address Post Office 
DBAs County recorder; Secretary of State 
Partnerships Secretary of State 
Officers of corporations Secretary of State 
Addresses of individuals Voting records 
Insurance policies Insurance company providing coverage 
Current or prior business activities Interviews conducted of creditors, former 
employees, former spouses, former business 
activities 
Criminal history, current or prior litigation Police records, local court records 
Tapes and transcripts of sworn testimony 
[341(a) and 2004 examinations] 
UST - 341(a) exams 
Bankruptcy Court - 2004 exams 
 
Investigative Procedures 
To fulfill their fiduciary investigative responsibilities, trustees need to gather financial 
information. If debtor’s books and records are missing, incomplete or unreliable, they should 
be obtained from third parties such as banks, customers, related parties, and so on. If the 
third-party resists the trustee’s request, the trustee can subpoena records or testimony under 
Bankruptcy Rule 2004. After receiving third-party records and testimony, the trustee might 
then: 
• Reconstruct cash receipts and cash disbursements journals, and general ledgers. 
• Identify new bank accounts, related-party transactions, and hidden or concealed assets. 
• Take 2004 exams (depositions) of uncooperative witnesses. 
• Take 2004 exams of third-party witnesses and others who can authenticate documents, 
records, etc.  
• Obtain declaration testimony from cooperative witnesses. 
• Interview witnesses — Determine direct versus indirect knowledge of facts. Bookkeepers 
are good sources of information who can provide information regarding cash receipts 
and disbursements, related-parties transactions, and evidence regarding destruction of 
records. 
• After documentary and other evidence has been gathered and analyzed, the trustee 
should prepare an investigative report. 
• If allegations of fraud are present, file a separate report pursuant to Title 18, section 3057 
(filed with United States Attorney’s Office).   
 
 



:


the bankruptci code titl 11 unit state code
the bankruptci code is broken down into eight chapter 1 3 5 7 9 11 12 and 13 under
titl 11 of the unit state code in addit there ar two other sourc of inform
deal with bankruptci issu that ar found in the unit state code thei can be found
at titl 18 usc chapter 9 which deal with crime and crimin procedur and titl 28
which deal with the judiciari and judici procedur some of the provis of the
bankruptci code as amend by the bankruptci reform act of 1994 ar outlin below
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11305
chapter 1 gener provis
chapter 1 contain definit rule of construct power of the court who can be a
debtor and other miscellan inform chapter 1 ha been amend to reflect issu
deal with person who neglig or fraudul prepar bankruptci petit section
101 of thi chapter is particularli import as it deal with definit of term us in
bankruptci proceed section 110 deal with the penalti for person who neglig or
fraudul prepar bankruptci petit see later section on crimin conduct
chapter 3 case administr
part 1 of chapter 3 deal with the commenc of case file requir and court
appear part 2 deal with offic the qualif of the truste the role of the
truste and the compens of truste and other offic part 3 deal with
administr involv meet of creditor notic requir properti of the
estat and other administr requir part 4 deal with administr power
includ the power of the truste to protect properti of the estat us leas or sell the
properti and obtain credit on behalf of the estat
chapter 5 creditor debtor and the estat
part 1 of chapter 5 deal with creditor clai ms their prioriti and their allow thi
section contain the priorit of claim and the distribut of estat asset part 2 deal
with specif duti of the debtor the exempt debtor can claim and discharg of
debt part 3 deal with properti of the estat recoveri of voidabl transfer and contractu
right of the estat
chapter 7 liquid of debtor asset
part 1 of chapter 7 deal with offic and the administr of chapter 7 case and spell
out duti of the truste part 2 deal with the collect liquid and distribut of the
estat asset part 3 deal with stockbrok liquid part 4 deal with commod
broker liquid
chapter 7 is the most common type of bankruptci it involv liquid of the debtor
asset by a truste to pai the creditor claim thi allow the debtor to get a court order
under which some or all of hi debt mai be elimin it involv the liquid of asset
that ar not exempt by state law person bankruptci doe not elimin tax fine
alimoni child support and certain student loan
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11306 2011 fraud examin manual
a petit for liquid under chapter 7 mai be file by ani entiti eg ani individu
corpor partnership busi trust etc but a chapter 7 case file by an individu
debtor mai be dismiss or convert to a case under chapter 11 or 13 with the debtor
consent if grant relief under chapter 7 would constitut an abus the mean test is us
to determin whether the chapter 7 file is presumpt abus under thi test the
truste or ani creditor can bring a motion to dismiss a chapter 7 file if the debtor incom
is greater than the state median incom
also a chapter 7 debtor cannot receiv a discharg if a prior discharg wa receiv within 8
year of the new file
chapter 11 reorgan
often debtor want to avoid liquid and chapter 11 provid a type of bankruptci that
is design to help the debtor by reorgan the busi the code allow for debtor to
restructur their debt pai their creditor and emerg from bankruptci part 1 of the chapter
deal with offic and administr part 2 deal with the plan of reorgan part 3
deal with postconfirm matter part 4 deal with railroad reorgan
the purpos of the chapter 11 file is to allow the debtor breath room from the
creditor so that the debtor can reorgan it financi affair and continu as a go
concern if the court is provid with suffici probabl caus regard the financi affair
of the debtor a truste or examin can be appoint by the court
chapter 13 adjust of debt
chapter 13 provid anoth type of bankruptci that allow a debtor pai off hi debt over
time in accord with a court approv plan under thi type of case the debtor mai keep
certain properti that he would not be allow to retain in a chapter 7 bankruptci becaus
of chang to the bankruptci law in 2005 mani peopl ar no longer elig to file for
bankruptci under chapter 7 some have their chapter 7 case convert to a chapter 13 case
but chapter 13 is not grant if the debtor receiv a discharg under chapter 7 11 or 12
within the previou 4 year or a discharg under chapter 13 in the previou 2 year
also the court mani not grant a chapter 13 discharg unless the debtor ha complet an
educ cours in person financi manag
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11307
the bankruptci case
a bankruptci case begin with the file of a bankruptci petit but to be elig to file a
bankruptci petit an individu debtor must have receiv credit counsel from an
approv counsel agenc within 180 dai befor file
when a petit is file the debtor must file the follow document
a list of creditor
a schedul of asset and liabil
a schedul of current incom and current expenditur
a statement of the debtor financi affair
evid of payment from employ if ani receiv 60 dai befor the file date
an item statement of monthli net incom
a statement disclos ani reason anticip increas in incom or expenditur for
the 12 month after the file
a record of ani interest in an qualifi state tuition program or an educ individu
retir account
a certif of credit counsel from the approv counsel agenc if the petition
is an individu
a statement of the debtor intent with respect to hi properti that secur debt if
the petition is an individu
a copi of the debtor tax return for the most recent tax year
gener if an individu debtor in a chapter 7 case fail to file the document within 45
dai of the origin file date the case is automat dismiss
onc the bankruptci case ha been commenc the debtor is protect by an automat
stai which prevent creditor from continu attempt to collect debt from the petition
there ar howev except where the automat stai doe not appli eg prosecut of
crimin case patern case domest support oblig case child custodi case etc
also if the bankruptci petit wa file as part of a scheme to delai hinder or defraud
creditor a creditor whose claim is securt by a real properti interest is entitl to relief
from the stai
addition after file the debtor will be appoint a truste who will overse the case in
a chapter 7 case the truste is respons for collect sell and reduc the estat
asset to cash temporarili continu to oper the debtor busi make a final report
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11308 2011 fraud examin manual
and file a final account in a chapter 11 case howev the debtor remain in possess of
hi asset and gener retain the same author as the truste except for the duti to
investig the debtor and the right to compens a truste is appoint in a chapter 13
case but the truste duti gener involv in vestig the debtor financi affair
provis affect individu
nondischarg debt
although a bankruptci proceed mai result in the discharg of a debtor debt certain
debt ar not discharg in chapter 7 case
tax in gener tax claim ar not discharg
debt incur by fraud embezzl and larceni gener liabil aris from fraud
embezzl and larceni ar not discharg
luxuri good debt ow to a singl creditor total more than 500 for luxuri good
incur within 90 dai of file ar preseum nondischarg
cash advanc cash advanc of 750 that ar made within 70 dai of file ar presum
nondischarg
unschedul debt in gener debt that ar not list or ar not schedul ar not
discharg
domest support oblig debt for domest support oblig ar not discharg
properti settlement aris from divorc or separ debt for properti settlement aris
from divorc or separ ar not discharg
certain liabil liabil aris from will and malici injuri and liabil for death
or person injuri incur when oper a vehicl ar not discharg
fine and penalti oblig to pai a fine penalti or forfeitur ow to the
govern ar not discharg
student loan student loan ar not discharg unless it would impos an undu
hardship for the debt surviv
homestead exempt
to prevent individu who ar like to file for bankruptci from move their asset to
state with more favor law the debtor must satisfi certain hold period requir
to qualifi for a state homestead exempt whic h allow filer to exempt the valu of their
home from creditor for properti worth more than 125000 the debtor must own that
properti for 1215 dai befor file also befor qualifi for a state homestead
exempt the debtor must have live in that state for 730 dai prior to file
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11309
retir plan exempt
debtor can exempt retiremet fund from the bankruptci estat if thei ar in a fund or
account that is exempt from tax under the intern revenu code
educ account exempt
debtor can exempt educ account under section 529 and 530 from the bankruptci
estat if the beneficiari of the account is a child stepchild grandchild or stepgrandchild of
the debtor for the taxabl year dure which fund were place in the account
privaci provis
under the bankruptci abus prevent and consum protect act the bankruptci
court is permit to honor the privaci polici of busi debtor the act creat a
consum privaci ombudsman to protect person privaci in bankruptci proceed
measur mai be implement to prevent ident theft and to guid what inform is
readili access to the public debtor ar permit to request that court protect sensit
inform befor it is place in public record
the role of the truste in bankruptci fraud matter
the truste in bankruptci matter is often confront with alleg of fraud and
misconduct on the part of the debtor and it princip in chapter 11 case it is often the
primari reason the court appoint a truste creditor repres of the creditor
committe or privat investig might be interact with a bankruptci truste for thi
reason it is import to know how the truste oper what the role of the truste is and
how to make the most of the opportun to work with the truste the truste author to
investig fraud is found in the bankruptci code the follow is a brief outlin of the
chapter 7 and chapter 11 truste author to investig fraud
statutori author
in chapter 7 case section 704 of the code spell out all duti of the truste which includ
investig claim file by creditor and the code provid that the truste shall
investig the financi affair of the debtor
although gener truste in chapter 11 case do not oper the debtor busi
chapter 11 truste ha the duti to investig the debtor financi affair
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11310 2011 fraud examin manual
investig by the truste
the truste power enabl him to gather financi inform from variou sourc
includ the debtor attornei and account a truste step into the shoe of the
debtor which allow him the opportun to break the attorneycli privileg attornei
might attempt to rais the attorneycli privileg as a defens to provid inform but
thei ar usual unsuccess in thi regard sinc the truste is now the client he must be
abl to understand what legal action need to be taken therefor it is imper that the
debtor attornei cooper with the truste the truste also should have access to the
account work paper tax return and client document in their possess which might
provid the truste and creditor with the opportun to locat and recov hidden asset
anoth us tool in the truste arsen is the power to have access to debtor record
that ar in the possess of the crimin author sinc the truste step into the shoe of
the debtor he ha the right to inspect and us these record to conduct the busi affair
of the debtor
if the investig uncov suffici evid of fraud the truste should file a report
detail the result of the investig with the unit state attornei thi duti is spell
out in titl 18 unit state code section 3057
sourc of inform
the truste should obtain the variou document or inform list below in the cours
of an investig if ani of thi inform is unavail the truste can subpoena these
document the subpoena document could either be the origin document certifi
copi of these document or other inform that could be us to reconstruct the
miss document
type of inform locat
debtor petit schedul statement of
financi affair
bankruptci court offic and ust
interim and oper statement bankruptci court and ust
adversari proceed claim regist
transcript of hear 2004 examin
bankruptci court
fee applic bankruptci court and ust
real properti record counti clerk counti assessor
person properti record counti clerk
ucc file secretari of state
financi statement lend institut debtor counsel
account chapter 7 or chapter 11 file
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11311
forward address post offic
dba counti record secretari of state
partnership secretari of state
offic of corpor secretari of state
address of individu vote record
insur polici insur compani provid coverag
current or prior busi activ interview conduct of creditor former
employe former spous former busi
activ
crimin histori current or prior litig polic record local court record
tape and transcript of sworn testimoni
341a and 2004 examin
ust 341a exam
bankruptci court 2004 exam
investig procedur
to fulfil their fiduciari investig respons truste need to gather financi
inform if debtor book and record ar miss incomplet or unreli thei should
be obtain from third parti such as bank custom relat parti and so on if the
thirdparti resist the truste request the truste can subpoena record or testimoni under
bankruptci rule 2004 after receiv thirdparti record and testimoni the truste might
then
reconstruct cash receipt and cash disburs journal and gener ledger
identifi new bank account relatedparti transact and hidden or conceal asset
take 2004 exam deposit of uncoop wit
take 2004 exam of thirdparti wit and other who can authent document
record etc
obtain declar testimoni from cooper wit
interview wit determin direct versu indirect knowledg of fact bookkeep
ar good sourc of inform who can provid inform regard cash receipt
and disburs relatedparti transact and evid regard destruct of
record
after documentari and other evid ha been gather and analyz the truste
should prepar an investig report
if alleg of fraud ar present file a separ report pursuant to titl 18 section 3057
file with unit state attornei offic
