2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/Creditors’ Rights and Remedies


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


Creditors’ Rights and Remedies 
Normally when businesses or individuals are not paid, they attempt to collect amounts owed 
to them. When normal collection efforts fail, they resort to legal action. But if, after a 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1312                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
creditor files a legal action, the debtor files a petition for bankruptcy, the creditor can take 
the following steps:  
• Investigate the reasons why payment has not been made. 
? Check with other creditors to see if they have not been paid. 
? Check with credit bureaus for credit history. 
• File a motion for the appointment of a trustee; other creditors and the office of the UST 
might join in with the petitioning creditor. 
• To succeed, the moving party must demonstrate that fraud is suspected, and, therefore, a 
trustee should be appointed to oversee the operations of the debtor. 
• The creditor should have sufficient documentary and other evidence of fraudulent 
conduct, including declarations provided by knowledgeable witnesses. 
• A hearing is held where the judge hears evidence supporting and refuting the fraud 
allegations. Thereafter, the judge issues a ruling regarding the appointment of a trustee. 
• In some cases, the judge might appoint an examiner instead of a trustee because it is less 
intrusive. An examiner’s role is only to investigate and report back to the judge whether 
the allegations of fraud are supported by the independent examiner’s own evidence. 
• If the debtor does not file bankruptcy, the creditor might join other creditors and file an 
involuntary petition against the debtor. 
 
Creditors’ Committees  
After filing a Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition, the UST normally appoints a committee of 
creditors holding unsecured claims. This committee is referred to as a creditors’ committee. 
Title 11, U.S.C., section 1102 provides guidance in the formation of creditors’ committees. 
 
Title 11, U.S.C., section 1103 details the powers of creditors’ committees. They can employ 
attorneys, accountants, or other agents to assist them in the performance of their duties 
under the code. In carrying out their duties, creditors’ committees are authorized to consult 
with the trustee or debtor-in-possession concerning the administration of the case; to 
investigate the acts, conduct, assets, liabilities, and financial condition of the debtor and the 
operation of the debtor’s business; to participate in the formation of a plan of 
reorganization; to request the appointment of a trustee or examiner; and to perform such 
other services as are in the interest of those represented. 
 
Involuntary Petitions (Title 11, U.S.C., Section 303)  
Most bankruptcy cases are voluntary (i.e., voluntarily filed by the debtor). As we have 
described above, debtors have specific reasons for filing bankruptcy. Individuals, 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1313 
partnerships, and corporations have the statutory right to file bankruptcy as a protection 
from their creditors. In exchange for exercising their privilege of filing bankruptcy, debtors 
give up their right to financial privacy and must do other things required under the code. 
 
Most creditors, however, do not want their de btors to file for bankruptcy because it might 
make recovering a claim more difficult, and it might diminish the amount they receive on 
their claim.  
 
To collect amounts owed to them or to obtain a judgment against the debtor, some creditors 
might sue the debtor in state court before any bankruptcy petition is filed. Numerous 
collection actions can be brought against the debtor, which might lead to an increase in 
competition for the debtor’s remaining assets. When this occurs, the debtor normally files 
bankruptcy to prevent these creditors from seizing its assets. In some rare instances, 
however, the creditors might involuntary petition the debtor into bankruptcy, although 
doing so runs contrary to their normal inclination to do everything they can to keep debtors 
out of bankruptcy. 
 
That being said, involuntary petitions serve very important purposes; they can be used to 
stop the financial hemorrhaging that usually takes place in fraudulently operated businesses, 
and they allow the creditors to control the debtor and protect the value of the business while 
investigating the financial affairs of the debtor.  
 
An involuntary petition can only be filed under Chapters 7 and 11. Creditors who have not 
been paid by the debtor can file a petition forcing the company into bankruptcy. Generally, 
the creditors must be able to demonstrate in court that the debtor is not paying debts as they 
mature. 
 
To commence the filing of an involuntary proceeding, creditors must satisfy the following 
criteria: 
• The debts must not be subject to a bona fide dispute and must be noncontingent. 
• The creditor(s) must be owed at least $14,425 more than the value of the lien or 
collateral. 
• If there are 12 or more creditors, then three creditors are needed to file. 
• If there are fewer than 12 creditors, only one creditor is needed to file. 
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1314                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
After the involuntary petition is filed, a court hearing is held. The court might dismiss the 
petition or enter an order for relief. But if the court deems it necessary, an interim trustee 
might be appointed to preserve the property of the estate. At the hearing on the involuntary 
petition, the creditors are required to demonstrate, through direct testimony, that the alleged 
debtor is not paying debts as they come due. 
 
Creditors must be careful when filing an involuntary petition. If the creditors are not 
successful in court and the judge dismisses the petition, they might be sued by the debtor. 
Damages for lost profits and goodwill could be assessed against the creditors who filed the 
involuntary petition. Occasionally, in egregious circumstances, courts have awarded punitive 
damages against creditors who filed an involuntary petition. 
 
Investigations by Creditors  
Individual creditors might conduct their own investigations and assist Chapter 7 and Chapter 
11 trustees in performing their investigations. Trustees are normally very appreciative of 
creditors who can provide information regarding the financial affairs of the debtor. Creditors 
also can attend the 341(a) examination of the debtor and ask pertinent questions. Creditors 
who bring copies of documents, such as prior loan applications or pictures of particular 
assets, to the 341(a) examination are of great interest to trustees. Creditors can ask the 
debtor what happened to the various assets listed on the loan applications or assets shown in 
photographs. 
 
 



:


creditor right and remedi
normal when busi or individu ar not paid thei attempt to collect amount ow
to them when normal collect effort fail thei resort to legal action but if after a
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11312 2011 fraud examin manual
creditor file a legal action the debtor file a petit for bankruptci the creditor can take
the follow step
investig the reason why payment ha not been made
check with other creditor to see if thei have not been paid
check with credit bureau for credit histori
file a motion for the appoint of a truste other creditor and the offic of the ust
might join in with the petit creditor
to succe the move parti must demonstr that fraud is suspect and therefor a
truste should be appoint to overse the oper of the debtor
the creditor should have suffici documentari and other evid of fraudul
conduct includ declar provid by knowledg wit
a hear is held where the judg hear evid support and refut the fraud
alleg thereaft the judg issu a rule regard the appoint of a truste
in some case the judg might appoint an examin instead of a truste becaus it is less
intrus an examin role is onli to investig and report back to the judg whether
the alleg of fraud ar support by the independ examin own evid
if the debtor doe not file bankruptci the creditor might join other creditor and file an
involuntari petit against the debtor
creditor committe
after file a chapter 11 bankruptci petit the ust normal appoint a committe of
creditor hold unsecur claim thi committe is refer to as a creditor committe
titl 11 usc section 1102 provid guidanc in the format of creditor committe
titl 11 usc section 1103 detail the power of creditor committe thei can emploi
attornei account or other agent to assist them in the perform of their duti
under the code in carri out their duti creditor committe ar author to consult
with the truste or debtorinpossess concern the administr of the case to
investig the act conduct asset liabil and financi condit of the debtor and the
oper of the debtor busi to particip in the format of a plan of
reorgan to request the appoint of a truste or examin and to perform such
other servic as ar in the interest of those repres
involuntari petit titl 11 usc section 303
most bankruptci case ar voluntari ie voluntarili file by the debtor as we have
describ abov debtor have specif reason for file bankruptci individu
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11313
partnership and corpor have the statutori right to file bankruptci as a protect
from their creditor in exchang for exercis their privileg of file bankruptci debtor
give up their right to financi privaci and must do other thing requir under the code
most creditor howev do not want their de btor to file for bankruptci becaus it might
make recov a claim more difficult and it might diminish the amount thei receiv on
their claim
to collect amount ow to them or to obtain a judgment against the debtor some creditor
might sue the debtor in state court befor ani bankruptci petit is file numer
collect action can be brought against the debtor which might lead to an increas in
competit for the debtor remain asset when thi occur the debtor normal file
bankruptci to prevent these creditor from seiz it asset in some rare instanc
howev the creditor might involuntari petit the debtor into bankruptci although
do so run contrari to their normal inclin to do everyth thei can to keep debtor
out of bankruptci
that be said involuntari petit serv veri import purpos thei can be us to
stop the financi hemorrhag that usual take place in fraudul oper busi
and thei allow the creditor to control the debtor and protect the valu of the busi while
investig the financi affair of the debtor
an involuntari petit can onli be file under chapter 7 and 11 creditor who have not
been paid by the debtor can file a petit forc the compani into bankruptci gener
the creditor must be abl to demonstr in court that the debtor is not pai debt as thei
matur
to commenc the file of an involuntari proceed creditor must satisfi the follow
criteria
the debt must not be subject to a bona fide disput and must be nonconting
the creditor must be ow at least 14425 more than the valu of the lien or
collater
if there ar 12 or more creditor then three creditor ar need to file
if there ar fewer than 12 creditor onli on creditor is need to file
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11314 2011 fraud examin manual
after the involuntari petit is file a court hear is held the court might dismiss the
petit or enter an order for relief but if the court deem it necessari an interim truste
might be appoint to preserv the properti of the estat at the hear on the involuntari
petit the creditor ar requir to demonstr through direct testimoni that the alleg
debtor is not pai debt as thei come due
creditor must be care when file an involuntari petit if the creditor ar not
success in court and the judg dismiss the petit thei might be su by the debtor
damag for lost profit and goodwil could be assess against the creditor who file the
involuntari petit occasion in egregi circumst court have award punit
damag against creditor who file an involuntari petit
investig by creditor
individu creditor might conduct their own investig and assist chapter 7 and chapter
11 truste in perform their investig truste ar normal veri appreci of
creditor who can provid inform regard the financi affair of the debtor creditor
also can attend the 341a examin of the debtor and ask pertin question creditor
who bring copi of document such as prior loan applic or pictur of particular
asset to the 341a examin ar of great interest to truste creditor can ask the
debtor what happen to the variou asset list on the loan applic or asset shown in
photograph
