2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/Bankruptcy Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


Bankruptcy Schemes 
 
Concealed Assets 
The most common crime is the concealment of assets rightfully belonging to the debtor 
estate. Assets might consist of cash, consumer property, houses, and interests in partnerships 
and corporations, as well as lawsuits in which the debtor is a plaintiff. Assets also include 
books and records of the debtor. Concealments vary from little or no monetary value to tens 
of millions of dollars. The various concealment offenses are described in more detail under 
the bankruptcy crime statutes. 
 
The Planned Bustout 
A bustout is a planned bankruptcy. It can take many different forms. The basic approach is 
for an apparently legitimate business to order large quantities of goods on credit, then 
dispose of those goods through legitimate or illegitimate channels. The perpetrators then 
close shop, absconding with the proceeds, and leaving the suppliers unpaid. 
 
Bustout schemes are planned and perpetrated by individuals both prior to and subsequent to 
the formation of the new business entity. Other characteristics of bustout schemes follow: 
• They are planned from the beginning. 
• Sometimes organized crime is involved. 
• Credit is established with numerous vendors; prompt payments are made to all vendors; 
vendors feel comfortable in dealings, thereby extending existing credit lines. 
• Perpetrators build inventory by ordering everything they can from vendors; they promise 
to pay soon and order more merchandise. 
• Sell out inventory at deep discount or move it before vendors can take possession of it. 
• Business fails or closes up, files bankruptcy, or creditors beat them to it with involuntary 
bankruptcy. 
  
Detection  
Some red flags that signal that a bustout scheme might be in process include: 
• A business relationship based principally on trust. Creditors are willing to offer extended 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1322                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
terms for payment, hold checks, or take post-dated checks. This makes them vulnerable. 
• Buyers with a history of purchasing goods for an unreasonable discount. 
• A large number of bank accounts, indicating a possible kiting scheme. The perpetrator 
occasionally pays some of his creditors with funds generated by floating checks between 
bank accounts. 
 
Prevention 
Lenders and suppliers should evaluate potential customers carefully prior to extending credit 
by performing due diligence and obtaining detailed background information. Lenders  
and suppliers should at times visit their customers’ locations to verify the legitimacy of  
the businesses. 
 
Multiple Filings 
This scheme involves repeated bankruptcy filings by the same debtor in order to obtain the 
benefit of the automatic stay. Usually each petition is dismissed for failure to file the required 
statements or to appear for examination. False statements on petitions are common, 
including a denial that the debtor has filed any previous petition. 
 
Credit Card Bustout 
The debtor intentionally runs up a number of credit cards to their limit and files bankruptcy 
with no intent to repay. Credit card debts might include purchases for jewelry, luxury items, 
or other personal property that are not disclosed on the schedules. Credit card debt also 
might include large cash advances taken prior to filing bankruptcy. 
 
Forged Filings 
Bankruptcy petitions are sometimes filed in another (uninvolved) person’s name, usually as 
part of a larger scheme using an assumed identity. It can take years to correct the credit 
records of the person whose identity has been stolen. Sometimes the debtor’s name is 
obtained from obituary notices. 
 
Typing Services or Petition Mills 
This scheme involves companies that file bankruptcy petitions typically on behalf of low-
 income and often unsuspecting clients. The petitions often contain numerous false 
statements. The debtor usually has no idea a bankruptcy has been filed, as the service has 
held itself out to be a renter’s rights group and has not told the client how it will accomplish 
what it has promised.   
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1401 



:


bankruptci scheme
conceal asset
the most common crime is the conceal of asset rightfulli belong to the debtor
estat asset might consist of cash consum properti hous and interest in partnership
and corpor as well as lawsuit in which the debtor is a plaintiff asset also includ
book and record of the debtor conceal vari from littl or no monetari valu to ten
of million of dollar the variou conceal offens ar describ in more detail under
the bankruptci crime statut
the plan bustout
a bustout is a plan bankruptci it can take mani differ form the basic approach is
for an appar legitim busi to order larg quantiti of good on credit then
dispos of those good through legitim or illegitim channel the perpetr then
close shop abscond with the proce and leav the supplier unpaid
bustout scheme ar plan and perpetr by individu both prior to and subsequ to
the format of the new busi entiti other characterist of bustout scheme follow
thei ar plan from the begin
sometim organ crime is involv
credit is establish with numer vendor prompt payment ar made to all vendor
vendor feel comfort in deal therebi extend exist credit line
perpetr build inventori by order everyth thei can from vendor thei promis
to pai soon and order more merchandis
sell out inventori at deep discount or move it befor vendor can take possess of it
busi fail or close up file bankruptci or creditor beat them to it with involuntari
bankruptci
detect
some red flag that signal that a bustout scheme might be in process includ
a busi relationship base princip on trust creditor ar will to offer extend
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11322 2011 fraud examin manual
term for payment hold check or take postdat check thi make them vulner
buyer with a histori of purchas good for an unreason discount
a larg number of bank account indic a possibl kite scheme the perpetr
occasion pai some of hi creditor with fund gener by float check between
bank account
prevent
lender and supplier should evalu potenti custom carefulli prior to extend credit
by perform due dilig and obtain detail background inform lender
and supplier should at time visit their custom locat to verifi the legitimaci of
the busi
multipl file
thi scheme involv repeat bankruptci file by the same debtor in order to obtain the
benefit of the automat stai usual each petit is dismiss for failur to file the requir
statement or to appear for examin fals statement on petit ar common
includ a denial that the debtor ha file ani previou petit
credit card bustout
the debtor intention run up a number of credit card to their limit and file bankruptci
with no intent to repai credit card debt might includ purchas for jewelri luxuri item
or other person properti that ar not disclos on the schedul credit card debt also
might includ larg cash advanc taken prior to file bankruptci
forg file
bankruptci petit ar sometim file in anoth uninvolv person name usual as
part of a larger scheme us an assum ident it can take year to correct the credit
record of the person whose ident ha been stolen sometim the debtor name is
obtain from obituari notic
type servic or petit mill
thi scheme involv compani that file bankruptci petit typic on behalf of low
incom and often unsuspect client the petit often contain numer fals
statement the debtor usual ha no idea a bankruptci ha been file as the servic ha
held itself out to be a renter right group and ha not told the client how it will accomplish
what it ha promis
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11401
