2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/The Bankruptcy Code (Title 11, United States Code)/Nondischargeable Debts


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


Nondischargeable Debts  
Although a bankruptcy proceeding may result in the discharge of a debtor’s debts, certain 
debts are not discharged in Chapter 7 cases: 
• Taxes: In general, tax claims are not discharged.  
• Debts incurred by fraud, embezzlement, and larceny: Generally, liabilities arising from fraud, 
embezzlement, and larceny are not dischargeable.  
• Luxury goods: Debts owed to a single creditor totaling more than $500 for luxury goods 
incurred within 90 days of filing are preseumed non-dischargeable. 
• Cash advances: Cash advances of $750 that are made within 70 days of filing are presumed 
non-dischargeable.  
• Unscheduled debts: In general, debts that are not listed or are not scheduled are not 
dischargeable.  
• Domestic support obligations: Debts for domestic support obligations are not dischargeable. 
• Property settlements arising from divorce or separation : Debts for property settlements arising 
from divorce or separation are not dischargeable. 
• Certain liabilities: Liabilities arising from willful and malicious injury and liability for death 
or personal injury incurred when operating a vehicle are not dischargeable.  
• Fines and penalties: Obligations to pay a fine, penalty, or forfeiture owed to the 
government are not dischargeable. 
• Student loans: Student loans are not dischargeable, unless it would impose an undue 
hardship for the debt’s survival.  
 



:


nondischarg debt
although a bankruptci proceed mai result in the discharg of a debtor debt certain
debt ar not discharg in chapter 7 case
tax in gener tax claim ar not discharg
debt incur by fraud embezzl and larceni gener liabil aris from fraud
embezzl and larceni ar not discharg
luxuri good debt ow to a singl creditor total more than 500 for luxuri good
incur within 90 dai of file ar preseum nondischarg
cash advanc cash advanc of 750 that ar made within 70 dai of file ar presum
nondischarg
unschedul debt in gener debt that ar not list or ar not schedul ar not
discharg
domest support oblig debt for domest support oblig ar not discharg
properti settlement aris from divorc or separ debt for properti settlement aris
from divorc or separ ar not discharg
certain liabil liabil aris from will and malici injuri and liabil for death
or person injuri incur when oper a vehicl ar not discharg
fine and penalti oblig to pai a fine penalti or forfeitur ow to the
govern ar not discharg
student loan student loan ar not discharg unless it would impos an undu
hardship for the debt surviv
