2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/Bankruptcy Schemes/The Planned Bustout


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


The Planned Bustout 
A bustout is a planned bankruptcy. It can take many different forms. The basic approach is 
for an apparently legitimate business to order large quantities of goods on credit, then 
dispose of those goods through legitimate or illegitimate channels. The perpetrators then 
close shop, absconding with the proceeds, and leaving the suppliers unpaid. 
 
Bustout schemes are planned and perpetrated by individuals both prior to and subsequent to 
the formation of the new business entity. Other characteristics of bustout schemes follow: 
• They are planned from the beginning. 
• Sometimes organized crime is involved. 
• Credit is established with numerous vendors; prompt payments are made to all vendors; 
vendors feel comfortable in dealings, thereby extending existing credit lines. 
• Perpetrators build inventory by ordering everything they can from vendors; they promise 
to pay soon and order more merchandise. 
• Sell out inventory at deep discount or move it before vendors can take possession of it. 
• Business fails or closes up, files bankruptcy, or creditors beat them to it with involuntary 
bankruptcy. 
  



:


the plan bustout
a bustout is a plan bankruptci it can take mani differ form the basic approach is
for an appar legitim busi to order larg quantiti of good on credit then
dispos of those good through legitim or illegitim channel the perpetr then
close shop abscond with the proce and leav the supplier unpaid
bustout scheme ar plan and perpetr by individu both prior to and subsequ to
the format of the new busi entiti other characterist of bustout scheme follow
thei ar plan from the begin
sometim organ crime is involv
credit is establish with numer vendor prompt payment ar made to all vendor
vendor feel comfort in deal therebi extend exist credit line
perpetr build inventori by order everyth thei can from vendor thei promis
to pai soon and order more merchandis
sell out inventori at deep discount or move it befor vendor can take possess of it
busi fail or close up file bankruptci or creditor beat them to it with involuntari
bankruptci
