2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/WHITE-COLLAR CRIME/Crimes of the Middle Classes — A Look at White-Collar Crime


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


White-Collar Crime


:


Crimes of the Middle Classes — A Look at White-Collar Crime 
Surveys carried out subsequently provide essentially the same result—that the public as a 
whole regards some white-collar offenses as serious matters. The difficulty with such 
surveys, however, is that they fail to convey in any effective manner the complexity of the 
white-collar offenses and the status of the offenders. It is one thing for a respondent to say 
that he regards toxic waste offenses that produce death as very serious violations, but quite 
another for that person to regard the corporate executive responsible for such matters as an 
“evil” person. Because of this, white-collar offe nders receive much less severe penalties than 
the street people who commit the offenses that the public generally regards to be as serious 
as theirs. 
 
The debate over just what constitutes a white-collar crime, and what drives the white-collar 
criminal, has been raging ever since Sutherland’s seminal work. The authors of Crimes of the 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.406   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Middle Classes3 offer a contribution that for the most part avoids theory-building, offering 
instead a statistical report of offenders convicted in federal court. 
 
Using federal court records, and an unprecedented access to probation officers’ 
presentencing investigation reports (PSIs), the authors determined that most people 
convicted of white-collar crimes are not upper class; that social status has only an indirect 
significance; and that, once a conviction is attained, higher status often means a stiffer 
sentence. The most important factor is “how personal situations and organizational 
opportunities combine” to make crime possible and attractive to average Americans. 4 White-
 collar crime does have a unique place in criminology, but the split is not between an 
underworld of the desperate poor and an elite universe of high-stakes shysters. White-collar 
crime has some relation to both of these mythological worlds, but is largely the province of 
the middle classes, where organizational position is more important than pedigree and 
personal situations are more forceful than sociological trends. 
 
Profiles of Offenders 
The wide array of crimes called “white-collar”—f rom anti-trust and securities violations to 
bank embezzlement and credit fraud—makes a ssembling a profile of the typical offender 
difficult, but not impossible. Most defendants are white males, with a modera te social status. 
They are slightly more likely than the general population to have a high school diploma (78 
percent versus 69 percent), or a college degree (24.7 percent versus 19 percent for the 
general public). The majority, then, are not highly educated, and in at least one category—
 owning one’s home—the offenders fall behind the average citizen: while 55 percent of 
Americans own their homes, only 45.3 percent of the offenders do. Social status is a factor 
in white-collar criminality, but as the authors point out, “The position conferred by status, 
rather than status itself, empowers the offender.” 5 So a corporate manager, who was 
promoted from inside the company with only a ninth-grade education and who doesn’t own 
his home, is not as atypical an offender as might be supposed. The key is that, by his 
position in his company, he has the opportunity and means to commit a crime.  
 
                                                 
3 Weisburd, David, et al. Crimes of the Middle Classes. White-Collar Offenders in the Federal Courts.  New Haven: Yale 
UP, 1991 
4 Weisburd, p. xiv. 
5 Weisburd, p. 61. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.407  
Cressey Study 
Donald R. Cressey found in a 1953 study of embezzlers that most of those he examined 
“had lived beyond their means for some time before deciding to embezzle.” 6 Crimes extends 
this statement more generally, remarking, “The most interesting fact about the white-collar 
offenders’ aggregate financial status is not the value of their assets but the extent of their 
liabilities.” Offenders often “have the material goods associated with successful people, but 
may barely be holding their financial selves together.” 7 These people have assembled a 
structure of respectability, but it is often built on the sands of debt. The Cressey Study is 
discussed in more detail in the chapter on “Occupational Fraud.” 
 
Effect of Status 
What is loosely called “class” or “social status” does have an effect on crimes. For example, 
one defendant used his position as chairman of a local bank board to set up loans for his 
ailing wood chip company. The loans would never have been approved without the 
chairman’s influence, and he never reported them in his proxy statement to the bank’s 
shareholders. Ultimately, the bank lost close to $6 million. In this case, the chairman’s class 
standing made a difference. His ruse squares with the documented knowledge that officers 
and managers commit the business crimes with the widest impact (in terms of dollar 
amounts and victimization), while owners and workers generally commit narrower schemes. 
 
Organizational Opportunity 
Of all factors, organizational opportunity remains the determinant aspect of white-collar 
crime. Against Sutherland’s emphasis on an elite group running high-class sting operations, 
Crimes shows that organization and complexity make a larger difference than the offender’s 
social status. In a fascinating case, a church group used its daycare center to defraud the 
federal government of approximately $1 million.  Their arrangement with the Department of 
Agriculture required the daycare’s administrators to submit monthly vouchers reporting the 
number of meals they had served and the cost of food and labor. When auditors descended 
upon the scam, they found that for about $79,000 in actual expenses, the administrators had 
submitted almost $1 million in food costs, and $400,000 for labor. Teachers said they 
sometimes brought food to the center themselves because the children weren’t being fed 
properly. There were also reports that “mor ning snacks were never served unless the 
government inspectors were expected, that the same children were run through serving lines 
                                                 
6 Weisburd, p. 65n. 
7 Weisburd, p. 65. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.408   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
twice when inspectors were present, and that some children were bused in from other 
daycare centers on inspection days.” 8 The example shows, according to the authors, that a 
criminal’s position in an organization and his ability to organize the scam have far more 
bearing on the crime than social status or class alone. 
 
The Middle Class 
People of moderate social standing are in fact more likely than members of the upper class 
to commit highly organized crimes from within a corporate structure.9 Some offenders do fit 
the stereotype of “respectability and high social status” in white-collar crime, but most of 
them are solidly middle class. “They appear to represent the very broad middle of the 
society, much above the poverty line but for the most part far from elite social status,” the 
authors say. Offenders “are mostly commonplace, not unlike the average American in most 
respects, though perhaps more often with personal lives that are in some state of disarray. 
The single quality that distinguishes them from other Americans is that they have been 
convicted of a federal crime.” 10 
 
Methodology 
All the conclusions in the Crimes of the Middle Classes are qualified. The authors and 
researchers drew from the federal court records of seven districts11 and obtained access to 
the pre-sentencing reports (PSIs) prepared by probation officers. PSIs had never been 
available to researchers before, and the close reading of these documents formed a central 
part of the project. Admittedly, the crimes and specific cases studied were selected, not 
drawn from a random sample. Eight crimes were targeted as “white-collar”: securities 
violations, anti-trust suits, bribery and influence-peddling, embezzlement, mail or wire fraud, 
tax fraud, false claims and statements (in official documents), and credit fraud. Certain 
violations—such as RICO charges against organized crime and breaking importation laws—
 were excluded, judged to lie outside the parameters of what most people think of as white-
 collar activity.  
                                                 
8 Weisburd, p. 94. 
9 The authors opine that “the individualism and in dependence” of professions like doctors or lawyers 
discourage their involvement in the organizational network that drives these crimes, though we are warned that 
“the growing participation of profes sionals in large private organizations” (such as HMOs) may change both 
the opportunity for and attitude toward criminal activity (89-91). 
10 Weisburd, p. 73. 
11 The districts and “central cities” were as follows:  Central California (Los Angeles), Northern Georgia 
(Atlanta), Northern Illinois (Chicago), Maryland (Balti more), Southern New York (Manhattan and the Bronx), 
Northern Texas (Dallas), and Western Washington (Seattle). A detailed discussion of the sampling process is 
included as Appendix 1. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.409  
Even within their eight categories, the authors didn’t examine every single case, deciding to 
focus on no more than 30 cases within each category in order to facilitate the close reading 
of PSIs. They warn that their findings were taken from studying people actually convicted, 
so the results don’t take into account how often charges are actually filed and followed up by 
prosecution. By dealing with the convicted, they focused on the treatment of people already 
inside the federal system.  
 
Finally, the long-range nature of the project meant that the study’s sample years — 
1976–1978 — were considerably past before the findings were published. The sentencing 
guidelines handed down in 1984 and adopted in 1987 make some material that judges 
considered at their discretion (like the dollar amount of a crime) a mandatory element of 
sentencing. At the same time, the Sentencing Act systematically excludes  judgments based on 
a defendant’s “moral character,” which had previously been a standard in assessments. 
Wheeler and company write that these developments will have to be accommodated in 
future studies, but they don’t expect that such trends will seriously affect the general picture 
they present. “For example, we see no reason to believe that the role of organizational 
opportunity in white-collar crime... is any different in substance in 1990 than it was in the 
late 1970s, although the particular organizations singled out for public inquiry and 
prosecution may well have changed.” 12  
 
With these qualifications in mind, it remains useful to consider the findings of this report. 
The following chart summarizes the ranking of offenders by social status and in respect to 
certain demographic features.  
 
Offenders Ranked by Status, with Selected Demographic Information 
 
High  
 
 
•Anti-trust 
 
 
 
•Securities  
These offenders committed the crimes with the largest dollar impact, and the 
widest geographic scope. They are overwhelmingly white (99%-plus) and male 
(99.1% for anti-trust, 97.8% for securities). The groups are equally likely to 
hold a college degree (40.9% in either case), and their frauds were usually 
occupational in nature. There are revealing contrasts when these two types of 
offenders are compared: 
 
1) Almost 97% of anti-trust offenders had been steadily employed in the 
                                                 
12 Weisburd, p.xv. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.410   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
years preceding their crime, while only about 60% of the securities 
offenders had continually held a job. 
2)  The anti-trusters had a median ratio of assets to liabilities of $200,000 
(assets) to $40,000 (liabilities); the securities offenders medianly held 
$57,500 in assets with $54,000 in liabilities. 
3) Anti-trust violators were more likely to own their own homes (73.5% vs. 
58.2%) and to be married (95.7% vs. 80.7%) than securities offenders.  
Middle  
 
•Tax fraud 
 
 
•Bribery  
These offenders are mainly white males, around 45 years old. Their crimes are 
not usually occupational—just 15% for tax fraud and less than 18% for 
bribery. Roughly 57% of offenders owned their own homes, and about 28% 
held a college degree. Their median assets ranged from $45,000–$49,500; 
median liabilities were between $19,000 and $23,500. The authors remark that 
although tax fraud is a typical white-collar crime, “two-thirds of the tax 
offenders work in the manufacturing or nonprofessional service sectors.” 
Low  
 
•Credit fraud 
 
•Mail fraud 
 
•False claims  
This group was not as likely to be white—71.5% for credit fraud, 76.8% for 
mail fraud, 61.8% for false claims—or male—84.8% for credit fraud, 82.1% 
for mail fraud, 84.7% for false claims. They were generally younger than the 
other category offenders (less than 40 years old); less likely to be married 
(about 50%); and less likely to own their own home (roughly 34–45% across 
the three crime types). Their net worth, as per the ratio of assets to liabilities, 
was remarkably low: $7,000/$7,000 for credit fraud; $2,000/$3,500 for mail 
fraud; $4,000/$5,000 for false claims. 
Outside Hierarchy  
 
 
•Bank embezzlement  
These offenders were placed outside the rankings because they were 
dramatically younger (a mean age of 31) and more likely to be female (44.8% 
female/55.2% male) than the other gr oups. While nearly 25% of the low-
 status group was unemployed at the time of their crime, only 3% of 
embezzlers were without a job (just slightly above the 2.8% rate for high-
 status offenders). They are the group least likely to have a college degree 
(12.9%) or to own their own home (28.4%). Their median net worth was 
$2,000 in assets with $3,000 in liabilities. Male embezzlers were usually 
managers of a local banking operation, while females were most often tellers 
or clerical workers.  
 
However difficult it may prove to be to sort out the demography of Crimes, the strength of 
the analysis lies in its tracing of the path of criminals through the federal system. Following 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.411  
their core group from offense to conviction, the authors report on general trends in the 
treatment and sentencing of white-collar criminals. The most surprising conclusion states 
that people of higher social status, once convicted, are more likely than similar offenders to 
receive prison time and to be fined. 
 
Cooperating Defendants 
Some standard assumptions still apply. For example, informing on one’s cohorts does help. 
Over 42 percent of cooperating defendants were charged with a single violation, while only 
30 percent of uncooperative defendants were so lucky. Also, white-collar defendants receive 
bail rather easily: just one person in eight spends any time incarcerated before trial, and for 
the generally high-status anti-trust defendants, the figure is fewer than one in 20. By 
comparison, in a control group of “common criminals” (i.e., people convicted of the 
“nonviolent economic crimes” of postal theft or postal fraud), at least 1/3 of the defendants 
spent time in jail before going to trial.  
 
Pleas by White-Collar Defendants 
White-collar defendants are more likely to insist on a trial than other offenders. In at least 90 
percent of federal cases, defendants will plead guilty, avoiding the expense and effort of a 
trial. But, over 18 percent of defendants in the Crimes sample (as opposed to the usual ten 
percent) pled “Not Guilty.” In cases like bank embezzlement, usually “simple cases with 
clear evidence,” plea bargains are easily negotiated and “prosecutors may actively seek guilty 
pleas.” 14 The decision on how to plead varies with the offender as much as the offense. For 
example, female bank tellers were especially prone to plead “Not Guilty,” while many of the 
male embezzlers—generally “higher-level officials involved in more complex crimes”—
 proceeded to trial. Of all white-collar defendants, securities offenders are the ones most 
likely to insist on their day in court. Evidently, both the government and the defendants in 
these cases feel more strongly about their chances to win.  
 
Judgments 
Judgments against white-collar defendants often  involve an assessment of personal suffering. 
It is widely held that, when convicted of a crime, these people suffer a greater blow 
                                                 
13 Postal theft and postal forgery were selected as economic crimes without a direct link to violence. Other 
common crimes, such as burglaries or larceny, are state offenses, and thus are not appropriate to this study of 
the federal system. Postal theft involves acts like stealing government-issued checks, such as welfare payments; 
postal forgery involves the act of cashing these items. Clearly, the choice of these crimes (and not others) for 
comparison is debatable. 
14 Weisburd, p. 114. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.412   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
personally and professionally than street criminals. Many observers think this suffering 
should be acknowledged in assessing a sentence. One federal judge is quoted as saying: 
 
The white-collar criminal by virt ue of his conviction has suffered a loss of position, usually 
loss of employment, sometimes status in his profession, other times the ability to ever find 
employment in anything requiring a fidelity bond or what have you. Whereas the common 
street criminal hasn’t had a career loss of a similar nature; indeed, in some areas the 
conviction of a crime is some sort of a badge of maturity. 15  
 
Personal Suffering 
Examining PSIs, the authors found that in about 65 percent of the cases overall, personal 
suffering was said to have played an overwhelming role in the defendant’s case. Securities 
offenders and embezzlers topped the list, with 70 and 87 percent of these people 
(respectively) reporting some hardship. Of course, the reports involved statements by the 
defendants or their families, which could be self-serving.  
 
And in actually looking at objective material—such as the loss of employment, marital 
separations and divorce, or mental health problems—the authors found the results 
“ambiguous.” Credit fraud perpetrators, for example, seldom reported any suffering, but 
they had a 20 percent divorce rate during the time of their prosecution, the highest in the 
study. And there were often large gaps between different types of crimes. Compared to the 
securities offenders, with a 70 percent rate of suffering, only about 24 percent of anti-trust 
offenders had similar complaints. The discrepancy may lie in how different crimes are 
viewed. “Anti-trust violators, who steal for their companies and actually provide the 
services they say they do,” aren’t seen as harshly as “those who steal from their 
companies.” 16 Securities offenders are stigmatized “b ecause their crimes are often against 
their own clients,” while bank embezzlers (with over 87 percent reported suffering) are 
judged with particular strictness “because they steal from their employers.” 17 
 
In summary, the authors believe that the extra legal suffering of white-collar defendants has 
some validity, but it’s not always possible to be sure that prosecution alone caused the 
hardship. The contradictory images of these criminals as both exceptionally privileged and 
                                                 
15 Weisburd, p. 116. 
16 Weisburd, p. 124. 
17 Weisburd, p. 125. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.413  
especially harassed “overstate their real experience in the legal system.” Neither factor is as 
great as the standard rhetoric might suggest.  
 
Imprisonment 
Crimes does find that the highest status group—an ti-trust violators — were the least likely to 
receive prison time (about 1 in 5) and to draw the shortest sentence (1.8 months). Securities 
fraud led the group, with over 67 percent doing time, followed by tax fraud (58.9 percent) 
and mail fraud (55.1 percent). But in considering all offenders in all groups, the authors 
discovered that the higher an individual’s status, the more likely the person was to be 
imprisoned: “All else being equal, doctors will have about a 30 percent greater likelihood of 
being imprisoned [for a white-collar crime] than truck drivers and almost a 13 percent 
greater likelihood than managers.” 18 Judges seem to find people of higher prestige more at 
fault, or in other words, more blameworthy, in the commission of their crimes. 
 
One remarkable variable in determining the severity of punishment was where the case was 
tried. The districts of Maryland, Northern  Illinois, and Northern Texas tended toward 
harsher sentences; Northern Georgia and Southern New York handed down the lightest 
ones. 
 
More often than prison, the punishment of  choice for white-collar criminals is the 
imposition of fines. Whereas 6 percent of the “common criminals” in the survey received 
fines, all of the anti-trust violators did; embezz lers were the least likely group to be fined, but 
even so, their 15 percent rate far exceeded the norm. For fines as well as imprisonment, 
higher status usually meant a higher penalty. Analysis showed that “white defendants, those 
with more impeccable records, and those who have higher class positions are more likely to 
be fined.” 19 But while the decision to fine seems based on status, the actual levies are often 
comparatively low. For anti-trust suits, the mean fine was $9,808; for embezzlement, it was 
just $1,397. Even well-off offenders got off light: a man convicted of fixing the price of 
candy bars in an eastern state, with a net worth exceeding $190,000, was fined $3,500; 
another defendant, whose net worth approached $1.4 million, was fined $5,000 for credit 
fraud. Only 4 percent of offenders were ever given the statute’s maximum penalty. 
 
                                                 
18 Weisburd, p. 143. 
19 Weisburd, p. 157. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.414   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Obviously, most white-collar crimes don’t even  approach the billion-dollar levels of the 
stereotype. An accurate picture actually looks rather mundane. “For every truly complicated 
and rarified offense,” according to Wheeler and his colleagues, “there are many others that 
are simple and could be carried out by almost anyone who can read, write, and give an 
outward appearance of stability.” 20 More than anything else — more than status, or class 
position, or heritage — the white-collar criminal needs an opportunity and some sort  
of organization.  
 
Contributing Factors 
The authors posit several factors which have contributed to the rising problem of  
economic crime: 
• America’s economy increasingly runs on credit, which often means rising personal debt. 
The offenders in the sample often showed serious discrepancies “between their 
resources and their commitments.” 21  
• New information technologies mean that the opportunity for wrongdoing is growing, 
and many of the techniques are not widely comprehended by businesses or individuals.  
• Government programs distributing large amounts of money make an enticing target  
for defalcations. 
• The importance of credentials in a professionalized society may influence individuals “to 
inflate the credentials, or to make them up when they do not exist.” This tendency 
involves everything from cheating on school entrance exams to falsifying  
credit applications. 
• Most broadly, the authors observe an American culture based on affluence and ever-
 higher levels of success. “The continued pressure of a value system that rewards 
economic affluence or its visible by-products has its effects on the broad middle of 
American society.” 22 Television and advertising in general promise that no one has to 
settle for second best, prompting those who find themselves running behind to fudge 
the difference, crossing ethical and sometimes legal lines. 
 
Conclusion 
Curbing this pernicious trend will not be easy, but there are ways. Since organizational 
opportunity determines so much criminal activity, the foremost deterrent is to pay 
heightened attention to “where the money is and how it flows” within any group. Obviously, 
                                                 
20 Weisburd, p. 171. 
21 Weisburd, p. 183. 
22 Weisburd, p. 184. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.415  
most businesses have some system of financial control, but the authors say that 
“organizational intelligence” is often less than stellar. Offenders are not usually “the highly 
sophisticated swindlers” from the mass media,  just “average people in a financial jam who 
see a way out through fraud.” 23  
 
Furthermore, like many analysts these days, the Crimes team believes it is far too easy to 
acquire money and goods on credit. Tightening the restrictions on credit cards and loans 
would directly address the role that debt plays in many schemes. 
 
Finally, these authors center the problem of white-collar crime around values. As long as the 
places where citizens learn their priorities — schools, families, neighborhoods, mass media —
emphasize high-pressure risk-taking and material affluence over “honesty and moral 
integrity,” many people will go for the gold, even if they have to steal it. It will never be easy, 
they acknowledge, to balance a market-based economy which requires competition, with an 
equal insistence on forthrightness and fair play. 
 
                                                 
23 Weisburd, p. 190. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.501  



:


crime of the middl class a look at whitecollar crime
survei carri out subsequ provid essenti the same resultthat the public as a
whole regard some whitecollar offens as seriou matter the difficulti with such
survei howev is that thei fail to convei in ani effect manner the complex of the
whitecollar offens and the statu of the offend it is on thing for a respond to sai
that he regard toxic wast offens that produc death as veri seriou violat but quit
anoth for that person to regard the corpor execut respons for such matter as an
evil person becaus of thi whitecollar off nder receiv much less sever penalti than
the street peopl who commit the offens that the public gener regard to be as seriou
as their
the debat over just what constitut a whitecollar crime and what drive the whitecollar
crimin ha been rage ever sinc sutherland semin work the author of crime of the
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4406 2011 fraud examin manual
middl classes3 offer a contribut that for the most part avoid theorybuild offer
instead a statist report of offend convict in feder court
us feder court record and an unpreced access to probat offic
presentenc investig report psi the author determin that most peopl
convict of whitecollar crime ar not upper class that social statu ha onli an indirect
signific and that onc a convict is attain higher statu often mean a stiffer
sentenc the most import factor is how person situat and organiz
opportun combin to make crime possibl and attract to averag american 4 white
collar crime doe have a uniqu place in criminolog but the split is not between an
underworld of the desper poor and an elit univers of highstak shyster whitecollar
crime ha some relat to both of these mytholog world but is larg the provinc of
the middl class where organiz posit is more import than pedigre and
person situat ar more forc than sociolog trend
profil of offend
the wide arrai of crime call whitecollarf rom antitrust and secur violat to
bank embezzl and credit fraudmak a ssembl a profil of the typic offend
difficult but not imposs most defend ar white male with a modera te social statu
thei ar slightli more like than the gener popul to have a high school diploma 78
percent versu 69 percent or a colleg degre 247 percent versu 19 percent for the
gener public the major then ar not highli educ and in at least on categori
own on hometh offend fall behind the averag citizen while 55 percent of
american own their home onli 453 percent of the offend do social statu is a factor
in whitecollar crimin but as the author point out the posit confer by statu
rather than statu itself empow the offend 5 so a corpor manag who wa
promot from insid the compani with onli a ninthgrad educ and who doesnt own
hi home is not as atyp an offend as might be suppos the kei is that by hi
posit in hi compani he ha the opportun and mean to commit a crime
3 weisburd david et al crime of the middl class whitecollar offend in the feder court new haven yale
up 1991
4 weisburd p xiv
5 weisburd p 61
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4407
cressei studi
donald r cressei found in a 1953 studi of embezzl that most of those he examin
had live beyond their mean for some time befor decid to embezzl 6 crime extend
thi statement more gener remark the most interest fact about the whitecollar
offend aggreg financi statu is not the valu of their asset but the extent of their
liabil offend often have the materi good associ with success peopl but
mai bare be hold their financi selv togeth 7 these peopl have assembl a
structur of respect but it is often built on the sand of debt the cressei studi is
discuss in more detail in the chapter on occup fraud
effect of statu
what is loos call class or social statu doe have an effect on crime for exampl
on defend us hi posit as chairman of a local bank board to set up loan for hi
ail wood chip compani the loan would never have been approv without the
chairman influenc and he never report them in hi proxi statement to the bank
sharehold ultim the bank lost close to 6 million in thi case the chairman class
stand made a differ hi ruse squar with the document knowledg that offic
and manag commit the busi crime with the widest impact in term of dollar
amount and victim while owner and worker gener commit narrow scheme
organiz opportun
of all factor organiz opportun remain the determin aspect of whitecollar
crime against sutherland emphasi on an elit group run highclass sting oper
crime show that organ and complex make a larger differ than the offend
social statu in a fascin case a church group us it daycar center to defraud the
feder govern of approxim 1 million their arrang with the depart of
agricultur requir the daycar administr to submit monthli voucher report the
number of meal thei had serv and the cost of food and labor when auditor descend
upon the scam thei found that for about 79000 in actual expens the administr had
submit almost 1 million in food cost and 400000 for labor teacher said thei
sometim brought food to the center themselv becaus the children werent be fed
properli there were also report that mor ning snack were never serv unless the
govern inspector were expect that the same children were run through serv line
6 weisburd p 65n
7 weisburd p 65
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4408 2011 fraud examin manual
twice when inspector were present and that some children were buse in from other
daycar center on inspect dai 8 the exampl show accord to the author that a
crimin posit in an organ and hi abil to organ the scam have far more
bear on the crime than social statu or class alon
the middl class
peopl of moder social stand ar in fact more like than member of the upper class
to commit highli organ crime from within a corpor structure9 some offend do fit
the stereotyp of respect and high social statu in whitecollar crime but most of
them ar solidli middl class thei appear to repres the veri broad middl of the
societi much abov the poverti line but for the most part far from elit social statu the
author sai offend ar mostli commonplac not unlik the averag american in most
respect though perhap more often with person live that ar in some state of disarrai
the singl qualiti that distinguish them from other american is that thei have been
convict of a feder crime 10
methodolog
all the conclus in the crime of the middl class ar qualifi the author and
research drew from the feder court record of seven districts11 and obtain access to
the presentenc report psi prepar by probat offic psi had never been
avail to research befor and the close read of these document form a central
part of the project admittedli the crime and specif case studi were select not
drawn from a random sampl eight crime were target as whitecollar secur
violat antitrust suit briberi and influencepeddl embezzl mail or wire fraud
tax fraud fals claim and statement in offici document and credit fraud certain
violationssuch as rico charg against organ crime and break import law
were exclud judg to lie outsid the paramet of what most peopl think of as white
collar activ
8 weisburd p 94
9 the author opin that the individu and in depend of profess like doctor or lawyer
discourag their involv in the organiz network that drive these crime though we ar warn that
the grow particip of profe sional in larg privat organ such as hmo mai chang both
the opportun for and attitud toward crimin activ 8991
10 weisburd p 73
11 the district and central citi were as follow central california lo angel northern georgia
atlanta northern illinoi chicago maryland balti more southern new york manhattan and the bronx
northern texa dalla and western washington seattl a detail discuss of the sampl process is
includ as appendix 1
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4409
even within their eight categori the author didnt examin everi singl case decid to
focu on no more than 30 case within each categori in order to facilit the close read
of psi thei warn that their find were taken from studi peopl actual convict
so the result dont take into account how often charg ar actual file and follow up by
prosecut by deal with the convict thei focus on the treatment of peopl alreadi
insid the feder system
final the longrang natur of the project meant that the studi sampl year
19761978 were consider past befor the find were publish the sentenc
guidelin hand down in 1984 and adopt in 1987 make some materi that judg
consid at their discret like the dollar amount of a crime a mandatori element of
sentenc at the same time the sentenc act systemat exclud judgment base on
a defend moral charact which had previous been a standard in assess
wheeler and compani write that these develop will have to be accommod in
futur studi but thei dont expect that such trend will serious affect the gener pictur
thei present for exampl we see no reason to believ that the role of organiz
opportun in whitecollar crime is ani differ in substanc in 1990 than it wa in the
late 1970 although the particular organ singl out for public inquiri and
prosecut mai well have chang 12
with these qualif in mind it remain us to consid the find of thi report
the follow chart summar the rank of offend by social statu and in respect to
certain demograph featur
offend rank by statu with select demograph inform
high
antitrust
secur
these offend commit the crime with the largest dollar impact and the
widest geograph scope thei ar overwhelmingli white 99plu and male
991 for antitrust 978 for secur the group ar equal like to
hold a colleg degre 409 in either case and their fraud were usual
occup in natur there ar reveal contrast when these two type of
offend ar compar
1 almost 97 of antitrust offend had been steadili emploi in the
12 weisburd pxv
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4410 2011 fraud examin manual
year preced their crime while onli about 60 of the secur
offend had continu held a job
2 the antitrust had a median ratio of asset to liabil of 200000
asset to 40000 liabil the secur offend medianli held
57500 in asset with 54000 in liabil
3 antitrust violat were more like to own their own home 735 vs
582 and to be marri 957 vs 807 than secur offend
middl
tax fraud
briberi
these offend ar mainli white male around 45 year old their crime ar
not usual occupationaljust 15 for tax fraud and less than 18 for
briberi roughli 57 of offend own their own home and about 28
held a colleg degre their median asset rang from 4500049500
median liabil were between 19000 and 23500 the author remark that
although tax fraud is a typic whitecollar crime twothird of the tax
offend work in the manufactur or nonprofession servic sector
low
credit fraud
mail fraud
fals claim
thi group wa not as like to be white715 for credit fraud 768 for
mail fraud 618 for fals claimsor male848 for credit fraud 821
for mail fraud 847 for fals claim thei were gener younger than the
other categori offend less than 40 year old less like to be marri
about 50 and less like to own their own home roughli 3445 across
the three crime type their net worth as per the ratio of asset to liabil
wa remark low 70007000 for credit fraud 20003500 for mail
fraud 40005000 for fals claim
outsid hierarchi
bank embezzl
these offend were place outsid the rank becaus thei were
dramat younger a mean ag of 31 and more like to be femal 448
female552 male than the other gr oup while nearli 25 of the low
statu group wa unemploi at the time of their crime onli 3 of
embezzl were without a job just slightli abov the 28 rate for high
statu offend thei ar the group least like to have a colleg degre
129 or to own their own home 284 their median net worth wa
2000 in asset with 3000 in liabil male embezzl were usual
manag of a local bank oper while femal were most often teller
or cleric worker
howev difficult it mai prove to be to sort out the demographi of crime the strength of
the analysi li in it trace of the path of crimin through the feder system follow
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4411
their core group from offens to convict the author report on gener trend in the
treatment and sentenc of whitecollar crimin the most surpris conclus state
that peopl of higher social statu onc convict ar more like than similar offend to
receiv prison time and to be fine
cooper defend
some standard assumpt still appli for exampl inform on on cohort doe help
over 42 percent of cooper defend were charg with a singl violat while onli
30 percent of uncoop defend were so lucki also whitecollar defend receiv
bail rather easili just on person in eight spend ani time incarcer befor trial and for
the gener highstatu antitrust defend the figur is fewer than on in 20 by
comparison in a control group of common crimin ie peopl convict of the
nonviol econom crime of postal theft or postal fraud at least 13 of the defend
spent time in jail befor go to trial
plea by whitecollar defend
whitecollar defend ar more like to insist on a trial than other offend in at least 90
percent of feder case defend will plead guilti avoid the expens and effort of a
trial but over 18 percent of defend in the crime sampl as oppos to the usual ten
percent pled not guilti in case like bank embezzl usual simpl case with
clear evid plea bargain ar easili negoti and prosecutor mai activ seek guilti
plea 14 the decis on how to plead vari with the offend as much as the offens for
exampl femal bank teller were especi prone to plead not guilti while mani of the
male embezzlersgener higherlevel offici involv in more complex crime
proceed to trial of all whitecollar defend secur offend ar the on most
like to insist on their dai in court evid both the govern and the defend in
these case feel more strongli about their chanc to win
judgment
judgment against whitecollar defend often involv an assess of person suffer
it is wide held that when convict of a crime these peopl suffer a greater blow
13 postal theft and postal forgeri were select as econom crime without a direct link to violenc other
common crime such as burglari or larceni ar state offens and thu ar not appropri to thi studi of
the feder system postal theft involv act like steal governmentissu check such as welfar payment
postal forgeri involv the act of cash these item clearli the choic of these crime and not other for
comparison is debat
14 weisburd p 114
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4412 2011 fraud examin manual
person and profession than street crimin mani observ think thi suffer
should be acknowledg in assess a sentenc on feder judg is quot as sai
the whitecollar crimin by virt ue of hi convict ha suffer a loss of posit usual
loss of employ sometim statu in hi profess other time the abil to ever find
employ in anyth requir a fidel bond or what have you wherea the common
street crimin hasnt had a career loss of a similar natur inde in some area the
convict of a crime is some sort of a badg of matur 15
person suffer
examin psi the author found that in about 65 percent of the case overal person
suffer wa said to have plai an overwhelm role in the defend case secur
offend and embezzl top the list with 70 and 87 percent of these peopl
respect report some hardship of cours the report involv statement by the
defend or their famili which could be selfserv
and in actual look at object materialsuch as the loss of employ marit
separ and divorc or mental health problemsth author found the result
ambigu credit fraud perpetr for exampl seldom report ani suffer but
thei had a 20 percent divorc rate dure the time of their prosecut the highest in the
studi and there were often larg gap between differ type of crime compar to the
secur offend with a 70 percent rate of suffer onli about 24 percent of antitrust
offend had similar complaint the discrep mai lie in how differ crime ar
view antitrust violat who steal for their compani and actual provid the
servic thei sai thei do arent seen as harshli as those who steal from their
compani 16 secur offend ar stigmat b ecaus their crime ar often against
their own client while bank embezzl with over 87 percent report suffer ar
judg with particular strict becaus thei steal from their employ 17
in summari the author believ that the extra legal suffer of whitecollar defend ha
some valid but it not alwai possibl to be sure that prosecut alon caus the
hardship the contradictori imag of these crimin as both exception privileg and
15 weisburd p 116
16 weisburd p 124
17 weisburd p 125
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4413
especi harass overst their real experi in the legal system neither factor is as
great as the standard rhetor might suggest
imprison
crime doe find that the highest statu groupan titrust violat were the least like to
receiv prison time about 1 in 5 and to draw the shortest sentenc 18 month secur
fraud led the group with over 67 percent do time follow by tax fraud 589 percent
and mail fraud 551 percent but in consid all offend in all group the author
discov that the higher an individu statu the more like the person wa to be
imprison all els be equal doctor will have about a 30 percent greater likelihood of
be imprison for a whitecollar crime than truck driver and almost a 13 percent
greater likelihood than manag 18 judg seem to find peopl of higher prestig more at
fault or in other word more blameworthi in the commiss of their crime
on remark variabl in determin the sever of punish wa where the case wa
tri the district of maryland northern illinoi and northern texa tend toward
harsher sentenc northern georgia and southern new york hand down the lightest
on
more often than prison the punish of choic for whitecollar crimin is the
imposit of fine wherea 6 percent of the common crimin in the survei receiv
fine all of the antitrust violat did embezz ler were the least like group to be fine but
even so their 15 percent rate far exceed the norm for fine as well as imprison
higher statu usual meant a higher penalti analysi show that white defend those
with more impecc record and those who have higher class posit ar more like to
be fine 19 but while the decis to fine seem base on statu the actual levi ar often
compar low for antitrust suit the mean fine wa 9808 for embezzl it wa
just 1397 even welloff offend got off light a man convict of fix the price of
candi bar in an eastern state with a net worth exceed 190000 wa fine 3500
anoth defend whose net worth approach 14 million wa fine 5000 for credit
fraud onli 4 percent of offend were ever given the statut maximum penalti
18 weisburd p 143
19 weisburd p 157
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4414 2011 fraud examin manual
obvious most whitecollar crime dont even approach the billiondollar level of the
stereotyp an accur pictur actual look rather mundan for everi truli complic
and rarifi offens accord to wheeler and hi colleagu there ar mani other that
ar simpl and could be carri out by almost anyon who can read write and give an
outward appear of stabil 20 more than anyth els more than statu or class
posit or heritag the whitecollar crimin need an opportun and some sort
of organ
contribut factor
the author posit sever factor which have contribut to the rise problem of
econom crime
america economi increasingli run on credit which often mean rise person debt
the offend in the sampl often show seriou discrep between their
resourc and their commit 21
new inform technolog mean that the opportun for wrongdo is grow
and mani of the techniqu ar not wide comprehend by busi or individu
govern program distribut larg amount of monei make an entic target
for defalc
the import of credenti in a profession societi mai influenc individu to
inflat the credenti or to make them up when thei do not exist thi tendenc
involv everyth from cheat on school entranc exam to falsifi
credit applic
most broadli the author observ an american cultur base on affluenc and ever
higher level of success the continu pressur of a valu system that reward
econom affluenc or it visibl byproduct ha it effect on the broad middl of
american societi 22 televis and advertis in gener promis that no on ha to
settl for second best prompt those who find themselv run behind to fudg
the differ cross ethic and sometim legal line
conclus
curb thi pernici trend will not be easi but there ar wai sinc organiz
opportun determin so much crimin activ the foremost deterr is to pai
heighten attent to where the monei is and how it flow within ani group obvious
20 weisburd p 171
21 weisburd p 183
22 weisburd p 184
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4415
most busi have some system of financi control but the author sai that
organiz intellig is often less than stellar offend ar not usual the highli
sophist swindler from the mass media just averag peopl in a financi jam who
see a wai out through fraud 23
furthermor like mani analyst these dai the crime team believ it is far too easi to
acquir monei and good on credit tighten the restrict on credit card and loan
would directli address the role that debt plai in mani scheme
final these author center the problem of whitecollar crime around valu as long as the
place where citizen learn their prioriti school famili neighborhood mass media
emphas highpressur risktak and materi affluenc over honesti and moral
integr mani peopl will go for the gold even if thei have to steal it it will never be easi
thei acknowledg to balanc a marketbas economi which requir competit with an
equal insist on forthright and fair plai
23 weisburd p 190
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4501
