2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


SOURCES OF INFORMATION 
 
When external documents are needed, fraud examiners should consider accessing public and 
non-public records, commercial databases, the Internet, and other valuable sources. 
 
There is a surprising amount of information about both individuals and businesses that can 
be accessed without a subpoena or other legal process. For instance, there is an enormous 
amount of information contained in public records.  
 
This chapter explains the difference between public and non-public records and summarizes 
some important rules governing the availability of certain types of information. It also 
explains some of the different types of information available and how each type of 
information can be used in a fraud examination. Moreover, this chapter outlines where to 
find popular types of records kept by local, state, and federal sources.  
 
The fraud examiner must be certain that information obtained is done so legally. Records 
from confidential sources generally cannot be introduced as evidence; in criminal cases, 
illegally obtained documentary evidence falls under the exclusionary rule (see the Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual ). In civil cases, using illegally obtained documentation 
might give rise to tort actions or other sanctions against the fraud examiner. Following is a 
list of information available from city, county, state, and federal agencies. 
 
 



:


sourc of inform
when extern document ar need fraud examin should consid access public and
nonpubl record commerci databas the internet and other valuabl sourc
there is a surpris amount of inform about both individu and busi that can
be access without a subpoena or other legal process for instanc there is an enorm
amount of inform contain in public record
thi chapter explain the differ between public and nonpubl record and summar
some import rule govern the avail of certain type of inform it also
explain some of the differ type of inform avail and how each type of
inform can be us in a fraud examin moreov thi chapter outlin where to
find popular type of record kept by local state and feder sourc
the fraud examin must be certain that inform obtain is done so legal record
from confidenti sourc gener cannot be introduc as evid in crimin case
illeg obtain documentari evid fall under the exclusionari rule see the law
section of the fraud examin manual in civil case us illeg obtain document
might give rise to tort action or other sanction against the fraud examin follow is a
list of inform avail from citi counti state and feder agenc
