2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Public Versus Non-Public Records/Public Records


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Public Records 
Public records  are documents that a governmental agency is required to keep by law or that are 
necessary to discharge the duties imposed by law. Each agency or governmental unit is 
responsible for many different functions that may require them to maintain unique 
information.  
 
Public records, which are available to anyone who wishes to use them, can be useful for a 
number of reasons. They can supply invaluable background information on employees, 
suspects, and witnesses. Public records can also be used to corroborate or refute witness 
statements, can help investigators track the flow of stolen cash or other assets, and can be 
extremely important in a company’s efforts to recover losses. 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.402   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Public records can be searched manually or online through governmental agency websites 
and online public databases. There also are many commercial search firms that will search 
public records and otherwise conduct an asset search for a fee. Business and commercial 
indexes, such as D&B (formerly Dun & Bradstreet) and Dow Jones Business Information 
Services, also can be searched for business credit and other information. But accessing 
public records through a third-party service can trigger certain notice requirements under the 
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). The impact of the FCRA is discussed below. 
 
Examiners should be prepared to answer the who, what, where, and how of public record 
research to conduct the investigation. The following items are essential to a records 
investigation of an individual: 
• Name 
• Date of birth 
• Social Security number 
• Last known address 
 
The better informed you are about the subject you are investigating, the easier your search 
will be. For investigating individuals, some of the issues at the outset include: 
• What is the person’s full name? 
• Do you have a last name only? Is that na me so common that your search will return 
thousands of possibilities (14,000 Smiths)? What are some ways of narrowing possible 
first names for the individual? 
• What is the person’s approximate age or date of birth?  
• Does the person have criminal background?  
• Has the person been sued or sued someone?  
• Has the person owned a business?  
• Does the person have tax liens?  
• Does the person have a professional license (contractor, accountant)?  
 
For investigating businesses, some of the issues at the outset include: 
• Is the business incorporated? 
• Where does the company do business?  
• What type of business is it?  
• Has the business sued or been sued?  
• Does the business have real property?  
• Does the company finance equipment?  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.403 
• Does the company charge sales tax?  
• How long has the company been in business?  
 



:


public record
public record ar document that a government agenc is requir to keep by law or that ar
necessari to discharg the duti impos by law each agenc or government unit is
respons for mani differ function that mai requir them to maintain uniqu
inform
public record which ar avail to anyon who wish to us them can be us for a
number of reason thei can suppli invalu background inform on employe
suspect and wit public record can also be us to corrobor or refut wit
statement can help investig track the flow of stolen cash or other asset and can be
extrem import in a compani effort to recov loss
sourc of inform investig
3402 2011 fraud examin manual
public record can be search manual or onlin through government agenc websit
and onlin public databas there also ar mani commerci search firm that will search
public record and otherwis conduct an asset search for a fee busi and commerci
index such as db formerli dun bradstreet and dow jone busi inform
servic also can be search for busi credit and other inform but access
public record through a thirdparti servic can trigger certain notic requir under the
fair credit report act fcra the impact of the fcra is discuss below
examin should be prepar to answer the who what where and how of public record
research to conduct the investig the follow item ar essenti to a record
investig of an individu
name
date of birth
social secur number
last known address
the better inform you ar about the subject you ar investig the easier your search
will be for investig individu some of the issu at the outset includ
what is the person full name
do you have a last name onli is that na me so common that your search will return
thousand of possibl 14000 smith what ar some wai of narrow possibl
first name for the individu
what is the person approxim ag or date of birth
doe the person have crimin background
ha the person been su or su someon
ha the person own a busi
doe the person have tax lien
doe the person have a profession licens contractor account
for investig busi some of the issu at the outset includ
is the busi incorpor
where doe the compani do busi
what type of busi is it
ha the busi su or been su
doe the busi have real properti
doe the compani financ equip
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3403
doe the compani charg sale tax
how long ha the compani been in busi
