2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Laws Governing Access to Information/Driver’s Privacy Protection Act


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Driver’s Privacy Protection Act  
In 1999, Congress made significant changes to the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act of 1994 
(18, U.S.C., § 2721). The law bars states from  releasing drivers’ Social Security numbers, 
photographs, or certain other information unless they obtain “the express consent” of each 
person in advance. Before the 1999 amendments, drivers could “opt out” and ask that their 
information not be released. Under the law, however, drivers are under an “opt in” system 
that requires their express authorization of the release of information. Although the law was 
challenged, the U.S. Supreme Court, in January 2000, upheld the constitutionality of the 
amendments. 
 
These amendments make it extremely difficult to obtain up-to-date information from state 
motor vehicle departments. Such information can only be obtained if the driver has 
expressly consented to its release. Therefore, companies may wish to consider having 
employees sign a consent form as early as the employment application stage. For example, 
the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act does not prohibit the use of motor vehicle records 
(MVR) for pre-employment screening, but the state can only release the records with the 
driver’s consent.  
 



:


driver privaci protect act
in 1999 congress made signific chang to the driver privaci protect act of 1994
18 usc 2721 the law bar state from releas driver social secur number
photograph or certain other inform unless thei obtain the express consent of each
person in advanc befor the 1999 amend driver could opt out and ask that their
inform not be releas under the law howev driver ar under an opt in system
that requir their express author of the releas of inform although the law wa
challeng the us suprem court in januari 2000 upheld the constitution of the
amend
these amend make it extrem difficult to obtain uptod inform from state
motor vehicl depart such inform can onli be obtain if the driver ha
expressli consent to it releas therefor compani mai wish to consid have
employe sign a consent form as earli as the employ applic stage for exampl
the driver privaci protect act doe not prohibit the us of motor vehicl record
mvr for preemploy screen but the state can onli releas the record with the
driver consent
