2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Federal Government Records/Bankruptcy Court Records


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Bankruptcy Court Records 
Bankruptcy proceedings are conducted in federal bankruptcy courts. In these courts, all 
documents filed with the court are public record and can be examined by anyone without 
charge. These on-site federal court records may include the case number, debtor’s name(s), 
Social Security number, address, filing date, chapter designation, and closure date. The 
search is available for all federal jurisdictions, usually covering a seven-year span that starts 
from the present and moves backward. 
 
Bankruptcy documents are usually located in the federal bankruptcy court for the district 
where the debtor resided or had his principal place of business. When checking bankruptcy 
court records, the examiner should remember to check not only the individual or business 
filing for bankruptcy, but also any related businesses, principals, employees, or relatives. 
 
A bankruptcy is initiated by the filing of a bankruptcy petition. The petition can be either 
voluntary or involuntary. Three or more creditors who have outstanding claims that have not 
been paid can file an involuntary petition. 
 
Specifically, a bankruptcy file typically contains the following documents: 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.429 
• Bankruptcy petition : The bankruptcy petition contains type of bankruptcy 
(voluntary/involuntary, Chapter 7, Chapter 11, etc.); Social Security number or tax ID 
number; street address and primary place of business; location of principal assets of 
business; type of business; name of attorney; estimated amount of assets; estimated 
number of creditors, liabilities, and employees; financial data; and a list of shareholders 
• Proof of claim forms : Proof of claim forms are filed by creditors listing the amounts they are 
owed by the debtor.  
• Trustee’s final report : The final report is filed by a trustee when a case is concluded; it 
shows which claims were paid.  
• Trustee’s final account : Trustee’s must also file a final a ccount of the administration of the 
estate. This account will also show which claims were paid.  
• Schedule A : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the debtor’s real 
property. 
• Schedule B : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the debtor’s personal 
property, including tangible property (e.g., jewelry and vehicles) and intangible property 
(e.g., investments and accounts receivable). 
• Schedule C : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes the property that the debtor 
is claiming as exempt from being used to satisfy claims. 
• Schedule D : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the secured debts the 
debtor owes (e.g., mortgages).  
• Schedule E : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the debtor’s priority 
debts (the Bankruptcy Code gives certain unsecured creditors priority, such as those 
owed wages, contributions to pension plans, taxes owed to governmental entities, etc.) 
• Schedule F : Filed by the debtor, this form describes unsecured, non-priority claims owed 
by the debtor.  
• Schedule G : Filed by the debtor, this form describes any leases and executory contracts 
(i.e., contracts that have not been fully performed) to which the debtor is a party.  
• Schedule H : This form is filed by the debtor, and it  describes all co-debtors that might be 
affected by the debtor’s bankruptcy.  
• Schedule I : Filed by the debtor, this form describes the debtor’s current income. 
• Schedule J : Filed by the debtor, this form describes the debtor’s current monthly 
expenditures. 
• Statement of financial affairs : This form is filed by the debt or, and it describes the debtor’s 
legal, economic, and business transactions prior to filing. It is a listing of all recent 
sources of income; payments to creditors;  lawsuits; repossessions or foreclosures; 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.430   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
assignments; gifts; losses; financial accounts; safe deposit box es; prior addresses; financial 
statements; inventories; and current and former officers, directors, and shareholders 
• Bankruptcy plan : The bankruptcy plan is a detailed account of how the creditor’s claims 
will be resolved. 
 
The bankruptcy file may also contain transcripts of depositions or interviews. If fraud was 
suspected, the trustee may have conducted a fraud investigation. Check with the trustee to 
find out if any investigations were conducted. 
 



:


bankruptci court record
bankruptci proceed ar conduct in feder bankruptci court in these court all
document file with the court ar public record and can be examin by anyon without
charg these onsit feder court record mai includ the case number debtor name
social secur number address file date chapter design and closur date the
search is avail for all feder jurisdict usual cover a sevenyear span that start
from the present and move backward
bankruptci document ar usual locat in the feder bankruptci court for the district
where the debtor resid or had hi princip place of busi when check bankruptci
court record the examin should rememb to check not onli the individu or busi
file for bankruptci but also ani relat busi princip employe or rel
a bankruptci is initi by the file of a bankruptci petit the petit can be either
voluntari or involuntari three or more creditor who have outstand claim that have not
been paid can file an involuntari petit
specif a bankruptci file typic contain the follow document
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3429
bankruptci petit the bankruptci petit contain type of bankruptci
voluntaryinvoluntari chapter 7 chapter 11 etc social secur number or tax id
number street address and primari place of busi locat of princip asset of
busi type of busi name of attornei estim amount of asset estim
number of creditor liabil and employe financi data and a list of sharehold
proof of claim form proof of claim form ar file by creditor list the amount thei ar
ow by the debtor
truste final report the final report is file by a truste when a case is conclud it
show which claim were paid
truste final account truste must also file a final a ccount of the administr of the
estat thi account will also show which claim were paid
schedul a thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the debtor real
properti
schedul b thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the debtor person
properti includ tangibl properti eg jewelri and vehicl and intang properti
eg invest and account receiv
schedul c thi form is file by the debtor and it describ the properti that the debtor
is claim as exempt from be us to satisfi claim
schedul d thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the secur debt the
debtor ow eg mortgag
schedul e thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the debtor prioriti
debt the bankruptci code give certain unsecur creditor prioriti such as those
ow wage contribut to pension plan tax ow to government entiti etc
schedul f file by the debtor thi form describ unsecur nonprior claim ow
by the debtor
schedul g file by the debtor thi form describ ani leas and executori contract
ie contract that have not been fulli perform to which the debtor is a parti
schedul h thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all codebtor that might be
affect by the debtor bankruptci
schedul i file by the debtor thi form describ the debtor current incom
schedul j file by the debtor thi form describ the debtor current monthli
expenditur
statement of financi affair thi form is file by the debt or and it describ the debtor
legal econom and busi transact prior to file it is a list of all recent
sourc of incom payment to creditor lawsuit repossess or foreclosur
sourc of inform investig
3430 2011 fraud examin manual
assign gift loss financi account safe deposit box es prior address financi
statement inventori and current and former offic director and sharehold
bankruptci plan the bankruptci plan is a detail account of how the creditor claim
will be resolv
the bankruptci file mai also contain transcript of deposit or interview if fraud wa
suspect the truste mai have conduct a fraud investig check with the truste to
find out if ani investig were conduct
