2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Investigative and Law Enforcement Information Centers and Databases/International Criminal Police Organization Case Tracking System


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


International Criminal Police Organization Case Tracking System 
The International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) Case Tracking Systems 
(ICTS), located at the U.S. National Central Bureau (USNCB) in Washington, D.C., contains 
information about people, property, and organizations involved in international criminal 
activity. The USNCB can determine the history of an international connection in an 
investigation or the existence of any previous international criminal activity. The USNCB 
operates to provide international support for U.S. law enforcement. 
 
Sixteen federal and state law enforcement agencies are represented at the USNCB, and all 50 
states have established INTERPOL liaison offices. Agencies represented at the USNCB 
include the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; Environmental 
Protection Agency; Drug Enforcement Administ ration; Federal Bureau of Investigation; 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement; Transportation Security Administration; U.S. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.483 
Coast Guard; Bureau of Customs and Border Protection; U.S. Marshals Service; U.S. 
Department of Defense; U.S. Department of State; U.S. F ood and Drug Administration; 
U.S. Postal Inspection Service;  and U.S. Secret Service. 
 



:


intern crimin polic organ case track system
the intern crimin polic organ interpol case track system
ict locat at the us nation central bureau usncb in washington dc contain
inform about peopl properti and organ involv in intern crimin
activ the usncb can determin the histori of an intern connect in an
investig or the exist of ani previou intern crimin activ the usncb
oper to provid intern support for us law enforc
sixteen feder and state law enforc agenc ar repres at the usncb and all 50
state have establish interpol liaison offic agenc repres at the usncb
includ the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos environment
protect agenc drug enforc administ ration feder bureau of investig
us immigr and custom enforc transport secur administr us
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3483
coast guard bureau of custom and border protect us marshal servic us
depart of defens us depart of state us f ood and drug administr
us postal inspect servic and us secret servic
