2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Online Public Database Searches/Using an Online Database to Find Information


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Using an Online Database to Find Information 
In the past, investigators hot on the heels of an asset-hider or suspect were hamstrung by the 
available investigative resources. In attempting to uncover unreported income, the 
investigator was forced to travel to the courthouse for the county in which the suspect 
conducted business, request the county files available, and take a number. These treks to  
the middle-of-nowhere were rarely cost-effective and were often fruitless in the search for 
pertinent information. 
 
This has all changed, however, and now maybe the flatfoot’s feet won’t be so flat. Thanks to 
the advent of online investigative services, such as LexisNexis, inquiries to the far-flung 
reaches of the United States can be conducted from a personal computer. These services 
have packaged a variety of invaluable investigative sources at very reasonable prices. 
 
Access to these services is accomplished in either one of two ways. Some services allow 
users to log in through an Internet site. Others provide access to their database through a 
software program and a modem. Each user has a user ID and password to gain access. 
 
The following is a description of how online searches can be used to conduct background 
checks and locate people, assets, and legal records. 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.518   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


us an onlin databas to find inform
in the past investig hot on the heel of an assethid or suspect were hamstrung by the
avail investig resourc in attempt to uncov unreport incom the
investig wa forc to travel to the courthous for the counti in which the suspect
conduct busi request the counti file avail and take a number these trek to
the middleofnowher were rare costeffect and were often fruitless in the search for
pertin inform
thi ha all chang howev and now mayb the flatfoot feet wont be so flat thank to
the advent of onlin investig servic such as lexisnexi inquiri to the farflung
reach of the unit state can be conduct from a person comput these servic
have packag a varieti of invalu investig sourc at veri reason price
access to these servic is accomplish in either on of two wai some servic allow
user to log in through an internet site other provid access to their databas through a
softwar program and a modem each user ha a user id and password to gain access
the follow is a descript of how onlin search can be us to conduct background
check and locat peopl asset and legal record
access inform onlin investig
3518 2011 fraud examin manual
