2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Hacking/Definition


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Definition 
Hacking is basically breaking into computers and telecommunications systems by learning 
the vulnerabilities of various hardware and software, and using a computer to systematically 
“guess” the user’s system identification and password.  
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1806                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Hackers use various “rogue” software applications to penetrate a system, or sometimes they 
enlist the help of the user surreptitiously by installing a program that is downloaded via an e-
 mail or by visiting a website. These programs operate in the background of the infected 
computer and can disable security settings and capture information that is sent back to  
the hacker. 
 
But, the most direct way of gaining access to a computer is to use someone else’s password 
or generate (without authorization) a password of one’s own. Passwords are designed to 
keep computers safe. If you don’t know the password, the machine will not run. However, 
most users choose passwords that, while not easy to crack, follow certain patterns. People 
usually pick something familiar and easy as their password. A deep-sea fisherman uses 
“marlin”; the man’s secretary, who received a mug about “soaring with the eagles and 
working with turkeys” from her boss last Christmas, uses “turkey” as her password. There 
are lists circulated among hackers of the most likely passwords.  
 
If the hacker knows or can learn something about his target, his job is even easier. That 
fisherman, for example, probably has a huge marlin mounted on his wall. It’s located directly 
in the man’s line of sight as he logs on each morning; it’s a good guess this guy will have 
“marlin” or “reel” or something else fishy in his password. A simple lesson here: real-word 
passwords, even in variation, are not secure. The safest passwords combine letters, numbers, 
and other special characters, such as punctuation. 
 



:


definit
hack is basic break into comput and telecommun system by learn
the vulner of variou hardwar and softwar and us a comput to systemat
guess the user system identif and password
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11806 2011 fraud examin manual
hacker us variou rogu softwar applic to penetr a system or sometim thei
enlist the help of the user surreptiti by instal a program that is download via an e
mail or by visit a websit these program oper in the background of the infect
comput and can disabl secur set and captur inform that is sent back to
the hacker
but the most direct wai of gain access to a comput is to us someon els password
or gener without author a password of on own password ar design to
keep comput safe if you dont know the password the machin will not run howev
most user choos password that while not easi to crack follow certain pattern peopl
usual pick someth familiar and easi as their password a deepsea fisherman us
marlin the man secretari who receiv a mug about soar with the eagl and
work with turkei from her boss last christma us turkei as her password there
ar list circul among hacker of the most like password
if the hacker know or can learn someth about hi target hi job is even easier that
fisherman for exampl probabl ha a huge marlin mount on hi wall it locat directli
in the man line of sight as he log on each morn it a good guess thi gui will have
marlin or reel or someth els fishi in hi password a simpl lesson here realword
password even in variat ar not secur the safest password combin letter number
and other special charact such as punctuat
