2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Electronic Mail/Organizational Liability


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Organizational Liability 
As with any communications media, legal issues of the Internet are emerging at a rapid rate, 
with a lot of discussion, but are of limited consensus so far. It can be said that employers do 
have some liability for how employees use a company’s e-mail system. The issues are similar 
to an employee’s use of the company telephone, the company postage meter, the company 
vehicle, and so on.  
 
The best general advice is to exercise some caution when dealing with an e-mail system. 
Within the company, e-mail can become a vehicle for sexual harassment, for creating a 
hostile work environment, or setting up gambling pools. Outside the company, employees 
can use e-mail to operate their own businesses or to send out fabricated messages in the 
name of other employees or their employer. Some employers monitor their e-mail systems, 
which presents legal issues, such as invasion of privacy. E-mail has also been used to gather 
evidence against employers or employees. Of course, there are no more dangers and pitfalls 
of e-mail than there are of any form of communications, whether inside or outside the 
organization. The telephone and postal systems are just as capable of such problems. 
 
As with any potential liability issue, employers must set guidelines for the proper internal and 
external use of e-mail, just as they would for the proper use of the company telephone, 
stationery and postage, vehicles, and so on. For instance, the organization should have a 
policy reminding employees in writing that e-mail must not be used to send inappropriate 
and unprofessional messages, including: 
• Harassing other users of the system. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1816                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Consuming unreasonable amounts of available resources. 
• Intentionally sending other users viruses. 
• Evading software licensing or copying mechanisms. 
• Crashing/disrupting system services. 
• Impersonating another user anywhere on the Internet. 
• Bypassing system security mechanisms. 
• Translating encrypted material without authorization. 
• Eavesdropping on other e-mail interactions. 
• Using the system for any personal gain either monetarily or politically unless permitted 
by the organization. 
 
A number of prominent liability law firms recommend some monitoring of e-mail, but this 
decision should not be taken lightly and not just because of employee’s privacy concerns. 
For instance, the fact that the company does try to monitor e-mail may be used against the 
company when something slips through that monitoring. 
 
Due to rapid growth of the Internet and e-mail, there is a great deal of uncertainty in the law. 
Organizations may want to seek legal counsel in establishing proper use guidelines and 
before taking disciplinary action against employees because of alleged abuses. 
 
 



:


organiz liabil
as with ani commun media legal issu of the internet ar emerg at a rapid rate
with a lot of discuss but ar of limit consensu so far it can be said that employ do
have some liabil for how employe us a compani email system the issu ar similar
to an employe us of the compani telephon the compani postag meter the compani
vehicl and so on
the best gener advic is to exercis some caution when deal with an email system
within the compani email can becom a vehicl for sexual harass for creat a
hostil work environ or set up gambl pool outsid the compani employe
can us email to oper their own busi or to send out fabric messag in the
name of other employe or their employ some employ monitor their email system
which present legal issu such as invas of privaci email ha also been us to gather
evid against employ or employe of cours there ar no more danger and pitfal
of email than there ar of ani form of commun whether insid or outsid the
organ the telephon and postal system ar just as capabl of such problem
as with ani potenti liabil issu employ must set guidelin for the proper intern and
extern us of email just as thei would for the proper us of the compani telephon
stationeri and postag vehicl and so on for instanc the organ should have a
polici remind employe in write that email must not be us to send inappropri
and unprofession messag includ
harass other user of the system
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11816 2011 fraud examin manual
consum unreason amount of avail resourc
intention send other user virus
evad softwar licens or copi mechan
crashingdisrupt system servic
imperson anoth user anywher on the internet
bypass system secur mechan
translat encrypt materi without author
eavesdrop on other email interact
us the system for ani person gain either monetarili or polit unless permit
by the organ
a number of promin liabil law firm recommend some monitor of email but thi
decis should not be taken lightli and not just becaus of employe privaci concern
for instanc the fact that the compani doe try to monitor email mai be us against the
compani when someth slip through that monitor
due to rapid growth of the internet and email there is a great deal of uncertainti in the law
organ mai want to seek legal counsel in establish proper us guidelin and
befor take disciplinari action against employe becaus of alleg abus
