2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Electronic Commerce/Smart Cards


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Smart Cards 
The cost and inefficiency of manually applying encryption techniques could prevent some 
organizations from fully engaging in e-commerce activities. Fortunately, a relatively 
inexpensive solution is available in the use of smart card technology. 
 
A smart card is a credit-card sized plastic card embedded with an integrated circuit chip that 
makes it “smart.” This marriage between a convenient plastic card and a microprocessor 
allows an immense amount of information to be stored, accessed, and processed either 
online or offline. Smart cards can store several hundred times more data than a conventional 
card with a magnetic stripe. The information or application stored in the IC chip is 
transferred through an electronic module that interconnects with a terminal or a card reader. 
A contactless smart card has an antenna coil that communicates with a receiving antenna to 
transfer information. Depending on the type of the embedded chip, smart cards can be 
either memory cards or processor cards. 
• Memory cards. Any plastic card is made “smart” by including an IC chip. But the chip 
may simply be a memory storage device. Memory cards can hold thousands of times 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1837 
more memory than a magnetic stripe card. Nevertheless, its functions are limited to basic 
applications such as phone cards. 
• Processor cards.  Smart cards with a full-fledged microprocessor on board can function 
as a processor device that offers multiple functions such as encryption, advanced security 
mechanisms, local data processing, complex calculation, and other interactive processes. 
Most stored-value cards integrated with identification, security, and information 
purposes are processor cards. Only processor cards are truly smart enough to offer the 
flexibility and multifunctionality desired in e-commerce. 
 
The top three international markets in smart card production are (1) miniature subscriber 
identity modules (SIMs) that fit inside mobile phones, (2) banking cards, and (3) 
identification cards, specifically those used by governments and large corporations. 
 
Most smart cards issued today are memory cards with limited processing capabilities; 
however, modern technology is constantly making advances toward increasing these 
capabilities. 
 
 



:


smart card
the cost and ineffici of manual appli encrypt techniqu could prevent some
organ from fulli engag in ecommerc activ fortun a rel
inexpens solut is avail in the us of smart card technolog
a smart card is a creditcard size plastic card embed with an integr circuit chip that
make it smart thi marriag between a conveni plastic card and a microprocessor
allow an immens amount of inform to be store access and process either
onlin or offlin smart card can store sever hundr time more data than a convent
card with a magnet stripe the inform or applic store in the ic chip is
transfer through an electron modul that interconnect with a termin or a card reader
a contactless smart card ha an antenna coil that commun with a receiv antenna to
transfer inform depend on the type of the embed chip smart card can be
either memori card or processor card
memori card ani plastic card is made smart by includ an ic chip but the chip
mai simpli be a memori storag devic memori card can hold thousand of time
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11837
more memori than a magnet stripe card nevertheless it function ar limit to basic
applic such as phone card
processor card smart card with a fullfledg microprocessor on board can function
as a processor devic that offer multipl function such as encrypt advanc secur
mechan local data process complex calcul and other interact process
most storedvalu card integr with identif secur and inform
purpos ar processor card onli processor card ar truli smart enough to offer the
flexibl and multifunction desir in ecommerc
the top three intern market in smart card product ar 1 miniatur subscrib
ident modul sim that fit insid mobil phone 2 bank card and 3
identif card specif those us by govern and larg corpor
most smart card issu todai ar memori card with limit process capabl
howev modern technolog is constantli make advanc toward increas these
capabl
