2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Security/Logs and History Files


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Logs and History Files 
Computer systems maintain a variety of history files or logs. These logs record activity in the 
following areas: 
• Mainframe activity 
? Programs executed 
? Data files accessed 
? Date, time, and duration 
? User IDs that initiated a particular action 
? Error messages 
? Equipment malfunctions 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1845 
• Communications activity 
? User ID 
? Terminal identifier 
? Dial-in port identifier 
? Date, time, and duration 
? Error messages 
? Equipment malfunctions 
• Security software activity 
? User ID 
? Unsuccessful log-in attempts 
? Modifications to the password files and access capability 
 
These logs were originally designed to help in troubleshooting the system and correcting 
errors. These files contain a very valuable audit and fraud examination trail of system 
activity, and are now used for internal control functions. The logs should be reviewed by a 
responsible data center official and evidence should exist of this review. Many of the history 
files have a limited capacity and can be forced into wrapping if not printed periodically. 
Wrapping forces the software to record at the beginning of the file if the file is full and not 
printed out.  
 



:


log and histori file
comput system maintain a varieti of histori file or log these log record activ in the
follow area
mainfram activ
program execut
data file access
date time and durat
user id that initi a particular action
error messag
equip malfunct
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11845
commun activ
user id
termin identifi
dialin port identifi
date time and durat
error messag
equip malfunct
secur softwar activ
user id
unsuccess login attempt
modif to the password file and access capabl
these log were origin design to help in troubleshoot the system and correct
error these file contain a veri valuabl audit and fraud examin trail of system
activ and ar now us for intern control function the log should be review by a
respons data center offici and evid should exist of thi review mani of the histori
file have a limit capac and can be forc into wrap if not print period
wrap forc the softwar to record at the begin of the file if the file is full and not
print out
