2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Security/Security Software


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Security Software 
There are a number of good security software packages on the market for all mainframes 
and most minicomputers. Security packages available for PCs are less numerous. Local area 
networks have some security packages available, but still rely primarily on the individual user 
in a stand-alone mode or the mainframe security in a connected mode. The purchase and 
installation of a security package might provide a false sense of security. Most of these 
packages are designed to be installed in a phased approach because of the complexity of  
the task.  
 
These options and decisions about security software should be reviewed by management. 
For example, most mainframe security packages allow a minimum of three levels of security. 
Log mode merely logs all system access to defined programs and data files. Warn mode tells the 
user if he is accessing a program or file that is not authorized for the password he has 
employed. Activity is also logged. Fail mode will not allow a user to access defined data files 
and programs without the proper password. This is the highest level of security and the only 
one that provides adequate protection. Another very important consideration involves the 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1846                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
manual supervision of data provided by security packages, usually in the form of access logs. 
A security package needs consistent review to protect against possible violations. 
 



:


secur softwar
there ar a number of good secur softwar packag on the market for all mainfram
and most minicomput secur packag avail for pc ar less numer local area
network have some secur packag avail but still reli primarili on the individu user
in a standalon mode or the mainfram secur in a connect mode the purchas and
instal of a secur packag might provid a fals sens of secur most of these
packag ar design to be instal in a phase approach becaus of the complex of
the task
these option and decis about secur softwar should be review by manag
for exampl most mainfram secur packag allow a minimum of three level of secur
log mode mere log all system access to defin program and data file warn mode tell the
user if he is access a program or file that is not author for the password he ha
emploi activ is also log fail mode will not allow a user to access defin data file
and program without the proper password thi is the highest level of secur and the onli
on that provid adequ protect anoth veri import consider involv the
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11846 2011 fraud examin manual
manual supervis of data provid by secur packag usual in the form of access log
a secur packag need consist review to protect against possibl violat
