2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Security/Internal Controls in Computer Applications


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Internal Controls in Computer Applications 
Internal controls establish checks and balances to prevent one person from controlling the 
entire financial transaction. Competent and trustworthy employees are obviously a necessary 
element of a good internal control system. No employee with a known history of dishonesty 
should be hired.  
 
Assets and records, which can be easily appropriated or destroyed, should be physically 
safeguarded. They should be safeguarded by locks, physical security, and other methods to 
ensure that they will not be misappropriated. All accounting systems rely on proper 
documentation. Missing documentation should be  regarded as a red flag of possible fraud. 
Someone independent of the transaction must check the accounting controls. The 
knowledge that all work is checked is a powerful fraud deterrent. The elements of sound 
internal control do not change in a computerized environment. Objectives do not change, 
but techniques do. 
 



:


intern control in comput applic
intern control establish check and balanc to prevent on person from control the
entir financi transact compet and trustworthi employe ar obvious a necessari
element of a good intern control system no employe with a known histori of dishonesti
should be hire
asset and record which can be easili appropri or destroi should be physic
safeguard thei should be safeguard by lock physic secur and other method to
ensur that thei will not be misappropri all account system reli on proper
document miss document should be regard as a red flag of possibl fraud
someon independ of the transact must check the account control the
knowledg that all work is check is a power fraud deterr the element of sound
intern control do not chang in a computer environ object do not chang
but techniqu do
