2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Security/Control Techniques


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Control Techniques 
Control techniques commonly used in computerized systems are listed below. 
• One-for-one checking consists of checking each source document against a detailed list 
processed by the computer. This technique is normally used for low-volume input 
because of the cost and time involved. 
• Batch/control totals involve manually grouping transactions at the input stage and 
manually establishing a control total over the entire group. The methods used include 
document counts, item or line counts, dollar totals, and cash totals. 
• In computer sequence checking, the computer verifies the preassigned serial numbers of 
input transactions and reports missing or duplicate numbers. 
• Computer matching consists of the computer matching the input data to information 
held on the master file or suspense files. Unmatched items are reported for investigation.  
• Programmed edit checks are computer program procedures that edit data. Examples 
include: 
? Reasonableness 
? Dependency 
? Existence 
? Format 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1847 
? Mathematical accuracy 
? Range 
? Digit verification 
? Prior data matching 
• Prerecorded input is used to reduce errors during data entry.  
 



:


control techniqu
control techniqu commonli us in computer system ar list below
oneforon check consist of check each sourc document against a detail list
process by the comput thi techniqu is normal us for lowvolum input
becaus of the cost and time involv
batchcontrol total involv manual group transact at the input stage and
manual establish a control total over the entir group the method us includ
document count item or line count dollar total and cash total
in comput sequenc check the comput verifi the preassign serial number of
input transact and report miss or duplic number
comput match consist of the comput match the input data to inform
held on the master file or suspens file unmatch item ar report for investig
program edit check ar comput program procedur that edit data exampl
includ
reason
depend
exist
format
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11847
mathemat accuraci
rang
digit verif
prior data match
prerecord input is us to reduc error dure data entri
