2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Conducting an Investigation Regarding Computer Crimes/Search Warrant Affidavit Construction


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Search Warrant Affidavit Construction 
The construction of search warrants has been affected by both advancements in technology 
and the evolving nature of criminal law. Fraud examiners must now consider several 
problems not encountered before. For example, the fraud examiner must know how to write 
a warrant to seize tangible property that contains intangible evidence. Further, the fraud 
examiner must be allowed to convert that evidence into a human-readable form (i.e., 
computer storage devices such as disks or CD-ROMs, which contain information that 
cannot be viewed without the aid of some electronic device).  
 
The warrant must allow for such contingencies as the ability to seize data files pertinent to 
the case that are mixed with data files that have nothing to do with the case but reside on the 
same storage device. The warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizure of 
all computer evidence relevant to the investigation, but narrow enough to exclude all 
material that is not. This can be an extremely difficult standard to meet at times and might 
depend on the magistrate to whom the affidavit is presented. 
 
To satisfy the “particularity” requirements of the Fourth Amendment, the fraud examiner 
must be able to justify each and every item that might contain evidence. For example, stating 
that “all printers” should be seized might be considered to be overly broad unless the fraud 
examiner can justify the need for each specific printer. 
 
However, with some thought fraud examiners should be able to justify the search and 
seizure for everything that they need to complete the search for evidence. Items to be seized 
might contain any or all of the following, depending upon the nature of the fraud case: 
• Computers 
• Computer components 
• Computer peripherals 
• Word processing equipment 
• Modems 
• Monitors 
• Printers 
• Plotters 
• Optical scanners 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1853 
• Data storage devices 
? Magnetic 
? Laser 
? Optical 
? Tape 
? PCMCIA 
? ZIP or JAZ drives 
• Cables, wiring, cords 
• Storage media 
? Floppy disks 
? Hard disks 
? Magnetic tape (reels) 
? PCMCIA RAM cards 
? CD-ROM 
? Magnetic/Optical disks 
? Digital Audio Tape (DAT) 
? Personal data managers 
? Flash RAM cards (consider digital camera storage) 
? USB thumb drives 
• Computer programs 
? Operating systems 
? Application software 
? Utility programs 
? Compilers 
? Interpreters 
• Documents 
• Manuals 
• Printouts 
• File listings 
 
All related documentation should be covered by the wording of the search warrant and 
seized along with the computer system. This documentation could be critical in the analysis 
of the system hardware and software. Documents could indicate changes that have been 
made to the system that will help the fraud examiner avoid damaging the system. The fact 
that access control products have been added to the system might be a helpful piece of 
information for the fraud examiner. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1854                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


search warrant affidavit construct
the construct of search warrant ha been affect by both advanc in technolog
and the evolv natur of crimin law fraud examin must now consid sever
problem not encount befor for exampl the fraud examin must know how to write
a warrant to seiz tangibl properti that contain intang evid further the fraud
examin must be allow to convert that evid into a humanread form ie
comput storag devic such as disk or cdrom which contain inform that
cannot be view without the aid of some electron devic
the warrant must allow for such conting as the abil to seiz data file pertin to
the case that ar mix with data file that have noth to do with the case but resid on the
same storag devic the warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizur of
all comput evid relev to the investig but narrow enough to exclud all
materi that is not thi can be an extrem difficult standard to meet at time and might
depend on the magistr to whom the affidavit is present
to satisfi the particular requir of the fourth amend the fraud examin
must be abl to justifi each and everi item that might contain evid for exampl state
that all printer should be seiz might be consid to be overli broad unless the fraud
examin can justifi the need for each specif printer
howev with some thought fraud examin should be abl to justifi the search and
seizur for everyth that thei need to complet the search for evid item to be seiz
might contain ani or all of the follow depend upon the natur of the fraud case
comput
comput compon
comput peripher
word process equip
modem
monitor
printer
plotter
optic scanner
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11853
data storag devic
magnet
laser
optic
tape
pcmcia
zip or jaz drive
cabl wire cord
storag media
floppi disk
hard disk
magnet tape reel
pcmcia ram card
cdrom
magneticopt disk
digit audio tape dat
person data manag
flash ram card consid digit camera storag
usb thumb drive
comput program
oper system
applic softwar
util program
compil
interpret
document
manual
printout
file list
all relat document should be cover by the word of the search warrant and
seiz along with the comput system thi document could be critic in the analysi
of the system hardwar and softwar document could indic chang that have been
made to the system that will help the fraud examin avoid damag the system the fact
that access control product have been ad to the system might be a help piec of
inform for the fraud examin
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11854 2011 fraud examin manual
