2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Crime Laws/International Law


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


International Law 
With a global communications network such as the Internet, the odds have dramatically 
increased that a crime may have been perpetrated in a foreign nation, or that records related 
to a portion of the communications transmission may have passed through another country. 
This can cause tremendous complications for a fraud examiner attempting to pursue his 
investigation. 
 
Victims of scams originating overseas usually find themselves with virtually no recourse. 
Recent computer equipment and software scam operations in former communist nations 
have specifically targeted U.S. users. Language, communication, and distance obstacles are 
nearly insurmountable in working with foreign law enforcement officials to resolve such 
cases. In the future, greater international cooperation will be necessary to combat 
international high tech crime.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1863 
Recently, however, the U.S. has taken two substantial steps to combat the inconsistency in 
international laws pertaining to computer fraud. First, on September 29, 2006, the United 
States became a party to the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime, which “is the 
only legally binding multilateral instrument specifically addressing computer-related crime, 
helping protect citizens against computer hacking and Internet fraud, as well as crimes 
involving electronic evidence.” Parties to the Convention are committed to harmonizing 
national laws, to improving investigative techniques, and to increasing cooperation.  
 
Second, the U.S. is an active participant in the Subgroup on High-Tech Crime at G8’s Lyon 
Group, which was created “to enhance the abilities of G8 countries to prevent, investigate, 
and prosecute crimes involving computers, networked communications, and other new 
technologies.” One significant accomplishment of the Subgroup was the creation of a 
network that allows law enforcement authorities of member nations to receive rapid 
cooperation in investigating computer crime. 
 



:


intern law
with a global commun network such as the internet the odd have dramat
increas that a crime mai have been perpetr in a foreign nation or that record relat
to a portion of the commun transmiss mai have pass through anoth countri
thi can caus tremend complic for a fraud examin attempt to pursu hi
investig
victim of scam origin oversea usual find themselv with virtual no recours
recent comput equip and softwar scam oper in former communist nation
have specif target us user languag commun and distanc obstacl ar
nearli insurmount in work with foreign law enforc offici to resolv such
case in the futur greater intern cooper will be necessari to combat
intern high tech crime
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11863
recent howev the us ha taken two substanti step to combat the inconsist in
intern law pertain to comput fraud first on septemb 29 2006 the unit
state becam a parti to the council of europ convent on cybercrim which is the
onli legal bind multilater instrument specif address computerrel crime
help protect citizen against comput hack and internet fraud as well as crime
involv electron evid parti to the convent ar commit to harmon
nation law to improv investig techniqu and to increas cooper
second the us is an activ particip in the subgroup on hightech crime at g8 lyon
group which wa creat to enhanc the abil of g8 countri to prevent investig
and prosecut crime involv comput network commun and other new
technolog on signific accomplish of the subgroup wa the creation of a
network that allow law enforc author of member nation to receiv rapid
cooper in investig comput crime
