2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


ANALYZING DOCUMENTS 
 
The fraud examiner will usually obtain a great deal of documentary evidence. It is critical that 
the examiner understand the relevance of this evidence and how it should be preserved and 
presented. Always keep in mind that documents can either help or hurt a case, depending on 
which ones are presented and how they are presented. The goal is to make certain that all 
relevant documents are included, and all irrelevant documents are eliminated. Many 
examiners pay too much attention to documents. It is easy to get bogged down in detail 
when examining records and to lose sight of a simple fact: documents do not make cases; 
witnesses make cases. The documents make or break the witness. So-called paper cases often 
confuse and bore a jury. 
 
Basic procedures in handling evidence are required for it to be accepted by the court.  
Proof must be provided that the evidence is relevant and material. Evidence submitted  
must be properly identified, and it must be established that the proper chain of custody  
was maintained. 
 
The relevance of documents cannot be easily determined early in a case. For that reason, all 
possible relevant documents should be obtained. If they are not needed, they can always be 
returned. Here are a few general rules regarding the collection of documents: 
• Obtain original documents where feasible. Make working copies for review, and keep the 
originals segregated. 
• Do not touch originals any more than necessary; they might later have to undergo 
forensic analysis. 
• Maintain a good filing system for the documents. This is especially critical when large 
numbers of documents are obtained. Losing a key document is an unpardonable sin, and 
can mortally damage the case. Documents can be stamped sequentially for easy 
reference. 
 
 



:


analyz document
the fraud examin will usual obtain a great deal of documentari evid it is critic that
the examin understand the relev of thi evid and how it should be preserv and
present alwai keep in mind that document can either help or hurt a case depend on
which on ar present and how thei ar present the goal is to make certain that all
relev document ar includ and all irrelev document ar elimin mani
examin pai too much attent to document it is easi to get bog down in detail
when examin record and to lose sight of a simpl fact document do not make case
wit make case the document make or break the wit socal paper case often
confus and bore a juri
basic procedur in handl evid ar requir for it to be accept by the court
proof must be provid that the evid is relev and materi evid submit
must be properli identifi and it must be establish that the proper chain of custodi
wa maintain
the relev of document cannot be easili determin earli in a case for that reason all
possibl relev document should be obtain if thei ar not need thei can alwai be
return here ar a few gener rule regard the collect of document
obtain origin document where feasibl make work copi for review and keep the
origin segreg
do not touch origin ani more than necessari thei might later have to undergo
forens analysi
maintain a good file system for the document thi is especi critic when larg
number of document ar obtain lose a kei document is an unpardon sin and
can mortal damag the case document can be stamp sequenti for easi
refer
