2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/Obtaining Documentary Evidence


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


Obtaining Documentary Evidence 
Documentary evidence may be obtained in a number of ways. If both parties agree, it is 
possible to obtain evidence by consent. This is the preferred method. Consent can be oral or 
written. When information is obtained from possible adverse witnesses, or the target of the 
examination, it is recommended that the consent be in writing. Sample forms are contained 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.102   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
in the Appendix to the “Report Writing” chapter. In many cases, however, the investigator 
will not wish to alert the suspect to his intentions and other routes must be taken.  
 
If the evidence is owned by and in the control of the party that requests the information 
(e.g., in an employee’s desk drawers at the office), then the investigator is usually able to 
obtain the documents as required.  
 
If, however, evidence is held by other parties or in uncontrolled locations, specific legal 
action is required. Most often, the legal process used takes the form of a subpoena or other 
court order to produce the documents and records (including electronic records). Other 
forms of court orders can be used to obtain witness evidence and statements.  
  
Under no circumstances should the investigator attempt to obtain documents by other 
means, as this can lead to charges of theft, trespass, and other sanctions. Further details are 
provided in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual. 
 



:


obtain documentari evid
documentari evid mai be obtain in a number of wai if both parti agre it is
possibl to obtain evid by consent thi is the prefer method consent can be oral or
written when inform is obtain from possibl advers wit or the target of the
examin it is recommend that the consent be in write sampl form ar contain
analyz document investig
3102 2011 fraud examin manual
in the appendix to the report write chapter in mani case howev the investig
will not wish to alert the suspect to hi intent and other rout must be taken
if the evid is own by and in the control of the parti that request the inform
eg in an employe desk drawer at the offic then the investig is usual abl to
obtain the document as requir
if howev evid is held by other parti or in uncontrol locat specif legal
action is requir most often the legal process us take the form of a subpoena or other
court order to produc the document and record includ electron record other
form of court order can be us to obtain wit evid and statement
under no circumst should the investig attempt to obtain document by other
mean as thi can lead to charg of theft trespass and other sanction further detail ar
provid in the law section of the fraud examin manual
