2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/How to Obtain Handwriting Samples/Directions for Obtaining Dictated Handwriting Samples


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


Directions for Obtaining Dictated Handwriting Samples 
Dictated writing samples should be obtained by using the same types of materials as the 
evidence document: writing instrument (ball-point pen, fountain pen, pencil, etc.), paper 
(lined, unlined, size of sheet), and forms (check forms, business forms, etc.). For purposes of 
the samples, an investigator can use a genuine form of the same or similar kind, make many 
photocopies of it, and have the samples prepared on the blank copies. 
 
To help the suspect relax, begin by having him write miscellaneous innocuous text, such as 
his name, the date, and a statement as to the voluntary nature of the samples being prepared. 
This statement will also assist later in getting the samples admitted in court.  
 
Patiently dictate to the suspect the same text or text containing the same letters and 
combinations of letters of the same type (hand printed, handwritten, capital, or small letters) 
as the questioned writings on the evidence document. Do not assist the suspect in the 
spelling of words, punctuation, or grammar. 
 
Obtain one sample at a time on separate sheets or forms. Once a sample is complete, 
remove it from the suspect’s sight before the next sample is prepared. To ensure that the 
suspect’s range of normal variation is displayed, several samples of each text should  
be obtained.  
 
Be alert for any attempts to disguise normal writings, such as exaggerated slant, very rapid 
writing, very slow and awkward writing, unusually large or small writing, or bizarre letter 
formations. (See the “Natural Variation, Disguise, Distortion, and Forgeries” section.)  
 
 



:


direct for obtain dictat handwrit sampl
dictat write sampl should be obtain by us the same type of materi as the
evid document write instrument ballpoint pen fountain pen pencil etc paper
line unlin size of sheet and form check form busi form etc for purpos of
the sampl an investig can us a genuin form of the same or similar kind make mani
photocopi of it and have the sampl prepar on the blank copi
to help the suspect relax begin by have him write miscellan innocu text such as
hi name the date and a statement as to the voluntari natur of the sampl be prepar
thi statement will also assist later in get the sampl admit in court
patient dictat to the suspect the same text or text contain the same letter and
combin of letter of the same type hand print handwritten capit or small letter
as the question write on the evid document do not assist the suspect in the
spell of word punctuat or grammar
obtain on sampl at a time on separ sheet or form onc a sampl is complet
remov it from the suspect sight befor the next sampl is prepar to ensur that the
suspect rang of normal variat is displai sever sampl of each text should
be obtain
be alert for ani attempt to disguis normal write such as exagger slant veri rapid
write veri slow and awkward write unusu larg or small write or bizarr letter
format see the natur variat disguis distort and forgeri section
