2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Computer Investigations and Computer Forensics/Privacy Issues


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Privacy Issues  
Before searching and seizing an item, the examiner must determine whether an employee has 
a privacy interest in the item(s) to be searched. In every case where it becomes necessary to 
seize a computer or other device capable of storing digital evidence, the investigator should 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.709 
consult with legal counsel. It is imperative that legal counsel be involved in the seizure 
process and be knowledgeable of case law pertaining to workplace seizures.  
 
Case law governing workplace seizures in the private sector is different from case law 
governing seizures in the government workplace, but generally, it all comes down to the 
employee’s expectation of privacy. Although the Fourth Amendment constitutional right 
guarantees protection against unreasonable searches and seizures, typically, the Fourth 
Amendment does not protect private sector employees.  
 
In the private sector, disputes over unreasonable searches and seizures usually come down 
on the side of the corporation. The case law in the private sector tends to support the 
argument that corporations have the right to decrease the level of privacy employees can 
expect with regard to workplace searches of computers and other digital media. Thus, 
companies to adopt a written policy establishing that all computer systems (e.g., the Internet, 
e-mail communications, hardware, and files) are solely for business use and that the 
company reserves the absolute right to review, audit, and disclose all matters sent over the 
system or placed in storage. And as long as written policies are in effect that support 
management’s actions, the corporation can avoid liability for violating an employee’s right to 
privacy. 
 
Additionally, when conducting an internal investigation or inquiry into allegations of 
misconduct or illegal activities in both the private and governmental sector, it is important to 
be aware of what the employee policy protects against and what it allows. It should also be 
determined whether steps have been taken to nullify any expectations of privacy. 
 
Governmental employees, whether local, state, or federal, have been provided special 
protections that do not generally apply to employees in the private sector. In all cases where 
it becomes necessary to seize a governmental employee’s computer or other digital device, it 
is imperative that the investigator consult with the entity’s legal counsel.  
 
Bryan R. Lemons, Branch Chief of the Legal Di vision Office of Training Operations at the 
FLETC training center in Georgia, has written an excellent paper on the subject of 
governmental workplace searches and seizures, in which he summarizes a number of cases 
where the courts have rendered opinions on governmental workplace searches and seizures. 
In his paper, Mr. Lemons defined the term workplace to include those areas and items that are 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.710   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
related to work and are generally within the employer’s control, which includes file cabinets, 
desks, and computers. 
 
Case law on this issue has attempted to answer several questions. Can a government 
employee have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the workplace? If so, what standards 
should be followed to ensure that a supervisor is conducting a lawful search of an 
employee’s work space? Is there a lesser standa rd employed in the case of mere suspicion? 
 
The Supreme Court case of O’Conner v. Ortega  was the hallmark case in the argument about 
the reasonableness of searches and seizures, but there were a number of other issues that 
were decided at the lower-court level. In O’Conner, the Supreme Court held that “the 
realities of the workplace” made some exp ectations of privacy among public employees 
unreasonable when the intrusion was by a supervisor rather than a law enforcement official. 
Work-related searches, the Court found, were “m erely incident to the primary business of 
the agency,” and a warrant requirement would “seriously disrupt the routine conduct of 
business.” The Court thus held that a standard  of “reasonableness” was sufficient for work-
 related intrusions by public employers. 
 
To simplify the decision-making process when considering a workplace search, Lemons 
explains that there is a two-part analysis that will offer some guidance. The first part requires 
a determination of the employee’s reasonable ex pectation of privacy in the area to be 
searched. Second, if a reasonable expectation of privacy does exist, then any search that 
occurs in the workplace must be reasonable under the given circumstances.  
 
In United States v. Gonzalez 4, the court dealt with the search of a government employee’s 
personal belongings. In this case, the employee (Gonzalez), as a condition of employment, 
signed a paper that indicated, among other things, his personal belongings might be searched 
in an effort to discourage employee theft. Gonzalez worked at a military exchange. He was 
stopped one day during his departure from the store and his backpack was searched by store 
security. The search revealed that Gonzalez’s backpack contained merchandise stolen from 
the store. On appeal, Gonzalez claimed that his Fourth Amendment rights had been 
violated. The court looked to the paper that was originally signed by Gonzalez and stated 
                                                 
4  United States v. Gonzalez, 300 F.3d 1048 (9th Cir. 2002). 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.711 
that Gonzalez was put on notice that his personal belongings might be searched and as a 
result his expectation of privacy was limited by his knowledge of store policy. 
 
In Gossmeyer v. McDonald, the court dealt with the question of whether there was a reasonable 
expectation of privacy regarding personally purchased items that were used to store work-
 related materials in the government workplace. In this case, a local detective received an 
anonymous tip from one of Gossmeyer’s coworkers that Gossmeyer was storing illegal 
pornographic material in a storage container that was purchased at Gossmeyer’s own 
expense. The local detective relayed the information to Gossmeyer’s supervisor who 
proceeded to search Gossmeyer’s workplace, including the storage cabinet. The supervisor 
found evidence to substantiate the allegation but no charges were ever filed. Gossmeyer filed 
a lawsuit alleging that her Fourth Amendment rights had been violated by the search of her 
personal property. The court disagreed, stating that the cabinet was not merely an item of 
personal property such as a purse or briefcase brought into the workplace, but that it was 
being used to house work-related materials and therefore, the cabinet was a part of the 
workplace and not a part of her personal domain. 
 
In O’Conner, the Supreme Court ruled that it is possible to reduce the expectation of privacy 
on the part of government employees, for example, in the form of a written notice signed by 
the employee that gives the employer the right to access or inspect information stored on the 
employee’s computer. In the case of United States v. Simons,  the defendant, Simons, was found 
to have visited several illicit websites that were prohibited by agency policy. The policy 
specifically prohibited access to unlawful material and further prohibited any personal use of 
the agency’s Internet. A remote audit of the hard drive on Simons’s government-owned 
computer revealed that the computer contained several illegal images. In Simons’s challenge 
of the search under the Fourth Amendment, he claimed that his rights were violated when 
the hard drive was searched remotely. The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals held that Simons 
had no legitimate expectation of privacy because of the agency’s Internet use policy. The 
policy’s language placed employees on notice of  their diminished expectation of privacy. 
 
When determining whether to conduct a search of government-workplace computers it is 
important to determine whether a reasonable expectation of privacy exists. To answer that 
question, one must look at whether there was a prior notice that diminishes the expectation. 
One can also look at the policy practices of the agency. Having a policy and only selectively 
enforcing it tends to diminish the policy to the point that it may not negate the privacy 
expectation. One must also look to the openness and accessibility of the workplace to other 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.712   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employees. Finally, was there a written waiver of the employee’s expectati on of privacy? If an 
expectation of privacy does not exist, then the Fourth Amendment will not apply. If it is 
determined that an expectation of privacy does exist, then what is the purpose behind the 
search? Is it a work-related search, such as looking for a missing file, or is it due to an 
allegation of misconduct? If it is a work-related  search, the search must be justified based on 
the overall circumstances; it must be justified in its inception and permissible in scope. If the 
search under these conditions is solely for the purpose of a criminal investigation, then a 
probable cause warrant will generally be necessary in addition to the employee consent. 
 
It should also be noted that personal digital devices are becoming more common in the 
workplace. Employees often carry smart phones, thumb drives, or MP3 players into the 
office. Each of these devices is capable of storing large amounts of data and can easily be 
used to steal a company’s intellectual property. Because these devices are often purchased by 
the employee for personal use, a search warrant may be needed to seize or search these 
devices because employees may have a “reasonable expectation of privacy” in these types of 
personal devices. Therefore, it is extremely important to include such devices in the 
company’s search policy. The policy should cl early state that any personal electronic devices, 
including laptops, cell phones, smart phones, thumb drives, MP3 players, and so forth, are 
(just like handbags and briefcases) subject to search if brought onto the company’s premises. 
 



:


privaci issu
befor search and seiz an item the examin must determin whether an employe ha
a privaci interest in the item to be search in everi case where it becom necessari to
seiz a comput or other devic capabl of store digit evid the investig should
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3709
consult with legal counsel it is imper that legal counsel be involv in the seizur
process and be knowledg of case law pertain to workplac seizur
case law govern workplac seizur in the privat sector is differ from case law
govern seizur in the govern workplac but gener it all come down to the
employe expect of privaci although the fourth amend constitut right
guarante protect against unreason search and seizur typic the fourth
amend doe not protect privat sector employe
in the privat sector disput over unreason search and seizur usual come down
on the side of the corpor the case law in the privat sector tend to support the
argument that corpor have the right to decreas the level of privaci employe can
expect with regard to workplac search of comput and other digit media thu
compani to adopt a written polici establish that all comput system eg the internet
email commun hardwar and file ar sole for busi us and that the
compani reserv the absolut right to review audit and disclos all matter sent over the
system or place in storag and as long as written polici ar in effect that support
manag action the corpor can avoid liabil for violat an employe right to
privaci
addition when conduct an intern investig or inquiri into alleg of
misconduct or illeg activ in both the privat and government sector it is import to
be awar of what the employe polici protect against and what it allow it should also be
determin whether step have been taken to nullifi ani expect of privaci
government employe whether local state or feder have been provid special
protect that do not gener appli to employe in the privat sector in all case where
it becom necessari to seiz a government employe comput or other digit devic it
is imper that the investig consult with the entiti legal counsel
bryan r lemon branch chief of the legal di vision offic of train oper at the
fletc train center in georgia ha written an excel paper on the subject of
government workplac search and seizur in which he summar a number of case
where the court have render opinion on government workplac search and seizur
in hi paper mr lemon defin the term workplac to includ those area and item that ar
digit forens investig
3710 2011 fraud examin manual
relat to work and ar gener within the employ control which includ file cabinet
desk and comput
case law on thi issu ha attempt to answer sever question can a govern
employe have a reason expect of privaci in the workplac if so what standard
should be follow to ensur that a supervisor is conduct a law search of an
employe work space is there a lesser standa rd emploi in the case of mere suspicion
the suprem court case of oconn v ortega wa the hallmark case in the argument about
the reason of search and seizur but there were a number of other issu that
were decid at the lowercourt level in oconn the suprem court held that the
realiti of the workplac made some exp ectat of privaci among public employe
unreason when the intrus wa by a supervisor rather than a law enforc offici
workrel search the court found were m er incid to the primari busi of
the agenc and a warrant requir would serious disrupt the routin conduct of
busi the court thu held that a standard of reason wa suffici for work
relat intrus by public employ
to simplifi the decisionmak process when consid a workplac search lemon
explain that there is a twopart analysi that will offer some guidanc the first part requir
a determin of the employe reason ex pectat of privaci in the area to be
search second if a reason expect of privaci doe exist then ani search that
occur in the workplac must be reason under the given circumst
in unit state v gonzalez 4 the court dealt with the search of a govern employe
person belong in thi case the employe gonzalez as a condit of employ
sign a paper that indic among other thing hi person belong might be search
in an effort to discourag employe theft gonzalez work at a militari exchang he wa
stop on dai dure hi departur from the store and hi backpack wa search by store
secur the search reveal that gonzalez backpack contain merchandis stolen from
the store on appeal gonzalez claim that hi fourth amend right had been
violat the court look to the paper that wa origin sign by gonzalez and state
4 unit state v gonzalez 300 f3d 1048 9th cir 2002
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3711
that gonzalez wa put on notic that hi person belong might be search and as a
result hi expect of privaci wa limit by hi knowledg of store polici
in gossmey v mcdonald the court dealt with the question of whether there wa a reason
expect of privaci regard person purchas item that were us to store work
relat materi in the govern workplac in thi case a local detect receiv an
anonym tip from on of gossmey cowork that gossmey wa store illeg
pornograph materi in a storag contain that wa purchas at gossmey own
expens the local detect relai the inform to gossmey supervisor who
proceed to search gossmey workplac includ the storag cabinet the supervisor
found evid to substanti the alleg but no charg were ever file gossmey file
a lawsuit alleg that her fourth amend right had been violat by the search of her
person properti the court disagre state that the cabinet wa not mere an item of
person properti such as a purs or briefcas brought into the workplac but that it wa
be us to hous workrel materi and therefor the cabinet wa a part of the
workplac and not a part of her person domain
in oconn the suprem court rule that it is possibl to reduc the expect of privaci
on the part of govern employe for exampl in the form of a written notic sign by
the employe that give the employ the right to access or inspect inform store on the
employe comput in the case of unit state v simon the defend simon wa found
to have visit sever illicit websit that were prohibit by agenc polici the polici
specif prohibit access to unlaw materi and further prohibit ani person us of
the agenc internet a remot audit of the hard drive on simonss governmentown
comput reveal that the comput contain sever illeg imag in simonss challeng
of the search under the fourth amend he claim that hi right were violat when
the hard drive wa search remot the fourth circuit court of appeal held that simon
had no legitim expect of privaci becaus of the agenc internet us polici the
polici languag place employe on notic of their diminish expect of privaci
when determin whether to conduct a search of governmentworkplac comput it is
import to determin whether a reason expect of privaci exist to answer that
question on must look at whether there wa a prior notic that diminish the expect
on can also look at the polici practic of the agenc have a polici and onli select
enforc it tend to diminish the polici to the point that it mai not negat the privaci
expect on must also look to the open and access of the workplac to other
digit forens investig
3712 2011 fraud examin manual
employe final wa there a written waiver of the employe expectati on of privaci if an
expect of privaci doe not exist then the fourth amend will not appli if it is
determin that an expect of privaci doe exist then what is the purpos behind the
search is it a workrel search such as look for a miss file or is it due to an
alleg of misconduct if it is a workrel search the search must be justifi base on
the overal circumst it must be justifi in it incept and permiss in scope if the
search under these condit is sole for the purpos of a crimin investig then a
probabl caus warrant will gener be necessari in addit to the employe consent
it should also be note that person digit devic ar becom more common in the
workplac employe often carri smart phone thumb drive or mp3 player into the
offic each of these devic is capabl of store larg amount of data and can easili be
us to steal a compani intellectu properti becaus these devic ar often purchas by
the employe for person us a search warrant mai be need to seiz or search these
devic becaus employe mai have a reason expect of privaci in these type of
person devic therefor it is extrem import to includ such devic in the
compani search polici the polici should cl earli state that ani person electron devic
includ laptop cell phone smart phone thumb drive mp3 player and so forth ar
just like handbag and briefcas subject to search if brought onto the compani premis
