2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Computer Investigations and Computer Forensics/Search Warrants


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Search Warrants  
If, however, a search warrant is required, additional considerations must be addressed. A 
search warrant  is a court order that grants authorities the right to search a premises or property 
for information pertinent to the case. 
 
All warrants must satisfy the requirements under the Fourth Amendment. That is, all 
warrants for searches must be judicially sanctioned and supported by “probable cause,” and 
they must “particularly” describe the place to be searched or things to be seized. Only a 
judge can issue a search warrant and only law enforcement can seek and serve a search 
warrant. 
 
To obtain a valid search warrant, law enforcement officers prepare affidavits. The affidavits 
will detail the probable cause or legal reasoning behind the request for the warrant. Often 
law enforcement personnel will need guidance from the fraud examiner as they conduct pre-
 search preparation and construct the search warrant affidavit.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.713 
But because the requirements for these affidavits have been affected by technological 
innovations, fraud examiners must consider several new issues must when constructing a 
search warrant affidavit involving digital evidence. The fraud examiner must know how to 
write a warrant to seize tangible property that contains intangible evidence. Further, the 
fraud examiner must be allowed to convert that evidence into a human-readable form (e.g., 
storage devices such as disks, which contain information that cannot be viewed without the 
aid of some electronic device). Likewise, the warrant must allow for the ability to seize data 
files pertinent to the case that are mixed with data files, which have nothing to do with the 
case but reside on the same storage device.  
 
Additionally, the warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizure of all 
computer evidence relevant to the investigation, but narrow enough to exclude all material 
that is not, and this can be an extremely difficult standard to meet at times and might depend 
on the magistrate to whom the affidavit is presented. However, with some thought fraud 
examiners should be able to justify the search and seizure of everything that they need to 
complete the search for evidence. Items to be seized might contain any or all of the 
following, depending on the nature of the fraud case: 
• Computers 
• Computer components 
• Computer peripherals 
• Word-processing equipment 
• Modems 
• Monitors 
• Printers 
• Plotters 
• Optical scanners 
• Data storage devices 
? Magnetic 
? Laser 
? Optical 
? Tape 
? PCMCIA 
? Portable drives, such as flash or thumb drives 
? Cables, wiring, cords 
? Storage media 
? Disks 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.714   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Magnetic tape (reels) 
? PCMCIA RAM cards 
? CD-ROMs 
? Magnetic/optical disks 
? Digital audio tape (DAT) 
? Personal data managers 
? Flash RAM cards (consider digital-camera storage) 
? Computer programs 
? Operating systems 
? Application software 
? Utility programs 
? Compilers 
? Interpreters 
? Documents 
? Manuals 
? Printouts 
? File listings 
 
Moreover, to satisfy the “particularity” requirement of the Fourth Amendment, the affidavit 
must be able to justify each item that might contain evidence. For example, stating that “all 
printers” should be seized might be overly broad unless the fraud examiner can justify the 
need for each specific printer. But with some thought, fraud examiners should be able to 
justify the search and seizure of everything they need to complete the search for evidence.  
 
Also, all related documentation should also be seized with the target computer system, and, 
therefore, it should be covered by the search warrant’s wording. Such documentation is 
important because it may be critical when analyzing the system’s hardware and software. 
Documents could indicate system changes that will help to avoid damaging the system. 
Documents could also contain other helpful pieces of information (e.g., the fact that access 
control products have been added to a system might be a helpful piece of information).  
 
Thus, obtaining as much intelligence as possible regarding the location of the potential 
evidence is very desirable before writing the search warrant affidavit. Considerations include: 
• Determine the type of computer systems that will be involved in the search. What 
operating system is used? Are the computers networked together? 
• Determine how many people will be needed to conduct the search.  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.715 
• If expert witnesses with a specific expertise are required during the search, identify and 
clear them before the search warrant is written. Depending on the circumstances, their 
credentials should possibly be included in the warrant affidavit before they are approved 
by the magistrate issuing the search warrant.  
• Determine the resources that will be required to conduct the search. If a great deal of 
equipment is to be seized, consider how the equipment will be transported from the 
location. Obtain sufficient boxes, labels, bags, and other supplies at this time. 
• Consider the timing of the search.  
 



:


search warrant
if howev a search warrant is requir addit consider must be address a
search warrant is a court order that grant author the right to search a premis or properti
for inform pertin to the case
all warrant must satisfi the requir under the fourth amend that is all
warrant for search must be judici sanction and support by probabl caus and
thei must particularli describ the place to be search or thing to be seiz onli a
judg can issu a search warrant and onli law enforc can seek and serv a search
warrant
to obtain a valid search warrant law enforc offic prepar affidavit the affidavit
will detail the probabl caus or legal reason behind the request for the warrant often
law enforc personnel will need guidanc from the fraud examin as thei conduct pre
search prepar and construct the search warrant affidavit
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3713
but becaus the requir for these affidavit have been affect by technolog
innov fraud examin must consid sever new issu must when construct a
search warrant affidavit involv digit evid the fraud examin must know how to
write a warrant to seiz tangibl properti that contain intang evid further the
fraud examin must be allow to convert that evid into a humanread form eg
storag devic such as disk which contain inform that cannot be view without the
aid of some electron devic likewis the warrant must allow for the abil to seiz data
file pertin to the case that ar mix with data file which have noth to do with the
case but resid on the same storag devic
addition the warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizur of all
comput evid relev to the investig but narrow enough to exclud all materi
that is not and thi can be an extrem difficult standard to meet at time and might depend
on the magistr to whom the affidavit is present howev with some thought fraud
examin should be abl to justifi the search and seizur of everyth that thei need to
complet the search for evid item to be seiz might contain ani or all of the
follow depend on the natur of the fraud case
comput
comput compon
comput peripher
wordprocess equip
modem
monitor
printer
plotter
optic scanner
data storag devic
magnet
laser
optic
tape
pcmcia
portabl drive such as flash or thumb drive
cabl wire cord
storag media
disk
digit forens investig
3714 2011 fraud examin manual
magnet tape reel
pcmcia ram card
cdrom
magneticopt disk
digit audio tape dat
person data manag
flash ram card consid digitalcamera storag
comput program
oper system
applic softwar
util program
compil
interpret
document
manual
printout
file list
moreov to satisfi the particular requir of the fourth amend the affidavit
must be abl to justifi each item that might contain evid for exampl state that all
printer should be seiz might be overli broad unless the fraud examin can justifi the
need for each specif printer but with some thought fraud examin should be abl to
justifi the search and seizur of everyth thei need to complet the search for evid
also all relat document should also be seiz with the target comput system and
therefor it should be cover by the search warrant word such document is
import becaus it mai be critic when analyz the system hardwar and softwar
document could indic system chang that will help to avoid damag the system
document could also contain other help piec of inform eg the fact that access
control product have been ad to a system might be a help piec of inform
thu obtain as much intellig as possibl regard the locat of the potenti
evid is veri desir befor write the search warrant affidavit consider includ
determin the type of comput system that will be involv in the search what
oper system is us ar the comput network togeth
determin how mani peopl will be need to conduct the search
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3715
if expert wit with a specif expertis ar requir dure the search identifi and
clear them befor the search warrant is written depend on the circumst their
credenti should possibl be includ in the warrant affidavit befor thei ar approv
by the magistr issu the search warrant
determin the resourc that will be requir to conduct the search if a great deal of
equip is to be seiz consid how the equip will be transport from the
locat obtain suffici box label bag and other suppli at thi time
consid the time of the search
