2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Forensic Examination and Analysis/User-protected Files/STEGANOGRAPHY


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


STEGANOGRAPHY 
Steganography is the process of hiding one piece of information within an apparently 
innocent file. For example, a user can use the least significant bits of a bitmap image to hide 
a message. By hiding the message in the least significant bits of an image, there is almost no 
perceivable change in the bitmap image itself. And without directly comparing the altered 
image to the original, it is practically impossible to tell that the image was altered.  
 
  
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.724   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
After a French defense contractor suspected that some of his critical designs were being 
compromised, the government conducted an invest igation. The investigation revealed that an 
employee had obtained his position at the company to steal the contractor’s trade secrets. To 
transmit the trade secrets out of the company, the employee imbedded them into graphic images 
used on the company’s public access website usin g steganography. Another party then copied the 
image files from the website and extracted the proprietary designs.  
 
Digitized audio files are another type of file that can be used to hide messages. For example, 
by encoding a message in the least significant bits of a .WAV file, a user can make the 
message almost impossible to detect. Messages can also be hidden in the unused sectors of a 
floppy disk. 
 



:


steganographi
steganographi is the process of hide on piec of inform within an appar
innoc file for exampl a user can us the least signific bit of a bitmap imag to hide
a messag by hide the messag in the least signific bit of an imag there is almost no
perceiv chang in the bitmap imag itself and without directli compar the alter
imag to the origin it is practic imposs to tell that the imag wa alter
digit forens investig
3724 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
after a french defens contractor suspect that some of hi critic design were be
compromis the govern conduct an invest igat the investig reveal that an
employe had obtain hi posit at the compani to steal the contractor trade secret to
transmit the trade secret out of the compani the employe imbed them into graphic imag
us on the compani public access websit usin g steganographi anoth parti then copi the
imag file from the websit and extract the proprietari design
digit audio file ar anoth type of file that can be us to hide messag for exampl
by encod a messag in the least signific bit of a wav file a user can make the
messag almost imposs to detect messag can also be hidden in the unus sector of a
floppi disk
