2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/TAX FRAUD/Introduction


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Tax Fraud


:


Introduction 
The most important distinction in determining whether an individual or company has 
committed tax fraud is whether the tax-filing party intentionally filed an improper tax return 
with the federal government. The intent of the party to wrongly file a return will determine 
the difference between tax avoidance and tax evasion. The U.S. courts have determined evasion 
to be unlawful, while avoidance has been deemed lawful. 
 
The definition of tax fraud is 
 
… the actual intentional wrongdoing, and the intent required … to evade a tax believed to 
be owing. Fraud implies bad faith, intentional wrongdoing, and a sinister motive. It is 
never imputed or presumed and the courts will not sustain findings of fraud upon 
circumstances which at most create only suspicion.    
 
This definition tells us that a false tax return is considered fraudulent if the responsible party 
has knowingly attempted to defraud the government of owed tax dollars. In U.S. v. 
Pomponio, the courts further refined the scope of tax fraud by stating that willfulness is “… a 
voluntary, intentional violation of a known legal duty, [that] does not require proof of an evil 
motive.” It can thus be accepted that accidental false tax returns do not qualify as fraudulent 
returns.  
 



:


introduct
the most import distinct in determin whether an individu or compani ha
commit tax fraud is whether the taxfil parti intention file an improp tax return
with the feder govern the intent of the parti to wrongli file a return will determin
the differ between tax avoid and tax evas the us court have determin evas
to be unlaw while avoid ha been deem law
the definit of tax fraud is
the actual intent wrongdo and the intent requir to evad a tax believ to
be ow fraud impli bad faith intent wrongdo and a sinist motiv it is
never imput or presum and the court will not sustain find of fraud upon
circumst which at most creat onli suspicion
thi definit tell us that a fals tax return is consid fraudul if the respons parti
ha knowingli attempt to defraud the govern of ow tax dollar in us v
pomponio the court further refin the scope of tax fraud by state that will is a
voluntari intent violat of a known legal duti that doe not requir proof of an evil
motiv it can thu be accept that accident fals tax return do not qualifi as fraudul
return
