2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Investigative and Law Enforcement Information Centers and Databases/Treasury Enforcement Communications Systems


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Treasury Enforcement Communications Systems 
The Treasury Enforcement Communications Systems (TECS) is a Department of the 
Treasury system managed by the Internal Revenue Service. TECS is a computerized 
information system designed to identify individuals and businesses suspected of, or involved 
in, a violation of federal law. TECS is also a communication system that transmits messages 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.488   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
among Treasury law enforcement offices and other federal, national, state, and local law 
enforcement agencies. 
 
TECS provides access to the FBI’s National Crime Information Center (NCIC) and the 
National Law Enforcement Telecommunication Systems (NLETS) with the capability of 
communicating directly with state and local enforcement agencies. The NLETS provides 
direct access to state motor vehicle departments.  
 
Participants include the U.S. Customs Service; Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and 
Explosives; Drug Enforcement Administration; U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services; 
Department of State; U.S. Coast Guard; Fe deral Bureau of Investigation (NCIC Section); 
U.S. Marshals Service; Internal Revenue Service; EPIC; INTERPOL (National Central 
Bureau); and Department of Agriculture. 
 
TECS works on a soundex-type system. If an inquiry is made regarding a certain name, then 
all similar sounding names on record are provided to the inquirer. Inquiries on TECS might 
be made by name alone, even if no identifying number—such as date of birth, FBI number, 
or Social Security number—is available. 
 
When TECS provides a list of similar sounding names, the subjects’ sex, race, and date of 
birth also are included. The inquirer then can determine which subject, if any, is of interest. 
If a name is selected, TECS can provide additional information, including special 
instructions (such as “armed and dangerous”), full  name, race, sex, height, weight, hair color, 
eye color, date of birth, fugitive (which agency), background information, miscellaneous 
number (such as FBI), where and by whom a warrant is held, date of offense, alias, case 
number, and NCIC number. 
 



:


treasuri enforc commun system
the treasuri enforc commun system tec is a depart of the
treasuri system manag by the intern revenu servic tec is a computer
inform system design to identifi individu and busi suspect of or involv
in a violat of feder law tec is also a commun system that transmit messag
sourc of inform investig
3488 2011 fraud examin manual
among treasuri law enforc offic and other feder nation state and local law
enforc agenc
tec provid access to the fbi nation crime inform center ncic and the
nation law enforc telecommun system nlet with the capabl of
commun directli with state and local enforc agenc the nlet provid
direct access to state motor vehicl depart
particip includ the us custom servic bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and
explos drug enforc administr us citizenship and immigr servic
depart of state us coast guard fe deral bureau of investig ncic section
us marshal servic intern revenu servic epic interpol nation central
bureau and depart of agricultur
tec work on a soundextyp system if an inquiri is made regard a certain name then
all similar sound name on record ar provid to the inquir inquiri on tec might
be made by name alon even if no identifi numbersuch as date of birth fbi number
or social secur numberi avail
when tec provid a list of similar sound name the subject sex race and date of
birth also ar includ the inquir then can determin which subject if ani is of interest
if a name is select tec can provid addit inform includ special
instruct such as arm and danger full name race sex height weight hair color
ey color date of birth fugit which agenc background inform miscellan
number such as fbi where and by whom a warrant is held date of offens alia case
number and ncic number
