2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Online Public Database Searches


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Online Public Database Searches 
Online public records databases are another source of information that can be accessed 
online. These databases are numerous and varied; they compile records from the federal, 
state, and county/local levels, and most can be readily accessed from a home computer after 
subscribing to their services. The costs associated with these databases can be equally varied. 
There are several access options available, and an examiner should be prepared to use any 
and all, separately or in combination. Keep in mind, however, that it may be necessary to 
spend time examining the actual documents to get the whole picture. 
 
A public records database will tell the researcher whether a particular record, or some of the 
information contained in that record, exists. However, note that such databases will not 
provide a copy of the actual document. For example, an examiner can conduct a property 
record search to find out that John Doe owns the property at 121 Main Street in Peoria, IL; 
however, if he needs a copy of the actual deed, he will have to retrieve it from the county 
clerk’s office. 
 
Additionally, there is a wealth of information now available on the Internet. As a caveat, 
however, remember that online records companies have to get their information from 
somewhere. Often, it comes directly from the county. But if the information in the county’s 
records was entered into the database incorrectly, then the report you will receive from the 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.516   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
database company will also be incorrect. Therefore, it is important to remember that 
accessing information online is never a full substitute for an examination of the public 
record itself. 
 
Remember, however, that if an examiner accesses certain types of information through an 
online service, he may be subject to the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), as discussed in 
the previous chapter. Again, the FCRA prohibits consumer reporting agencies from releasing 
personal information about an individual (e.g., information about the consumer’s character, 
general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living) to third parties without 
authorization, and it limits disclosure of consumer credit information, such as a subject’s 
credit history, to third parties. Thus, before accessing such information, you should always 
contact your attorney. 
 



:


onlin public databas search
onlin public record databas ar anoth sourc of inform that can be access
onlin these databas ar numer and vari thei compil record from the feder
state and countyloc level and most can be readili access from a home comput after
subscrib to their servic the cost associ with these databas can be equal vari
there ar sever access option avail and an examin should be prepar to us ani
and all separ or in combin keep in mind howev that it mai be necessari to
spend time examin the actual document to get the whole pictur
a public record databas will tell the research whether a particular record or some of the
inform contain in that record exist howev note that such databas will not
provid a copi of the actual document for exampl an examin can conduct a properti
record search to find out that john doe own the properti at 121 main street in peoria il
howev if he need a copi of the actual deed he will have to retriev it from the counti
clerk offic
addition there is a wealth of inform now avail on the internet as a caveat
howev rememb that onlin record compani have to get their inform from
somewher often it come directli from the counti but if the inform in the counti
record wa enter into the databas incorrectli then the report you will receiv from the
access inform onlin investig
3516 2011 fraud examin manual
databas compani will also be incorrect therefor it is import to rememb that
access inform onlin is never a full substitut for an examin of the public
record itself
rememb howev that if an examin access certain type of inform through an
onlin servic he mai be subject to the fair credit report act fcra as discuss in
the previou chapter again the fcra prohibit consum report agenc from releas
person inform about an individu eg inform about the consum charact
gener reput person characterist or mode of live to third parti without
author and it limit disclosur of consum credit inform such as a subject
credit histori to third parti thu befor access such inform you should alwai
contact your attornei
