2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS 
 
Employees involved in investigations of suspected fraud have certain rights and obligations, 
whether the employee is merely a bystander to the fraud who may have some information 
relevant to the investigation or is the person actually suspected of committing the fraud. 
Many of these rights and obligations, however, are not perfectly clear, and they typically vary 
from case to case, generally depending on the employee’s contractual rights, applicable laws, 
and business policies. Therefore, fraud examiners conducting investigations into suspected 
misconduct must be flexible enough to adapt quickly to the unique situations they 
encounter. 
 
 
Employee’s Duty to Cooperate 
A duty to cooperate exits in every employer/employee relationship. Some states have 
statutes defining the scope of this duty, while in others, the duty is found to be implied from 
the basic nature of the employment relationship. For instance, California Labor Code section 
2856 states that an employee “shall substantially comply with all directions of his employer 
concerning the service on which he is engaged” unless compliance is impossible, unlawful, 
or would impose unreasonable burdens on the employee.  
 
The duty to cooperate extends to workplace investigations; therefore, employees have a duty 
to cooperate during an internal investigation as long as what is requested from them is 
reasonable. 
 
What is reasonable will be determined by the facts and circumstances of the particular case 
and by the duties for which the employee was hired. For example, if inventory items were 
missing, it would probably be reasonable to request that a warehouse supervisor review 
inventory records because this falls within the scope of his work duties. It might not be 
reasonable to ask the same supervisor to review detail tapes from the company’s cash 
registers. It almost certainly would not be reasonable to ask the warehouse supervisor to let 
company investigators search his personal residence.  
 
The issue of whether an employee has a duty to cooperate often comes up when 
investigators seek to interview employees about suspected workplace misconduct. In general, 
interviews should be considered reasonable if the interview addresses matters within the 
scope of the employee’s actions or duties.  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.402  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Employee’s Rights During the Investigation 
While the employee has a duty to cooperate, the employee also has certain other rights that 
define the scope of that duty. Employee rights, however, vary from case to case, generally 
depending on the employee’s contractual rights, applicable federal and state statutes, and 
constitutional protections. Thus, before beginning any fraud examination, it is important for 
the fraud examiner to determine the employee’s rights.  
 
Contractual Rights 
An employee may have contractual rights that limit the ability of the employer to compel full 
cooperation in a fraud examination. For example, if the employee is a member of a union, 
the union contract or collective bargaining agreement might contain certain restrictions on 
the company’s investigatory procedures. For instance, the company might be required to 
notify the union before the interview, and the employee may have the right to have a union 
representative present. (See NLRB v. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. 251 [1975]). Other employees 
might have a written employment agreement, which might contain provisions concerning 
the employee’s rights during an investigation. 
 
Other employees might have a written employment agreement, which may contain 
provisions concerning the employee’s rights during an investigation. In addition, many 
courts have held that company policies, employee manuals, and past practices can create 
“implied” contractual relationships between the employer and the employee. Therefore, if 
the company deviates from these historical practices, the target of the investigation may 
claim that they were singled out and investigated differently than others in similar 
circumstances.  
 
Whistleblowers 
Federal law and many state laws provide protection to employees who report improper or 
illegal acts to government authorities. Most of these laws protect the employee from any 
adverse employment action or retaliatory action from the employer. For more information 
on whistleblower laws, see the Federal “Whistleblower” Statutes section in the “The Law 
Related to Fraud (Part 2)” chapter above.  
 
Employee’s Constitutional Rights 
The United States Constitution protects individuals from abuse of governmental power, and 
several Constitutional provisions can come into play in the course of a fraud investigation. 
The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution prohibits unreasonable searches and 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.403 
seizures. The Fifth Amendment provides that a person cannot be compelled to give 
information that might incriminate him. The Sixth Amendment provides that a person has 
the right to an attorney and to confront the witnesses against him. Additionally, while the 
Constitution contains no express guarantee of privacy, courts have found that individual 
privacy rights are implied from many of the express protections in the Bill of Rights. 
 
The general rule is that the United States Constitution only limits government action; it does 
not limit the powers of private employers in conducting a corporate investigation. That rule, 
however, is subject to several limitations, and, although a private employer usually cannot be 
sued for a violation of the Fourth, Fifth, or Sixth Amendments, these provisions still have 
important implications for the fraud investigator. 
 
Private Action Versus State Action 
For an employee to sue an employer for the violation of a constitutional right, there must be 
some form of “state action” involved. State acti on is involved during any investigation by a 
state or federal entity, including investigations of their own employees. 
 
There are no bright-line rules regarding when an investigation can be considered to involve 
state action. The following examples, however, could be considered to involve state action: 
• Investigations conducted by a private company but at the suggestion of the state or 
federal authorities 
• Investigations begun by a private company that later are taken over or expanded by state 
or federal authorities 
• Joint investigations with or aided by state or federal authorities 
• Investigations conducted by a private company that are required by state or federal law 
• Searches or interrogations conducted by outside investigators who are off-duty state, 
local, or federal authorities 
 
Investigation by a Private Company Pursuant to a Federal Statute 
If an investigation is conducted by a private company in accordance with federal laws, an 
issue is raised as to whether the corporation’s internal investigation could be considered state 
action.  
 
For example, in the case of Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives Ass’n, 489 U.S. 602 (1989), the 
U.S. Supreme Court found that a private railroad acted as an agent for the government when 
it complied with the provisions of the Federal Railroad Administration Act in administering 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.404  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
drug tests to its employees. Under the regulation at issue, the railroad was required by law to 
conduct the test and the Federal Railroad Administration was authorized to receive the test 
results. 
 
If a company is conducting an investigation pursuant to such federal laws as the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934 or the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, the company should be 
aware of the possible implications of state action. Therefore, before any adverse action is 
taken against an employee, legal advice should be obtained. 
 
Employee Protection from Polygraph Examinations 
The Employee Polygraph Protection Act prohibits the use of polygraphs by most private 
employers, unless the employer is engaged in an ongoing investigation involving economic 
loss or injury to the employer in the employer’s business and has a reasonable suspicion that 
the employee is involved in the incident. 
 
Employers subject to this Act cannot use polygraphs to screen applicants for employment, 
and they cannot discharge an employee for refusing to take an exam. This Act, however, 
does not protect government employees.  
 
In addition, some courts have found the use of polygraphs actionable on common law 
grounds under certain circumstances. For example, some state courts have held that 
polygraph tests can constitute an invasion of privacy. 
 
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) 
One of the primary statutes limiting access to information is the federal Fair Credit 
Reporting Act (FCRA). This statute regulates the dissemination of consumer information to 
third parties by consumer reporting agencies. Historically, the FCRA only applied to 
consumer credit reports, but due to amendments in 1997, the FCRA applies to the gathering 
of many other types of information about an individual through third parties. 
 
The FCRA regulates the type of information that can be contained in a consumer credit 
report; it restricts credit bureaus from releasing an individual’s credit information to any 
third parties without authorization, and it sets forth the circumstances under which a third-
 party can obtain a copy of the report. 
 
If the FCRA does apply, it means that an examiner cannot obtain certain information about 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.405 
a person unless that person has received certain notices and signed a consent form. The 
failure to do so can mean civil penalties. Also, if an examiner obtains a copy of a credit 
report, that fact will be noted on the report. 
 
Often, fraud examiners will need to obtain consumer reports for pre-employment purposes 
and workplace investigations of fraud an misconduct.  
 
For more information about the FCRA, see the Obtaining Information About Employees 
section below. 
 
 
Interviews 
 
Introduction 
Interviews, and especially admission-seeking interviews, may expose the company and the 
fraud examiner to certain legal risks. Thus, before engaging in an interview, the examiner 
must understand the ramifications of their actions, which requires an understanding of 
certain legal issues and how they limit or affect the ways in which an interview may be 
conducted. The following is an overview of some of the most common legal issues that may 
affect interview situations.   
 
And since employee rights vary from case to case, fraud examiners should always consult 
with an attorney regarding the specific laws and regulations for their state or locality. 
 
Restrictions on Employee Interviews 
In the context of an internal investigation, employees of private entities generally do not 
enjoy constitutional protections. However, they may possess contractual rights that must be 
respected during the course of an interview. For example, an employee covered by a 
collective-bargaining agreement may have the right to have a representative present during 
the interview.  
 
Thus, it is in the company’s best interest to review all aspects of the employer-employee 
relationship, including company policies, contractual relationships, and prevailing law before 
conducting the interview.   
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.406  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Employee’s Right Against Self-Incrimination 
The Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution provides that a person cannot be 
compelled to give information that may incriminate him in a criminal case. It provides:  
 
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a 
presentment or indictment of a grand jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or 
in the militia, when in actual service in time of war and public danger; nor shall any person be 
subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in 
any criminal case to be a witness ag ainst himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, 
without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use without just 
compensation. 
 
The Fifth Amendment’s right against self-incrimination contains two basic protections: it 
protects a person from being forced to give information that could be used to convict him 
of a criminal offense, and it prevents the state from punishing an employee for his silence or 
otherwise using his exercise of that right against him. 
 
Public Employers 
As stated above, constitutional protections generally only apply to public employees. This 
means that employees of federal, state, and local governments must be afforded protection 
under the Fifth Amendment. A public employer cannot fire employees for refusing to 
answer questions that might incriminate them. The leading case on this issue is Garrity v. New 
Jersey, 385 U.S. 493 (1967). In Garrity, several New Jersey police officers were threatened with 
dismissal from their jobs if they refused to answer questions relating to a conspiracy to 
obstruct traffic laws. The officers, faced with termination, answered the questions and were 
subsequently prosecuted. The U.S. Supreme Court found that the statements had been 
improperly coerced and thus they were not admissible at trial.  
 
The Fifth Amendment only protects persons against compelled  testimony. Thus, if an 
employee voluntarily confesses to a crime, they can be fired without violating their 
constitutional rights. The confession, however, must be truly voluntary; the employee cannot 
be coerced in any way to give self-incriminating evidence during an interview.  
 
If a public employer or government official wants to compel an employee to provide 
answers with potential criminal liability and administrative consequences, they may get 
written approval to offer the employee a Kalkines warning. Kalkines warnings are a form of 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.407 
immunity that precludes prosecution against the employee for statements derived from the 
compelled testimony. However, this immunity does not prevent prosecution against the 
employee where the government received evidence from a legitimate independent source, 
and it does not prevent prosecution of an employee for providing the government with false 
statements or answers. Additionally, if an employee refuses to answer questions after 
receiving a proper Kalkines warning, the public employer may take disciplinary actions, 
including dismissal.  
 
It should also be noted that the right against self-incrimination only applies in criminal cases. 
Thus, an employee — public or private — can be fired for refusing to answer a question when 
the answer will only lead to an administrative punishment or a civil suit, but not to criminal 
conviction. Furthermore, in a civil lawsuit, it is permissible to draw an adverse inference 
from the fact that an employee refused to answer an incriminating question; it is not 
permissible to draw a negative inference in a criminal case from refusal to answer such a 
question.  
 
In practice, however, it may be very difficult to draw the distinction between questions that 
will lead to criminal prosecution and those that will only lead to civil or administrative 
punishments. If an employee is compelled to answer a question and the answer provides 
evidence of criminal wrongdoing that was previously unknown, that evidence could be 
inadmissible in a subsequent criminal case. It is a better practice not to compel answers from 
public employees in any setting so that constitutional issues can be avoided.  
 
Even if a setting is deemed noncustodial and Miranda warnings are not required, this does not 
eliminate the public employee’s Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
Regardless of the setting, a public employer cannot compel its employees to choose between 
their constitutional rights and their job.  
 
Private Employers 
The Fifth Amendment generally does not apply to private employers because, in the absence 
of a state action, there is no constitutional protection against self-incrimination. Therefore, 
an employee might be subject to dismissal by a private company if he fails to cooperate in an 
investigation. However, there are situations, as discussed above, where private companies 
may be held liable for violating their employees’ constitutional rights. When there is a 
sufficient nexus between a regulated company and the government such that the private 
company essentially acts as an agent of the government, then that private company’s actions 
will be treated as actions of the government itself. In such a case, constitutional protections 
for the private company’s employees are triggered.  
 
The key to the determination is whether the private company is acting on behalf of the 
government as an agent of the government. For example, if a private entity were directed by the 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.408  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
police to interview its employees in connection with a crime, this entity would be acting as 
an agent of the police. In this situation, the private company’s employees could not be 
terminated for refusing to answer questions that might incriminate them.  
 
It should also be noted that some states have expanded the rights of private employees to 
include protections for certain constitutional rights. Thus, an interviewer should consult with 
an attorney before taking any adverse action against an employee who refuses to answer 
potentially incriminating questions.  
 
Miranda Warnings 
Designed to protect an individual’s Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination, 
Miranda warnings advice suspects that they have the right not to answer questions and the 
right to legal counsel during interrogations. Miranda warnings are required only if a person is 
being interrogated by public authorities in a custodial setting. Custodial setting refers to 
questioning initiated by law enforcement officers after a person has been taken into custody, 
or otherwise deprived of his freedom or action in any significant way. As a result, both 
private and public employers might interview employees in noncustodial settings without 
giving Miranda warnings. 
 
In subsequent civil proceedings, an adverse inference might be drawn from silence in 
response to questioning. 
 
Presence of Corporate Attorney 
Although Miranda warnings might not be required, a company’s attorney may conduct or be 
present during the interview of company employees. Because the company’s lawyer 
represents only the interests of the company and not those of the individual employee, an 
employee who is being interviewed must not be permitted — or misled — to believe that the 
company’s lawyer represents his interests during an interview. For this reason, if a corporate 
attorney is present during the interview, it is good policy to inform the employee of several 
things before the interview begins. Counsel should inform the employee of the following: 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.409 
• Counsel represents the company, not the employee. 
• The purpose of the interview is to obtain information to provide legal advice to the 
company. 
• Information provided by the employee initially will be treated as confidential, but the 
company ultimately will determine whether to disclose the information to law 
enforcement agencies. 
• The employee is expected to answer the questions fully and truthfully. 
 
The employee should not discuss the interview with anyone (either inside or outside the 
company) except his attorney. 
 
Depending on the circumstances, the attorney might also wish to advise the employee that 
he is free to retain an attorney. Factors to include in determining whether to give such advice 
include the degree of evidence of the employee’s culpability, whether the evidence is such to 
draw a conclusion concerning a violation of the law, the likelihood of criminal prosecution if 
the results of the investigation are disclosed, the existence of a conflict of interest between 
the employee and the company, and state ethical codes. 
 
Employee’s Right to Counsel 
The Sixth Amendment affords subjects in a criminal investigation the right to counsel. The 
relevant text provides:  
 
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right … to be confronted with witnesses 
against him, to have compulsory process for obta ining witnesses in his favor, and to have the 
assistance of counsel for his defense. 
 
Applicability 
If no state action is involved, a private employer can interview an employee without the 
presence of his attorney. However, the employee, an individual, always has the right to 
consult an attorney, but there is typically no legal obligation to consult the employee’s lawyer 
prior to the interview or allow the employee’s lawyer to sit in during an interview. 
 
Whether an employee will be permitted to be accompanied by a representative during an 
interview generally depends on the particular circumstances. If the employee is covered by a 
collective-bargaining agreement, for example, the terms of the agreement will generally 
control whether a representative can be present. In the absence of such circumstances, the 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.410  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
general rule is that it is at the company’s discretion whether it will allow the employee to be 
represented during an interview. 
 
Employee’s Right to Due Process 
The Fourteenth Amendment guarantees the right to due process: 
 
All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are 
citizens of the United States and of  the state wherein they reside. No state shall make or enforce 
any law, which shall abridge the privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States; nor 
shall any state deprive any person of life, libert y, or property without due process of law; nor 
deny to any person within its jurisdict ion the equal protection of the laws … 
 
In the context of a fraud investigation, the constitutional right to due process usually refers 
to procedural rights that must be observed before the employee suffers any adverse 
consequence. Again, the right to due process usually is not applicable to employees of 
private companies. State or federal employers, however, might be required to provide the 
wrongdoing employee with the following: 
• Written notice of the charges 
• Adequate opportunity to rebut any charges brought prior to any disciplinary action being 
taken, which might include the right to call witnesses and the right to be represented by 
an attorney 
 
Even in the absence of constitutional due process protections, similar procedures to ensure 
fundamental fairness may be required even of private employers because of contractual 
provisions, collective bargaining agreements, established company policies, or applicable 
labor or employment statutes. Thus, private employers might also wish to employ the above 
procedures to avoid a possible civil suit by the employee. 
 
State Constitutions 
Many states have constitutional provisions concerning self-incrimination, right to counsel, 
and due process. The law of your particular state should be examined closely. In some 
instances, state constitutions provide broader protections than the U.S. Constitution. 
 
Federal Statutes 
National Labor Relations Act 
The National Labor Relations Act prohibits any form of interrogation by employers that 
Law Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.411 
interferes with the rights of the employee to organize, bargain, or otherwise engage in 
concerted activities for the purpose of bargaining or other mutual aid or protection. An 
employer might not question an employee about any of these protected activities, either his 
own or that of other employees. 
 
RULES REGARDING NON-UNION REPRESENTATION DURING INTERVIEWS 
In June 2004, the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) overruled a controversial 
decision regarding the rights of non-union employees to have a “representative” present 
during interviews, and reinstated the former 1975 ruling that non-union employees are not 
entitled to representation during investigatory interviews (I BM Corp., 341 NLRB No. 148 
(2004)). The NLRB reasoned that allowing co-workers to sit in as representatives during 
investigatory interviews would compromise the requisite confidentiality, sensitivity, and 
thoroughness of the interview. Accordingly, non-union employers no longer have a legal 
obligation to accept an employee’s request for such representation.  
 
UNION EMPLOYEES  
Since 1975 and the U.S. Supreme Court decision of NLRB v. Weingarten, 420 U.S. 251 (1975), 
union employees have had the right to union representation during an investigatory 
interview, provided that the employee “reasonably believes” the interview “might result in 
disciplinary action.” This right derived from the National Labor Relations Act, which 
provides that employees have the right “to act in concert for mutual aid and protection.” In 
the years since Weingarten, this right has only been applied in cases where the employee under 
investigation was covered by a collective-bargaining agreement. 
 
FORMER LAW: NON-UNION EMPLOYEES  
In the case of Epilepsy Foundation of Northeast Ohio (331 NLRB No. 92; decided July 10, 2000), 
the NLRB extended the so-called Weingarten rights to non-union employees. The case involved 
two workers who were fired from the Epilepsy Foundation. Prior to their discharge, the two 
employees wrote a memo that was critical of their supervisor. Later, the executive director 
requested to meet with one of the employees and the supervisor. The employee requested to 
meet with the executive director alone, but the request was denied. The employee then asked 
if the co-author of the memo could be present at the meeting. This request was also denied. 
When the employee still expressed apprehension about the meeting, he was told to go home, 
and he was fired the next day for insubordination. 
 
The NLRB ruled that discharging the employee for refusing to attend the meeting violated 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.412  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the National Labor Relations Act. A majority of the board felt that the rights set forth in 
Weingarten should apply equally in circumstances in which employees are not represented by 
a union. They reasoned that the right to have a co-worker present at an investigatory 
interview “greatly enhances the employees’ opportunities to act in concert to address the 
concern that the employer does not initiate or continue a practice of imposing punishment 
unjustly.” 
 
CURRENT LAW: NON-UNION EMPLOYEES  
A representative may be present where the employer allows for such. 
 
No longer must an employer allow a representative to be present where an employee 
specifically requests representation. However, an employer is not precluded from allowing 
the employee to have representation upon request. 
 
Employers can always decide not to conduct an interview, but refusing to do so may cause 
problems of its own. If the company administers disciplinary action without first hearing the 
employee’s side of the story, then the company may be handing the employee a lawsuit for 
wrongful discharge or a discrimination claim. As a general rule, it is difficult to defend a 
termination action if the employer did not at least listen to the employee’s version of events 
prior to taking action. 
 
Where the employer allows for employee representation, the employer need not “bargain 
with” the employee’s representative.  
 
Presumably, the ruling in Weingarten will continue to control this issue. In Weingarten, the 
Supreme Court stated that the representative’s role is to assist the employee, and he “may do 
so by attempting to clarify facts or suggest other employees who may have knowledge of 
them.” The Court made it clear that the employer may insist on hearing the subject’s version 
of events, and the representative is not allowed to direct the subject not to answer a question 
or to tell the subject to answer questions only once. Therefore, the employer is allowed to 
conduct the interview without interference by the representative. 
 
Employees do not have a right to be represented at an interview by a private attorney.  
 
Under Epilepsy, where an employer failed to comply with the rules requiring representation 
upon employee request, it could have been subjected to an administrative cease-and-desist 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.413 
order and/or reinstatement of the employee with back pay. Due to the overturning of 
Epilepsy and reinstatement of Weingarten, however, these penalties will probably not apply 
unless the non-union employer agrees to allow employee representation. 
 
If an employee requests any type of representation at an interview, you should immediately 
consult your legal counsel. You should also consult counsel to review your existing policies 
and procedures to ensure that you are aware of the legal duties, ramifications, and remedies 
surrounding employee representation. 
 
Nondiscrimination Statutes 
Included in the Civil Rights Acts of 1866 and 1871, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 
and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1970, is the prohibition of singling out 
employees for interviews based on their race, national origin, religion, sex, or age. 
 
Fair Labor Standards 
The Fair Labor Standards require an employer to pay an employee for time spent in an 
interview. 
 
Common Law Protection in Connection with Interviews  
Even though employees of private organizations do not, in most cases, enjoy constitutional 
protections in connection with interviews, they do have certain protections that arise out of 
common law. These protections also apply to employees of public organizations. Fraud 
examiners must be aware of the relevant common-law protections that relate to internal 
interviews and must be careful not to expose themselves to legal liability. 
 
Invasion of Privacy 
While modern tort law includes four categories of invasion of privacy, this discussion only 
addresses the two most common forms of invasion of privacy applicable to fraud 
examinations: intrusion upon seclusion and public disclosure of private facts. 
 
INTRUSION INTO SECLUSION 
Intrusion upon seclusion occurs when an individual intentionally intrudes “upon the solitude 
or seclusion of another or his private affairs or concerns” and “the intrusion would be highly 
offensive to a reasonable person.” Questioning employees about activities not related to job 
performance might constitute an invasion of privacy. 
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.414  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The elements of this tort include:  
• An intentional intrusion 
• Into an area where an individual has a reasonable expectation of privacy 
• The intrusion would be highly offensive or objectionable to a reasonable person  
 
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF PRIVATE FACTS 
The tort of public disclosure of private facts occurs when one party makes public statements 
about another party’s private life that are not of public concern. For instance, disclosing 
information obtained in an interview to individuals not involved in the investigation. 
 
Unlike defamation claims, which are discussed below, this cause of action can arise even if 
the statements are true. The key is that the information is private in nature and it is not a 
matter of public interest. 
 
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress 
Intentional infliction of emotional distress refers to any unprivileged conduct that is so 
outrageous and egregious that it exceeds all bounds usually tolerated by civilized society and 
that is intended to cause injury (or was committed with reckless disregard for the likelihood 
of its causing injury) to another.  
 
For an employee to state a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress, he must 
establish all of the following elements: 
• The employer engaged in extreme and outrageous conduct 
• The employer’s conduct was intended to cause severe emotional distress (or, if not 
intended, would cause severe emotional distress in a reasonable person) 
• The employee actually did suffer emotional or mental distress as a result of the 
employer’s conduct 
 
It is not enough that the employee is merely “upset” by the conduct. For example, 
questioning alone, even coupled with accusations and raised voices, probably will not give 
rise to such a claim. 
 
Defamation 
Defamation is an unprivileged publication of a falsehood about a person that tends to harm 
the reputation of that person. The law of defamation actually consists of two torts: libel and 
slander. Libel is basically defamation that appears in written form, while slander involves 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.415 
defamatory remarks that are only spoken. 
 
In general, the elements of these two causes of action are essentially the same. To recover 
for defamation, the plaintiff must prove the following elements:  
• The defendant made an untrue statement of fact 
• The statement was communicated (published) to third parties 
• The statement was made on an unprivileged occasion 
• The statement damaged the subject’s reputation 
 
The threat of a defamation lawsuit is always present when allegations of wrongdoing are 
made against certain employees. For example, a claim of defamation might arise in the 
context of an interview as a result of unfounded accusations or statements made by the 
interviewer, where someone in addition to the employee and the interviewer is present. 
 
Assuming that an employee can establish that defamatory statements were made and 
communicated to a third-party, the most important defense to a defamation action for fraud 
examiners is that of qualified business privilege. If this privilege applies, then no liability can 
attach to the speaker.  
 
The qualified business privilege generally applies if a person makes a statement (1) in good 
faith; (2) regarding a subject in which the person making the statement has a legitimate 
interest or duty; and (3) to those who have an interest in the matter.  
 
The privilege, however, might be lost if the defamatory statements are communicated with 
“malice.” This usually means that the person communicating the statements knew they were 
false or made them without regard to whether they were false. 
 
Some courts have held that there can be no defamation arising from an employer’s inquiries 
of its employees concerning their possible involvement in a violation of company policy. 
The employer might even have duty to investigate, arising from its duty to protect its 
business, its employees, and the public from wrongdoing employees. 
 
Good Faith and Fair Dealing 
Several states recognize a duty on the part of employers to deal with their employees fairly 
and in good faith. This duty might include abiding by all provisions in an employee 
handbook. For example, it might contain a provision that interviews will be conducted in a 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.416  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
professional manner and only concerning job related matters. 
 
Breach of Implied Contract 
Employers and employees may enter into contracts that govern the length and terms of 
employment, and if the employer violates the contract, the employee can sue for breach of 
contract. 
 
Moreover, employment contracts can be express or implied. Just because the company has 
not signed a written, formalized contract with an employee, this does not mean that there is 
no employment contract. Collective-bargaining agreements, employee handbooks, and even 
oral promises can establish an employment contract and limit the company’s ability to 
discipline or fire an employee. Before taking any disciplinary action against an employee, 
make sure you are aware of the true status of the employment relationship.  
 
False Imprisonment 
False imprisonment is restraint by one person of the physical liberty of another without consent 
or legal justification. A claim of false imprisonment might be made if an employee is 
detained in any way during a search either of the employee or of the employee’s desk, locker, 
etc. Generally, an employer is entitled to question an employee at work about a violation of 
company policy without incurring liability as long as the employee submits to the 
questioning voluntarily; that is, not as a result of threats or force. However, the length, 
nature, and manner of the interview will determine whether liability arises. 
 
False imprisonment factors include: 
• Size and nature of the room where an interview takes place (small, windowless, not easily 
accessible is a negative) 
• Lighting in room—soft versus severe 
• Requiring the employee’s presence or continued presence by any amount of force, 
including holding the employee’s arm to escort him 
• Violent behavior of any kind during the in terview, including yelling, pounding on desks, 
or kicking furniture or walls 
• Refusing to allow the employee to leave the room, such as by pushing the employee into 
a chair or locking the door 
• The number of people involved in the interview 
 
 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.417 
Searches and Surveillance 
Workplace privacy is a rapidly evolving area of law that can arise in numerous contexts 
involving the employer-employee relationship, such as surveillance and monitoring, searches, 
and polygraph testing. In most cases, an employer might investigate its workplace for 
wrongdoing by means of workplace searches and surveillance of workplace areas or 
employees. However, an employee’s privacy may be protected by the Constitution, state 
constitutions, federal and state statutes, or common law limitations. 
 
Employee Rights Under the Fourth Amendment  
The Fourth Amendment is the principal constitutional limitation on searches and seizures by 
public authorities. It states: 
 
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against 
unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon 
probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be 
searched, and the persons or things to be seized. 
 
In short, the Fourth Amendment prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures. That is, it 
prohibits public employers from unreasonably invading their employees’ privacy to conduct 
a workplace search, and it prohibits unreasonable surveillance of employees (such as 
videotaping or wiretapping) where they would reasonably expect privacy. 
 
The Warrant Requirement 
All searches and seizures must be reasonable. Whether it is reasonable to conduct a search 
and whether the activities were conducted in a reasonable manner is determined by the 
totality of the circumstances. A reasonable search is one carried out pursuant to a warrant 
(i.e., a court order that grants authorities the right to take a particular action) issued upon a 
showing of probable cause. Thus, in some circumstances, the Fourth Amendment requires 
that the government obtain a warrant before they conduct a search.  
 
Moreover, in Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967), the Supreme Court held that the 
Fourth Amendment “protects people, not places” (meaning that its provisions extend 
beyond the property line of the citizen), that the amendment applies wherever there is a 
“reasonable expectation of privacy,” and that a search without a warrant is “per se  
unreasonable,” in the absence of exigent circumstances. Thus, the police normally need to 
obtain a warrant not only to search a house, but also to intercept calls from a public 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.418  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
telephone booth, or inspect the contents of a safe deposit box, or to otherwise intrude into 
matters that the courts would reasonably consider to be private. 
 
In Johnson v. United States, 333 U.S. 10 (1948), the Supreme Court ruled that all warrants must 
be issued by a judge or magistrate (the latter a federal judicial officer empowered to hear 
misdemeanor cases), explaining that “the point  of the Fourth Amendment … is not that it 
denies law enforcement the support of the usual inferences which reasonable men draw 
from evidence. Its protection consists in requiring that those inferences be drawn by a 
neutral and detached magistrate instead of being judged by the officer engaged in the often 
competitive enterprise of ferreting out crime.” 
 
Additionally, all warrants must satisfy the requirements under the Fourth Amendment. That 
is, all warrants for searches must be judicially sanctioned and supported by “probable cause,” 
and they must “particularly” describe the place to be searched or things to be seized. 
 
The “probable cause” requirement of the Fourth Amendment is the central restraint on the 
power of the police to search. Probable cause has been defined as those facts and 
circumstances sufficient to cause a person of reasonable caution to believe that a crime has 
been committed and that the accused committed it. It requires more than mere suspicion or 
hunch, but less than virtual certainty. “Reasonable grounds to believe” is probably as good a 
definition as any. 
 
Furthermore, all warrants must particularly describe the place to be searched or the person 
or things to be seized. The particularity requirement was intended to prevent prevents “the 
issuance of warrants on loose, vague or doubtful bases of facts,”  an abuse that outraged the 
constitutional drafters. Go-Bart Importing Co. v. United States, 282 US 344, 357 (1931). In 
today’s terms, the clause would prohibit a search warrant in a white-collar investigation or a 
subpoena that commanded the production of all the defendant’s books and records whether 
or not relevant to the investigation or trial. 
 
But even if a warrant is technically required, there are a number of recognized exceptions to 
the warrant requirement, principally: 
• Workplace searches by government employers 
• Searches incident to arrest 
• Searches of motor vehicles 
• Exigent or emergency circumstances, to prevent the destruction of evidence, or while in 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.419 
“hot pursuit” of a suspect 
• When the search is conducted pursuant to a valid, voluntary consent 
• When the evidence is in “plain view” 
• Border, customs, and prison searches 
 
WORKPLACE SEARCHES BY GOVERNMENT EMPLOYERS 
Public employers are not generally required to obtain a warrant when they conduct searches 
for investigations of workplace misconduct. In O’Connor v. Ortega, 480 U.S. 709 (1987), the 
Supreme Court held that requiring warrants for all forms of public workplace searches 
would be unworkable and would impose intolerable burdens on public employers. 
Therefore, the Court ruled that workplace searches should be held to a lower standard.  
 
In reaching this decision, the Court stated that when public employers conduct a workplace 
investigation, their interest is substantially different from the normal interests of law 
enforcement. The goal of public employers is to ensure that their offices run efficiently, not 
to enforce the law. Requiring these employers to obtain a warrant for every workplace search 
would impede the effective administration of the government’s work.  
 
The Court also found that while public employees have some legitimate privacy interests in 
the workplace, these interests are less than in other places, such as their homes. Government 
offices are provided to public employees for the purpose of doing government work, and 
employees can avoid exposing truly personal belongings at work by simply leaving them at 
home. Thus, by balancing the strong government interest in maintaining an efficient 
workplace against the diminished privacy interests of government employees, the court 
justified the use of a lower standard for workplace searches by government employers. 
Instead of a warrant requirement based on probable cause, government employers are 
generally held to a standard of reasonableness under all the circumstances.  
 
THE REASONABLENESS STANDARD  
Workplace searches by government employers are subject to the reasonableness standard in 
two circumstances:  
• For noninvestigatory, work-related purposes, which are wholly unrelated to illegal 
conduct (such as retrieving a file from someone’s desk) 
• For investigations of work-related misconduct 
 
When a public employer conducts an investigation of work-related misconduct, and when 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.420  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that investigation necessitates a search of an employee’s workspace, the employer is not 
generally required to obtain a warrant to perform the search, nor is the employer required to 
make a showing of probable cause that the suspect has committed a crime. This does not 
mean, however, that there are no restrictions on the employer’s ability to conduct the search; 
it still must meet the test for “reasonableness under all the circumstances.”  
 
There is a two-part test to determine if a workplace search is reasonable:  
• The search must be justified at its inception 
• The search must be conducted in a way that is reasonably related in scope to the 
circumstances that justified the interference in the first place 
 
A search is justified at its inception if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the 
search will turn up evidence that the employee is guilty of work-related misconduct, or if the 
search is necessary for a noninvestigatory purpose such as to retrieve a file. A search is not 
justified at its inception simply because an employer thinks that the suspect might be 
engaged in workplace misconduct. The employer must be able to demonstrate a reasonable, 
clear suspicion, based on factual information, that the area to be searched contains evidence 
of misconduct.  
 
The second part of the test requires that the search be reasonable in scope. The fact that a 
search is justified at its inception does not give the employer carte blanche  authority to intrude 
upon the suspect’s privacy in all areas. The search must be no broader than is necessary to 
serve the organization’s legitimate, work-related purposes.  
 
REASONABLE EXPECTATIONS OF PRIVACY  
The Fourth Amendment only applies to workplace searches by government employers 
where an employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy. Thus, to determine if a 
workplace search will violate an employee’s Fourth Amendment rights, an employer must 
first determine if the employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy in the area to be 
searched. There is no bright-line rule for determining whether an employee has a reasonable 
privacy expectation in a particular area. Such a privacy interest can exist for a desk drawer, a 
file cabinet, a locker, or even an entire office, depending on the circumstances. The issue is 
whether a reasonable person would expect the area to be free from intrusion. The employee 
does not have to have an ownership interest in the area to have a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the area. Thus, even though a public employer may own the office where an 
employee works, that employee can still have a privacy interest in the office that prohibits 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.421 
the employer from conducting a search.  
 
The key factor to consider is whether the employee has exclusive control over the area in 
question. If so, this tends to show that the employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy 
in that area. For instance, assume that an employee has a file cabinet in his office; that he is 
the only person who uses that file cabinet; that the cabinet has a lock on it; that the 
employee is the only person with a key; and that the cabinet remains locked when the 
employee is not using it. These facts indicate that the employee has exclusive control over 
the contents of the file cabinet, and thus has a reasonable expectation of privacy in its 
contents. In other words, based on the circumstances, the employee would be justified in 
believing that others cannot and will not enter the file cabinet without his consent. The 
employee in this scenario has a constitutionally protected privacy interest in the contents of 
the file cabinet. A search of this file cabinet by the public employer would have to comport 
with the reasonableness  standard as discussed above.  
 
But if the file cabinet does not have a lock, if several employees store and retrieve files from 
that cabinet, and if it is generally understood that they can do so without employees’ 
consent, then the employee cannot reasonably expect that the contents of the file cabinet 
will be private. Under these facts, the employee would not have a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the file cabinet; therefore, a search of that file cabinet would not violate the 
employee’s Fourth Amendment rights.  
 
Reasonable privacy expectations can also attach to communications. Employees might 
reasonably expect personal phone conversations or e-mail messages to be private and free 
from monitoring.  
 
In terms of surveillance, employees are likely to have reasonable privacy expectations in 
bathrooms, changing rooms, and other personal areas within the workplace.  
 
Obviously, there are a lot of factors that go into determining whether an employee has a 
reasonable expectation of privacy. Before conducting a search or surveillance, employers 
should consult legal counsel to make sure they are not intruding upon an employee’s privacy 
interests. 
 
SEARCHES INCIDENT TO ARREST 
Police officers may, without a warrant, conduct a limited search incident to an a lawful arrest. 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.422  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The search, however, must be limited to the arrestee’s body and the area within his 
immediate control. This exception is designed to protect the officers and to prevent the 
destruction of evidence. For the search to be valid, the arrest must be valid (i.e., based on 
probable cause, and not merely a pretext to justify a search). If the arrest is unlawful when 
made, it cannot be justified by the fruits of the subsequent search, and all evidence obtained 
must be suppressed. 
 
SEARCHES OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
An automobile, airplane, or vessel may be searched without a warrant if there is probable 
cause to believe it contains contraband or other evidence of a crime. This is because of the 
mobility of the vehicles (hence the risk that evidence may be lost or destroyed while a 
warrant is being obtained) and the lower expectation of privacy associated with vehicles. If 
there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle contains contraband, the police are also 
permitted to remove the vehicle from the scene to a stationhouse to conduct a search 
without obtaining a warrant. Furthermore, the police also may conduct warrantless 
“inventory” searches of impounded vehicles  to secure and protect the owner’s personal 
property, and they may seize contraband or other evidence discovered as a result.  
 
It may also be permissible for law enforcement to make warrantless searches of containers 
and luggage found within a vehicle. This applies if the police have probable cause to believe 
there is contraband in the containers, or if they have probable cause to believe there is 
contraband in the car and that contraband could be hidden in the containers.  
 
The search incident to arrest exception also applies in the motor vehicle context. However, 
the boundaries of this search have changed with time. Most recently, on April 21, 2009, the 
Supreme Court imposed new restrictions on the exception in Arizona v. Gant, 556 U.S. ___ 
(2009). For many years, the rule had been that the police may search the entire passenger 
compartment of a vehicle incident to the custodial arrest of an occupant of the car. In Gant, 
however, the Supreme Court added a new limitation: Vehicle searches following an 
occupant’s arrest are legal “only when the arrestee is unsecured and within reaching distance 
of the passenger compartment at the time of the search” or when the officer has reason to 
believe the vehicle has evidence of the crime that forms the basis for the arrest.  
 
The motor vehicle exception to the warrant requirement does not extend to passengers in 
the car. Once a passenger has been arrested, however, the police are permitted to make a 
warrantless search of the suspect and the area within his control pursuant to the exception 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.423 
for searches incident to arrest, as discussed above.  
 
EXIGENT OR EMERGENCY CIRCUMSTANCES 
There is also an exception to the warrant requirement for exigent circumstances, which 
means where the officers must act quickly.  
 
CONSENT SEARCHES 
Individuals are always free to waive their Fourth Amendment rights. If a suspect consents to 
a search by police, this eliminates the need for a warrant. The courts, however, will closely 
scrutinize any such “consent” to make sure it was truly voluntary, particularly when it leads 
to the seizure of incriminating evidence. Consents obtained by deceit, bribery, or 
misrepresentations are generally held to be involuntary and invalid. (However, when an 
undercover police officer conceals his identity and, as a result, an individual allows the 
officer to enter an area, this amounts to consent, even though the person did not know 
permission was being granted to a police officer.) Consent might not be voluntary if it requires 
a choice between exercising constitutional rights and continued employment. There is also 
no requirement that suspects be informed of their right to refuse consent.  
 
Consent may be implied in circumstances in which the individual can choose between 
entering an area and submitting to a search or not entering, as when one enters a secured 
courthouse, boards an airplane, or crosses an international border. Consent may be given by 
third parties to searches of property over which the third parties have authority, such as a co-
 tenant in a leased apartment. 
 
EVIDENCE IN “PLAIN VIEW” 
Evidence in “plain view” of an officer who has a right to be in a position to observe it also 
may be seized without a warrant. This situation usually occurs when contraband or evidence 
of another crime is inadvertently discovered during a search or arrest for another offense. 
The discovery must be truly inadvertent; however, if discovery of the evidence is anticipated 
and no other exception applies, a warrant must first be obtained. 
 
BORDER, CUSTOMS, AND PRISON SEARCHES 
Border and customs searches are a long-standing exception to the Fourth Amendment and 
may be conducted without probable cause or a warrant. Searches of prison cells and the 
monitoring of inmates’ telephone conversations also may be conducted without a warrant or  
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.424  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
probable cause because of security concerns and the absence of a realistic expectation of 
privacy in prison. 
 
Searching an Employee's Mail 
An employer may not conduct searches of an employee’s mail before it has been delivered. 
Under federal law, any person who takes a letter, postcard, or package from the mail before 
it has been delivered to the person to whom it was directed, with design to obstruct the 
correspondence, faces up to five years imprisonment, a fine, or both. See 18 U.S.C. § 1702. 
Once the mail has been delivered, however, then ordinary rules regarding searches apply. 
 
Surveillance 
An employer, in certain circumstances, can use monitoring and surveillance methods to 
uncover employee wrongdoing. Various federal and state laws govern the availability and 
methods of surveillance techniques. Because of the complexity of these laws and the 
differing interpretations of them by state and federal courts, counsel should always be 
consulted beforehand. For example, if an employer monitors employees’ phone calls without 
following the proper legal procedure, the employer might violate federal or state wiretap 
laws. The employer might also expose itself to substantial legal liability for invasion of 
privacy. 
 
To lower the expectation of privacy and to preserve the right to search any and all areas and 
to monitor and survey employee conduct, the employer should adopt a written policy which 
provides that to maintain the security of its operations, the company might gain access to 
and search all work areas and personal belongings, including desks, file drawers, lockers, 
briefcases, handbags, pockets, and personal effects. Include in the policy that workplace 
areas are subject to surveillance and that business phone calls might be monitored. In 
addition, as discussed below, the policy also should state that the employer could monitor all 
electronic communications, such as e-mail, as well as monitor what sites are visited over the 
Internet. 
 
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986   
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA), codified at 18 U.S.C. §§ 
2510–2521, 2701–2710, 3121–3126, is the primary federal statute that offers workers 
protections in communications privacy. 
 
Under the ECPA, electronic communications are defined as “any transfer of signs, signals, 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.425 
writing, images, sounds, data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or in part by 
a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photolectronic, or photooptical system that affects 
interstate or foreign commerce.” 
 
The ECPA is divided into three parts: the Wiretap Act, which governs the interception of 
electronic communications, the Stored Communications Act, which covers access to stored 
communications and records; and the Pen Regis ter Act, which regulates pen registers and 
trap and trace devices.  
 
THE WIRETAP ACT (18 U.S.C. §§ 2510–2521) 
In response to an increasing number of privacy breaches, Congress enacted the Wiretap Act, 
which prohibits anyone from intentionally intercepting or attempting to intercept any wire, 
oral, or electronic communication.  
 
Section 2511 prohibits covert spying on voice and data communications, extending 
protection from eavesdropping on mail and telephone communications to include digital 
data communications, such as e-mail and remote computing; it does not govern stored 
communications. Under the Wiretap Act, an interception occurs by the acquisition of the 
contents of any electronic communication through the use of any device. Most courts have 
held that interception occurs only when the protected communications are obtained 
contemporaneously with their transmission.  
 
Remedies for violating the Wiretap Act include criminal sanctions and civil relief. A criminal 
violation under the Act is a felony and is punishable by up to five years imprisonment 
and/or fines. Under a private cause of action, a court may award the plaintiff equitable relief, 
actual damages, punitive damages, and attorneys’ fees. 
 
THE STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (18 U.S.C. § 2701) 
As part of the ECPA, Congress enacted the Stored Communications Act (SCA) to protect 
stored electronic communications, such as e-mail and voicemail, by prohibiting the 
unauthorized access of such communications that are in storage. More specifically, the SCA 
prohibits unlawful access to a facility that provides an electronic communication service, 
and, then, obtaining, altering, or preventing authorized access to a wire or electronic 
communication while it is electronically stored in such a system. An electronic 
communication falls under the SCA once a system receives and stores it.  
  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.426  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The SCA includes both civil and criminal penalties. Concerning civil penalties, the SCA 
provides a private right of action and allows appropriate relief, including equitable relief, 
damages, and attorneys fees. Regarding criminal penalties, the SCA provides that if the first 
offense is committed for purposes of commercial advantage, malicious destruction, or 
damage or private commercial gain, punishment may include a fine and/or imprisonment 
for up to five years. For any subsequent offense, penalties include a fine and/or 
imprisonment for not more than ten years. In any other case, where it is a first offense, 
courts may impose a fine or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. For all 
subsequent convictions, courts may impose a fine and/or imprisonment for up to ten years. 
 
THE PEN REGISTERS ACT 
Pen registers are devices that can detect the telephone number from which an incoming call 
has been made. Title 18, section 3121, of the U.S. Code generally prohibits the installation of 
pen registers without a court order.  
 
EXCEPTIONS 
Although the ECPA imposes several rules about electronic communications, it also contains 
several exceptions to these rules. The exceptions most relevant to the workplace are:  
• The ordinary course of business exception 
• The provider exception 
• The consent exception 
 
ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS EXCEPTION  
The ECPA’s definition of “electronic device” specifically excludes devices that are used by 
an employer in the “ordinary course of busi ness.” Therefore, employers are permitted to 
monitor their employees’ wire or electronic communications, including phone calls, if done 
for a legitimate business purpose.  
 
THE PROVIDER EXCEPTION  
The provider exception allows suppliers of wire or electronic communications services (e.g., 
telephone, voice mail, e-mail, or Internet services) to intercept or access electronic 
communications in the normal course of business. For example, telephone providers can 
monitor phone calls when it is necessary to maintain and protect the system, run quality 
control checks, or to protect the service against theft or harassment. Most courts hold that 
employers qualify as providers with respect to their internal e-mail and voice mail systems.   
 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.427 
CONSENT EXCEPTION  
The ECPA allows an entity to intercept or access an electronic communication if one of the 
parties to the communication has given prior consent. This exception does not apply if the 
communication is intercepted for the purpose of committing a crime. 
 
Monitoring Employee Phone Calls 
To review, the Wiretap Act provisions of the ECPA limit an employer’s ability to monitor 
employee phone calls. In addition to the ECPA, a company’s right to monitor employee 
phone calls is also limited by employees’ constitutional and common law privacy rights, as 
discussed above. 
 
Although interception is generally forbidden under the Wiretap Act, employers may lawfully 
monitor phone calls if they fall under one of the statutory exceptions, including the ordinary 
course of business exception and the consent exception.  
 
ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS EXCEPTION 
Under the ordinary course of business exception, employers are permitted to monitor their 
employees’ wire or electronic communications, including phone calls, if done for a legitimate 
business purpose.  
 
This exception could apply in various scenarios. For example, it would apply where the 
employer routinely monitors phone communications for purposes of quality control (e.g., 
monitoring the phone calls of operators, telemarketers, customer service personnel, etc.). It 
may also apply where there is a legitimate business purpose for the monitoring, such as 
preventing business losses or employee misconduct. Keep in mind, however, that there must 
be a specific, legitimate business purpose for the interception. Blanket monitoring probably 
will be found to violate the act. In Sanders v. Robert Bosch, 38 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 1994), an 
employer who used a “voice logger” to record all telephone conversations on certain 
company lines did not fall within the ordinary course of business exception because the 
employer was unable to state a legitimate business purpose for the interceptions.  
 
Even if a company has a legitimate business purpose for monitoring a phone call, the 
method used to intercept and monitor the call must be no more intrusive than necessary to 
achieve the purpose. In Deal v. Spears, 980 F.2d 1153 (8th Cir. 1992), an employer who tape-
 recorded and listened to all calls, including personal calls, was found to have violated the 
statute even though the employer had legitimate suspicions of theft. Once it becomes 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.428  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
apparent that a communication is personal and not otherwise unauthorized, the employer 
must immediately stop listening to the call. Overly broad efforts to monitor employee calls 
may give rise to a claim for invasion of privacy.  
 
CONSENT EXCEPTION 
The ECPA allows an entity to intercept an electronic communication if that entity is a party 
to the communication, or if one of the parties to the communication has given prior consent 
to the interception.  
 
For an employer to monitor an employee under this exception, the employee must expressly 
consent to the monitoring. Generally, employers must obtain written consent (e.g., an 
employer provides its employees with a written policy explaining that phone calls may be 
monitored and the employees sign the policy). It is important to note that providing a 
notification that employees might be monitored (as opposed to being notified that the phone 
calls or e-mail will be monitored) may not satisfy the consent exception. For example, in one 
case, notification to an employee that her phone calls might be monitored was not enough to 
establish that she consented to the recording of her phone calls. Even when an employee 
consents to monitoring, this does not give the employer unlimited access to the employee’s 
communications. Monitoring still should be c onducted only for legitimate business purposes 
and should be no more broad than necessary.  
 
Using Pen Registers to Monitor Employees 
In general, section 3121 prohibits the installation of pen registers without a court order, but 
there are a number of exceptions under which employers can use pen registers to track their 
employees’ phone activity. Those exceptions include: 
• Phone service providers can use pen registers to protect users (employers) from abuse of 
service or unlawful use of service.  
• Phone service providers can use a pen register to record the fact that a phone call was 
initiated or completed to protect users of the service (employers) from fraudulent, 
unlawful, or abusive use of the service.  
• Phone service providers can use a pen register where consent of the user of the service 
has been obtained.  
 
Monitoring Employees’ E-Mail and Voicemail 
The ECPA regulates access to stored e-mail and voicemail; it prohibits the unauthorized 
access of electronic communications that are in storage.   
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.429 
Although the SCA generally prohibits third parties from accessing stored communications, 
there are two key exceptions: the provider exception and the consent exception. The provider 
exception  exempts providers of electronic communications services from the restrictions of 
the SCA. In other words, if a message is stored on an e-mail or voice mail system that the 
company provides, then the employer can access those messages as it sees fit without 
violating the ECPA. Note, however, that this exception does not allow the employer to 
access messages stored with an outside provider such as Yahoo!, Google, or AOL.  
 
The consent exception permits access of stored messages if such access is authorized by the 
intended recipient of the communication. This means that employers will be free to access 
employee e-mail and voice mail (including messages stored with outside providers) as long as 
the employees have given their consent. This exception provides the safest haven for 
employers who want to monitor their employees’ stored messages. To make sure the 
consent exception will apply, companies should obtain express written consent from all 
employees for such monitoring as a condition of employment.  
 
In addition to the ECPA, employers must also be aware of employees’ constitutional and 
common law privacy rights in the contents of their e-mail. As was discussed above, it is a 
good idea for all employers to establish a written policy which notifies employees that their 
stored messages are the property of the employer, and that they are subject to monitoring by 
the employer at any time.  
 
Also, keep in mind that, as with other forms of searches and surveillance, the courts will not 
look kindly on overly broad monitoring of stored communications. Employers should only 
access their employees’ stored voice mail or e-mail when there is a legitimate business 
purpose for doing so, and the access should be no more intrusive than necessary to achieve 
the purpose. 
 
Monitoring Employees’ Blogging Activity 
Because the blogging trend is growing, it is important for employers and employees to 
understand their rights and obligations with respect to such online activity. As a general rule, 
employers can monitor employee blogging because employees have a limited expectation of 
privacy with respect to their blog posts, which are posted publicly. However, the extent of an 
employer’s rights to monitor largely depend on whether the employee blogged while on-duty 
using the employer’s computer system.  
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.430  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Employees have no reasonable expectation of privacy when blogging on the employer’s 
system because the system was set up to provide business communications. If there is no 
reasonable expectation of privacy, then there is no constitutional or common law restriction 
on monitoring such activity. Therefore, an employee who uses an employer’s system to blog 
about violating company policy or illegal activity, or who engages in other unacceptable 
conduct, can generally be disciplined for such posts. However, employers should formalize 
their computer/Internet use policies to cover blogging and to effectively maintain control 
over such use.  
 
Concerning an employee’s off-duty blogging, employers should carefully examine the legal 
consequences of using such conduct when discharging or disciplining an employee, including 
those that are at will, because such action implicates state and federal law. In fact, some 
states (California, New York, Colorado, Montana, and North Dakota) enacted laws that limit 
an employer’s power to discharge an employee for off-duty conduct. Furthermore, an 
employee who blogs about certain topics related to status in a protected class may also be 
protected from discharge (i.e., when employee reveals personal information about his 
disability or religious beliefs, or writes about harassment or discrimination in the workplace). 
Therefore, companies should enact and apply Internet-use policies consistently and 
uniformly.  
 
Monitoring Employees’ Internet Activity 
As with monitoring employees’ e-mail and blogging activity, employers should be aware of 
federal protections against monitoring employees’ Internet use, including an employee’s 
instant messages, website postings, etc. This is true even though federal law provides 
employees little protection from an employer’s electronic monitoring. For example, although 
the ECPA prohibits the intentional interception of electronic communications when 
employees have a reasonable expectation of privacy, an employer may monitor Internet use 
when there is employee consent, when there are legitimate business purposes, or when an 
employer has reason to believe that the company’s interests are at risk. In addition, the 
common law right to privacy also extends to employees in the workplace; however, the 
public nature of the workplace has led many courts to reject most invasion claims on the 
basis that there was no reasonable expectation of privacy.  
 
Video Surveillance of Employees 
In some scenarios, investigators may consider the use of video surveillance equipment as 
part of an internal investigation. In general, video surveillance is not permissible in areas 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.431 
where employees have a legitimate expectation of privacy. For instance, an employer is not 
allowed to install video cameras in a restroom or dressing room unless there are special 
circumstances to justify this intrusion on employees’ privacy. Conversely, an employer is 
much more likely to be allowed to use video surveillance in open areas, such as around cash 
registers or in public hallways. These areas are open to the public and an employee could not 
reasonably expect privacy there. It is advisable to provide written notice to employees 
informing them that their activities are subject to monitoring in advance of any surveillance. 
Again, the scope of the surveillance should be no greater than necessary to fulfill the 
employer’s legitimate business purposes.  
 
If video surveillance were accompanied by audio recording, then this type of surveillance 
would be covered by Wiretap Act provisions of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 
which prohibit the interception of wire, electronic, or oral communication  except in limited 
circumstances. However, the ECPA does not cover silent video monitoring. The question in 
this type of surveillance is whether the surveillance violates the employee’s constitutional or 
common law privacy rights. 
 
Effect of Violation of Employee’s Rights 
Illegally seized evidence will be excluded in criminal proceedings. A public employer cannot 
use illegally seized evidence to discipline an employee. There is no Fourth Amendment 
prohibition against a private employer using illegally seized evidence to discipline an 
employee; however, the employer might be exposing itself to litigation for invasion of 
privacy, trespass, or other common law causes of action described below. 
 
The Exclusionary Rule 
Under the exclusionary rule, which is in effect in all federal and state courts, evidence seized in 
violation of the Fourth Amendment will be suppressed — that is, it becomes inadmissible in 
any prosecution against the suspect except under a few limited exceptions. In addition, all 
evidence that is obtained as a result of the illegally obtained evidence will also be excluded. 
An unlawful search and seizure does not mean the suspect cannot be prosecuted, and it does 
not invalidate a conviction based on other evidence. But it does prevent the wrongfully 
obtained evidence and all evidence derived from it from being presented at trial. 
 
Generally, this rule applies only in criminal cases and does not apply to private individuals 
acting for their own purposes. However, the Fourth Amendment does apply to government  
  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.432  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employers. Therefore, a public employer cannot use illegally seized evidence to discipline an 
employee.  
 
There is, however, no Fourth Amendment prohibition against a private employer using 
illegally seized evidence to discipline an employee. Thus, evidence illegally obtained by a 
private employer may be admitted in court, but the employer might be exposing itself to 
litigation for invasion of privacy, trespass or other common law causes of action described 
below. 
 
Furthermore, evidence that has been suppressed under the exclusionary rule might still be 
admissible in a civil trial or an administrative proceeding such as an employee disciplinary 
hearing. The primary goal of the exclusionary rule is to deter police  misconduct. If the 
deterrent effect of excluding the evidence from a civil or administrative proceeding is 
outweighed by the costs that would result from excluding the evidence, and if the party 
whose rights were violated has other forms of redress for the violation, then evidence that 
was suppressed in a criminal trial may be admissible in a noncriminal proceeding. However, 
there are some circumstances in which wrongfully obtained evidence will be excluded from 
civil proceedings, so public employers should not feel free to disregard their employees’ 
constitutional rights under the assumption that any illegally obtained evidence can still be 
used against an employee in a noncriminal matter. 
 
Civil Liability for Damages (42 U.S.C. § 1983) 
Section 1983 of Title 42, U.S. Code, provides a remedy for violation of federally protected 
rights where state action is involved. To prevail in a claim under section 1983, the plaintiff 
must prove two critical issues: (1) that he  has been denied a right guaranteed by the 
Constitution and the laws of the United States, and (2) that the defendant(s) deprived him of 
that right while acting under the color of state law.  
 
The defendant, however, can raise certain defenses to a section 1983 claim, including 
qualified immunity and consent. For public employers, there might be a qualified immunity 
from liability if they act in good faith on the basis of unsettled law. Qualified immunity 
shields government officials from both suit and liability if their conduct did not violate any 
clearly established right which a reasonable person would have known.  
 
In addition, valid consent is a well-recognized exception to the Fourth Amendment 
prohibition against warrantless searches. Consent to search can be voluntary, involuntary, or 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.433 
“informed.” Consent is not voluntary if it requires a choice between constitutional rights. 
Consent might not be voluntary if it requires a choice between exercising constitutional 
rights and continued employment. Courts are split on this issue. (Published “search” policy 
as a barrier to expectation of privacy is used to diminish or eliminate the expectation 
altogether.) 
 
State Constitutions and Statutes 
Most states have enacted  constitutional provisions similar to the Fourth Amendment, and 
many of the same issues arise under the state constitutions as under the federal Constitution. 
In most states, standards similar to those applied under the federal Constitution apply. Most 
states have enacted laws governing an employee’s right to privacy in the workplace. Many 
states have enacted statutes that restrict surveillance, including wiretapping or electronic 
surveillance, cameras, pen registers, two-way mirrors, or surveillance in particular areas, such 
as locker rooms, lounges, and rest areas. 
 
Surreptitious Recording 
All but 12 states allow you to record a conversation to which you are a party without 
informing the other parties to the conversation that you are recording it. Federal wiretap 
statutes also permit one-party consent of telephone conversations in most circumstances 
(employees being the most notable exception; see the material on the Electronic 
Communication Privacy Act discussed previously in this chapter). 
 
The 38 states that allow such recordings are generally referred to as “one-party” states. The 
District of Columbia is also a “one-party” jurisdiction. The other 12 states are incorrectly 
referred to as “two-party” states. Be aware, however, that this is a misnomer because consent 
of all parties to the conversation is required. Currently, the following states require the 
consent of all parties to a conversation in most circumstances: 
• California 
• Connecticut 
• Delaware 
• Florida 
• Illinois 
• Maryland 
• Massachusetts 
• Michigan 
• Montana 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.434  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• New Hampshire 
• Pennsylvania 
• Washington 
 
There are, however, variations among states regarding the details of such recordings and 
their admissibility in court. Before you record a conversation, make sure you consult an 
attorney or check the laws for your jurisdiction. 
 
Additionally, there are a number of different laws regarding videotaping. At least fifteen 
states have outlawed the use of hidden cameras in private places. In some states, however, 
there is no prohibition on videotaping anyone as long as there is no audio recording. Due to 
privacy concerns, a number of states have proposed legislation to outlaw surreptitious 
videotaping in certain circumstances. Since this area of the law is changing constantly, make 
sure you check the law in your jurisdiction. 
 
Federal and State Nondiscrimination Statutes  
Nondiscrimination statutes such as the federal Civil Rights Acts of 1866 and 1871, Title VII 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1970, as 
well as similar state statutes, protect employees from being singled out for searches on the 
basis of such characteristics as race, national origin, sex, religion, and age. These laws also 
protect employees against disparate discipline assessed as a result of a search. 
 
Common Law Protections in Connection with Searches and Surveillance 
Employees also enjoy common law privacy protections that limit an employer’s right to 
search and use surveillance techniques. These common law rights apply to private as well as 
government employers; no state action is required to trigger their protections. 
 
Some of the common law protections that applied in the interview setting also apply to an 
employer’s right to search and use surveillance techniques. 
 
Invasion of Privacy 
Employees also have common law privacy interests that limit an employer’s right to search. 
These common law protections, which are similar in nature and scope to the Fourth 
Amendment protections discussed above, cover both public and private employees. As long 
as an employee does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in an area, the employer 
can search that area without violating an employee’s common law right to privacy. 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.435 
While modern tort law includes four categories of invasion of privacy, this discussion only 
addresses two of those torts: publicity of private facts and intrusion upon seclusion. 
 
INTRUSION INTO SECLUSION 
Intrusion upon seclusion is the cause of action that is most frequently raised with regard to 
workplace searches. As stated before, intrusion upon seclusion occurs when an individual 
intentionally intrudes “upon the solitude or secl usion of another or his private affairs or 
concerns” and “the intrusion would be highly offensive to a reasonable person.” Thus, 
where there is an expectation of privacy on the part of the employee, a search without cause 
might give rise to a claim of invasion of privacy. The mere gathering of information is not a 
tort; however, the gathering of confidential information where the intrusion is unreasonable 
might be a tort. There is no invasion of privacy if the information is open to public view or 
has been disclosed to others. 
 
As with constitutional actions, an intrusion upon seclusion claim can be based not only on 
physical intrusions, but also on wiretapping, eavesdropping and other forms of surveillance. 
 
An employer can eliminate the potential for claim of invasion of privacy by publishing and 
following a “search” policy. In addition, the following measures can be taken: 
• Having a written policy regarding searches, surveillance, and telephone monitoring 
• Retaining a key to all desks, lockers, etc. 
• Requiring employees to provide keys to all personal locks 
• Obtaining consent to search 
 
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF PRIVATE FACTS 
The tort of public disclosure of private facts occurs when one party makes public statements 
about another party’s private life that are not of public concern. The disclosure of those facts 
must be highly offensive to a reasonable person. This tort can exist even if the statements 
are true. Because giving unreasonable publicity to true, but private, information about an 
employee can give rise to a claim for invasion of privacy, the need to communicate 
information about the employee must be balanced against the intrusion into the employee’s 
privacy. 
 
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress 
Again, intentional infliction of emotional distress refers to any unprivileged conduct which is 
so outrageous and egregious that it exceeds all bounds usually tolerated by civilized society 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.436  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
and which is intended to cause injury (or was committed with reckless disregard for the 
likelihood of its causing injury) to another.  
 
This tort is significant particularly to private employers whose searches might not be subject 
to the Fourth Amendment or similar state constitutional provisions because damages for 
pain and suffering and punitive damages might be awarded. 
 
Good Faith and Fair Dealing 
To review, several states recognize a duty on the part of employers to deal with their 
employees fairly and in good faith. This duty might include abiding by all company policies 
and provisions in an employee handbook, including those relating to searches (e.g., how and 
when they can be conducted) and expectations of privacy on the part of employees. 
 
Breach of Implied Contract 
As noted above, many states now recognize an implied contract between employers and 
employees arising out of employee handbooks or oral promises. For example, an employer 
with an employee handbook containing provisions relating to searches or employee 
expectations of privacy might find itself contractually bound by those provisions and in 
breach of contract if the provisions are not followed to the letter. 
 
False Imprisonment 
Again, false imprisonment is the restraint by one person of the physical liberty of another 
without consent or legal justification. A claim of false imprisonment might be made if an 
employee is detained in any way during a search, either of the employee himself or of the 
employee’s desk, locker, and so on. For more information on false imprisonment, see the 
Interviews section in this chapter. 
 
Trespass 
Trespass is the unauthorized, intentional, or negligent entry upon the property of others. A 
claim of trespass might arise from a search of an employee’s locker, but it is particularly 
applicable to surveillance at an employee’s home. 
 
Reducing Employees’ Expectation of Privacy  
The single most effective method of eliminating potential problems involving employees’ 
right of privacy, including workplace searches and the monitoring or reading of electronic 
communications, is for a company to adopt a written policy which provides that to maintain 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.437 
the security of its operations, the company may gain access to and search all work areas and 
personal belongings, including desks, file drawers, lockers, briefcases, handbags, pockets, and 
personal effects. 
 
The policy should also notify employees that computer systems (including the Internet, e-
 mail communications, hardware, and files) are solely for business use, and that the company 
reserves the absolute right to review, audit, and disclose all matters sent over the system or 
placed in storage. Include in the policy that workplace areas are subject to surveillance and 
that business phone calls may be monitored. 
 
 
Polygraph Examinations 
 
Employee Polygraph Protection Act 
The Employee Polygraph Protection Act prohibits the use of polygraphs by most private 
employers unless the employer is engaged in an ongoing investigation involving economic 
loss or injury to the employer in the employer’s business, and has a reasonable suspicion that 
the employee is involved in the incident. Reasonable suspicion is an observable, articulated basis 
in fact; it is similar to predication.  
 
Employers subject to this Act cannot use polygraphs to screen applicants for employment, 
and they cannot discharge an employee for refusing to take a polygraph exam.  
 
The Employee Polygraph Protection Act, however, does not protect government employees. 
 
Other Federal Statutes 
Other statu tes do not address the use of polygraphs directly, but nonetheless might give rise 
to liability if a polygraph test is administered in a discriminatory fashion (e.g., based on race, 
sex, or some other prohibited factor), or used to ferret out union sympathies in connection 
with a union organizing campaign. 
 
State Statutes 
Several states have enacted laws addressing the use of polygraph examinations, and some are 
more restrictive than the federal statute. Courts have recognized claims arising from 
unlawful administration of polygraph exams and wrongful discharge for refusal to take an 
exam after having been accused of fraud. 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.438  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Common Law Liability from Polygraph Exams 
In addition to the statutory restrictions discussed above, some courts have found the use of 
polygraphs actionable on common law grounds under certain circumstances. 
 
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress 
Most courts have found that the circumstances surrounding the giving of a polygraph exam 
do not, in and of themselves, rise to the level of outrageous conduct, as required to state a 
common law claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress. 
 
Invasion of Privacy 
In some states, courts have defined polygraph tests as invasions of privacy. Questions 
directly related to job performance or the incident under investigation generally are held not 
to be invasions of privacy. Control questions might be an invasion of privacy, though 
circumstances might warrant the intrusion. Check with counsel. 
 
Wrongful Discharge 
Polygraph exams may also give rise to claims of wrongful discharge. For example, a former 
employee may bring a wrongful discharge claim if he is terminated for refusing to take a 
polygraph exam after having been accused of fraud.  
 
 
Obtaining Information About Employees 
 
Introduction 
There is a surprising amount of information about individuals that can be accessed without 
legal process (e.g., a subpoena). In fact, the government is bound by law to facilitate the 
public’s access to government information and to  encourage a diversity of sources to acquire 
and use this information. But despite the public’s broad right of access, there are numerous 
laws that limit access to certain types of information, and a number of risks to privacy are 
raised by the collection of information. Therefore, fraud examiners must be certain that 
information obtained is done so legally.  
 
Federal Statutes 
Privacy Act of 1974 
The Privacy Act of 1974 establishes a code of information practices that regulates the 
collection, maintenance, consumption, and diffusion of personally identifiable information 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.439 
that is maintained by federal agencies. It restricts information about individuals, both 
employees and nonemployees, and it applies to government agencies and government 
contractors running a system of records on behalf of the government. The Privacy Act 
prohibits an agency from disclosing such information without the written consent of the 
subject individual. 
 
An agency, for example, might maintain records about a person containing information that 
is relevant and necessary to accomplish a purpose of the agency. This information might 
include a person’s education, finances, medical history, criminal history, employment history, 
and identifying information (fingerprint, voiceprint, or photograph). An agency employee 
might have access to the information unless it is investigatory material compiled for law 
enforcement purposes, statistical records, or material compiled solely for determining 
suitability, eligibility, or qualification for federal service or promotion. 
 
Fair Credit Reporting Act 
One of the primary statutes limiting access to information is the federal Fair Credit 
Reporting Act (FCRA). This statute regulates the dissemination of consumer information to 
third parties by consumer reporting agencies. Historically, the FCRA only applied to 
consumer credit reports, but due to amendments in 1997, the FCRA now applies to the 
gathering of many other types of information about an individual through third parties.  
 
The FCRA prohibits consumer reporting agencies from releasing personal information 
about an individual (e.g., information about the consumer’s character, general reputation, 
personal characteristics, or mode of living) to third parties without authorization, and limits 
disclosure of credit information to third parties with a purpose permitted by the statute. 
 
The FCRA applies in the employment context when an employer contracts with a third party 
(e.g., a private investigator or an online public records service) to collect credit information 
on current or potential employees. The FCRA, however, does not apply if the person or 
organization seeking the information gathers it directly from the source.  
 
If the FCRA does apply, it generally means that an examiner cannot use a third party to 
obtain certain information about a person unless that person has received certain notices and 
signed a consent form. The failure to do so can mean civil penalties.  
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.440  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
COVERAGE UNDER THE FCRA 
Coverage of the FCRA, however, turns largely on three terms: consumer, consumer reports, 
and consumer reporting agency.  
 
CONSUMER  
At its core, the FCRA protects those that fall within its definition of consumer. The Act 
defines a consumer as “an individual.” That is, only individuals have rights under the FCRA.   
 
CONSUMER REPORTS  
For the FCRA to apply, the information that is being obtained must be a “consumer report.” 
A consumer report  is defined as any written, oral, or other communication by a consumer-reporting 
agency bearing on a customer’s cred it worthiness, credit standing, character, 
general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living. 
 
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC), which is the federal agency responsible for 
enforcement of the FCRA, has interpreted this to mean basically any information collected 
on a person. It does not refer to just credit reports. It would also apply to public records 
such as criminal records and DMV searches. 
 
But in general, when faced with the question of whether a specific report is a consumer 
report, courts have focused on the purpose for which the person or organization collected 
the consumer information. 
 
CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCY  
Also, for the FCRA to apply, the information must be gathered from a “consumer reporting 
agency” (CRA). A CRA is defined as anyone who sells in formation about people. It could be 
an online service such as ChoicePoint or LexisNex is, or it could be a private investigator. 
 
COMPLYING WITH THE FCRA 
Before employers can get a consumer report about a current or prospective employee, they 
must comply with certain requirements; however, employers that are gathering such 
information in connection with a workplace investigation of misconduct may be excluded 
from the FCRA (see the section “Workplace Investigations of Fraud and Misconduct” 
below).  
 
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.441 
If the FCRA applies, the party seeking the information must comply with the following 
requirements:  
• Inform the consumer reporting agency that it will follow the FCRA. 
• Provide the individual with a separate written disclosure.  
• Obtain the individual’s written authorization.  
 
The disclosure and the authorization can be contained in the same document. 
 
If, however, an employer relies on a consumer report for an “adverse action” (e.g., denying a 
job application, reassigning or terminating an employee, or denying a promotion), it must 
provide the individual with a pre-adverse action disclosure before taking the adverse action. 
This disclosure must include a copy of the individual’s consumer report and a copy of “A 
Summary of Your Rights Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act,” which is available from the FTC. 
 
After adverse action is taken, the employer must notify the individual via an adverse action 
notice that the action has been taken. That notice must include the following: 
• Name, address, and phone number of the consumer reporting agency (CRA) that 
supplied the report 
• A statement that the CRA did not make the adverse action decision and cannot explain 
why the adverse action was taken 
• A notice of the individual’s right to di spute the accuracy or completeness of the 
information furnished, and his right to an additional free consumer report from the 
agency upon request within 60 days 
 
WORKPLACE INVESTIGATIONS OF FRAUD AND MISCONDUCT 
Furthermore, the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 amended the FCRA to 
exempt certain reports involving employee misconduct investigations. As a result of these 
amendments, an employer who uses a third party to conduct a workplace investigation no 
longer has to obtain the prior consent of an employee if the investigation involves suspected: 
• Misconduct 
• Violation of law or regulations 
• Violation of any pre-existing policy of the employer 
 
To qualify for this exception, the report from the third party must not be communicated to 
anyone other than the employer, an agent of the employer, or the government. 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.442  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If, however, adverse action is taken against the employee based on the results of the 
investigation, the FCRA still requires that the employer provide the employee with a 
summary of the report. Adverse action is broadly defined as any employment decision that 
adversely affects the employee. The summary must “contain the nature and substance of the 
communication upon which the adverse action is based.” However, it does not have to 
identify the individuals interviewed or the sources of the information. 
 
INVESTIGATIVE CONSUMER REPORT 
The FCRA also covers “investigative consumer reports.” Under the FCRA, an investigative 
consumer report is a report containing information about an individual’s character, general 
reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living that is obtained through personal 
interviews with neighbors, friends, or associates. If such a report is made, then other notices 
and consents may need to be obtained from the individual. For example, a separate 
disclosure must be used to inform the employee that an investigative consumer report is 
being obtained. The form must also state what sort of information will be collected. 
 
In addition, the company must disclose to the individual the nature and scope of the 
investigation (if he requests). If any adverse action is to be taken against the person, he can 
ask to receive a copy of the report before such action is taken. Further, the report given to 
the individual must not be redacted, meaning that if the report contains names of the people 
providing the information and what they reported, such information could not be deleted 
from the report. The person must also be given an opportunity to dispute the findings in the 
report. 
 
CONTACT YOUR ATTORNEY 
Unfortunately, for fraud examiners, the FCRA has created several more hoops that 
examiners must jump through before they can obtain certain types of information. The 
FCRA is not clearly written, but the Federal Trade Commission has published several letters 
giving its interpretation of the statute. These letters and the text of the FCRA can be 
obtained through their website at www.ftc.gov.  
 
The most important thing for the fraud examiner to remember is to consult his in-house or 
outside counsel. Your attorney will help you determine what procedures you need to 
institute to comply with the FCRA. 
 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.443 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB) was passed in 1999, and the rules implementing the 
Act became final in 2001. GLB was originally enacted to allow banks and other companies 
to offer previously forbidden services, such as insurance and securities brokerage services. 
Congress was worried that these “super banks” would share customers’ financial data with 
affiliates and other companies to hawk their new products. Therefore, Congress added a 
provision requiring a “financial intuition” to tell customers about its privacy policy, to notify 
them of private information the institution intends to share, and to give customers the 
chance to block such information-sharing. 
 
To implement the law, Congress ordered regulators to define financial institution in the 
broadest possible terms. Thus, financial institutions include not just banks, but also insurance 
companies, accountants, tax preparation and real estate settlement services, and investment 
advisors. The text of the rule can be found at 16 C.F.R. Part 313.1. Additional information 
about the rule can be found at the Federal Trade Commission’s website: www.ftc.gov. 
 
The problem for fraud examiners is that the privacy rules implemented as part of GLB have 
been interpreted to prevent the selling of credit header information. Under the FTC’s 
interpretation of the rule, credit header information cannot be sold except for the very 
limited purposes allowed under the Fair Credit Reporting Act. The agency reached this 
decision by concluding that such basic personal information, such as names and addresses, is 
“financial” information and therefore must be protected under GLB. Unfortunately, this 
prevents credit bureaus from selling credit header information (including names, addresses, 
phone numbers, and Social Security numbers) to private investigators, direct marketers, or 
other information brokers. 
 
GLB also made it a criminal offense to engage in “pretexting,” (i.e., the practice of obtaining 
or attempting to obtain, sell, or buy private information through the use of false pretenses). 
Some individuals used pretexting as a means to gather financial information about a subject. 
Pretexters would contact a financial institution and pretend to be the customer or someone 
else authorized to obtain financial information, thereby tricking the financial institution into 
providing information about the subject. 
 
Section 6821 of Title 15, U.S. Code, (added by GLB) makes it an offense to: 
• Use false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements or documents to get customer information 
from a financial institution or directly from a customer of a financial institution 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.444  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Use forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen documents to get customer information from a 
financial institution or directly from a customer of a financial institution 
• Ask another person to get someone else’s custom er information using false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent statements; using false, fictitious, or fraudulent documents; or using forged, 
counterfeit, lost, or stolen documents 
 
Violators can, under certain circumstances, be fined and/or imprisoned up to 10 years. 
 
Telephone Records and Privacy Protection Act of 2006 
The Telephone Records and Privacy Protection Act of 2006 (TRPPA) also criminalizes 
pretexting. In 2006, pretexting garnered much criticism after Hewlett-Packard admitted that 
to uncover board room leaks, its investigators obtained phone records of journalists and 
board members through pretexting. Within four months of the scandal’s public release, 
President Bush signed the TRPPA into law. 
 
Specifically, the TRPPA criminalizes the practice of obtaining and attempting to obtain, sell, 
or buy confidential phone records through the use of false statements, unless otherwise 
permitted by law. Violations of the Act are criminal, and, if convicted, a violator faces up to 
10 years in prison and up to $100,000 in fines. These fines and prison terms may be 
increased in case of violation compounded with other activities, or some egregious crimes. 
 
Before engaging in any type of pretexting activity, investigators should consult with an 
attorney to determine whether the information sought is protected by state or federal law, as 
well as whether the planned impersonation method is legally acceptable. 
 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (Public Law 104–191, Partially Codified in 45 C.F.R. §§ 160, 164) 
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) instituted several privacy 
rules concerning personal health information. While most of the rules do not directly affect 
investigations, fraud examiners should be aware of the rules because they may have an 
impact on the type of information that can be legally gathered on employees.  
 
The HIPAA privacy rules place restrictions on the availability and use of “protected health 
information.” The definition of this term is extremely broad and covers any information 
relating to an individual’s past, present, or future physical or mental health, payment for 
services, or health care operations. For example, a cancer center employee who stole a 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.445 
patient’s identification information to obtain credit cards violated HIPAA. This case marked 
a significant point in HIPAA legislation because it had more to do with identity theft than 
actual health information, yet it was still covered under the statute. 
 
If information about the health of an individual, or payments for services, becomes an issue 
during an investigation, the examiners should immediately contact the human resources 
(HR) department, which should have information about whether the entity is subject to the 
HIPAA rules and can assist you in compliance with those rules.  
 
The most important thing to note is that if the HIPAA rules apply, the party seeking the 
information is restricted as to the type of health information it can access without specific 
written authorization. Examiners should never contact the health care provider, the health 
plan administrator, or a medical billing services for copies of employee records without first 
consulting the employer’s legal counsel or HR department. 
 
Avoiding Liability for Obstruction of Justice and Witness Tampering 
It is assumed that no CFE would knowingly or intentionally suborn perjury, conceal 
evidence, or otherwise attempt to undermine a government investigation or a judicial 
proceeding. But it is important to understand the potential for liability for these offenses 
during a fraud examination. 
 
To understand what conduct could lead to accusations of impropriety or criminal liability, 
fraud examiners should be familiar with the following federal statutes. There may be 
additional state statutes that prohibit similar conduct in connection with state investigations 
or even state civil lawsuits. An attorney should be consulted for the law of a specific 
jurisdiction.  
 
Witness Tampering (18 U.S.C. § 1512 et seq.) 
The Victim and Witness Protection Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1512 et seq., makes it a felony to engage 
in “misleading conduct toward another person” with the intent to “influence, delay, or 
prevent” a witness’s testimony or to “cause or induce any person” to “withhold” testimony 
or documents.  
 
Section 1512(b)(2)(a) makes it a crime to (1) knowingly; (2) use intimidation or physical 
force, threats, or corrupt persuasion; (3) with the intent to induce another; (4) to withhold 
testimony, a record, document, or other object from an official proceeding; or (5) alter, 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.446  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
destroy, mutilate, or conceal; (6) an object; (7) with the intent to impair the object’s integrity 
or availability; (8) for use in an official proceeding. 
 
Section 1512(b)(2)(a) is the statute under which Arthur Andersen, LLP was charged 
following the Enron scandal. During the investigations into Enron misdeeds, it was found 
that Andersen directed its employees to destroy documents to prevent their retrieval by the 
SEC during the investigation of Enron. However, the Andersen conviction was overturned 
in 2005 because of errors in the jury instructions. 
 
Criminal sanctions have been added to section 1512 for the corrupt alteration or destruction 
of documents. Section 1512(c) makes it a crime to (1) corruptly; (2) alter, destroy, mutilate, 
conceal, or attempt thereto; (3) a record, document, or other object; (4) with the intent to 
impair the object’s integrity or availability for use; (5) in an official proceeding; or (6) 
otherwise obstruct, influence, impede, or attempt thereto, any official proceeding.  
 
Section 1512(c) originally criminalized those who knowingly and corruptly destroyed, or 
directed others to destroy, relevant evidence. However, the U.S. Supreme Court in Arthur 
Andersen LLP vs. United States narrowed the statute to exclude the term knowingly. 
 
Section 1515 provides definitions for certain provisions under obstruction of justice statutes. 
For example, it defines misleading conduct as including, among other things: 
• Knowingly making a false statement 
• Omitting or concealing information that renders a statement misleading 
• Knowingly inviting reliance on a writing that is false, forged, altered, or otherwise lacking 
in authenticity with intent to mislead 
• Knowingly inviting reliance on a materia lly misleading sample, specimen, map, 
photograph, or other object with intent to mislead 
• Knowingly using a trick, scheme, or device with intent to mislead 
 
Unlike obstruction of justice (see below), the Victim and Witness Protection Act statute can 
be violated without any corrupt purpose to obstruct justice, even if there is no grand jury or 
other judicial proceeding pending. Section 1512 only requires proof that the defendant acted 
intentionally with intent to “influence, delay, or prevent” testimony or the withholding of 
evidence. The Act applies to witnesses in a prospective or anticipated proceeding as well as a 
pending one. 
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.447 
In light of the Victim and Witness Protection Act, fraud examiners must take care as to how 
he instructs a witness with regard to the confidentiality of the investigation. Confidentiality is 
a legitimate concern, and the investigator needs to instruct a witness concerning how to 
preserve privileges and confidentiality. However, instructing a witness not to speak with 
government investigators or other parties to litigation — or giving instructions that could be 
misunderstood in that way — exposes the investigator and the company to potential witness 
tampering liability. 
 
The Victim and Witness Protection Act also makes it a misdemeanor to harass another 
person and thereby hinder, delay, prevent, or dissuade any person from attending or 
testifying in an official proceeding, reporting a federal offense, causing an arrest for a federal 
offense, or causing a criminal prosecution.  
 
Obstruction of Justice  
To review, obstruction of justice statutes punish efforts to impede or obstruct the 
investigation or trial of other substantive offenses. There are several federal criminal statutes 
that prohibit obstruction of justice. Many are specific to a particular setting or industry, or to 
a particular kind of proceeding such as the prohibition against obstructing a federal audit (18 
U.S.C. § 1516) or obstructing the examination of a financial institution by a federal agency (18 U.S.C. § 1517).   
 
These statutes are contained in Chapter 73 of the U.S. Code and prohibit impeding, 
influencing, or obstructing virtually any type of federal proceeding (including criminal 
investigations) through the destruction of documents, threats, bribes, or witness tampering. 
for more information, see the Obstruction of Justice section in “The Law Related to Fraud 
(Part 2)” chapter above. 
 
Spoliation of Evidence 
Spoliation of evidence is broadly defined as the act of destroying evidence or making it 
otherwise unavailable. The act of spoliation can surface in just about any type of case, 
criminal or civil, and by any party, plaintiff, or defendant. The theory behind spoliation of 
evidence presumes that the individual who makes evidence unavailable following the 
probable initiation of a lawsuit is aware of its detrimental effect upon a case. 
 
Although few jurisdictions have a separate cause of action for spoliation of evidence, almost 
every jurisdiction allows for sanctions resulting from such acts. Some courts require the 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.448  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
spoliation to be intentional, though others merely require negligence or reckless spoliation.  
 
Intentional spoliation claims usually involve elements similar to the following: (1) the 
existence of a potential lawsuit; (2) the defend ant’s knowledge of the potential lawsuit; (3) 
the destruction, mutilation, or significant alteration of potential evidence; (4) intent on the 
part of the defendant to disrupt or defeat the lawsuit; (5) a causal relationship between the 
act of spoliation and the inability to prove the lawsuit; and (6) damages. 
 
Negligent spoliation claims generally occur when a party unintentionally loses evidence 
valuable to his claim, or a third party loses or destroys evidence in a suit. An example of the 
required elements for a negligent spoliation claim include: (1) existence of a potential civil 
action; (2) a legal or contractual duty to preser ve evidence which is relevant to the potential 
civil action; (3) destruction of that evidence; (4) significant impairment in the ability to prove 
the lawsuit; (5) a causal relationship between the evidence destruction and the inability to 
prove the lawsuit; and (6) damages. 
 
Perjury and Subornation of Perjury 
Perjury is the willful giving of false material testimony under oath, and includes falsely 
claiming that one cannot remember a material fact. There are three general federal perjury 
laws. First, section 1621 of Title 18, U.S. Code, is the general federal perjury statute; it makes 
it a crime to present material false statements under oath in federal proceedings. Section 
1621 applies “in any case in which a law of the United States authorizes an oath to be 
administered.” All states have similar statutes.  
 
Second, section 1623 of Title 18, U.S. Code, makes it a crime to present false testimony or 
produce other false information under oath before, or ancillary to, a federal court or grand 
jury. 
 
Third, section 1622 of Title 18, U.S. Code, criminalizes subornation of perjury; it makes it a 
federal crime to induce or cause another to commit perjury. A person violates section 1622 if 
he induces another to commit perjury in violation of either section 1621 or section 1623. 
The most obvious example of subornation of perjury is telling a prospective witness to lie or 
to conceal the conduct that is the subject of the investigation. Similarly, subornation also has 
been found to exist where a person counseled a witness to give testimony, the truth of which 
he recklessly disregarded, even though he did not know for certain that the information was  
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.449 
untrue. Subornation is only an offense when the perjury has in fact occurred — proof of 
subornation requires proof of the perjury. 
 
 
Discharging a Suspected Wrongdoer 
Many employers, when confronted with a possible wrongdoer or an employee who refuses 
to cooperate in the investigation, immediately want to fire the employee. Whether the 
employee can or should be discharged depends on the facts of the case and the law in the 
employer’s state. Public employers are governed by stricter standards than private employers. 
Constitutional and statutory laws govern the investigation and termination of public 
employees. For example, a public employee cannot be terminated for exercising his Fifth 
Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
 
Employers are generally permitted to discipline or terminate an employee who refuses to 
cooperate with a reasonable request to provide information. But if the employee has an 
employment contract for a specified term or is employed under a collective bargaining 
agreement that requires the employer to have good cause to terminate employment, then the 
question will be whether the refusal to cooperate amounted to good cause for the termination. 
This, in turn, depends on the nature and reasonableness of the request for information, the 
reasons for the refusal and the overall impact that the refusal has on the investigation. A 
good cause requirement can also arise if the company’s policies and practices create an 
implied employment contract. 
 
In contrast, employees who do not have an employment contract that imposes a good cause 
requirement — so-called at-will employees — can be discharged at any time and for any reason; 
that is, an employer does not need good cause to discharge an at-will employee. In some 
states, employment is considered at will in the absence of an employment contract.   
 
An employer, however, does not have a right to fire any employee — including an at-will 
employee — if the firing contravenes a fundamental public policy (for instance, firing an 
employee who refuses to commit an illegal act) or if it violates the company’s established or 
customary disciplinary practices and procedures. For more information, see the Discharge in 
Violation of Public Policy section below. 
 
  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.450  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Good Cause 
Before discharging an employee, it is best to document in the employee’s file that the 
employer has “good cause” to terminate employment. Although there is no exact definition 
of “good cause,” there are several questions that the company should ask before terminating 
an employee: 
• Did the employee know that the conduct would be subject to discipline? 
• Was the rule the employee violated reasonably related to the safe, efficient, or orderly 
operation of the business? 
• Did the company investigate to discover whether the employee violated the rule? 
• Did the company conduct a fair and objective investigation? 
• Did the company obtain significant evidence of a violation? 
• Was the decision nondiscriminatory? 
• Was the discipline related to the seriousness of the offense and the prior record of the 
employee? 
 
If the company feels that discharge of the employee is likely, it should make sure that the 
employee’s actions and the company’s actions  are well documented and placed in the 
employee’s personnel file. 
 
Negligent Discharge 
At least one state has recognized the right of an employee to sue for the employer’s failure to 
properly investigate charges against the employee before discharging him. Most of the courts 
that have addressed this issue have refused to recognize the claim. 
 
Breach of Implied Contract 
Even if there is no express employment contract between an employer and employee, many 
states recognize that an implied contract may be created under certain circumstances. An 
implied contract arises out of the conduct of the parties, even without any formal written or 
oral agreement. If a court finds that an implied contract exists, then the employee who is a 
party to the contract can usually only be fired for good cause.  
 
Implied contracts can be found to exist even when the employer was not aware that there 
was a contract. In fact, many states now recognize that an implied contract between 
employers and employees can arise out of employee handbooks. Handbook provisions 
might limit the right to discharge for “just cause,” and the issue might be whether the 
employer has enough evidence of wrongdoing to constitute “just cause.” 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.451 
Breach of the Duty of Good Faith and Fair Dealing 
A few states recognize a duty on the part of the employer to deal with its employees fairly 
and in good faith. This duty is implied in most contracts, including contracts of employment. 
The scope of this duty might also be shaped from specific obligations found in the 
provisions of an employee handbook or from company personnel policies or practices. 
Documenting that the employer had good cause to terminate the employee should defeat 
this claim. 
 
Discharge in Violation of Public Policy 
Some states recognize a public policy exception to at-will employment. Under this exception, 
an employer does not have the right to discharge an at-will employee if it contravenes a 
fundamental public policy. To qualify under this exception, the employee must prove that 
his conduct is favored by a relevant public policy and that the employer retaliated against 
him for engaging in this “protected” activity. Agai n, to counter this claim, the employer will 
need to show that it had good cause to fire the employee and that it was not retaliating 
against the employee because of the protected conduct. 
 
For example, if an employee is fired because he supported a particular political candidate in 
the last election, a court or jury might find that his termination is in violation of the general 
public policy allowing people to vote for whomever they please. But if the employee was 
conducting fund-raising activities on company time, the company would likely have good 
cause to terminate the employee and such termination would not be in retaliation of the 
employee’s support of a particular candidate. 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.501 



:


individu right dure examin
employe involv in investig of suspect fraud have certain right and oblig
whether the employe is mere a bystand to the fraud who mai have some inform
relev to the investig or is the person actual suspect of commit the fraud
mani of these right and oblig howev ar not perfectli clear and thei typic vari
from case to case gener depend on the employe contractu right applic law
and busi polici therefor fraud examin conduct investig into suspect
misconduct must be flexibl enough to adapt quickli to the uniqu situat thei
encount
employe duti to cooper
a duti to cooper exit in everi employeremploye relationship some state have
statut defin the scope of thi duti while in other the duti is found to be impli from
the basic natur of the employ relationship for instanc california labor code section
2856 state that an employe shall substanti compli with all direct of hi employ
concern the servic on which he is engag unless complianc is imposs unlaw
or would impos unreason burden on the employe
the duti to cooper extend to workplac investig therefor employe have a duti
to cooper dure an intern investig as long as what is request from them is
reason
what is reason will be determin by the fact and circumst of the particular case
and by the duti for which the employe wa hire for exampl if inventori item were
miss it would probabl be reason to request that a warehous supervisor review
inventori record becaus thi fall within the scope of hi work duti it might not be
reason to ask the same supervisor to review detail tape from the compani cash
regist it almost certainli would not be reason to ask the warehous supervisor to let
compani investig search hi person resid
the issu of whether an employe ha a duti to cooper often come up when
investig seek to interview employe about suspect workplac misconduct in gener
interview should be consid reason if the interview address matter within the
scope of the employe action or duti
individu right dure examin law
2402 2011 fraud examin manual
employe right dure the investig
while the employe ha a duti to cooper the employe also ha certain other right that
defin the scope of that duti employe right howev vari from case to case gener
depend on the employe contractu right applic feder and state statut and
constitut protect thu befor begin ani fraud examin it is import for
the fraud examin to determin the employe right
contractu right
an employe mai have contractu right that limit the abil of the employ to compel full
cooper in a fraud examin for exampl if the employe is a member of a union
the union contract or collect bargain agreement might contain certain restrict on
the compani investigatori procedur for instanc the compani might be requir to
notifi the union befor the interview and the employe mai have the right to have a union
repres present see nlrb v weingarten inc 420 us 251 1975 other employe
might have a written employ agreement which might contain provis concern
the employe right dure an investig
other employe might have a written employ agreement which mai contain
provis concern the employe right dure an investig in addit mani
court have held that compani polici employe manual and past practic can creat
impli contractu relationship between the employ and the employe therefor if
the compani deviat from these histor practic the target of the investig mai
claim that thei were singl out and investig differ than other in similar
circumst
whistleblow
feder law and mani state law provid protect to employe who report improp or
illeg act to govern author most of these law protect the employe from ani
advers employ action or retaliatori action from the employ for more inform
on whistleblow law see the feder whistleblow statut section in the the law
relat to fraud part 2 chapter abov
employe constitut right
the unit state constitut protect individu from abus of government power and
sever constitut provis can come into plai in the cours of a fraud investig
the fourth amend to the us constitut prohibit unreason search and
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2403
seizur the fifth amend provid that a person cannot be compel to give
inform that might incrimin him the sixth amend provid that a person ha
the right to an attornei and to confront the wit against him addition while the
constitut contain no express guarante of privaci court have found that individu
privaci right ar impli from mani of the express protect in the bill of right
the gener rule is that the unit state constitut onli limit govern action it doe
not limit the power of privat employ in conduct a corpor investig that rule
howev is subject to sever limit and although a privat employ usual cannot be
su for a violat of the fourth fifth or sixth amend these provis still have
import implic for the fraud investig
privat action versu state action
for an employe to sue an employ for the violat of a constitut right there must be
some form of state action involv state acti on is involv dure ani investig by a
state or feder entiti includ investig of their own employe
there ar no brightlin rule regard when an investig can be consid to involv
state action the follow exampl howev could be consid to involv state action
investig conduct by a privat compani but at the suggest of the state or
feder author
investig begun by a privat compani that later ar taken over or expand by state
or feder author
joint investig with or aid by state or feder author
investig conduct by a privat compani that ar requir by state or feder law
search or interrog conduct by outsid investig who ar offduti state
local or feder author
investig by a privat compani pursuant to a feder statut
if an investig is conduct by a privat compani in accord with feder law an
issu is rais as to whether the corpor intern investig could be consid state
action
for exampl in the case of skinner v railwai labor execut assn 489 us 602 1989 the
us suprem court found that a privat railroad act as an agent for the govern when
it compli with the provis of the feder railroad administr act in administ
individu right dure examin law
2404 2011 fraud examin manual
drug test to it employe under the regul at issu the railroad wa requir by law to
conduct the test and the feder railroad administr wa author to receiv the test
result
if a compani is conduct an investig pursuant to such feder law as the secur
exchang act of 1934 or the foreign corrupt practic act of 1977 the compani should be
awar of the possibl implic of state action therefor befor ani advers action is
taken against an employe legal advic should be obtain
employe protect from polygraph examin
the employe polygraph protect act prohibit the us of polygraph by most privat
employ unless the employ is engag in an ongo investig involv econom
loss or injuri to the employ in the employ busi and ha a reason suspicion that
the employe is involv in the incid
employ subject to thi act cannot us polygraph to screen applic for employ
and thei cannot discharg an employe for refus to take an exam thi act howev
doe not protect govern employe
in addit some court have found the us of polygraph action on common law
ground under certain circumst for exampl some state court have held that
polygraph test can constitut an invas of privaci
fair credit report act fcra
on of the primari statut limit access to inform is the feder fair credit
report act fcra thi statut regul the dissemin of consum inform to
third parti by consum report agenc histor the fcra onli appli to
consum credit report but due to amend in 1997 the fcra appli to the gather
of mani other type of inform about an individu through third parti
the fcra regul the type of inform that can be contain in a consum credit
report it restrict credit bureau from releas an individu credit inform to ani
third parti without author and it set forth the circumst under which a third
parti can obtain a copi of the report
if the fcra doe appli it mean that an examin cannot obtain certain inform about
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2405
a person unless that person ha receiv certain notic and sign a consent form the
failur to do so can mean civil penalti also if an examin obtain a copi of a credit
report that fact will be note on the report
often fraud examin will need to obtain consum report for preemploy purpos
and workplac investig of fraud an misconduct
for more inform about the fcra see the obtain inform about employe
section below
interview
introduct
interview and especi admissionseek interview mai expos the compani and the
fraud examin to certain legal risk thu befor engag in an interview the examin
must understand the ramif of their action which requir an understand of
certain legal issu and how thei limit or affect the wai in which an interview mai be
conduct the follow is an overview of some of the most common legal issu that mai
affect interview situat
and sinc employe right vari from case to case fraud examin should alwai consult
with an attornei regard the specif law and regul for their state or local
restrict on employe interview
in the context of an intern investig employe of privat entiti gener do not
enjoi constitut protect howev thei mai possess contractu right that must be
respect dure the cours of an interview for exampl an employe cover by a
collectivebargain agreement mai have the right to have a repres present dure
the interview
thu it is in the compani best interest to review all aspect of the employeremploye
relationship includ compani polici contractu relationship and prevail law befor
conduct the interview
individu right dure examin law
2406 2011 fraud examin manual
employe right against selfincrimin
the fifth amend of the unit state constitut provid that a person cannot be
compel to give inform that mai incrimin him in a crimin case it provid
no person shall be held to answer for a capit or otherwis infam crime unless on a
present or indict of a grand juri except in case aris in the land or naval forc or
in the militia when in actual servic in time of war and public danger nor shall ani person be
subject for the same offens to be twice put in jeopardi of life or limb nor shall be compel in
ani crimin case to be a wit ag ainst himself nor be depriv of life liberti or properti
without due process of law nor shall privat properti be taken for public us without just
compens
the fifth amend right against selfincrimin contain two basic protect it
protect a person from be forc to give inform that could be us to convict him
of a crimin offens and it prevent the state from punish an employe for hi silenc or
otherwis us hi exercis of that right against him
public employ
as state abov constitut protect gener onli appli to public employe thi
mean that employe of feder state and local govern must be afford protect
under the fifth amend a public employ cannot fire employe for refus to
answer question that might incrimin them the lead case on thi issu is garriti v new
jersei 385 us 493 1967 in garriti sever new jersei polic offic were threaten with
dismiss from their job if thei refus to answer question relat to a conspiraci to
obstruct traffic law the offic face with termin answer the question and were
subsequ prosecut the us suprem court found that the statement had been
improperli coerc and thu thei were not admiss at trial
the fifth amend onli protect person against compel testimoni thu if an
employe voluntarili confess to a crime thei can be fire without violat their
constitut right the confess howev must be truli voluntari the employe cannot
be coerc in ani wai to give selfincrimin evid dure an interview
if a public employ or govern offici want to compel an employe to provid
answer with potenti crimin liabil and administr consequ thei mai get
written approv to offer the employe a kalkin warn kalkin warn ar a form of
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2407
immun that preclud prosecut against the employe for statement deriv from the
compel testimoni howev thi immun doe not prevent prosecut against the
employe where the govern receiv evid from a legitim independ sourc
and it doe not prevent prosecut of an employe for provid the govern with fals
statement or answer addition if an employe refus to answer question after
receiv a proper kalkin warn the public employ mai take disciplinari action
includ dismiss
it should also be note that the right against selfincrimin onli appli in crimin case
thu an employe public or privat can be fire for refus to answer a question when
the answer will onli lead to an administr punish or a civil suit but not to crimin
convict furthermor in a civil lawsuit it is permiss to draw an advers infer
from the fact that an employe refus to answer an incrimin question it is not
permiss to draw a neg infer in a crimin case from refus to answer such a
question
in practic howev it mai be veri difficult to draw the distinct between question that
will lead to crimin prosecut and those that will onli lead to civil or administr
punish if an employe is compel to answer a question and the answer provid
evid of crimin wrongdo that wa previous unknown that evid could be
inadmiss in a subsequ crimin case it is a better practic not to compel answer from
public employe in ani set so that constitut issu can be avoid
even if a set is deem noncustodi and miranda warn ar not requir thi doe not
elimin the public employe fifth amend right against selfincrimin
regardless of the set a public employ cannot compel it employe to choos between
their constitut right and their job
privat employ
the fifth amend gener doe not appli to privat employ becaus in the absenc
of a state action there is no constitut protect against selfincrimin therefor
an employe might be subject to dismiss by a privat compani if he fail to cooper in an
investig howev there ar situat as discuss abov where privat compani
mai be held liabl for violat their employe constitut right when there is a
suffici nexu between a regul compani and the govern such that the privat
compani essenti act as an agent of the govern then that privat compani action
will be treat as action of the govern itself in such a case constitut protect
for the privat compani employe ar trigger
the kei to the determin is whether the privat compani is act on behalf of the
govern as an agent of the govern for exampl if a privat entiti were direct by the
individu right dure examin law
2408 2011 fraud examin manual
polic to interview it employe in connect with a crime thi entiti would be act as
an agent of the polic in thi situat the privat compani employe could not be
termin for refus to answer question that might incrimin them
it should also be note that some state have expand the right of privat employe to
includ protect for certain constitut right thu an interview should consult with
an attornei befor take ani advers action against an employe who refus to answer
potenti incrimin question
miranda warn
design to protect an individu fifth amend right against selfincrimin
miranda warn advic suspect that thei have the right not to answer question and the
right to legal counsel dure interrog miranda warn ar requir onli if a person is
be interrog by public author in a custodi set custodi set refer to
question initi by law enforc offic after a person ha been taken into custodi
or otherwis depriv of hi freedom or action in ani signific wai as a result both
privat and public employ might interview employe in noncustodi set without
give miranda warn
in subsequ civil proceed an advers infer might be drawn from silenc in
respons to question
presenc of corpor attornei
although miranda warn might not be requir a compani attornei mai conduct or be
present dure the interview of compani employe becaus the compani lawyer
repres onli the interest of the compani and not those of the individu employe an
employe who is be interview must not be permit or misl to believ that the
compani lawyer repres hi interest dure an interview for thi reason if a corpor
attornei is present dure the interview it is good polici to inform the employe of sever
thing befor the interview begin counsel should inform the employe of the follow
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2409
counsel repres the compani not the employe
the purpos of the interview is to obtain inform to provid legal advic to the
compani
inform provid by the employe initi will be treat as confidenti but the
compani ultim will determin whether to disclos the inform to law
enforc agenc
the employe is expect to answer the question fulli and truthfulli
the employe should not discuss the interview with anyon either insid or outsid the
compani except hi attornei
depend on the circumst the attornei might also wish to advis the employe that
he is free to retain an attornei factor to includ in determin whether to give such advic
includ the degre of evid of the employe culpabl whether the evid is such to
draw a conclus concern a violat of the law the likelihood of crimin prosecut if
the result of the investig ar disclos the exist of a conflict of interest between
the employe and the compani and state ethic code
employe right to counsel
the sixth amend afford subject in a crimin investig the right to counsel the
relev text provid
in all crimin prosecut the accus shall enjoi the right to be confront with wit
against him to have compulsori process for obta in wit in hi favor and to have the
assist of counsel for hi defens
applic
if no state action is involv a privat employ can interview an employe without the
presenc of hi attornei howev the employe an individu alwai ha the right to
consult an attornei but there is typic no legal oblig to consult the employe lawyer
prior to the interview or allow the employe lawyer to sit in dure an interview
whether an employe will be permit to be accompani by a repres dure an
interview gener depend on the particular circumst if the employe is cover by a
collectivebargain agreement for exampl the term of the agreement will gener
control whether a repres can be present in the absenc of such circumst the
individu right dure examin law
2410 2011 fraud examin manual
gener rule is that it is at the compani discret whether it will allow the employe to be
repres dure an interview
employe right to due process
the fourteenth amend guarante the right to due process
all person born or natur in the unit state and subject to the jurisdict thereof ar
citizen of the unit state and of the state wherein thei resid no state shall make or enforc
ani law which shall abridg the privileg and immun of citizen of the unit state nor
shall ani state depriv ani person of life libert y or properti without due process of law nor
deni to ani person within it jurisdict ion the equal protect of the law
in the context of a fraud investig the constitut right to due process usual refer
to procedur right that must be observ befor the employe suffer ani advers
consequ again the right to due process usual is not applic to employe of
privat compani state or feder employ howev might be requir to provid the
wrongdo employe with the follow
written notic of the charg
adequ opportun to rebut ani charg brought prior to ani disciplinari action be
taken which might includ the right to call wit and the right to be repres by
an attornei
even in the absenc of constitut due process protect similar procedur to ensur
fundament fair mai be requir even of privat employ becaus of contractu
provis collect bargain agreement establish compani polici or applic
labor or employ statut thu privat employ might also wish to emploi the abov
procedur to avoid a possibl civil suit by the employe
state constitut
mani state have constitut provis concern selfincrimin right to counsel
and due process the law of your particular state should be examin close in some
instanc state constitut provid broader protect than the us constitut
feder statut
nation labor relat act
the nation labor relat act prohibit ani form of interrog by employ that
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2411
interfer with the right of the employe to organ bargain or otherwis engag in
concert activ for the purpos of bargain or other mutual aid or protect an
employ might not question an employe about ani of these protect activ either hi
own or that of other employe
rule regard nonunion represent dure interview
in june 2004 the nation labor relat board nlrb overrul a controversi
decis regard the right of nonunion employe to have a repres present
dure interview and reinstat the former 1975 rule that nonunion employe ar not
entitl to represent dure investigatori interview i bm corp 341 nlrb no 148
2004 the nlrb reason that allow cowork to sit in as repres dure
investigatori interview would compromis the requisit confidenti sensit and
thorough of the interview accordingli nonunion employ no longer have a legal
oblig to accept an employe request for such represent
union employe
sinc 1975 and the us suprem court decis of nlrb v weingarten 420 us 251 1975
union employe have had the right to union represent dure an investigatori
interview provid that the employe reason believ the interview might result in
disciplinari action thi right deriv from the nation labor relat act which
provid that employe have the right to act in concert for mutual aid and protect in
the year sinc weingarten thi right ha onli been appli in case where the employe under
investig wa cover by a collectivebargain agreement
former law nonunion employe
in the case of epilepsi foundat of northeast ohio 331 nlrb no 92 decid juli 10 2000
the nlrb extend the socal weingarten right to nonunion employe the case involv
two worker who were fire from the epilepsi foundat prior to their discharg the two
employe wrote a memo that wa critic of their supervisor later the execut director
request to meet with on of the employe and the supervisor the employe request to
meet with the execut director alon but the request wa deni the employe then ask
if the coauthor of the memo could be present at the meet thi request wa also deni
when the employe still express apprehens about the meet he wa told to go home
and he wa fire the next dai for insubordin
the nlrb rule that discharg the employe for refus to attend the meet violat
individu right dure examin law
2412 2011 fraud examin manual
the nation labor relat act a major of the board felt that the right set forth in
weingarten should appli equal in circumst in which employe ar not repres by
a union thei reason that the right to have a cowork present at an investigatori
interview greatli enhanc the employe opportun to act in concert to address the
concern that the employ doe not initi or continu a practic of impos punish
unjustli
current law nonunion employe
a repres mai be present where the employ allow for such
no longer must an employ allow a repres to be present where an employe
specif request represent howev an employ is not preclud from allow
the employe to have represent upon request
employ can alwai decid not to conduct an interview but refus to do so mai caus
problem of it own if the compani administ disciplinari action without first hear the
employe side of the stori then the compani mai be hand the employe a lawsuit for
wrong discharg or a discrimin claim as a gener rule it is difficult to defend a
termin action if the employ did not at least listen to the employe version of event
prior to take action
where the employ allow for employe represent the employ need not bargain
with the employe repres
presum the rule in weingarten will continu to control thi issu in weingarten the
suprem court state that the repres role is to assist the employe and he mai do
so by attempt to clarifi fact or suggest other employe who mai have knowledg of
them the court made it clear that the employ mai insist on hear the subject version
of event and the repres is not allow to direct the subject not to answer a question
or to tell the subject to answer question onli onc therefor the employ is allow to
conduct the interview without interfer by the repres
employe do not have a right to be repres at an interview by a privat attornei
under epilepsi where an employ fail to compli with the rule requir represent
upon employe request it could have been subject to an administr ceaseanddesist
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2413
order andor reinstat of the employe with back pai due to the overturn of
epilepsi and reinstat of weingarten howev these penalti will probabl not appli
unless the nonunion employ agre to allow employe represent
if an employe request ani type of represent at an interview you should immedi
consult your legal counsel you should also consult counsel to review your exist polici
and procedur to ensur that you ar awar of the legal duti ramif and remedi
surround employe represent
nondiscrimin statut
includ in the civil right act of 1866 and 1871 titl vii of the civil right act of 1964
and the ag discrimin in employ act of 1970 is the prohibit of singl out
employe for interview base on their race nation origin religion sex or ag
fair labor standard
the fair labor standard requir an employ to pai an employe for time spent in an
interview
common law protect in connect with interview
even though employe of privat organ do not in most case enjoi constitut
protect in connect with interview thei do have certain protect that aris out of
common law these protect also appli to employe of public organ fraud
examin must be awar of the relev commonlaw protect that relat to intern
interview and must be care not to expos themselv to legal liabil
invas of privaci
while modern tort law includ four categori of invas of privaci thi discuss onli
address the two most common form of invas of privaci applic to fraud
examin intrus upon seclus and public disclosur of privat fact
intrus into seclus
intrus upon seclus occur when an individu intention intrud upon the solitud
or seclus of anoth or hi privat affair or concern and the intrus would be highli
offens to a reason person question employe about activ not relat to job
perform might constitut an invas of privaci
individu right dure examin law
2414 2011 fraud examin manual
the element of thi tort includ
an intent intrus
into an area where an individu ha a reason expect of privaci
the intrus would be highli offens or objection to a reason person
public disclosur of privat fact
the tort of public disclosur of privat fact occur when on parti make public statement
about anoth parti privat life that ar not of public concern for instanc disclos
inform obtain in an interview to individu not involv in the investig
unlik defam claim which ar discuss below thi caus of action can aris even if
the statement ar true the kei is that the inform is privat in natur and it is not a
matter of public interest
intent inflict of emot distress
intent inflict of emot distress refer to ani unprivileg conduct that is so
outrag and egregi that it exce all bound usual toler by civil societi and
that is intend to caus injuri or wa commit with reckless disregard for the likelihood
of it caus injuri to anoth
for an employe to state a claim for intent inflict of emot distress he must
establish all of the follow element
the employ engag in extrem and outrag conduct
the employ conduct wa intend to caus sever emot distress or if not
intend would caus sever emot distress in a reason person
the employe actual did suffer emot or mental distress as a result of the
employ conduct
it is not enough that the employe is mere upset by the conduct for exampl
question alon even coupl with accus and rais voic probabl will not give
rise to such a claim
defam
defam is an unprivileg public of a falsehood about a person that tend to harm
the reput of that person the law of defam actual consist of two tort libel and
slander libel is basic defam that appear in written form while slander involv
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2415
defamatori remark that ar onli spoken
in gener the element of these two caus of action ar essenti the same to recov
for defam the plaintiff must prove the follow element
the defend made an untru statement of fact
the statement wa commun publish to third parti
the statement wa made on an unprivileg occas
the statement damag the subject reput
the threat of a defam lawsuit is alwai present when alleg of wrongdo ar
made against certain employe for exampl a claim of defam might aris in the
context of an interview as a result of unfound accus or statement made by the
interview where someon in addit to the employe and the interview is present
assum that an employe can establish that defamatori statement were made and
commun to a thirdparti the most import defens to a defam action for fraud
examin is that of qualifi busi privileg if thi privileg appli then no liabil can
attach to the speaker
the qualifi busi privileg gener appli if a person make a statement 1 in good
faith 2 regard a subject in which the person make the statement ha a legitim
interest or duti and 3 to those who have an interest in the matter
the privileg howev might be lost if the defamatori statement ar commun with
malic thi usual mean that the person commun the statement knew thei were
fals or made them without regard to whether thei were fals
some court have held that there can be no defam aris from an employ inquiri
of it employe concern their possibl involv in a violat of compani polici
the employ might even have duti to investig aris from it duti to protect it
busi it employe and the public from wrongdo employe
good faith and fair deal
sever state recogn a duti on the part of employ to deal with their employe fairli
and in good faith thi duti might includ abid by all provis in an employe
handbook for exampl it might contain a provis that interview will be conduct in a
individu right dure examin law
2416 2011 fraud examin manual
profession manner and onli concern job relat matter
breach of impli contract
employ and employe mai enter into contract that govern the length and term of
employ and if the employ violat the contract the employe can sue for breach of
contract
moreov employ contract can be express or impli just becaus the compani ha
not sign a written formal contract with an employe thi doe not mean that there is
no employ contract collectivebargain agreement employe handbook and even
oral promis can establish an employ contract and limit the compani abil to
disciplin or fire an employe befor take ani disciplinari action against an employe
make sure you ar awar of the true statu of the employ relationship
fals imprison
fals imprison is restraint by on person of the physic liberti of anoth without consent
or legal justif a claim of fals imprison might be made if an employe is
detain in ani wai dure a search either of the employe or of the employe desk locker
etc gener an employ is entitl to question an employe at work about a violat of
compani polici without incur liabil as long as the employe submit to the
question voluntarili that is not as a result of threat or forc howev the length
natur and manner of the interview will determin whether liabil aris
fals imprison factor includ
size and natur of the room where an interview take place small windowless not easili
access is a neg
light in roomsoft versu sever
requir the employe presenc or continu presenc by ani amount of forc
includ hold the employe arm to escort him
violent behavior of ani kind dure the in terview includ yell pound on desk
or kick furnitur or wall
refus to allow the employe to leav the room such as by push the employe into
a chair or lock the door
the number of peopl involv in the interview
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2417
search and surveil
workplac privaci is a rapidli evolv area of law that can aris in numer context
involv the employeremploye relationship such as surveil and monitor search
and polygraph test in most case an employ might investig it workplac for
wrongdo by mean of workplac search and surveil of workplac area or
employe howev an employe privaci mai be protect by the constitut state
constitut feder and state statut or common law limit
employe right under the fourth amend
the fourth amend is the princip constitut limit on search and seizur by
public author it state
the right of the peopl to be secur in their person hous paper and effect against
unreason search and seizur shall not be violat and no warrant shall issu but upon
probabl caus support by oath or affirm and particularli describ the place to be
search and the person or thing to be seiz
in short the fourth amend prohibit unreason search and seizur that is it
prohibit public employ from unreason invad their employe privaci to conduct
a workplac search and it prohibit unreason surveil of employe such as
videotap or wiretap where thei would reason expect privaci
the warrant requir
all search and seizur must be reason whether it is reason to conduct a search
and whether the activ were conduct in a reason manner is determin by the
total of the circumst a reason search is on carri out pursuant to a warrant
ie a court order that grant author the right to take a particular action issu upon a
show of probabl caus thu in some circumst the fourth amend requir
that the govern obtain a warrant befor thei conduct a search
moreov in katz v unit state 389 us 347 1967 the suprem court held that the
fourth amend protect peopl not place mean that it provis extend
beyond the properti line of the citizen that the amend appli wherev there is a
reason expect of privaci and that a search without a warrant is per se
unreason in the absenc of exig circumst thu the polic normal need to
obtain a warrant not onli to search a hous but also to intercept call from a public
individu right dure examin law
2418 2011 fraud examin manual
telephon booth or inspect the content of a safe deposit box or to otherwis intrud into
matter that the court would reason consid to be privat
in johnson v unit state 333 us 10 1948 the suprem court rule that all warrant must
be issu by a judg or magistr the latter a feder judici offic empow to hear
misdemeanor case explain that the point of the fourth amend is not that it
deni law enforc the support of the usual infer which reason men draw
from evid it protect consist in requir that those infer be drawn by a
neutral and detach magistr instead of be judg by the offic engag in the often
competit enterpris of ferret out crime
addition all warrant must satisfi the requir under the fourth amend that
is all warrant for search must be judici sanction and support by probabl caus
and thei must particularli describ the place to be search or thing to be seiz
the probabl caus requir of the fourth amend is the central restraint on the
power of the polic to search probabl caus ha been defin as those fact and
circumst suffici to caus a person of reason caution to believ that a crime ha
been commit and that the accus commit it it requir more than mere suspicion or
hunch but less than virtual certainti reason ground to believ is probabl as good a
definit as ani
furthermor all warrant must particularli describ the place to be search or the person
or thing to be seiz the particular requir wa intend to prevent prevent the
issuanc of warrant on loos vagu or doubt base of fact an abus that outrag the
constitut drafter gobart import co v unit state 282 us 344 357 1931 in
todai term the claus would prohibit a search warrant in a whitecollar investig or a
subpoena that command the product of all the defend book and record whether
or not relev to the investig or trial
but even if a warrant is technic requir there ar a number of recogn except to
the warrant requir princip
workplac search by govern employ
search incid to arrest
search of motor vehicl
exig or emerg circumst to prevent the destruct of evid or while in
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2419
hot pursuit of a suspect
when the search is conduct pursuant to a valid voluntari consent
when the evid is in plain view
border custom and prison search
workplac search by govern employ
public employ ar not gener requir to obtain a warrant when thei conduct search
for investig of workplac misconduct in oconnor v ortega 480 us 709 1987 the
suprem court held that requir warrant for all form of public workplac search
would be unwork and would impos intoler burden on public employ
therefor the court rule that workplac search should be held to a lower standard
in reach thi decis the court state that when public employ conduct a workplac
investig their interest is substanti differ from the normal interest of law
enforc the goal of public employ is to ensur that their offic run effici not
to enforc the law requir these employ to obtain a warrant for everi workplac search
would imped the effect administr of the govern work
the court also found that while public employe have some legitim privaci interest in
the workplac these interest ar less than in other place such as their home govern
offic ar provid to public employe for the purpos of do govern work and
employe can avoid expos truli person belong at work by simpli leav them at
home thu by balanc the strong govern interest in maintain an effici
workplac against the diminish privaci interest of govern employe the court
justifi the us of a lower standard for workplac search by govern employ
instead of a warrant requir base on probabl caus govern employ ar
gener held to a standard of reason under all the circumst
the reason standard
workplac search by govern employ ar subject to the reason standard in
two circumst
for noninvestigatori workrel purpos which ar wholli unrel to illeg
conduct such as retriev a file from someon desk
for investig of workrel misconduct
when a public employ conduct an investig of workrel misconduct and when
individu right dure examin law
2420 2011 fraud examin manual
that investig necessit a search of an employe workspac the employ is not
gener requir to obtain a warrant to perform the search nor is the employ requir to
make a show of probabl caus that the suspect ha commit a crime thi doe not
mean howev that there ar no restrict on the employ abil to conduct the search
it still must meet the test for reason under all the circumst
there is a twopart test to determin if a workplac search is reason
the search must be justifi at it incept
the search must be conduct in a wai that is reason relat in scope to the
circumst that justifi the interfer in the first place
a search is justifi at it incept if there ar reason ground for suspect that the
search will turn up evid that the employe is guilti of workrel misconduct or if the
search is necessari for a noninvestigatori purpos such as to retriev a file a search is not
justifi at it incept simpli becaus an employ think that the suspect might be
engag in workplac misconduct the employ must be abl to demonstr a reason
clear suspicion base on factual inform that the area to be search contain evid
of misconduct
the second part of the test requir that the search be reason in scope the fact that a
search is justifi at it incept doe not give the employ cart blanch author to intrud
upon the suspect privaci in all area the search must be no broader than is necessari to
serv the organ legitim workrel purpos
reason expect of privaci
the fourth amend onli appli to workplac search by govern employ
where an employe ha a reason expect of privaci thu to determin if a
workplac search will violat an employe fourth amend right an employ must
first determin if the employe ha a reason expect of privaci in the area to be
search there is no brightlin rule for determin whether an employe ha a reason
privaci expect in a particular area such a privaci interest can exist for a desk drawer a
file cabinet a locker or even an entir offic depend on the circumst the issu is
whether a reason person would expect the area to be free from intrus the employe
doe not have to have an ownership interest in the area to have a reason expect of
privaci in the area thu even though a public employ mai own the offic where an
employe work that employe can still have a privaci interest in the offic that prohibit
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2421
the employ from conduct a search
the kei factor to consid is whether the employe ha exclus control over the area in
question if so thi tend to show that the employe ha a reason expect of privaci
in that area for instanc assum that an employe ha a file cabinet in hi offic that he is
the onli person who us that file cabinet that the cabinet ha a lock on it that the
employe is the onli person with a kei and that the cabinet remain lock when the
employe is not us it these fact indic that the employe ha exclus control over
the content of the file cabinet and thu ha a reason expect of privaci in it
content in other word base on the circumst the employe would be justifi in
believ that other cannot and will not enter the file cabinet without hi consent the
employe in thi scenario ha a constitution protect privaci interest in the content of
the file cabinet a search of thi file cabinet by the public employ would have to comport
with the reason standard as discuss abov
but if the file cabinet doe not have a lock if sever employe store and retriev file from
that cabinet and if it is gener understood that thei can do so without employe
consent then the employe cannot reason expect that the content of the file cabinet
will be privat under these fact the employe would not have a reason expect of
privaci in the file cabinet therefor a search of that file cabinet would not violat the
employe fourth amend right
reason privaci expect can also attach to commun employe might
reason expect person phone convers or email messag to be privat and free
from monitor
in term of surveil employe ar like to have reason privaci expect in
bathroom chang room and other person area within the workplac
obvious there ar a lot of factor that go into determin whether an employe ha a
reason expect of privaci befor conduct a search or surveil employ
should consult legal counsel to make sure thei ar not intrud upon an employe privaci
interest
search incid to arrest
polic offic mai without a warrant conduct a limit search incid to an a law arrest
individu right dure examin law
2422 2011 fraud examin manual
the search howev must be limit to the arreste bodi and the area within hi
immedi control thi except is design to protect the offic and to prevent the
destruct of evid for the search to be valid the arrest must be valid ie base on
probabl caus and not mere a pretext to justifi a search if the arrest is unlaw when
made it cannot be justifi by the fruit of the subsequ search and all evid obtain
must be suppress
search of motor vehicl
an automobil airplan or vessel mai be search without a warrant if there is probabl
caus to believ it contain contraband or other evid of a crime thi is becaus of the
mobil of the vehicl henc the risk that evid mai be lost or destroi while a
warrant is be obtain and the lower expect of privaci associ with vehicl if
there is probabl caus to believ that the vehicl contain contraband the polic ar also
permit to remov the vehicl from the scene to a stationhous to conduct a search
without obtain a warrant furthermor the polic also mai conduct warrantless
inventori search of impound vehicl to secur and protect the owner person
properti and thei mai seiz contraband or other evid discov as a result
it mai also be permiss for law enforc to make warrantless search of contain
and luggag found within a vehicl thi appli if the polic have probabl caus to believ
there is contraband in the contain or if thei have probabl caus to believ there is
contraband in the car and that contraband could be hidden in the contain
the search incid to arrest except also appli in the motor vehicl context howev
the boundari of thi search have chang with time most recent on april 21 2009 the
suprem court impos new restrict on the except in arizona v gant 556 us
2009 for mani year the rule had been that the polic mai search the entir passeng
compart of a vehicl incid to the custodi arrest of an occup of the car in gant
howev the suprem court ad a new limit vehicl search follow an
occup arrest ar legal onli when the arreste is unsecur and within reach distanc
of the passeng compart at the time of the search or when the offic ha reason to
believ the vehicl ha evid of the crime that form the basi for the arrest
the motor vehicl except to the warrant requir doe not extend to passeng in
the car onc a passeng ha been arrest howev the polic ar permit to make a
warrantless search of the suspect and the area within hi control pursuant to the except
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2423
for search incid to arrest as discuss abov
exig or emerg circumst
there is also an except to the warrant requir for exig circumst which
mean where the offic must act quickli
consent search
individu ar alwai free to waiv their fourth amend right if a suspect consent to
a search by polic thi elimin the need for a warrant the court howev will close
scrutin ani such consent to make sure it wa truli voluntari particularli when it lead
to the seizur of incrimin evid consent obtain by deceit briberi or
misrepresent ar gener held to be involuntari and invalid howev when an
undercov polic offic conceal hi ident and as a result an individu allow the
offic to enter an area thi amount to consent even though the person did not know
permiss wa be grant to a polic offic consent might not be voluntari if it requir
a choic between exercis constitut right and continu employ there is also
no requir that suspect be inform of their right to refus consent
consent mai be impli in circumst in which the individu can choos between
enter an area and submit to a search or not enter as when on enter a secur
courthous board an airplan or cross an intern border consent mai be given by
third parti to search of properti over which the third parti have author such as a co
tenant in a leas apart
evid in plain view
evid in plain view of an offic who ha a right to be in a posit to observ it also
mai be seiz without a warrant thi situat usual occur when contraband or evid
of anoth crime is inadvert discov dure a search or arrest for anoth offens
the discoveri must be truli inadvert howev if discoveri of the evid is anticip
and no other except appli a warrant must first be obtain
border custom and prison search
border and custom search ar a longstand except to the fourth amend and
mai be conduct without probabl caus or a warrant search of prison cell and the
monitor of inmat telephon convers also mai be conduct without a warrant or
individu right dure examin law
2424 2011 fraud examin manual
probabl caus becaus of secur concern and the absenc of a realist expect of
privaci in prison
search an employe mail
an employ mai not conduct search of an employe mail befor it ha been deliv
under feder law ani person who take a letter postcard or packag from the mail befor
it ha been deliv to the person to whom it wa direct with design to obstruct the
correspond face up to five year imprison a fine or both see 18 usc 1702
onc the mail ha been deliv howev then ordinari rule regard search appli
surveil
an employ in certain circumst can us monitor and surveil method to
uncov employe wrongdo variou feder and state law govern the avail and
method of surveil techniqu becaus of the complex of these law and the
differ interpret of them by state and feder court counsel should alwai be
consult beforehand for exampl if an employ monitor employe phone call without
follow the proper legal procedur the employ might violat feder or state wiretap
law the employ might also expos itself to substanti legal liabil for invas of
privaci
to lower the expect of privaci and to preserv the right to search ani and all area and
to monitor and survei employe conduct the employ should adopt a written polici which
provid that to maintain the secur of it oper the compani might gain access to
and search all work area and person belong includ desk file drawer locker
briefcas handbag pocket and person effect includ in the polici that workplac
area ar subject to surveil and that busi phone call might be monitor in
addit as discuss below the polici also should state that the employ could monitor all
electron commun such as email as well as monitor what site ar visit over the
internet
electron commun privaci act of 1986
the electron commun privaci act of 1986 ecpa codifi at 18 usc
25102521 27012710 31213126 is the primari feder statut that offer worker
protect in commun privaci
under the ecpa electron commun ar defin as ani transfer of sign signal
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2425
write imag sound data or intellig of ani natur transmit in whole or in part by
a wire radio electromagnet photolectron or photoopt system that affect
interst or foreign commerc
the ecpa is divid into three part the wiretap act which govern the intercept of
electron commun the store commun act which cover access to store
commun and record and the pen regi ter act which regul pen regist and
trap and trace devic
the wiretap act 18 usc 25102521
in respons to an increas number of privaci breach congress enact the wiretap act
which prohibit anyon from intention intercept or attempt to intercept ani wire
oral or electron commun
section 2511 prohibit covert spy on voic and data commun extend
protect from eavesdrop on mail and telephon commun to includ digit
data commun such as email and remot comput it doe not govern store
commun under the wiretap act an intercept occur by the acquisit of the
content of ani electron commun through the us of ani devic most court have
held that intercept occur onli when the protect commun ar obtain
contemporan with their transmiss
remedi for violat the wiretap act includ crimin sanction and civil relief a crimin
violat under the act is a feloni and is punish by up to five year imprison
andor fine under a privat caus of action a court mai award the plaintiff equit relief
actual damag punit damag and attornei fee
the store commun act 18 usc 2701
as part of the ecpa congress enact the store commun act sca to protect
store electron commun such as email and voicemail by prohibit the
unauthor access of such commun that ar in storag more specif the sca
prohibit unlaw access to a facil that provid an electron commun servic
and then obtain alter or prevent author access to a wire or electron
commun while it is electron store in such a system an electron
commun fall under the sca onc a system receiv and store it
individu right dure examin law
2426 2011 fraud examin manual
the sca includ both civil and crimin penalti concern civil penalti the sca
provid a privat right of action and allow appropri relief includ equit relief
damag and attornei fee regard crimin penalti the sca provid that if the first
offens is commit for purpos of commerci advantag malici destruct or
damag or privat commerci gain punish mai includ a fine andor imprison
for up to five year for ani subsequ offens penalti includ a fine andor
imprison for not more than ten year in ani other case where it is a first offens
court mai impos a fine or imprison for not more than six month or both for all
subsequ convict court mai impos a fine andor imprison for up to ten year
the pen regist act
pen regist ar devic that can detect the telephon number from which an incom call
ha been made titl 18 section 3121 of the us code gener prohibit the instal of
pen regist without a court order
except
although the ecpa impos sever rule about electron commun it also contain
sever except to these rule the except most relev to the workplac ar
the ordinari cours of busi except
the provid except
the consent except
ordinari cours of busi except
the ecpa definit of electron devic specif exclud devic that ar us by
an employ in the ordinari cours of busi ness therefor employ ar permit to
monitor their employe wire or electron commun includ phone call if done
for a legitim busi purpos
the provid except
the provid except allow supplier of wire or electron commun servic eg
telephon voic mail email or internet servic to intercept or access electron
commun in the normal cours of busi for exampl telephon provid can
monitor phone call when it is necessari to maintain and protect the system run qualiti
control check or to protect the servic against theft or harass most court hold that
employ qualifi as provid with respect to their intern email and voic mail system
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2427
consent except
the ecpa allow an entiti to intercept or access an electron commun if on of the
parti to the commun ha given prior consent thi except doe not appli if the
commun is intercept for the purpos of commit a crime
monitor employe phone call
to review the wiretap act provis of the ecpa limit an employ abil to monitor
employe phone call in addit to the ecpa a compani right to monitor employe
phone call is also limit by employe constitut and common law privaci right as
discuss abov
although intercept is gener forbidden under the wiretap act employ mai lawfulli
monitor phone call if thei fall under on of the statutori except includ the ordinari
cours of busi except and the consent except
ordinari cours of busi except
under the ordinari cours of busi except employ ar permit to monitor their
employe wire or electron commun includ phone call if done for a legitim
busi purpos
thi except could appli in variou scenario for exampl it would appli where the
employ routin monitor phone commun for purpos of qualiti control eg
monitor the phone call of oper telemarket custom servic personnel etc it
mai also appli where there is a legitim busi purpos for the monitor such as
prevent busi loss or employe misconduct keep in mind howev that there must
be a specif legitim busi purpos for the intercept blanket monitor probabl
will be found to violat the act in sander v robert bosch 38 f3d 736 4th cir 1994 an
employ who us a voic logger to record all telephon convers on certain
compani line did not fall within the ordinari cours of busi except becaus the
employ wa unabl to state a legitim busi purpos for the intercept
even if a compani ha a legitim busi purpos for monitor a phone call the
method us to intercept and monitor the call must be no more intrus than necessari to
achiev the purpos in deal v spear 980 f2d 1153 8th cir 1992 an employ who tape
record and listen to all call includ person call wa found to have violat the
statut even though the employ had legitim suspicion of theft onc it becom
individu right dure examin law
2428 2011 fraud examin manual
appar that a commun is person and not otherwis unauthor the employ
must immedi stop listen to the call overli broad effort to monitor employe call
mai give rise to a claim for invas of privaci
consent except
the ecpa allow an entiti to intercept an electron commun if that entiti is a parti
to the commun or if on of the parti to the commun ha given prior consent
to the intercept
for an employ to monitor an employe under thi except the employe must expressli
consent to the monitor gener employ must obtain written consent eg an
employ provid it employe with a written polici explain that phone call mai be
monitor and the employe sign the polici it is import to note that provid a
notif that employe might be monitor as oppos to be notifi that the phone
call or email will be monitor mai not satisfi the consent except for exampl in on
case notif to an employe that her phone call might be monitor wa not enough to
establish that she consent to the record of her phone call even when an employe
consent to monitor thi doe not give the employ unlimit access to the employe
commun monitor still should be c onduct onli for legitim busi purpos
and should be no more broad than necessari
us pen regist to monitor employe
in gener section 3121 prohibit the instal of pen regist without a court order but
there ar a number of except under which employ can us pen regist to track their
employe phone activ those except includ
phone servic provid can us pen regist to protect user employ from abus of
servic or unlaw us of servic
phone servic provid can us a pen regist to record the fact that a phone call wa
initi or complet to protect user of the servic employ from fraudul
unlaw or abus us of the servic
phone servic provid can us a pen regist where consent of the user of the servic
ha been obtain
monitor employe email and voicemail
the ecpa regul access to store email and voicemail it prohibit the unauthor
access of electron commun that ar in storag
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2429
although the sca gener prohibit third parti from access store commun
there ar two kei except the provid except and the consent except the provid
except exempt provid of electron commun servic from the restrict of
the sca in other word if a messag is store on an email or voic mail system that the
compani provid then the employ can access those messag as it see fit without
violat the ecpa note howev that thi except doe not allow the employ to
access messag store with an outsid provid such as yahoo googl or aol
the consent except permit access of store messag if such access is author by the
intend recipi of the commun thi mean that employ will be free to access
employe email and voic mail includ messag store with outsid provid as long as
the employe have given their consent thi except provid the safest haven for
employ who want to monitor their employe store messag to make sure the
consent except will appli compani should obtain express written consent from all
employe for such monitor as a condit of employ
in addit to the ecpa employ must also be awar of employe constitut and
common law privaci right in the content of their email as wa discuss abov it is a
good idea for all employ to establish a written polici which notifi employe that their
store messag ar the properti of the employ and that thei ar subject to monitor by
the employ at ani time
also keep in mind that as with other form of search and surveil the court will not
look kindli on overli broad monitor of store commun employ should onli
access their employe store voic mail or email when there is a legitim busi
purpos for do so and the access should be no more intrus than necessari to achiev
the purpos
monitor employe blog activ
becaus the blog trend is grow it is import for employ and employe to
understand their right and oblig with respect to such onlin activ as a gener rule
employ can monitor employe blog becaus employe have a limit expect of
privaci with respect to their blog post which ar post publicli howev the extent of an
employ right to monitor larg depend on whether the employe blog while onduti
us the employ comput system
individu right dure examin law
2430 2011 fraud examin manual
employe have no reason expect of privaci when blog on the employ
system becaus the system wa set up to provid busi commun if there is no
reason expect of privaci then there is no constitut or common law restrict
on monitor such activ therefor an employe who us an employ system to blog
about violat compani polici or illeg activ or who engag in other unaccept
conduct can gener be disciplin for such post howev employ should formal
their computerinternet us polici to cover blog and to effect maintain control
over such us
concern an employe offduti blog employ should carefulli examin the legal
consequ of us such conduct when discharg or disciplin an employe includ
those that ar at will becaus such action implic state and feder law in fact some
state california new york colorado montana and north dakota enact law that limit
an employ power to discharg an employe for offduti conduct furthermor an
employe who blog about certain topic relat to statu in a protect class mai also be
protect from discharg ie when employe reveal person inform about hi
disabl or religi belief or write about harass or discrimin in the workplac
therefor compani should enact and appli internetus polici consist and
uniformli
monitor employe internet activ
as with monitor employe email and blog activ employ should be awar of
feder protect against monitor employe internet us includ an employe
instant messag websit post etc thi is true even though feder law provid
employe littl protect from an employ electron monitor for exampl although
the ecpa prohibit the intent intercept of electron commun when
employe have a reason expect of privaci an employ mai monitor internet us
when there is employe consent when there ar legitim busi purpos or when an
employ ha reason to believ that the compani interest ar at risk in addit the
common law right to privaci also extend to employe in the workplac howev the
public natur of the workplac ha led mani court to reject most invas claim on the
basi that there wa no reason expect of privaci
video surveil of employe
in some scenario investig mai consid the us of video surveil equip as
part of an intern investig in gener video surveil is not permiss in area
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2431
where employe have a legitim expect of privaci for instanc an employ is not
allow to instal video camera in a restroom or dress room unless there ar special
circumst to justifi thi intrus on employe privaci convers an employ is
much more like to be allow to us video surveil in open area such as around cash
regist or in public hallwai these area ar open to the public and an employe could not
reason expect privaci there it is advis to provid written notic to employe
inform them that their activ ar subject to monitor in advanc of ani surveil
again the scope of the surveil should be no greater than necessari to fulfil the
employ legitim busi purpos
if video surveil were accompani by audio record then thi type of surveil
would be cover by wiretap act provis of the electron commun privaci act
which prohibit the intercept of wire electron or oral commun except in limit
circumst howev the ecpa doe not cover silent video monitor the question in
thi type of surveil is whether the surveil violat the employe constitut or
common law privaci right
effect of violat of employe right
illeg seiz evid will be exclud in crimin proceed a public employ cannot
us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an employe there is no fourth amend
prohibit against a privat employ us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an
employe howev the employ might be expos itself to litig for invas of
privaci trespass or other common law caus of action describ below
the exclusionari rule
under the exclusionari rule which is in effect in all feder and state court evid seiz in
violat of the fourth amend will be suppress that is it becom inadmiss in
ani prosecut against the suspect except under a few limit except in addit all
evid that is obtain as a result of the illeg obtain evid will also be exclud
an unlaw search and seizur doe not mean the suspect cannot be prosecut and it doe
not invalid a convict base on other evid but it doe prevent the wrongfulli
obtain evid and all evid deriv from it from be present at trial
gener thi rule appli onli in crimin case and doe not appli to privat individu
act for their own purpos howev the fourth amend doe appli to govern
individu right dure examin law
2432 2011 fraud examin manual
employ therefor a public employ cannot us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an
employe
there is howev no fourth amend prohibit against a privat employ us
illeg seiz evid to disciplin an employe thu evid illeg obtain by a
privat employ mai be admit in court but the employ might be expos itself to
litig for invas of privaci trespass or other common law caus of action describ
below
furthermor evid that ha been suppress under the exclusionari rule might still be
admiss in a civil trial or an administr proceed such as an employe disciplinari
hear the primari goal of the exclusionari rule is to deter polic misconduct if the
deterr effect of exclud the evid from a civil or administr proceed is
outweigh by the cost that would result from exclud the evid and if the parti
whose right were violat ha other form of redress for the violat then evid that
wa suppress in a crimin trial mai be admiss in a noncrimin proceed howev
there ar some circumst in which wrongfulli obtain evid will be exclud from
civil proceed so public employ should not feel free to disregard their employe
constitut right under the assumpt that ani illeg obtain evid can still be
us against an employe in a noncrimin matter
civil liabil for damag 42 usc 1983
section 1983 of titl 42 us code provid a remedi for violat of feder protect
right where state action is involv to prevail in a claim under section 1983 the plaintiff
must prove two critic issu 1 that he ha been deni a right guarante by the
constitut and the law of the unit state and 2 that the defend depriv him of
that right while act under the color of state law
the defend howev can rais certain defens to a section 1983 claim includ
qualifi immun and consent for public employ there might be a qualifi immun
from liabil if thei act in good faith on the basi of unsettl law qualifi immun
shield govern offici from both suit and liabil if their conduct did not violat ani
clearli establish right which a reason person would have known
in addit valid consent is a wellrecogn except to the fourth amend
prohibit against warrantless search consent to search can be voluntari involuntari or
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2433
inform consent is not voluntari if it requir a choic between constitut right
consent might not be voluntari if it requir a choic between exercis constitut
right and continu employ court ar split on thi issu publish search polici
as a barrier to expect of privaci is us to diminish or elimin the expect
altogeth
state constitut and statut
most state have enact constitut provis similar to the fourth amend and
mani of the same issu aris under the state constitut as under the feder constitut
in most state standard similar to those appli under the feder constitut appli most
state have enact law govern an employe right to privaci in the workplac mani
state have enact statut that restrict surveil includ wiretap or electron
surveil camera pen regist twowai mirror or surveil in particular area such
as locker room loung and rest area
surreptiti record
all but 12 state allow you to record a convers to which you ar a parti without
inform the other parti to the convers that you ar record it feder wiretap
statut also permit oneparti consent of telephon convers in most circumst
employe be the most notabl except see the materi on the electron
commun privaci act discuss previous in thi chapter
the 38 state that allow such record ar gener refer to as oneparti state the
district of columbia is also a oneparti jurisdict the other 12 state ar incorrectli
refer to as twoparti state be awar howev that thi is a misnom becaus consent
of all parti to the convers is requir current the follow state requir the
consent of all parti to a convers in most circumst
california
connecticut
delawar
florida
illinoi
maryland
massachusett
michigan
montana
individu right dure examin law
2434 2011 fraud examin manual
new hampshir
pennsylvania
washington
there ar howev variat among state regard the detail of such record and
their admiss in court befor you record a convers make sure you consult an
attornei or check the law for your jurisdict
addition there ar a number of differ law regard videotap at least fifteen
state have outlaw the us of hidden camera in privat place in some state howev
there is no prohibit on videotap anyon as long as there is no audio record due to
privaci concern a number of state have propos legisl to outlaw surreptiti
videotap in certain circumst sinc thi area of the law is chang constantli make
sure you check the law in your jurisdict
feder and state nondiscrimin statut
nondiscrimin statut such as the feder civil right act of 1866 and 1871 titl vii
of the civil right act of 1964 and the ag discrimin in employ act of 1970 as
well as similar state statut protect employe from be singl out for search on the
basi of such characterist as race nation origin sex religion and ag these law also
protect employe against dispar disciplin assess as a result of a search
common law protect in connect with search and surveil
employe also enjoi common law privaci protect that limit an employ right to
search and us surveil techniqu these common law right appli to privat as well as
govern employ no state action is requir to trigger their protect
some of the common law protect that appli in the interview set also appli to an
employ right to search and us surveil techniqu
invas of privaci
employe also have common law privaci interest that limit an employ right to search
these common law protect which ar similar in natur and scope to the fourth
amend protect discuss abov cover both public and privat employe as long
as an employe doe not have a reason expect of privaci in an area the employ
can search that area without violat an employe common law right to privaci
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2435
while modern tort law includ four categori of invas of privaci thi discuss onli
address two of those tort public of privat fact and intrus upon seclus
intrus into seclus
intrus upon seclus is the caus of action that is most frequent rais with regard to
workplac search as state befor intrus upon seclus occur when an individu
intention intrud upon the solitud or secl usion of anoth or hi privat affair or
concern and the intrus would be highli offens to a reason person thu
where there is an expect of privaci on the part of the employe a search without caus
might give rise to a claim of invas of privaci the mere gather of inform is not a
tort howev the gather of confidenti inform where the intrus is unreason
might be a tort there is no invas of privaci if the inform is open to public view or
ha been disclos to other
as with constitut action an intrus upon seclus claim can be base not onli on
physic intrus but also on wiretap eavesdrop and other form of surveil
an employ can elimin the potenti for claim of invas of privaci by publish and
follow a search polici in addit the follow measur can be taken
have a written polici regard search surveil and telephon monitor
retain a kei to all desk locker etc
requir employe to provid kei to all person lock
obtain consent to search
public disclosur of privat fact
the tort of public disclosur of privat fact occur when on parti make public statement
about anoth parti privat life that ar not of public concern the disclosur of those fact
must be highli offens to a reason person thi tort can exist even if the statement
ar true becaus give unreason public to true but privat inform about an
employe can give rise to a claim for invas of privaci the need to commun
inform about the employe must be balanc against the intrus into the employe
privaci
intent inflict of emot distress
again intent inflict of emot distress refer to ani unprivileg conduct which is
so outrag and egregi that it exce all bound usual toler by civil societi
individu right dure examin law
2436 2011 fraud examin manual
and which is intend to caus injuri or wa commit with reckless disregard for the
likelihood of it caus injuri to anoth
thi tort is signific particularli to privat employ whose search might not be subject
to the fourth amend or similar state constitut provis becaus damag for
pain and suffer and punit damag might be award
good faith and fair deal
to review sever state recogn a duti on the part of employ to deal with their
employe fairli and in good faith thi duti might includ abid by all compani polici
and provis in an employe handbook includ those relat to search eg how and
when thei can be conduct and expect of privaci on the part of employe
breach of impli contract
as note abov mani state now recogn an impli contract between employ and
employe aris out of employe handbook or oral promis for exampl an employ
with an employe handbook contain provis relat to search or employe
expect of privaci might find itself contractu bound by those provis and in
breach of contract if the provis ar not follow to the letter
fals imprison
again fals imprison is the restraint by on person of the physic liberti of anoth
without consent or legal justif a claim of fals imprison might be made if an
employe is detain in ani wai dure a search either of the employe himself or of the
employe desk locker and so on for more inform on fals imprison see the
interview section in thi chapter
trespass
trespass is the unauthor intent or neglig entri upon the properti of other a
claim of trespass might aris from a search of an employe locker but it is particularli
applic to surveil at an employe home
reduc employe expect of privaci
the singl most effect method of elimin potenti problem involv employe
right of privaci includ workplac search and the monitor or read of electron
commun is for a compani to adopt a written polici which provid that to maintain
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2437
the secur of it oper the compani mai gain access to and search all work area and
person belong includ desk file drawer locker briefcas handbag pocket and
person effect
the polici should also notifi employe that comput system includ the internet e
mail commun hardwar and file ar sole for busi us and that the compani
reserv the absolut right to review audit and disclos all matter sent over the system or
place in storag includ in the polici that workplac area ar subject to surveil and
that busi phone call mai be monitor
polygraph examin
employe polygraph protect act
the employe polygraph protect act prohibit the us of polygraph by most privat
employ unless the employ is engag in an ongo investig involv econom
loss or injuri to the employ in the employ busi and ha a reason suspicion that
the employe is involv in the incid reason suspicion is an observ articul basi
in fact it is similar to predic
employ subject to thi act cannot us polygraph to screen applic for employ
and thei cannot discharg an employe for refus to take a polygraph exam
the employe polygraph protect act howev doe not protect govern employe
other feder statut
other statu te do not address the us of polygraph directli but nonetheless might give rise
to liabil if a polygraph test is administ in a discriminatori fashion eg base on race
sex or some other prohibit factor or us to ferret out union sympathi in connect
with a union organ campaign
state statut
sever state have enact law address the us of polygraph examin and some ar
more restrict than the feder statut court have recogn claim aris from
unlaw administr of polygraph exam and wrong discharg for refus to take an
exam after have been accus of fraud
individu right dure examin law
2438 2011 fraud examin manual
common law liabil from polygraph exam
in addit to the statutori restrict discuss abov some court have found the us of
polygraph action on common law ground under certain circumst
intent inflict of emot distress
most court have found that the circumst surround the give of a polygraph exam
do not in and of themselv rise to the level of outrag conduct as requir to state a
common law claim of intent inflict of emot distress
invas of privaci
in some state court have defin polygraph test as invas of privaci question
directli relat to job perform or the incid under investig gener ar held not
to be invas of privaci control question might be an invas of privaci though
circumst might warrant the intrus check with counsel
wrong discharg
polygraph exam mai also give rise to claim of wrong discharg for exampl a former
employe mai bring a wrong discharg claim if he is termin for refus to take a
polygraph exam after have been accus of fraud
obtain inform about employe
introduct
there is a surpris amount of inform about individu that can be access without
legal process eg a subpoena in fact the govern is bound by law to facilit the
public access to govern inform and to encourag a divers of sourc to acquir
and us thi inform but despit the public broad right of access there ar numer
law that limit access to certain type of inform and a number of risk to privaci ar
rais by the collect of inform therefor fraud examin must be certain that
inform obtain is done so legal
feder statut
privaci act of 1974
the privaci act of 1974 establish a code of inform practic that regul the
collect mainten consumpt and diffus of person identifi inform
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2439
that is maintain by feder agenc it restrict inform about individu both
employe and nonemploye and it appli to govern agenc and govern
contractor run a system of record on behalf of the govern the privaci act
prohibit an agenc from disclos such inform without the written consent of the
subject individu
an agenc for exampl might maintain record about a person contain inform that
is relev and necessari to accomplish a purpos of the agenc thi inform might
includ a person educ financ medic histori crimin histori employ histori
and identifi inform fingerprint voiceprint or photograph an agenc employe
might have access to the inform unless it is investigatori materi compil for law
enforc purpos statist record or materi compil sole for determin
suitabl elig or qualif for feder servic or promot
fair credit report act
on of the primari statut limit access to inform is the feder fair credit
report act fcra thi statut regul the dissemin of consum inform to
third parti by consum report agenc histor the fcra onli appli to
consum credit report but due to amend in 1997 the fcra now appli to the
gather of mani other type of inform about an individu through third parti
the fcra prohibit consum report agenc from releas person inform
about an individu eg inform about the consum charact gener reput
person characterist or mode of live to third parti without author and limit
disclosur of credit inform to third parti with a purpos permit by the statut
the fcra appli in the employ context when an employ contract with a third parti
eg a privat investig or an onlin public record servic to collect credit inform
on current or potenti employe the fcra howev doe not appli if the person or
organ seek the inform gather it directli from the sourc
if the fcra doe appli it gener mean that an examin cannot us a third parti to
obtain certain inform about a person unless that person ha receiv certain notic and
sign a consent form the failur to do so can mean civil penalti
individu right dure examin law
2440 2011 fraud examin manual
coverag under the fcra
coverag of the fcra howev turn larg on three term consum consum report
and consum report agenc
consum
at it core the fcra protect those that fall within it definit of consum the act
defin a consum as an individu that is onli individu have right under the fcra
consum report
for the fcra to appli the inform that is be obtain must be a consum report
a consum report is defin as ani written oral or other commun by a consumerreport
agenc bear on a custom cred it worthi credit stand charact
gener reput person characterist or mode of live
the feder trade commiss ftc which is the feder agenc respons for
enforc of the fcra ha interpret thi to mean basic ani inform collect
on a person it doe not refer to just credit report it would also appli to public record
such as crimin record and dmv search
but in gener when face with the question of whether a specif report is a consum
report court have focus on the purpos for which the person or organ collect
the consum inform
consum report agenc
also for the fcra to appli the inform must be gather from a consum report
agenc cra a cra is defin as anyon who sell in format about peopl it could be
an onlin servic such as choicepoint or lexisnex is or it could be a privat investig
compli with the fcra
befor employ can get a consum report about a current or prospect employe thei
must compli with certain requir howev employ that ar gather such
inform in connect with a workplac investig of misconduct mai be exclud
from the fcra see the section workplac investig of fraud and misconduct
below
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2441
if the fcra appli the parti seek the inform must compli with the follow
requir
inform the consum report agenc that it will follow the fcra
provid the individu with a separ written disclosur
obtain the individu written author
the disclosur and the author can be contain in the same document
if howev an employ reli on a consum report for an advers action eg deni a
job applic reassign or termin an employe or deni a promot it must
provid the individu with a preadvers action disclosur befor take the advers action
thi disclosur must includ a copi of the individu consum report and a copi of a
summari of your right under the fair credit report act which is avail from the ftc
after advers action is taken the employ must notifi the individu via an advers action
notic that the action ha been taken that notic must includ the follow
name address and phone number of the consum report agenc cra that
suppli the report
a statement that the cra did not make the advers action decis and cannot explain
why the advers action wa taken
a notic of the individu right to di spute the accuraci or complet of the
inform furnish and hi right to an addit free consum report from the
agenc upon request within 60 dai
workplac investig of fraud and misconduct
furthermor the fair and accur credit transact act of 2003 amend the fcra to
exempt certain report involv employe misconduct investig as a result of these
amend an employ who us a third parti to conduct a workplac investig no
longer ha to obtain the prior consent of an employe if the investig involv suspect
misconduct
violat of law or regul
violat of ani preexist polici of the employ
to qualifi for thi except the report from the third parti must not be commun to
anyon other than the employ an agent of the employ or the govern
individu right dure examin law
2442 2011 fraud examin manual
if howev advers action is taken against the employe base on the result of the
investig the fcra still requir that the employ provid the employe with a
summari of the report advers action is broadli defin as ani employ decis that
advers affect the employe the summari must contain the natur and substanc of the
commun upon which the advers action is base howev it doe not have to
identifi the individu interview or the sourc of the inform
investig consum report
the fcra also cover investig consum report under the fcra an investig
consum report is a report contain inform about an individu charact gener
reput person characterist or mode of live that is obtain through person
interview with neighbor friend or associ if such a report is made then other notic
and consent mai need to be obtain from the individu for exampl a separ
disclosur must be us to inform the employe that an investig consum report is
be obtain the form must also state what sort of inform will be collect
in addit the compani must disclos to the individu the natur and scope of the
investig if he request if ani advers action is to be taken against the person he can
ask to receiv a copi of the report befor such action is taken further the report given to
the individu must not be redact mean that if the report contain name of the peopl
provid the inform and what thei report such inform could not be delet
from the report the person must also be given an opportun to disput the find in the
report
contact your attornei
unfortun for fraud examin the fcra ha creat sever more hoop that
examin must jump through befor thei can obtain certain type of inform the
fcra is not clearli written but the feder trade commiss ha publish sever letter
give it interpret of the statut these letter and the text of the fcra can be
obtain through their websit at wwwftcgov
the most import thing for the fraud examin to rememb is to consult hi inhous or
outsid counsel your attornei will help you determin what procedur you need to
institut to compli with the fcra
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2443
grammleachblilei act
the grammleachblilei act glb wa pass in 1999 and the rule implement the
act becam final in 2001 glb wa origin enact to allow bank and other compani
to offer previous forbidden servic such as insur and secur brokerag servic
congress wa worri that these super bank would share custom financi data with
affili and other compani to hawk their new product therefor congress ad a
provis requir a financi intuit to tell custom about it privaci polici to notifi
them of privat inform the institut intend to share and to give custom the
chanc to block such informationshar
to implement the law congress order regul to defin financi institut in the
broadest possibl term thu financi institut includ not just bank but also insur
compani account tax prepar and real estat settlement servic and invest
advisor the text of the rule can be found at 16 cfr part 3131 addit inform
about the rule can be found at the feder trade commiss websit wwwftcgov
the problem for fraud examin is that the privaci rule implement as part of glb have
been interpret to prevent the sell of credit header inform under the ftc
interpret of the rule credit header inform cannot be sold except for the veri
limit purpos allow under the fair credit report act the agenc reach thi
decis by conclud that such basic person inform such as name and address is
financi inform and therefor must be protect under glb unfortun thi
prevent credit bureau from sell credit header inform includ name address
phone number and social secur number to privat investig direct market or
other inform broker
glb also made it a crimin offens to engag in pretext ie the practic of obtain
or attempt to obtain sell or bui privat inform through the us of fals pretens
some individu us pretext as a mean to gather financi inform about a subject
pretext would contact a financi institut and pretend to be the custom or someon
els author to obtain financi inform therebi trick the financi institut into
provid inform about the subject
section 6821 of titl 15 us code ad by glb make it an offens to
us fals fictiti or fraudul statement or document to get custom inform
from a financi institut or directli from a custom of a financi institut
individu right dure examin law
2444 2011 fraud examin manual
us forg counterfeit lost or stolen document to get custom inform from a
financi institut or directli from a custom of a financi institut
ask anoth person to get someon els custom er inform us fals fictiti or
fraudul statement us fals fictiti or fraudul document or us forg
counterfeit lost or stolen document
violat can under certain circumst be fine andor imprison up to 10 year
telephon record and privaci protect act of 2006
the telephon record and privaci protect act of 2006 trppa also crimin
pretext in 2006 pretext garner much critic after hewlettpackard admit that
to uncov board room leak it investig obtain phone record of journalist and
board member through pretext within four month of the scandal public releas
presid bush sign the trppa into law
specif the trppa crimin the practic of obtain and attempt to obtain sell
or bui confidenti phone record through the us of fals statement unless otherwis
permit by law violat of the act ar crimin and if convict a violat face up to
10 year in prison and up to 100000 in fine these fine and prison term mai be
increas in case of violat compound with other activ or some egregi crime
befor engag in ani type of pretext activ investig should consult with an
attornei to determin whether the inform sought is protect by state or feder law as
well as whether the plan imperson method is legal accept
health insur portabl and account act public law 104191 partial codifi in 45 cfr 160 164
the health insur portabl and account act hipaa institut sever privaci
rule concern person health inform while most of the rule do not directli affect
investig fraud examin should be awar of the rule becaus thei mai have an
impact on the type of inform that can be legal gather on employe
the hipaa privaci rule place restrict on the avail and us of protect health
inform the definit of thi term is extrem broad and cover ani inform
relat to an individu past present or futur physic or mental health payment for
servic or health care oper for exampl a cancer center employe who stole a
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2445
patient identif inform to obtain credit card violat hipaa thi case mark
a signific point in hipaa legisl becaus it had more to do with ident theft than
actual health inform yet it wa still cover under the statut
if inform about the health of an individu or payment for servic becom an issu
dure an investig the examin should immedi contact the human resourc
hr depart which should have inform about whether the entiti is subject to the
hipaa rule and can assist you in complianc with those rule
the most import thing to note is that if the hipaa rule appli the parti seek the
inform is restrict as to the type of health inform it can access without specif
written author examin should never contact the health care provid the health
plan administr or a medic bill servic for copi of employe record without first
consult the employ legal counsel or hr depart
avoid liabil for obstruct of justic and wit tamper
it is assum that no cfe would knowingli or intention suborn perjuri conceal
evid or otherwis attempt to undermin a govern investig or a judici
proceed but it is import to understand the potenti for liabil for these offens
dure a fraud examin
to understand what conduct could lead to accus of improprieti or crimin liabil
fraud examin should be familiar with the follow feder statut there mai be
addit state statut that prohibit similar conduct in connect with state investig
or even state civil lawsuit an attornei should be consult for the law of a specif
jurisdict
wit tamper 18 usc 1512 et seq
the victim and wit protect act 18 usc 1512 et seq make it a feloni to engag
in mislead conduct toward anoth person with the intent to influenc delai or
prevent a witnesss testimoni or to caus or induc ani person to withhold testimoni
or document
section 1512b2a make it a crime to 1 knowingli 2 us intimid or physic
forc threat or corrupt persuas 3 with the intent to induc anoth 4 to withhold
testimoni a record document or other object from an offici proceed or 5 alter
individu right dure examin law
2446 2011 fraud examin manual
destroi mutil or conceal 6 an object 7 with the intent to impair the object integr
or avail 8 for us in an offici proceed
section 1512b2a is the statut under which arthur andersen llp wa charg
follow the enron scandal dure the investig into enron misde it wa found
that andersen direct it employe to destroi document to prevent their retriev by the
sec dure the investig of enron howev the andersen convict wa overturn
in 2005 becaus of error in the juri instruct
crimin sanction have been ad to section 1512 for the corrupt alter or destruct
of document section 1512c make it a crime to 1 corruptli 2 alter destroi mutil
conceal or attempt thereto 3 a record document or other object 4 with the intent to
impair the object integr or avail for us 5 in an offici proceed or 6
otherwis obstruct influenc imped or attempt thereto ani offici proceed
section 1512c origin crimin those who knowingli and corruptli destroi or
direct other to destroi relev evid howev the us suprem court in arthur
andersen llp vs unit state narrow the statut to exclud the term knowingli
section 1515 provid definit for certain provis under obstruct of justic statut
for exampl it defin mislead conduct as includ among other thing
knowingli make a fals statement
omit or conceal inform that render a statement mislead
knowingli invit relianc on a write that is fals forg alter or otherwis lack
in authent with intent to mislead
knowingli invit relianc on a materia lly mislead sampl specimen map
photograph or other object with intent to mislead
knowingli us a trick scheme or devic with intent to mislead
unlik obstruct of justic see below the victim and wit protect act statut can
be violat without ani corrupt purpos to obstruct justic even if there is no grand juri or
other judici proceed pend section 1512 onli requir proof that the defend act
intention with intent to influenc delai or prevent testimoni or the withhold of
evid the act appli to wit in a prospect or anticip proceed as well as a
pend on
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2447
in light of the victim and wit protect act fraud examin must take care as to how
he instruct a wit with regard to the confidenti of the investig confidenti is
a legitim concern and the investig need to instruct a wit concern how to
preserv privileg and confidenti howev instruct a wit not to speak with
govern investig or other parti to litig or give instruct that could be
misunderstood in that wai expos the investig and the compani to potenti wit
tamper liabil
the victim and wit protect act also make it a misdemeanor to harass anoth
person and therebi hinder delai prevent or dissuad ani person from attend or
testifi in an offici proceed report a feder offens caus an arrest for a feder
offens or caus a crimin prosecut
obstruct of justic
to review obstruct of justic statut punish effort to imped or obstruct the
investig or trial of other substant offens there ar sever feder crimin statut
that prohibit obstruct of justic mani ar specif to a particular set or industri or to
a particular kind of proceed such as the prohibit against obstruct a feder audit 18
usc 1516 or obstruct the examin of a financi institut by a feder agenc 18 usc 1517
these statut ar contain in chapter 73 of the us code and prohibit imped
influenc or obstruct virtual ani type of feder proceed includ crimin
investig through the destruct of document threat bribe or wit tamper
for more inform see the obstruct of justic section in the law relat to fraud
part 2 chapter abov
spoliat of evid
spoliat of evid is broadli defin as the act of destroi evid or make it
otherwis unavail the act of spoliat can surfac in just about ani type of case
crimin or civil and by ani parti plaintiff or defend the theori behind spoliat of
evid presum that the individu who make evid unavail follow the
probabl initi of a lawsuit is awar of it detriment effect upon a case
although few jurisdict have a separ caus of action for spoliat of evid almost
everi jurisdict allow for sanction result from such act some court requir the
individu right dure examin law
2448 2011 fraud examin manual
spoliat to be intent though other mere requir neglig or reckless spoliat
intent spoliat claim usual involv element similar to the follow 1 the
exist of a potenti lawsuit 2 the defend ant knowledg of the potenti lawsuit 3
the destruct mutil or signific alter of potenti evid 4 intent on the
part of the defend to disrupt or defeat the lawsuit 5 a causal relationship between the
act of spoliat and the inabl to prove the lawsuit and 6 damag
neglig spoliat claim gener occur when a parti unintention lose evid
valuabl to hi claim or a third parti lose or destroi evid in a suit an exampl of the
requir element for a neglig spoliat claim includ 1 exist of a potenti civil
action 2 a legal or contractu duti to preser ve evid which is relev to the potenti
civil action 3 destruct of that evid 4 signific impair in the abil to prove
the lawsuit 5 a causal relationship between the evid destruct and the inabl to
prove the lawsuit and 6 damag
perjuri and suborn of perjuri
perjuri is the will give of fals materi testimoni under oath and includ fals
claim that on cannot rememb a materi fact there ar three gener feder perjuri
law first section 1621 of titl 18 us code is the gener feder perjuri statut it make
it a crime to present materi fals statement under oath in feder proceed section
1621 appli in ani case in which a law of the unit state author an oath to be
administ all state have similar statut
second section 1623 of titl 18 us code make it a crime to present fals testimoni or
produc other fals inform under oath befor or ancillari to a feder court or grand
juri
third section 1622 of titl 18 us code crimin suborn of perjuri it make it a
feder crime to induc or caus anoth to commit perjuri a person violat section 1622 if
he induc anoth to commit perjuri in violat of either section 1621 or section 1623
the most obviou exampl of suborn of perjuri is tell a prospect wit to lie or
to conceal the conduct that is the subject of the investig similarli suborn also ha
been found to exist where a person counsel a wit to give testimoni the truth of which
he recklessli disregard even though he did not know for certain that the inform wa
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2449
untru suborn is onli an offens when the perjuri ha in fact occur proof of
suborn requir proof of the perjuri
discharg a suspect wrongdoer
mani employ when confront with a possibl wrongdoer or an employe who refus
to cooper in the investig immedi want to fire the employe whether the
employe can or should be discharg depend on the fact of the case and the law in the
employ state public employ ar govern by stricter standard than privat employ
constitut and statutori law govern the investig and termin of public
employe for exampl a public employe cannot be termin for exercis hi fifth
amend right against selfincrimin
employ ar gener permit to disciplin or termin an employe who refus to
cooper with a reason request to provid inform but if the employe ha an
employ contract for a specifi term or is emploi under a collect bargain
agreement that requir the employ to have good caus to termin employ then the
question will be whether the refus to cooper amount to good caus for the termin
thi in turn depend on the natur and reason of the request for inform the
reason for the refus and the overal impact that the refus ha on the investig a
good caus requir can also aris if the compani polici and practic creat an
impli employ contract
in contrast employe who do not have an employ contract that impos a good caus
requir socal atwil employe can be discharg at ani time and for ani reason
that is an employ doe not need good caus to discharg an atwil employe in some
state employ is consid at will in the absenc of an employ contract
an employ howev doe not have a right to fire ani employe includ an atwil
employe if the fire contraven a fundament public polici for instanc fire an
employe who refus to commit an illeg act or if it violat the compani establish or
customari disciplinari practic and procedur for more inform see the discharg in
violat of public polici section below
individu right dure examin law
2450 2011 fraud examin manual
good caus
befor discharg an employe it is best to document in the employe file that the
employ ha good caus to termin employ although there is no exact definit
of good caus there ar sever question that the compani should ask befor termin
an employe
did the employe know that the conduct would be subject to disciplin
wa the rule the employe violat reason relat to the safe effici or orderli
oper of the busi
did the compani investig to discov whether the employe violat the rule
did the compani conduct a fair and object investig
did the compani obtain signific evid of a violat
wa the decis nondiscriminatori
wa the disciplin relat to the serious of the offens and the prior record of the
employe
if the compani feel that discharg of the employe is like it should make sure that the
employe action and the compani action ar well document and place in the
employe personnel file
neglig discharg
at least on state ha recogn the right of an employe to sue for the employ failur to
properli investig charg against the employe befor discharg him most of the court
that have address thi issu have refus to recogn the claim
breach of impli contract
even if there is no express employ contract between an employ and employe mani
state recogn that an impli contract mai be creat under certain circumst an
impli contract aris out of the conduct of the parti even without ani formal written or
oral agreement if a court find that an impli contract exist then the employe who is a
parti to the contract can usual onli be fire for good caus
impli contract can be found to exist even when the employ wa not awar that there
wa a contract in fact mani state now recogn that an impli contract between
employ and employe can aris out of employe handbook handbook provis
might limit the right to discharg for just caus and the issu might be whether the
employ ha enough evid of wrongdo to constitut just caus
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2451
breach of the duti of good faith and fair deal
a few state recogn a duti on the part of the employ to deal with it employe fairli
and in good faith thi duti is impli in most contract includ contract of employ
the scope of thi duti might also be shape from specif oblig found in the
provis of an employe handbook or from compani personnel polici or practic
document that the employ had good caus to termin the employe should defeat
thi claim
discharg in violat of public polici
some state recogn a public polici except to atwil employ under thi except
an employ doe not have the right to discharg an atwil employe if it contraven a
fundament public polici to qualifi under thi except the employe must prove that
hi conduct is favor by a relev public polici and that the employ retali against
him for engag in thi protect activ agai n to counter thi claim the employ will
need to show that it had good caus to fire the employe and that it wa not retali
against the employe becaus of the protect conduct
for exampl if an employe is fire becaus he support a particular polit candid in
the last elect a court or juri might find that hi termin is in violat of the gener
public polici allow peopl to vote for whomev thei pleas but if the employe wa
conduct fundrais activ on compani time the compani would like have good
caus to termin the employe and such termin would not be in retali of the
employe support of a particular candid
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2501
