2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Employee’s Rights During the Investigation


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Employee’s Rights During the Investigation 
While the employee has a duty to cooperate, the employee also has certain other rights that 
define the scope of that duty. Employee rights, however, vary from case to case, generally 
depending on the employee’s contractual rights, applicable federal and state statutes, and 
constitutional protections. Thus, before beginning any fraud examination, it is important for 
the fraud examiner to determine the employee’s rights.  
 
Contractual Rights 
An employee may have contractual rights that limit the ability of the employer to compel full 
cooperation in a fraud examination. For example, if the employee is a member of a union, 
the union contract or collective bargaining agreement might contain certain restrictions on 
the company’s investigatory procedures. For instance, the company might be required to 
notify the union before the interview, and the employee may have the right to have a union 
representative present. (See NLRB v. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. 251 [1975]). Other employees 
might have a written employment agreement, which might contain provisions concerning 
the employee’s rights during an investigation. 
 
Other employees might have a written employment agreement, which may contain 
provisions concerning the employee’s rights during an investigation. In addition, many 
courts have held that company policies, employee manuals, and past practices can create 
“implied” contractual relationships between the employer and the employee. Therefore, if 
the company deviates from these historical practices, the target of the investigation may 
claim that they were singled out and investigated differently than others in similar 
circumstances.  
 
Whistleblowers 
Federal law and many state laws provide protection to employees who report improper or 
illegal acts to government authorities. Most of these laws protect the employee from any 
adverse employment action or retaliatory action from the employer. For more information 
on whistleblower laws, see the Federal “Whistleblower” Statutes section in the “The Law 
Related to Fraud (Part 2)” chapter above.  
 
Employee’s Constitutional Rights 
The United States Constitution protects individuals from abuse of governmental power, and 
several Constitutional provisions can come into play in the course of a fraud investigation. 
The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution prohibits unreasonable searches and 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.403 
seizures. The Fifth Amendment provides that a person cannot be compelled to give 
information that might incriminate him. The Sixth Amendment provides that a person has 
the right to an attorney and to confront the witnesses against him. Additionally, while the 
Constitution contains no express guarantee of privacy, courts have found that individual 
privacy rights are implied from many of the express protections in the Bill of Rights. 
 
The general rule is that the United States Constitution only limits government action; it does 
not limit the powers of private employers in conducting a corporate investigation. That rule, 
however, is subject to several limitations, and, although a private employer usually cannot be 
sued for a violation of the Fourth, Fifth, or Sixth Amendments, these provisions still have 
important implications for the fraud investigator. 
 
Private Action Versus State Action 
For an employee to sue an employer for the violation of a constitutional right, there must be 
some form of “state action” involved. State acti on is involved during any investigation by a 
state or federal entity, including investigations of their own employees. 
 
There are no bright-line rules regarding when an investigation can be considered to involve 
state action. The following examples, however, could be considered to involve state action: 
• Investigations conducted by a private company but at the suggestion of the state or 
federal authorities 
• Investigations begun by a private company that later are taken over or expanded by state 
or federal authorities 
• Joint investigations with or aided by state or federal authorities 
• Investigations conducted by a private company that are required by state or federal law 
• Searches or interrogations conducted by outside investigators who are off-duty state, 
local, or federal authorities 
 
Investigation by a Private Company Pursuant to a Federal Statute 
If an investigation is conducted by a private company in accordance with federal laws, an 
issue is raised as to whether the corporation’s internal investigation could be considered state 
action.  
 
For example, in the case of Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives Ass’n, 489 U.S. 602 (1989), the 
U.S. Supreme Court found that a private railroad acted as an agent for the government when 
it complied with the provisions of the Federal Railroad Administration Act in administering 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.404  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
drug tests to its employees. Under the regulation at issue, the railroad was required by law to 
conduct the test and the Federal Railroad Administration was authorized to receive the test 
results. 
 
If a company is conducting an investigation pursuant to such federal laws as the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934 or the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, the company should be 
aware of the possible implications of state action. Therefore, before any adverse action is 
taken against an employee, legal advice should be obtained. 
 
Employee Protection from Polygraph Examinations 
The Employee Polygraph Protection Act prohibits the use of polygraphs by most private 
employers, unless the employer is engaged in an ongoing investigation involving economic 
loss or injury to the employer in the employer’s business and has a reasonable suspicion that 
the employee is involved in the incident. 
 
Employers subject to this Act cannot use polygraphs to screen applicants for employment, 
and they cannot discharge an employee for refusing to take an exam. This Act, however, 
does not protect government employees.  
 
In addition, some courts have found the use of polygraphs actionable on common law 
grounds under certain circumstances. For example, some state courts have held that 
polygraph tests can constitute an invasion of privacy. 
 
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) 
One of the primary statutes limiting access to information is the federal Fair Credit 
Reporting Act (FCRA). This statute regulates the dissemination of consumer information to 
third parties by consumer reporting agencies. Historically, the FCRA only applied to 
consumer credit reports, but due to amendments in 1997, the FCRA applies to the gathering 
of many other types of information about an individual through third parties. 
 
The FCRA regulates the type of information that can be contained in a consumer credit 
report; it restricts credit bureaus from releasing an individual’s credit information to any 
third parties without authorization, and it sets forth the circumstances under which a third-
 party can obtain a copy of the report. 
 
If the FCRA does apply, it means that an examiner cannot obtain certain information about 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.405 
a person unless that person has received certain notices and signed a consent form. The 
failure to do so can mean civil penalties. Also, if an examiner obtains a copy of a credit 
report, that fact will be noted on the report. 
 
Often, fraud examiners will need to obtain consumer reports for pre-employment purposes 
and workplace investigations of fraud an misconduct.  
 
For more information about the FCRA, see the Obtaining Information About Employees 
section below. 
 
 



:


employe right dure the investig
while the employe ha a duti to cooper the employe also ha certain other right that
defin the scope of that duti employe right howev vari from case to case gener
depend on the employe contractu right applic feder and state statut and
constitut protect thu befor begin ani fraud examin it is import for
the fraud examin to determin the employe right
contractu right
an employe mai have contractu right that limit the abil of the employ to compel full
cooper in a fraud examin for exampl if the employe is a member of a union
the union contract or collect bargain agreement might contain certain restrict on
the compani investigatori procedur for instanc the compani might be requir to
notifi the union befor the interview and the employe mai have the right to have a union
repres present see nlrb v weingarten inc 420 us 251 1975 other employe
might have a written employ agreement which might contain provis concern
the employe right dure an investig
other employe might have a written employ agreement which mai contain
provis concern the employe right dure an investig in addit mani
court have held that compani polici employe manual and past practic can creat
impli contractu relationship between the employ and the employe therefor if
the compani deviat from these histor practic the target of the investig mai
claim that thei were singl out and investig differ than other in similar
circumst
whistleblow
feder law and mani state law provid protect to employe who report improp or
illeg act to govern author most of these law protect the employe from ani
advers employ action or retaliatori action from the employ for more inform
on whistleblow law see the feder whistleblow statut section in the the law
relat to fraud part 2 chapter abov
employe constitut right
the unit state constitut protect individu from abus of government power and
sever constitut provis can come into plai in the cours of a fraud investig
the fourth amend to the us constitut prohibit unreason search and
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2403
seizur the fifth amend provid that a person cannot be compel to give
inform that might incrimin him the sixth amend provid that a person ha
the right to an attornei and to confront the wit against him addition while the
constitut contain no express guarante of privaci court have found that individu
privaci right ar impli from mani of the express protect in the bill of right
the gener rule is that the unit state constitut onli limit govern action it doe
not limit the power of privat employ in conduct a corpor investig that rule
howev is subject to sever limit and although a privat employ usual cannot be
su for a violat of the fourth fifth or sixth amend these provis still have
import implic for the fraud investig
privat action versu state action
for an employe to sue an employ for the violat of a constitut right there must be
some form of state action involv state acti on is involv dure ani investig by a
state or feder entiti includ investig of their own employe
there ar no brightlin rule regard when an investig can be consid to involv
state action the follow exampl howev could be consid to involv state action
investig conduct by a privat compani but at the suggest of the state or
feder author
investig begun by a privat compani that later ar taken over or expand by state
or feder author
joint investig with or aid by state or feder author
investig conduct by a privat compani that ar requir by state or feder law
search or interrog conduct by outsid investig who ar offduti state
local or feder author
investig by a privat compani pursuant to a feder statut
if an investig is conduct by a privat compani in accord with feder law an
issu is rais as to whether the corpor intern investig could be consid state
action
for exampl in the case of skinner v railwai labor execut assn 489 us 602 1989 the
us suprem court found that a privat railroad act as an agent for the govern when
it compli with the provis of the feder railroad administr act in administ
individu right dure examin law
2404 2011 fraud examin manual
drug test to it employe under the regul at issu the railroad wa requir by law to
conduct the test and the feder railroad administr wa author to receiv the test
result
if a compani is conduct an investig pursuant to such feder law as the secur
exchang act of 1934 or the foreign corrupt practic act of 1977 the compani should be
awar of the possibl implic of state action therefor befor ani advers action is
taken against an employe legal advic should be obtain
employe protect from polygraph examin
the employe polygraph protect act prohibit the us of polygraph by most privat
employ unless the employ is engag in an ongo investig involv econom
loss or injuri to the employ in the employ busi and ha a reason suspicion that
the employe is involv in the incid
employ subject to thi act cannot us polygraph to screen applic for employ
and thei cannot discharg an employe for refus to take an exam thi act howev
doe not protect govern employe
in addit some court have found the us of polygraph action on common law
ground under certain circumst for exampl some state court have held that
polygraph test can constitut an invas of privaci
fair credit report act fcra
on of the primari statut limit access to inform is the feder fair credit
report act fcra thi statut regul the dissemin of consum inform to
third parti by consum report agenc histor the fcra onli appli to
consum credit report but due to amend in 1997 the fcra appli to the gather
of mani other type of inform about an individu through third parti
the fcra regul the type of inform that can be contain in a consum credit
report it restrict credit bureau from releas an individu credit inform to ani
third parti without author and it set forth the circumst under which a third
parti can obtain a copi of the report
if the fcra doe appli it mean that an examin cannot obtain certain inform about
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2405
a person unless that person ha receiv certain notic and sign a consent form the
failur to do so can mean civil penalti also if an examin obtain a copi of a credit
report that fact will be note on the report
often fraud examin will need to obtain consum report for preemploy purpos
and workplac investig of fraud an misconduct
for more inform about the fcra see the obtain inform about employe
section below
