2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Interviews/Public Employers


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Public Employers 
As stated above, constitutional protections generally only apply to public employees. This 
means that employees of federal, state, and local governments must be afforded protection 
under the Fifth Amendment. A public employer cannot fire employees for refusing to 
answer questions that might incriminate them. The leading case on this issue is Garrity v. New 
Jersey, 385 U.S. 493 (1967). In Garrity, several New Jersey police officers were threatened with 
dismissal from their jobs if they refused to answer questions relating to a conspiracy to 
obstruct traffic laws. The officers, faced with termination, answered the questions and were 
subsequently prosecuted. The U.S. Supreme Court found that the statements had been 
improperly coerced and thus they were not admissible at trial.  
 
The Fifth Amendment only protects persons against compelled  testimony. Thus, if an 
employee voluntarily confesses to a crime, they can be fired without violating their 
constitutional rights. The confession, however, must be truly voluntary; the employee cannot 
be coerced in any way to give self-incriminating evidence during an interview.  
 
If a public employer or government official wants to compel an employee to provide 
answers with potential criminal liability and administrative consequences, they may get 
written approval to offer the employee a Kalkines warning. Kalkines warnings are a form of 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.407 
immunity that precludes prosecution against the employee for statements derived from the 
compelled testimony. However, this immunity does not prevent prosecution against the 
employee where the government received evidence from a legitimate independent source, 
and it does not prevent prosecution of an employee for providing the government with false 
statements or answers. Additionally, if an employee refuses to answer questions after 
receiving a proper Kalkines warning, the public employer may take disciplinary actions, 
including dismissal.  
 
It should also be noted that the right against self-incrimination only applies in criminal cases. 
Thus, an employee — public or private — can be fired for refusing to answer a question when 
the answer will only lead to an administrative punishment or a civil suit, but not to criminal 
conviction. Furthermore, in a civil lawsuit, it is permissible to draw an adverse inference 
from the fact that an employee refused to answer an incriminating question; it is not 
permissible to draw a negative inference in a criminal case from refusal to answer such a 
question.  
 
In practice, however, it may be very difficult to draw the distinction between questions that 
will lead to criminal prosecution and those that will only lead to civil or administrative 
punishments. If an employee is compelled to answer a question and the answer provides 
evidence of criminal wrongdoing that was previously unknown, that evidence could be 
inadmissible in a subsequent criminal case. It is a better practice not to compel answers from 
public employees in any setting so that constitutional issues can be avoided.  
 
Even if a setting is deemed noncustodial and Miranda warnings are not required, this does not 
eliminate the public employee’s Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
Regardless of the setting, a public employer cannot compel its employees to choose between 
their constitutional rights and their job.  
 



:


public employ
as state abov constitut protect gener onli appli to public employe thi
mean that employe of feder state and local govern must be afford protect
under the fifth amend a public employ cannot fire employe for refus to
answer question that might incrimin them the lead case on thi issu is garriti v new
jersei 385 us 493 1967 in garriti sever new jersei polic offic were threaten with
dismiss from their job if thei refus to answer question relat to a conspiraci to
obstruct traffic law the offic face with termin answer the question and were
subsequ prosecut the us suprem court found that the statement had been
improperli coerc and thu thei were not admiss at trial
the fifth amend onli protect person against compel testimoni thu if an
employe voluntarili confess to a crime thei can be fire without violat their
constitut right the confess howev must be truli voluntari the employe cannot
be coerc in ani wai to give selfincrimin evid dure an interview
if a public employ or govern offici want to compel an employe to provid
answer with potenti crimin liabil and administr consequ thei mai get
written approv to offer the employe a kalkin warn kalkin warn ar a form of
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2407
immun that preclud prosecut against the employe for statement deriv from the
compel testimoni howev thi immun doe not prevent prosecut against the
employe where the govern receiv evid from a legitim independ sourc
and it doe not prevent prosecut of an employe for provid the govern with fals
statement or answer addition if an employe refus to answer question after
receiv a proper kalkin warn the public employ mai take disciplinari action
includ dismiss
it should also be note that the right against selfincrimin onli appli in crimin case
thu an employe public or privat can be fire for refus to answer a question when
the answer will onli lead to an administr punish or a civil suit but not to crimin
convict furthermor in a civil lawsuit it is permiss to draw an advers infer
from the fact that an employe refus to answer an incrimin question it is not
permiss to draw a neg infer in a crimin case from refus to answer such a
question
in practic howev it mai be veri difficult to draw the distinct between question that
will lead to crimin prosecut and those that will onli lead to civil or administr
punish if an employe is compel to answer a question and the answer provid
evid of crimin wrongdo that wa previous unknown that evid could be
inadmiss in a subsequ crimin case it is a better practic not to compel answer from
public employe in ani set so that constitut issu can be avoid
even if a set is deem noncustodi and miranda warn ar not requir thi doe not
elimin the public employe fifth amend right against selfincrimin
regardless of the set a public employ cannot compel it employe to choos between
their constitut right and their job
