2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Interviews/National Labor Relations Act


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


National Labor Relations Act 
The National Labor Relations Act prohibits any form of interrogation by employers that 
Law Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.411 
interferes with the rights of the employee to organize, bargain, or otherwise engage in 
concerted activities for the purpose of bargaining or other mutual aid or protection. An 
employer might not question an employee about any of these protected activities, either his 
own or that of other employees. 
 
RULES REGARDING NON-UNION REPRESENTATION DURING INTERVIEWS 
In June 2004, the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) overruled a controversial 
decision regarding the rights of non-union employees to have a “representative” present 
during interviews, and reinstated the former 1975 ruling that non-union employees are not 
entitled to representation during investigatory interviews (I BM Corp., 341 NLRB No. 148 
(2004)). The NLRB reasoned that allowing co-workers to sit in as representatives during 
investigatory interviews would compromise the requisite confidentiality, sensitivity, and 
thoroughness of the interview. Accordingly, non-union employers no longer have a legal 
obligation to accept an employee’s request for such representation.  
 
UNION EMPLOYEES  
Since 1975 and the U.S. Supreme Court decision of NLRB v. Weingarten, 420 U.S. 251 (1975), 
union employees have had the right to union representation during an investigatory 
interview, provided that the employee “reasonably believes” the interview “might result in 
disciplinary action.” This right derived from the National Labor Relations Act, which 
provides that employees have the right “to act in concert for mutual aid and protection.” In 
the years since Weingarten, this right has only been applied in cases where the employee under 
investigation was covered by a collective-bargaining agreement. 
 
FORMER LAW: NON-UNION EMPLOYEES  
In the case of Epilepsy Foundation of Northeast Ohio (331 NLRB No. 92; decided July 10, 2000), 
the NLRB extended the so-called Weingarten rights to non-union employees. The case involved 
two workers who were fired from the Epilepsy Foundation. Prior to their discharge, the two 
employees wrote a memo that was critical of their supervisor. Later, the executive director 
requested to meet with one of the employees and the supervisor. The employee requested to 
meet with the executive director alone, but the request was denied. The employee then asked 
if the co-author of the memo could be present at the meeting. This request was also denied. 
When the employee still expressed apprehension about the meeting, he was told to go home, 
and he was fired the next day for insubordination. 
 
The NLRB ruled that discharging the employee for refusing to attend the meeting violated 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.412  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the National Labor Relations Act. A majority of the board felt that the rights set forth in 
Weingarten should apply equally in circumstances in which employees are not represented by 
a union. They reasoned that the right to have a co-worker present at an investigatory 
interview “greatly enhances the employees’ opportunities to act in concert to address the 
concern that the employer does not initiate or continue a practice of imposing punishment 
unjustly.” 
 
CURRENT LAW: NON-UNION EMPLOYEES  
A representative may be present where the employer allows for such. 
 
No longer must an employer allow a representative to be present where an employee 
specifically requests representation. However, an employer is not precluded from allowing 
the employee to have representation upon request. 
 
Employers can always decide not to conduct an interview, but refusing to do so may cause 
problems of its own. If the company administers disciplinary action without first hearing the 
employee’s side of the story, then the company may be handing the employee a lawsuit for 
wrongful discharge or a discrimination claim. As a general rule, it is difficult to defend a 
termination action if the employer did not at least listen to the employee’s version of events 
prior to taking action. 
 
Where the employer allows for employee representation, the employer need not “bargain 
with” the employee’s representative.  
 
Presumably, the ruling in Weingarten will continue to control this issue. In Weingarten, the 
Supreme Court stated that the representative’s role is to assist the employee, and he “may do 
so by attempting to clarify facts or suggest other employees who may have knowledge of 
them.” The Court made it clear that the employer may insist on hearing the subject’s version 
of events, and the representative is not allowed to direct the subject not to answer a question 
or to tell the subject to answer questions only once. Therefore, the employer is allowed to 
conduct the interview without interference by the representative. 
 
Employees do not have a right to be represented at an interview by a private attorney.  
 
Under Epilepsy, where an employer failed to comply with the rules requiring representation 
upon employee request, it could have been subjected to an administrative cease-and-desist 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.413 
order and/or reinstatement of the employee with back pay. Due to the overturning of 
Epilepsy and reinstatement of Weingarten, however, these penalties will probably not apply 
unless the non-union employer agrees to allow employee representation. 
 
If an employee requests any type of representation at an interview, you should immediately 
consult your legal counsel. You should also consult counsel to review your existing policies 
and procedures to ensure that you are aware of the legal duties, ramifications, and remedies 
surrounding employee representation. 
 



:


nation labor relat act
the nation labor relat act prohibit ani form of interrog by employ that
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2411
interfer with the right of the employe to organ bargain or otherwis engag in
concert activ for the purpos of bargain or other mutual aid or protect an
employ might not question an employe about ani of these protect activ either hi
own or that of other employe
rule regard nonunion represent dure interview
in june 2004 the nation labor relat board nlrb overrul a controversi
decis regard the right of nonunion employe to have a repres present
dure interview and reinstat the former 1975 rule that nonunion employe ar not
entitl to represent dure investigatori interview i bm corp 341 nlrb no 148
2004 the nlrb reason that allow cowork to sit in as repres dure
investigatori interview would compromis the requisit confidenti sensit and
thorough of the interview accordingli nonunion employ no longer have a legal
oblig to accept an employe request for such represent
union employe
sinc 1975 and the us suprem court decis of nlrb v weingarten 420 us 251 1975
union employe have had the right to union represent dure an investigatori
interview provid that the employe reason believ the interview might result in
disciplinari action thi right deriv from the nation labor relat act which
provid that employe have the right to act in concert for mutual aid and protect in
the year sinc weingarten thi right ha onli been appli in case where the employe under
investig wa cover by a collectivebargain agreement
former law nonunion employe
in the case of epilepsi foundat of northeast ohio 331 nlrb no 92 decid juli 10 2000
the nlrb extend the socal weingarten right to nonunion employe the case involv
two worker who were fire from the epilepsi foundat prior to their discharg the two
employe wrote a memo that wa critic of their supervisor later the execut director
request to meet with on of the employe and the supervisor the employe request to
meet with the execut director alon but the request wa deni the employe then ask
if the coauthor of the memo could be present at the meet thi request wa also deni
when the employe still express apprehens about the meet he wa told to go home
and he wa fire the next dai for insubordin
the nlrb rule that discharg the employe for refus to attend the meet violat
individu right dure examin law
2412 2011 fraud examin manual
the nation labor relat act a major of the board felt that the right set forth in
weingarten should appli equal in circumst in which employe ar not repres by
a union thei reason that the right to have a cowork present at an investigatori
interview greatli enhanc the employe opportun to act in concert to address the
concern that the employ doe not initi or continu a practic of impos punish
unjustli
current law nonunion employe
a repres mai be present where the employ allow for such
no longer must an employ allow a repres to be present where an employe
specif request represent howev an employ is not preclud from allow
the employe to have represent upon request
employ can alwai decid not to conduct an interview but refus to do so mai caus
problem of it own if the compani administ disciplinari action without first hear the
employe side of the stori then the compani mai be hand the employe a lawsuit for
wrong discharg or a discrimin claim as a gener rule it is difficult to defend a
termin action if the employ did not at least listen to the employe version of event
prior to take action
where the employ allow for employe represent the employ need not bargain
with the employe repres
presum the rule in weingarten will continu to control thi issu in weingarten the
suprem court state that the repres role is to assist the employe and he mai do
so by attempt to clarifi fact or suggest other employe who mai have knowledg of
them the court made it clear that the employ mai insist on hear the subject version
of event and the repres is not allow to direct the subject not to answer a question
or to tell the subject to answer question onli onc therefor the employ is allow to
conduct the interview without interfer by the repres
employe do not have a right to be repres at an interview by a privat attornei
under epilepsi where an employ fail to compli with the rule requir represent
upon employe request it could have been subject to an administr ceaseanddesist
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2413
order andor reinstat of the employe with back pai due to the overturn of
epilepsi and reinstat of weingarten howev these penalti will probabl not appli
unless the nonunion employ agre to allow employe represent
if an employe request ani type of represent at an interview you should immedi
consult your legal counsel you should also consult counsel to review your exist polici
and procedur to ensur that you ar awar of the legal duti ramif and remedi
surround employe represent
