2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Searches and Surveillance


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Searches and Surveillance 
Workplace privacy is a rapidly evolving area of law that can arise in numerous contexts 
involving the employer-employee relationship, such as surveillance and monitoring, searches, 
and polygraph testing. In most cases, an employer might investigate its workplace for 
wrongdoing by means of workplace searches and surveillance of workplace areas or 
employees. However, an employee’s privacy may be protected by the Constitution, state 
constitutions, federal and state statutes, or common law limitations. 
 
Employee Rights Under the Fourth Amendment  
The Fourth Amendment is the principal constitutional limitation on searches and seizures by 
public authorities. It states: 
 
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against 
unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon 
probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be 
searched, and the persons or things to be seized. 
 
In short, the Fourth Amendment prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures. That is, it 
prohibits public employers from unreasonably invading their employees’ privacy to conduct 
a workplace search, and it prohibits unreasonable surveillance of employees (such as 
videotaping or wiretapping) where they would reasonably expect privacy. 
 
The Warrant Requirement 
All searches and seizures must be reasonable. Whether it is reasonable to conduct a search 
and whether the activities were conducted in a reasonable manner is determined by the 
totality of the circumstances. A reasonable search is one carried out pursuant to a warrant 
(i.e., a court order that grants authorities the right to take a particular action) issued upon a 
showing of probable cause. Thus, in some circumstances, the Fourth Amendment requires 
that the government obtain a warrant before they conduct a search.  
 
Moreover, in Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967), the Supreme Court held that the 
Fourth Amendment “protects people, not places” (meaning that its provisions extend 
beyond the property line of the citizen), that the amendment applies wherever there is a 
“reasonable expectation of privacy,” and that a search without a warrant is “per se  
unreasonable,” in the absence of exigent circumstances. Thus, the police normally need to 
obtain a warrant not only to search a house, but also to intercept calls from a public 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.418  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
telephone booth, or inspect the contents of a safe deposit box, or to otherwise intrude into 
matters that the courts would reasonably consider to be private. 
 
In Johnson v. United States, 333 U.S. 10 (1948), the Supreme Court ruled that all warrants must 
be issued by a judge or magistrate (the latter a federal judicial officer empowered to hear 
misdemeanor cases), explaining that “the point  of the Fourth Amendment … is not that it 
denies law enforcement the support of the usual inferences which reasonable men draw 
from evidence. Its protection consists in requiring that those inferences be drawn by a 
neutral and detached magistrate instead of being judged by the officer engaged in the often 
competitive enterprise of ferreting out crime.” 
 
Additionally, all warrants must satisfy the requirements under the Fourth Amendment. That 
is, all warrants for searches must be judicially sanctioned and supported by “probable cause,” 
and they must “particularly” describe the place to be searched or things to be seized. 
 
The “probable cause” requirement of the Fourth Amendment is the central restraint on the 
power of the police to search. Probable cause has been defined as those facts and 
circumstances sufficient to cause a person of reasonable caution to believe that a crime has 
been committed and that the accused committed it. It requires more than mere suspicion or 
hunch, but less than virtual certainty. “Reasonable grounds to believe” is probably as good a 
definition as any. 
 
Furthermore, all warrants must particularly describe the place to be searched or the person 
or things to be seized. The particularity requirement was intended to prevent prevents “the 
issuance of warrants on loose, vague or doubtful bases of facts,”  an abuse that outraged the 
constitutional drafters. Go-Bart Importing Co. v. United States, 282 US 344, 357 (1931). In 
today’s terms, the clause would prohibit a search warrant in a white-collar investigation or a 
subpoena that commanded the production of all the defendant’s books and records whether 
or not relevant to the investigation or trial. 
 
But even if a warrant is technically required, there are a number of recognized exceptions to 
the warrant requirement, principally: 
• Workplace searches by government employers 
• Searches incident to arrest 
• Searches of motor vehicles 
• Exigent or emergency circumstances, to prevent the destruction of evidence, or while in 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.419 
“hot pursuit” of a suspect 
• When the search is conducted pursuant to a valid, voluntary consent 
• When the evidence is in “plain view” 
• Border, customs, and prison searches 
 
WORKPLACE SEARCHES BY GOVERNMENT EMPLOYERS 
Public employers are not generally required to obtain a warrant when they conduct searches 
for investigations of workplace misconduct. In O’Connor v. Ortega, 480 U.S. 709 (1987), the 
Supreme Court held that requiring warrants for all forms of public workplace searches 
would be unworkable and would impose intolerable burdens on public employers. 
Therefore, the Court ruled that workplace searches should be held to a lower standard.  
 
In reaching this decision, the Court stated that when public employers conduct a workplace 
investigation, their interest is substantially different from the normal interests of law 
enforcement. The goal of public employers is to ensure that their offices run efficiently, not 
to enforce the law. Requiring these employers to obtain a warrant for every workplace search 
would impede the effective administration of the government’s work.  
 
The Court also found that while public employees have some legitimate privacy interests in 
the workplace, these interests are less than in other places, such as their homes. Government 
offices are provided to public employees for the purpose of doing government work, and 
employees can avoid exposing truly personal belongings at work by simply leaving them at 
home. Thus, by balancing the strong government interest in maintaining an efficient 
workplace against the diminished privacy interests of government employees, the court 
justified the use of a lower standard for workplace searches by government employers. 
Instead of a warrant requirement based on probable cause, government employers are 
generally held to a standard of reasonableness under all the circumstances.  
 
THE REASONABLENESS STANDARD  
Workplace searches by government employers are subject to the reasonableness standard in 
two circumstances:  
• For noninvestigatory, work-related purposes, which are wholly unrelated to illegal 
conduct (such as retrieving a file from someone’s desk) 
• For investigations of work-related misconduct 
 
When a public employer conducts an investigation of work-related misconduct, and when 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.420  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that investigation necessitates a search of an employee’s workspace, the employer is not 
generally required to obtain a warrant to perform the search, nor is the employer required to 
make a showing of probable cause that the suspect has committed a crime. This does not 
mean, however, that there are no restrictions on the employer’s ability to conduct the search; 
it still must meet the test for “reasonableness under all the circumstances.”  
 
There is a two-part test to determine if a workplace search is reasonable:  
• The search must be justified at its inception 
• The search must be conducted in a way that is reasonably related in scope to the 
circumstances that justified the interference in the first place 
 
A search is justified at its inception if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the 
search will turn up evidence that the employee is guilty of work-related misconduct, or if the 
search is necessary for a noninvestigatory purpose such as to retrieve a file. A search is not 
justified at its inception simply because an employer thinks that the suspect might be 
engaged in workplace misconduct. The employer must be able to demonstrate a reasonable, 
clear suspicion, based on factual information, that the area to be searched contains evidence 
of misconduct.  
 
The second part of the test requires that the search be reasonable in scope. The fact that a 
search is justified at its inception does not give the employer carte blanche  authority to intrude 
upon the suspect’s privacy in all areas. The search must be no broader than is necessary to 
serve the organization’s legitimate, work-related purposes.  
 
REASONABLE EXPECTATIONS OF PRIVACY  
The Fourth Amendment only applies to workplace searches by government employers 
where an employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy. Thus, to determine if a 
workplace search will violate an employee’s Fourth Amendment rights, an employer must 
first determine if the employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy in the area to be 
searched. There is no bright-line rule for determining whether an employee has a reasonable 
privacy expectation in a particular area. Such a privacy interest can exist for a desk drawer, a 
file cabinet, a locker, or even an entire office, depending on the circumstances. The issue is 
whether a reasonable person would expect the area to be free from intrusion. The employee 
does not have to have an ownership interest in the area to have a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the area. Thus, even though a public employer may own the office where an 
employee works, that employee can still have a privacy interest in the office that prohibits 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.421 
the employer from conducting a search.  
 
The key factor to consider is whether the employee has exclusive control over the area in 
question. If so, this tends to show that the employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy 
in that area. For instance, assume that an employee has a file cabinet in his office; that he is 
the only person who uses that file cabinet; that the cabinet has a lock on it; that the 
employee is the only person with a key; and that the cabinet remains locked when the 
employee is not using it. These facts indicate that the employee has exclusive control over 
the contents of the file cabinet, and thus has a reasonable expectation of privacy in its 
contents. In other words, based on the circumstances, the employee would be justified in 
believing that others cannot and will not enter the file cabinet without his consent. The 
employee in this scenario has a constitutionally protected privacy interest in the contents of 
the file cabinet. A search of this file cabinet by the public employer would have to comport 
with the reasonableness  standard as discussed above.  
 
But if the file cabinet does not have a lock, if several employees store and retrieve files from 
that cabinet, and if it is generally understood that they can do so without employees’ 
consent, then the employee cannot reasonably expect that the contents of the file cabinet 
will be private. Under these facts, the employee would not have a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the file cabinet; therefore, a search of that file cabinet would not violate the 
employee’s Fourth Amendment rights.  
 
Reasonable privacy expectations can also attach to communications. Employees might 
reasonably expect personal phone conversations or e-mail messages to be private and free 
from monitoring.  
 
In terms of surveillance, employees are likely to have reasonable privacy expectations in 
bathrooms, changing rooms, and other personal areas within the workplace.  
 
Obviously, there are a lot of factors that go into determining whether an employee has a 
reasonable expectation of privacy. Before conducting a search or surveillance, employers 
should consult legal counsel to make sure they are not intruding upon an employee’s privacy 
interests. 
 
SEARCHES INCIDENT TO ARREST 
Police officers may, without a warrant, conduct a limited search incident to an a lawful arrest. 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.422  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The search, however, must be limited to the arrestee’s body and the area within his 
immediate control. This exception is designed to protect the officers and to prevent the 
destruction of evidence. For the search to be valid, the arrest must be valid (i.e., based on 
probable cause, and not merely a pretext to justify a search). If the arrest is unlawful when 
made, it cannot be justified by the fruits of the subsequent search, and all evidence obtained 
must be suppressed. 
 
SEARCHES OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
An automobile, airplane, or vessel may be searched without a warrant if there is probable 
cause to believe it contains contraband or other evidence of a crime. This is because of the 
mobility of the vehicles (hence the risk that evidence may be lost or destroyed while a 
warrant is being obtained) and the lower expectation of privacy associated with vehicles. If 
there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle contains contraband, the police are also 
permitted to remove the vehicle from the scene to a stationhouse to conduct a search 
without obtaining a warrant. Furthermore, the police also may conduct warrantless 
“inventory” searches of impounded vehicles  to secure and protect the owner’s personal 
property, and they may seize contraband or other evidence discovered as a result.  
 
It may also be permissible for law enforcement to make warrantless searches of containers 
and luggage found within a vehicle. This applies if the police have probable cause to believe 
there is contraband in the containers, or if they have probable cause to believe there is 
contraband in the car and that contraband could be hidden in the containers.  
 
The search incident to arrest exception also applies in the motor vehicle context. However, 
the boundaries of this search have changed with time. Most recently, on April 21, 2009, the 
Supreme Court imposed new restrictions on the exception in Arizona v. Gant, 556 U.S. ___ 
(2009). For many years, the rule had been that the police may search the entire passenger 
compartment of a vehicle incident to the custodial arrest of an occupant of the car. In Gant, 
however, the Supreme Court added a new limitation: Vehicle searches following an 
occupant’s arrest are legal “only when the arrestee is unsecured and within reaching distance 
of the passenger compartment at the time of the search” or when the officer has reason to 
believe the vehicle has evidence of the crime that forms the basis for the arrest.  
 
The motor vehicle exception to the warrant requirement does not extend to passengers in 
the car. Once a passenger has been arrested, however, the police are permitted to make a 
warrantless search of the suspect and the area within his control pursuant to the exception 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.423 
for searches incident to arrest, as discussed above.  
 
EXIGENT OR EMERGENCY CIRCUMSTANCES 
There is also an exception to the warrant requirement for exigent circumstances, which 
means where the officers must act quickly.  
 
CONSENT SEARCHES 
Individuals are always free to waive their Fourth Amendment rights. If a suspect consents to 
a search by police, this eliminates the need for a warrant. The courts, however, will closely 
scrutinize any such “consent” to make sure it was truly voluntary, particularly when it leads 
to the seizure of incriminating evidence. Consents obtained by deceit, bribery, or 
misrepresentations are generally held to be involuntary and invalid. (However, when an 
undercover police officer conceals his identity and, as a result, an individual allows the 
officer to enter an area, this amounts to consent, even though the person did not know 
permission was being granted to a police officer.) Consent might not be voluntary if it requires 
a choice between exercising constitutional rights and continued employment. There is also 
no requirement that suspects be informed of their right to refuse consent.  
 
Consent may be implied in circumstances in which the individual can choose between 
entering an area and submitting to a search or not entering, as when one enters a secured 
courthouse, boards an airplane, or crosses an international border. Consent may be given by 
third parties to searches of property over which the third parties have authority, such as a co-
 tenant in a leased apartment. 
 
EVIDENCE IN “PLAIN VIEW” 
Evidence in “plain view” of an officer who has a right to be in a position to observe it also 
may be seized without a warrant. This situation usually occurs when contraband or evidence 
of another crime is inadvertently discovered during a search or arrest for another offense. 
The discovery must be truly inadvertent; however, if discovery of the evidence is anticipated 
and no other exception applies, a warrant must first be obtained. 
 
BORDER, CUSTOMS, AND PRISON SEARCHES 
Border and customs searches are a long-standing exception to the Fourth Amendment and 
may be conducted without probable cause or a warrant. Searches of prison cells and the 
monitoring of inmates’ telephone conversations also may be conducted without a warrant or  
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.424  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
probable cause because of security concerns and the absence of a realistic expectation of 
privacy in prison. 
 
Searching an Employee's Mail 
An employer may not conduct searches of an employee’s mail before it has been delivered. 
Under federal law, any person who takes a letter, postcard, or package from the mail before 
it has been delivered to the person to whom it was directed, with design to obstruct the 
correspondence, faces up to five years imprisonment, a fine, or both. See 18 U.S.C. § 1702. 
Once the mail has been delivered, however, then ordinary rules regarding searches apply. 
 
Surveillance 
An employer, in certain circumstances, can use monitoring and surveillance methods to 
uncover employee wrongdoing. Various federal and state laws govern the availability and 
methods of surveillance techniques. Because of the complexity of these laws and the 
differing interpretations of them by state and federal courts, counsel should always be 
consulted beforehand. For example, if an employer monitors employees’ phone calls without 
following the proper legal procedure, the employer might violate federal or state wiretap 
laws. The employer might also expose itself to substantial legal liability for invasion of 
privacy. 
 
To lower the expectation of privacy and to preserve the right to search any and all areas and 
to monitor and survey employee conduct, the employer should adopt a written policy which 
provides that to maintain the security of its operations, the company might gain access to 
and search all work areas and personal belongings, including desks, file drawers, lockers, 
briefcases, handbags, pockets, and personal effects. Include in the policy that workplace 
areas are subject to surveillance and that business phone calls might be monitored. In 
addition, as discussed below, the policy also should state that the employer could monitor all 
electronic communications, such as e-mail, as well as monitor what sites are visited over the 
Internet. 
 
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986   
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA), codified at 18 U.S.C. §§ 
2510–2521, 2701–2710, 3121–3126, is the primary federal statute that offers workers 
protections in communications privacy. 
 
Under the ECPA, electronic communications are defined as “any transfer of signs, signals, 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.425 
writing, images, sounds, data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or in part by 
a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photolectronic, or photooptical system that affects 
interstate or foreign commerce.” 
 
The ECPA is divided into three parts: the Wiretap Act, which governs the interception of 
electronic communications, the Stored Communications Act, which covers access to stored 
communications and records; and the Pen Regis ter Act, which regulates pen registers and 
trap and trace devices.  
 
THE WIRETAP ACT (18 U.S.C. §§ 2510–2521) 
In response to an increasing number of privacy breaches, Congress enacted the Wiretap Act, 
which prohibits anyone from intentionally intercepting or attempting to intercept any wire, 
oral, or electronic communication.  
 
Section 2511 prohibits covert spying on voice and data communications, extending 
protection from eavesdropping on mail and telephone communications to include digital 
data communications, such as e-mail and remote computing; it does not govern stored 
communications. Under the Wiretap Act, an interception occurs by the acquisition of the 
contents of any electronic communication through the use of any device. Most courts have 
held that interception occurs only when the protected communications are obtained 
contemporaneously with their transmission.  
 
Remedies for violating the Wiretap Act include criminal sanctions and civil relief. A criminal 
violation under the Act is a felony and is punishable by up to five years imprisonment 
and/or fines. Under a private cause of action, a court may award the plaintiff equitable relief, 
actual damages, punitive damages, and attorneys’ fees. 
 
THE STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (18 U.S.C. § 2701) 
As part of the ECPA, Congress enacted the Stored Communications Act (SCA) to protect 
stored electronic communications, such as e-mail and voicemail, by prohibiting the 
unauthorized access of such communications that are in storage. More specifically, the SCA 
prohibits unlawful access to a facility that provides an electronic communication service, 
and, then, obtaining, altering, or preventing authorized access to a wire or electronic 
communication while it is electronically stored in such a system. An electronic 
communication falls under the SCA once a system receives and stores it.  
  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.426  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The SCA includes both civil and criminal penalties. Concerning civil penalties, the SCA 
provides a private right of action and allows appropriate relief, including equitable relief, 
damages, and attorneys fees. Regarding criminal penalties, the SCA provides that if the first 
offense is committed for purposes of commercial advantage, malicious destruction, or 
damage or private commercial gain, punishment may include a fine and/or imprisonment 
for up to five years. For any subsequent offense, penalties include a fine and/or 
imprisonment for not more than ten years. In any other case, where it is a first offense, 
courts may impose a fine or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. For all 
subsequent convictions, courts may impose a fine and/or imprisonment for up to ten years. 
 
THE PEN REGISTERS ACT 
Pen registers are devices that can detect the telephone number from which an incoming call 
has been made. Title 18, section 3121, of the U.S. Code generally prohibits the installation of 
pen registers without a court order.  
 
EXCEPTIONS 
Although the ECPA imposes several rules about electronic communications, it also contains 
several exceptions to these rules. The exceptions most relevant to the workplace are:  
• The ordinary course of business exception 
• The provider exception 
• The consent exception 
 
ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS EXCEPTION  
The ECPA’s definition of “electronic device” specifically excludes devices that are used by 
an employer in the “ordinary course of busi ness.” Therefore, employers are permitted to 
monitor their employees’ wire or electronic communications, including phone calls, if done 
for a legitimate business purpose.  
 
THE PROVIDER EXCEPTION  
The provider exception allows suppliers of wire or electronic communications services (e.g., 
telephone, voice mail, e-mail, or Internet services) to intercept or access electronic 
communications in the normal course of business. For example, telephone providers can 
monitor phone calls when it is necessary to maintain and protect the system, run quality 
control checks, or to protect the service against theft or harassment. Most courts hold that 
employers qualify as providers with respect to their internal e-mail and voice mail systems.   
 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.427 
CONSENT EXCEPTION  
The ECPA allows an entity to intercept or access an electronic communication if one of the 
parties to the communication has given prior consent. This exception does not apply if the 
communication is intercepted for the purpose of committing a crime. 
 
Monitoring Employee Phone Calls 
To review, the Wiretap Act provisions of the ECPA limit an employer’s ability to monitor 
employee phone calls. In addition to the ECPA, a company’s right to monitor employee 
phone calls is also limited by employees’ constitutional and common law privacy rights, as 
discussed above. 
 
Although interception is generally forbidden under the Wiretap Act, employers may lawfully 
monitor phone calls if they fall under one of the statutory exceptions, including the ordinary 
course of business exception and the consent exception.  
 
ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS EXCEPTION 
Under the ordinary course of business exception, employers are permitted to monitor their 
employees’ wire or electronic communications, including phone calls, if done for a legitimate 
business purpose.  
 
This exception could apply in various scenarios. For example, it would apply where the 
employer routinely monitors phone communications for purposes of quality control (e.g., 
monitoring the phone calls of operators, telemarketers, customer service personnel, etc.). It 
may also apply where there is a legitimate business purpose for the monitoring, such as 
preventing business losses or employee misconduct. Keep in mind, however, that there must 
be a specific, legitimate business purpose for the interception. Blanket monitoring probably 
will be found to violate the act. In Sanders v. Robert Bosch, 38 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 1994), an 
employer who used a “voice logger” to record all telephone conversations on certain 
company lines did not fall within the ordinary course of business exception because the 
employer was unable to state a legitimate business purpose for the interceptions.  
 
Even if a company has a legitimate business purpose for monitoring a phone call, the 
method used to intercept and monitor the call must be no more intrusive than necessary to 
achieve the purpose. In Deal v. Spears, 980 F.2d 1153 (8th Cir. 1992), an employer who tape-
 recorded and listened to all calls, including personal calls, was found to have violated the 
statute even though the employer had legitimate suspicions of theft. Once it becomes 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.428  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
apparent that a communication is personal and not otherwise unauthorized, the employer 
must immediately stop listening to the call. Overly broad efforts to monitor employee calls 
may give rise to a claim for invasion of privacy.  
 
CONSENT EXCEPTION 
The ECPA allows an entity to intercept an electronic communication if that entity is a party 
to the communication, or if one of the parties to the communication has given prior consent 
to the interception.  
 
For an employer to monitor an employee under this exception, the employee must expressly 
consent to the monitoring. Generally, employers must obtain written consent (e.g., an 
employer provides its employees with a written policy explaining that phone calls may be 
monitored and the employees sign the policy). It is important to note that providing a 
notification that employees might be monitored (as opposed to being notified that the phone 
calls or e-mail will be monitored) may not satisfy the consent exception. For example, in one 
case, notification to an employee that her phone calls might be monitored was not enough to 
establish that she consented to the recording of her phone calls. Even when an employee 
consents to monitoring, this does not give the employer unlimited access to the employee’s 
communications. Monitoring still should be c onducted only for legitimate business purposes 
and should be no more broad than necessary.  
 
Using Pen Registers to Monitor Employees 
In general, section 3121 prohibits the installation of pen registers without a court order, but 
there are a number of exceptions under which employers can use pen registers to track their 
employees’ phone activity. Those exceptions include: 
• Phone service providers can use pen registers to protect users (employers) from abuse of 
service or unlawful use of service.  
• Phone service providers can use a pen register to record the fact that a phone call was 
initiated or completed to protect users of the service (employers) from fraudulent, 
unlawful, or abusive use of the service.  
• Phone service providers can use a pen register where consent of the user of the service 
has been obtained.  
 
Monitoring Employees’ E-Mail and Voicemail 
The ECPA regulates access to stored e-mail and voicemail; it prohibits the unauthorized 
access of electronic communications that are in storage.   
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.429 
Although the SCA generally prohibits third parties from accessing stored communications, 
there are two key exceptions: the provider exception and the consent exception. The provider 
exception  exempts providers of electronic communications services from the restrictions of 
the SCA. In other words, if a message is stored on an e-mail or voice mail system that the 
company provides, then the employer can access those messages as it sees fit without 
violating the ECPA. Note, however, that this exception does not allow the employer to 
access messages stored with an outside provider such as Yahoo!, Google, or AOL.  
 
The consent exception permits access of stored messages if such access is authorized by the 
intended recipient of the communication. This means that employers will be free to access 
employee e-mail and voice mail (including messages stored with outside providers) as long as 
the employees have given their consent. This exception provides the safest haven for 
employers who want to monitor their employees’ stored messages. To make sure the 
consent exception will apply, companies should obtain express written consent from all 
employees for such monitoring as a condition of employment.  
 
In addition to the ECPA, employers must also be aware of employees’ constitutional and 
common law privacy rights in the contents of their e-mail. As was discussed above, it is a 
good idea for all employers to establish a written policy which notifies employees that their 
stored messages are the property of the employer, and that they are subject to monitoring by 
the employer at any time.  
 
Also, keep in mind that, as with other forms of searches and surveillance, the courts will not 
look kindly on overly broad monitoring of stored communications. Employers should only 
access their employees’ stored voice mail or e-mail when there is a legitimate business 
purpose for doing so, and the access should be no more intrusive than necessary to achieve 
the purpose. 
 
Monitoring Employees’ Blogging Activity 
Because the blogging trend is growing, it is important for employers and employees to 
understand their rights and obligations with respect to such online activity. As a general rule, 
employers can monitor employee blogging because employees have a limited expectation of 
privacy with respect to their blog posts, which are posted publicly. However, the extent of an 
employer’s rights to monitor largely depend on whether the employee blogged while on-duty 
using the employer’s computer system.  
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.430  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Employees have no reasonable expectation of privacy when blogging on the employer’s 
system because the system was set up to provide business communications. If there is no 
reasonable expectation of privacy, then there is no constitutional or common law restriction 
on monitoring such activity. Therefore, an employee who uses an employer’s system to blog 
about violating company policy or illegal activity, or who engages in other unacceptable 
conduct, can generally be disciplined for such posts. However, employers should formalize 
their computer/Internet use policies to cover blogging and to effectively maintain control 
over such use.  
 
Concerning an employee’s off-duty blogging, employers should carefully examine the legal 
consequences of using such conduct when discharging or disciplining an employee, including 
those that are at will, because such action implicates state and federal law. In fact, some 
states (California, New York, Colorado, Montana, and North Dakota) enacted laws that limit 
an employer’s power to discharge an employee for off-duty conduct. Furthermore, an 
employee who blogs about certain topics related to status in a protected class may also be 
protected from discharge (i.e., when employee reveals personal information about his 
disability or religious beliefs, or writes about harassment or discrimination in the workplace). 
Therefore, companies should enact and apply Internet-use policies consistently and 
uniformly.  
 
Monitoring Employees’ Internet Activity 
As with monitoring employees’ e-mail and blogging activity, employers should be aware of 
federal protections against monitoring employees’ Internet use, including an employee’s 
instant messages, website postings, etc. This is true even though federal law provides 
employees little protection from an employer’s electronic monitoring. For example, although 
the ECPA prohibits the intentional interception of electronic communications when 
employees have a reasonable expectation of privacy, an employer may monitor Internet use 
when there is employee consent, when there are legitimate business purposes, or when an 
employer has reason to believe that the company’s interests are at risk. In addition, the 
common law right to privacy also extends to employees in the workplace; however, the 
public nature of the workplace has led many courts to reject most invasion claims on the 
basis that there was no reasonable expectation of privacy.  
 
Video Surveillance of Employees 
In some scenarios, investigators may consider the use of video surveillance equipment as 
part of an internal investigation. In general, video surveillance is not permissible in areas 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.431 
where employees have a legitimate expectation of privacy. For instance, an employer is not 
allowed to install video cameras in a restroom or dressing room unless there are special 
circumstances to justify this intrusion on employees’ privacy. Conversely, an employer is 
much more likely to be allowed to use video surveillance in open areas, such as around cash 
registers or in public hallways. These areas are open to the public and an employee could not 
reasonably expect privacy there. It is advisable to provide written notice to employees 
informing them that their activities are subject to monitoring in advance of any surveillance. 
Again, the scope of the surveillance should be no greater than necessary to fulfill the 
employer’s legitimate business purposes.  
 
If video surveillance were accompanied by audio recording, then this type of surveillance 
would be covered by Wiretap Act provisions of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 
which prohibit the interception of wire, electronic, or oral communication  except in limited 
circumstances. However, the ECPA does not cover silent video monitoring. The question in 
this type of surveillance is whether the surveillance violates the employee’s constitutional or 
common law privacy rights. 
 
Effect of Violation of Employee’s Rights 
Illegally seized evidence will be excluded in criminal proceedings. A public employer cannot 
use illegally seized evidence to discipline an employee. There is no Fourth Amendment 
prohibition against a private employer using illegally seized evidence to discipline an 
employee; however, the employer might be exposing itself to litigation for invasion of 
privacy, trespass, or other common law causes of action described below. 
 
The Exclusionary Rule 
Under the exclusionary rule, which is in effect in all federal and state courts, evidence seized in 
violation of the Fourth Amendment will be suppressed — that is, it becomes inadmissible in 
any prosecution against the suspect except under a few limited exceptions. In addition, all 
evidence that is obtained as a result of the illegally obtained evidence will also be excluded. 
An unlawful search and seizure does not mean the suspect cannot be prosecuted, and it does 
not invalidate a conviction based on other evidence. But it does prevent the wrongfully 
obtained evidence and all evidence derived from it from being presented at trial. 
 
Generally, this rule applies only in criminal cases and does not apply to private individuals 
acting for their own purposes. However, the Fourth Amendment does apply to government  
  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.432  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employers. Therefore, a public employer cannot use illegally seized evidence to discipline an 
employee.  
 
There is, however, no Fourth Amendment prohibition against a private employer using 
illegally seized evidence to discipline an employee. Thus, evidence illegally obtained by a 
private employer may be admitted in court, but the employer might be exposing itself to 
litigation for invasion of privacy, trespass or other common law causes of action described 
below. 
 
Furthermore, evidence that has been suppressed under the exclusionary rule might still be 
admissible in a civil trial or an administrative proceeding such as an employee disciplinary 
hearing. The primary goal of the exclusionary rule is to deter police  misconduct. If the 
deterrent effect of excluding the evidence from a civil or administrative proceeding is 
outweighed by the costs that would result from excluding the evidence, and if the party 
whose rights were violated has other forms of redress for the violation, then evidence that 
was suppressed in a criminal trial may be admissible in a noncriminal proceeding. However, 
there are some circumstances in which wrongfully obtained evidence will be excluded from 
civil proceedings, so public employers should not feel free to disregard their employees’ 
constitutional rights under the assumption that any illegally obtained evidence can still be 
used against an employee in a noncriminal matter. 
 
Civil Liability for Damages (42 U.S.C. § 1983) 
Section 1983 of Title 42, U.S. Code, provides a remedy for violation of federally protected 
rights where state action is involved. To prevail in a claim under section 1983, the plaintiff 
must prove two critical issues: (1) that he  has been denied a right guaranteed by the 
Constitution and the laws of the United States, and (2) that the defendant(s) deprived him of 
that right while acting under the color of state law.  
 
The defendant, however, can raise certain defenses to a section 1983 claim, including 
qualified immunity and consent. For public employers, there might be a qualified immunity 
from liability if they act in good faith on the basis of unsettled law. Qualified immunity 
shields government officials from both suit and liability if their conduct did not violate any 
clearly established right which a reasonable person would have known.  
 
In addition, valid consent is a well-recognized exception to the Fourth Amendment 
prohibition against warrantless searches. Consent to search can be voluntary, involuntary, or 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.433 
“informed.” Consent is not voluntary if it requires a choice between constitutional rights. 
Consent might not be voluntary if it requires a choice between exercising constitutional 
rights and continued employment. Courts are split on this issue. (Published “search” policy 
as a barrier to expectation of privacy is used to diminish or eliminate the expectation 
altogether.) 
 
State Constitutions and Statutes 
Most states have enacted  constitutional provisions similar to the Fourth Amendment, and 
many of the same issues arise under the state constitutions as under the federal Constitution. 
In most states, standards similar to those applied under the federal Constitution apply. Most 
states have enacted laws governing an employee’s right to privacy in the workplace. Many 
states have enacted statutes that restrict surveillance, including wiretapping or electronic 
surveillance, cameras, pen registers, two-way mirrors, or surveillance in particular areas, such 
as locker rooms, lounges, and rest areas. 
 
Surreptitious Recording 
All but 12 states allow you to record a conversation to which you are a party without 
informing the other parties to the conversation that you are recording it. Federal wiretap 
statutes also permit one-party consent of telephone conversations in most circumstances 
(employees being the most notable exception; see the material on the Electronic 
Communication Privacy Act discussed previously in this chapter). 
 
The 38 states that allow such recordings are generally referred to as “one-party” states. The 
District of Columbia is also a “one-party” jurisdiction. The other 12 states are incorrectly 
referred to as “two-party” states. Be aware, however, that this is a misnomer because consent 
of all parties to the conversation is required. Currently, the following states require the 
consent of all parties to a conversation in most circumstances: 
• California 
• Connecticut 
• Delaware 
• Florida 
• Illinois 
• Maryland 
• Massachusetts 
• Michigan 
• Montana 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.434  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• New Hampshire 
• Pennsylvania 
• Washington 
 
There are, however, variations among states regarding the details of such recordings and 
their admissibility in court. Before you record a conversation, make sure you consult an 
attorney or check the laws for your jurisdiction. 
 
Additionally, there are a number of different laws regarding videotaping. At least fifteen 
states have outlawed the use of hidden cameras in private places. In some states, however, 
there is no prohibition on videotaping anyone as long as there is no audio recording. Due to 
privacy concerns, a number of states have proposed legislation to outlaw surreptitious 
videotaping in certain circumstances. Since this area of the law is changing constantly, make 
sure you check the law in your jurisdiction. 
 
Federal and State Nondiscrimination Statutes  
Nondiscrimination statutes such as the federal Civil Rights Acts of 1866 and 1871, Title VII 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1970, as 
well as similar state statutes, protect employees from being singled out for searches on the 
basis of such characteristics as race, national origin, sex, religion, and age. These laws also 
protect employees against disparate discipline assessed as a result of a search. 
 
Common Law Protections in Connection with Searches and Surveillance 
Employees also enjoy common law privacy protections that limit an employer’s right to 
search and use surveillance techniques. These common law rights apply to private as well as 
government employers; no state action is required to trigger their protections. 
 
Some of the common law protections that applied in the interview setting also apply to an 
employer’s right to search and use surveillance techniques. 
 
Invasion of Privacy 
Employees also have common law privacy interests that limit an employer’s right to search. 
These common law protections, which are similar in nature and scope to the Fourth 
Amendment protections discussed above, cover both public and private employees. As long 
as an employee does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in an area, the employer 
can search that area without violating an employee’s common law right to privacy. 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.435 
While modern tort law includes four categories of invasion of privacy, this discussion only 
addresses two of those torts: publicity of private facts and intrusion upon seclusion. 
 
INTRUSION INTO SECLUSION 
Intrusion upon seclusion is the cause of action that is most frequently raised with regard to 
workplace searches. As stated before, intrusion upon seclusion occurs when an individual 
intentionally intrudes “upon the solitude or secl usion of another or his private affairs or 
concerns” and “the intrusion would be highly offensive to a reasonable person.” Thus, 
where there is an expectation of privacy on the part of the employee, a search without cause 
might give rise to a claim of invasion of privacy. The mere gathering of information is not a 
tort; however, the gathering of confidential information where the intrusion is unreasonable 
might be a tort. There is no invasion of privacy if the information is open to public view or 
has been disclosed to others. 
 
As with constitutional actions, an intrusion upon seclusion claim can be based not only on 
physical intrusions, but also on wiretapping, eavesdropping and other forms of surveillance. 
 
An employer can eliminate the potential for claim of invasion of privacy by publishing and 
following a “search” policy. In addition, the following measures can be taken: 
• Having a written policy regarding searches, surveillance, and telephone monitoring 
• Retaining a key to all desks, lockers, etc. 
• Requiring employees to provide keys to all personal locks 
• Obtaining consent to search 
 
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF PRIVATE FACTS 
The tort of public disclosure of private facts occurs when one party makes public statements 
about another party’s private life that are not of public concern. The disclosure of those facts 
must be highly offensive to a reasonable person. This tort can exist even if the statements 
are true. Because giving unreasonable publicity to true, but private, information about an 
employee can give rise to a claim for invasion of privacy, the need to communicate 
information about the employee must be balanced against the intrusion into the employee’s 
privacy. 
 
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress 
Again, intentional infliction of emotional distress refers to any unprivileged conduct which is 
so outrageous and egregious that it exceeds all bounds usually tolerated by civilized society 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.436  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
and which is intended to cause injury (or was committed with reckless disregard for the 
likelihood of its causing injury) to another.  
 
This tort is significant particularly to private employers whose searches might not be subject 
to the Fourth Amendment or similar state constitutional provisions because damages for 
pain and suffering and punitive damages might be awarded. 
 
Good Faith and Fair Dealing 
To review, several states recognize a duty on the part of employers to deal with their 
employees fairly and in good faith. This duty might include abiding by all company policies 
and provisions in an employee handbook, including those relating to searches (e.g., how and 
when they can be conducted) and expectations of privacy on the part of employees. 
 
Breach of Implied Contract 
As noted above, many states now recognize an implied contract between employers and 
employees arising out of employee handbooks or oral promises. For example, an employer 
with an employee handbook containing provisions relating to searches or employee 
expectations of privacy might find itself contractually bound by those provisions and in 
breach of contract if the provisions are not followed to the letter. 
 
False Imprisonment 
Again, false imprisonment is the restraint by one person of the physical liberty of another 
without consent or legal justification. A claim of false imprisonment might be made if an 
employee is detained in any way during a search, either of the employee himself or of the 
employee’s desk, locker, and so on. For more information on false imprisonment, see the 
Interviews section in this chapter. 
 
Trespass 
Trespass is the unauthorized, intentional, or negligent entry upon the property of others. A 
claim of trespass might arise from a search of an employee’s locker, but it is particularly 
applicable to surveillance at an employee’s home. 
 
Reducing Employees’ Expectation of Privacy  
The single most effective method of eliminating potential problems involving employees’ 
right of privacy, including workplace searches and the monitoring or reading of electronic 
communications, is for a company to adopt a written policy which provides that to maintain 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.437 
the security of its operations, the company may gain access to and search all work areas and 
personal belongings, including desks, file drawers, lockers, briefcases, handbags, pockets, and 
personal effects. 
 
The policy should also notify employees that computer systems (including the Internet, e-
 mail communications, hardware, and files) are solely for business use, and that the company 
reserves the absolute right to review, audit, and disclose all matters sent over the system or 
placed in storage. Include in the policy that workplace areas are subject to surveillance and 
that business phone calls may be monitored. 
 
 



:


search and surveil
workplac privaci is a rapidli evolv area of law that can aris in numer context
involv the employeremploye relationship such as surveil and monitor search
and polygraph test in most case an employ might investig it workplac for
wrongdo by mean of workplac search and surveil of workplac area or
employe howev an employe privaci mai be protect by the constitut state
constitut feder and state statut or common law limit
employe right under the fourth amend
the fourth amend is the princip constitut limit on search and seizur by
public author it state
the right of the peopl to be secur in their person hous paper and effect against
unreason search and seizur shall not be violat and no warrant shall issu but upon
probabl caus support by oath or affirm and particularli describ the place to be
search and the person or thing to be seiz
in short the fourth amend prohibit unreason search and seizur that is it
prohibit public employ from unreason invad their employe privaci to conduct
a workplac search and it prohibit unreason surveil of employe such as
videotap or wiretap where thei would reason expect privaci
the warrant requir
all search and seizur must be reason whether it is reason to conduct a search
and whether the activ were conduct in a reason manner is determin by the
total of the circumst a reason search is on carri out pursuant to a warrant
ie a court order that grant author the right to take a particular action issu upon a
show of probabl caus thu in some circumst the fourth amend requir
that the govern obtain a warrant befor thei conduct a search
moreov in katz v unit state 389 us 347 1967 the suprem court held that the
fourth amend protect peopl not place mean that it provis extend
beyond the properti line of the citizen that the amend appli wherev there is a
reason expect of privaci and that a search without a warrant is per se
unreason in the absenc of exig circumst thu the polic normal need to
obtain a warrant not onli to search a hous but also to intercept call from a public
individu right dure examin law
2418 2011 fraud examin manual
telephon booth or inspect the content of a safe deposit box or to otherwis intrud into
matter that the court would reason consid to be privat
in johnson v unit state 333 us 10 1948 the suprem court rule that all warrant must
be issu by a judg or magistr the latter a feder judici offic empow to hear
misdemeanor case explain that the point of the fourth amend is not that it
deni law enforc the support of the usual infer which reason men draw
from evid it protect consist in requir that those infer be drawn by a
neutral and detach magistr instead of be judg by the offic engag in the often
competit enterpris of ferret out crime
addition all warrant must satisfi the requir under the fourth amend that
is all warrant for search must be judici sanction and support by probabl caus
and thei must particularli describ the place to be search or thing to be seiz
the probabl caus requir of the fourth amend is the central restraint on the
power of the polic to search probabl caus ha been defin as those fact and
circumst suffici to caus a person of reason caution to believ that a crime ha
been commit and that the accus commit it it requir more than mere suspicion or
hunch but less than virtual certainti reason ground to believ is probabl as good a
definit as ani
furthermor all warrant must particularli describ the place to be search or the person
or thing to be seiz the particular requir wa intend to prevent prevent the
issuanc of warrant on loos vagu or doubt base of fact an abus that outrag the
constitut drafter gobart import co v unit state 282 us 344 357 1931 in
todai term the claus would prohibit a search warrant in a whitecollar investig or a
subpoena that command the product of all the defend book and record whether
or not relev to the investig or trial
but even if a warrant is technic requir there ar a number of recogn except to
the warrant requir princip
workplac search by govern employ
search incid to arrest
search of motor vehicl
exig or emerg circumst to prevent the destruct of evid or while in
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2419
hot pursuit of a suspect
when the search is conduct pursuant to a valid voluntari consent
when the evid is in plain view
border custom and prison search
workplac search by govern employ
public employ ar not gener requir to obtain a warrant when thei conduct search
for investig of workplac misconduct in oconnor v ortega 480 us 709 1987 the
suprem court held that requir warrant for all form of public workplac search
would be unwork and would impos intoler burden on public employ
therefor the court rule that workplac search should be held to a lower standard
in reach thi decis the court state that when public employ conduct a workplac
investig their interest is substanti differ from the normal interest of law
enforc the goal of public employ is to ensur that their offic run effici not
to enforc the law requir these employ to obtain a warrant for everi workplac search
would imped the effect administr of the govern work
the court also found that while public employe have some legitim privaci interest in
the workplac these interest ar less than in other place such as their home govern
offic ar provid to public employe for the purpos of do govern work and
employe can avoid expos truli person belong at work by simpli leav them at
home thu by balanc the strong govern interest in maintain an effici
workplac against the diminish privaci interest of govern employe the court
justifi the us of a lower standard for workplac search by govern employ
instead of a warrant requir base on probabl caus govern employ ar
gener held to a standard of reason under all the circumst
the reason standard
workplac search by govern employ ar subject to the reason standard in
two circumst
for noninvestigatori workrel purpos which ar wholli unrel to illeg
conduct such as retriev a file from someon desk
for investig of workrel misconduct
when a public employ conduct an investig of workrel misconduct and when
individu right dure examin law
2420 2011 fraud examin manual
that investig necessit a search of an employe workspac the employ is not
gener requir to obtain a warrant to perform the search nor is the employ requir to
make a show of probabl caus that the suspect ha commit a crime thi doe not
mean howev that there ar no restrict on the employ abil to conduct the search
it still must meet the test for reason under all the circumst
there is a twopart test to determin if a workplac search is reason
the search must be justifi at it incept
the search must be conduct in a wai that is reason relat in scope to the
circumst that justifi the interfer in the first place
a search is justifi at it incept if there ar reason ground for suspect that the
search will turn up evid that the employe is guilti of workrel misconduct or if the
search is necessari for a noninvestigatori purpos such as to retriev a file a search is not
justifi at it incept simpli becaus an employ think that the suspect might be
engag in workplac misconduct the employ must be abl to demonstr a reason
clear suspicion base on factual inform that the area to be search contain evid
of misconduct
the second part of the test requir that the search be reason in scope the fact that a
search is justifi at it incept doe not give the employ cart blanch author to intrud
upon the suspect privaci in all area the search must be no broader than is necessari to
serv the organ legitim workrel purpos
reason expect of privaci
the fourth amend onli appli to workplac search by govern employ
where an employe ha a reason expect of privaci thu to determin if a
workplac search will violat an employe fourth amend right an employ must
first determin if the employe ha a reason expect of privaci in the area to be
search there is no brightlin rule for determin whether an employe ha a reason
privaci expect in a particular area such a privaci interest can exist for a desk drawer a
file cabinet a locker or even an entir offic depend on the circumst the issu is
whether a reason person would expect the area to be free from intrus the employe
doe not have to have an ownership interest in the area to have a reason expect of
privaci in the area thu even though a public employ mai own the offic where an
employe work that employe can still have a privaci interest in the offic that prohibit
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2421
the employ from conduct a search
the kei factor to consid is whether the employe ha exclus control over the area in
question if so thi tend to show that the employe ha a reason expect of privaci
in that area for instanc assum that an employe ha a file cabinet in hi offic that he is
the onli person who us that file cabinet that the cabinet ha a lock on it that the
employe is the onli person with a kei and that the cabinet remain lock when the
employe is not us it these fact indic that the employe ha exclus control over
the content of the file cabinet and thu ha a reason expect of privaci in it
content in other word base on the circumst the employe would be justifi in
believ that other cannot and will not enter the file cabinet without hi consent the
employe in thi scenario ha a constitution protect privaci interest in the content of
the file cabinet a search of thi file cabinet by the public employ would have to comport
with the reason standard as discuss abov
but if the file cabinet doe not have a lock if sever employe store and retriev file from
that cabinet and if it is gener understood that thei can do so without employe
consent then the employe cannot reason expect that the content of the file cabinet
will be privat under these fact the employe would not have a reason expect of
privaci in the file cabinet therefor a search of that file cabinet would not violat the
employe fourth amend right
reason privaci expect can also attach to commun employe might
reason expect person phone convers or email messag to be privat and free
from monitor
in term of surveil employe ar like to have reason privaci expect in
bathroom chang room and other person area within the workplac
obvious there ar a lot of factor that go into determin whether an employe ha a
reason expect of privaci befor conduct a search or surveil employ
should consult legal counsel to make sure thei ar not intrud upon an employe privaci
interest
search incid to arrest
polic offic mai without a warrant conduct a limit search incid to an a law arrest
individu right dure examin law
2422 2011 fraud examin manual
the search howev must be limit to the arreste bodi and the area within hi
immedi control thi except is design to protect the offic and to prevent the
destruct of evid for the search to be valid the arrest must be valid ie base on
probabl caus and not mere a pretext to justifi a search if the arrest is unlaw when
made it cannot be justifi by the fruit of the subsequ search and all evid obtain
must be suppress
search of motor vehicl
an automobil airplan or vessel mai be search without a warrant if there is probabl
caus to believ it contain contraband or other evid of a crime thi is becaus of the
mobil of the vehicl henc the risk that evid mai be lost or destroi while a
warrant is be obtain and the lower expect of privaci associ with vehicl if
there is probabl caus to believ that the vehicl contain contraband the polic ar also
permit to remov the vehicl from the scene to a stationhous to conduct a search
without obtain a warrant furthermor the polic also mai conduct warrantless
inventori search of impound vehicl to secur and protect the owner person
properti and thei mai seiz contraband or other evid discov as a result
it mai also be permiss for law enforc to make warrantless search of contain
and luggag found within a vehicl thi appli if the polic have probabl caus to believ
there is contraband in the contain or if thei have probabl caus to believ there is
contraband in the car and that contraband could be hidden in the contain
the search incid to arrest except also appli in the motor vehicl context howev
the boundari of thi search have chang with time most recent on april 21 2009 the
suprem court impos new restrict on the except in arizona v gant 556 us
2009 for mani year the rule had been that the polic mai search the entir passeng
compart of a vehicl incid to the custodi arrest of an occup of the car in gant
howev the suprem court ad a new limit vehicl search follow an
occup arrest ar legal onli when the arreste is unsecur and within reach distanc
of the passeng compart at the time of the search or when the offic ha reason to
believ the vehicl ha evid of the crime that form the basi for the arrest
the motor vehicl except to the warrant requir doe not extend to passeng in
the car onc a passeng ha been arrest howev the polic ar permit to make a
warrantless search of the suspect and the area within hi control pursuant to the except
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2423
for search incid to arrest as discuss abov
exig or emerg circumst
there is also an except to the warrant requir for exig circumst which
mean where the offic must act quickli
consent search
individu ar alwai free to waiv their fourth amend right if a suspect consent to
a search by polic thi elimin the need for a warrant the court howev will close
scrutin ani such consent to make sure it wa truli voluntari particularli when it lead
to the seizur of incrimin evid consent obtain by deceit briberi or
misrepresent ar gener held to be involuntari and invalid howev when an
undercov polic offic conceal hi ident and as a result an individu allow the
offic to enter an area thi amount to consent even though the person did not know
permiss wa be grant to a polic offic consent might not be voluntari if it requir
a choic between exercis constitut right and continu employ there is also
no requir that suspect be inform of their right to refus consent
consent mai be impli in circumst in which the individu can choos between
enter an area and submit to a search or not enter as when on enter a secur
courthous board an airplan or cross an intern border consent mai be given by
third parti to search of properti over which the third parti have author such as a co
tenant in a leas apart
evid in plain view
evid in plain view of an offic who ha a right to be in a posit to observ it also
mai be seiz without a warrant thi situat usual occur when contraband or evid
of anoth crime is inadvert discov dure a search or arrest for anoth offens
the discoveri must be truli inadvert howev if discoveri of the evid is anticip
and no other except appli a warrant must first be obtain
border custom and prison search
border and custom search ar a longstand except to the fourth amend and
mai be conduct without probabl caus or a warrant search of prison cell and the
monitor of inmat telephon convers also mai be conduct without a warrant or
individu right dure examin law
2424 2011 fraud examin manual
probabl caus becaus of secur concern and the absenc of a realist expect of
privaci in prison
search an employe mail
an employ mai not conduct search of an employe mail befor it ha been deliv
under feder law ani person who take a letter postcard or packag from the mail befor
it ha been deliv to the person to whom it wa direct with design to obstruct the
correspond face up to five year imprison a fine or both see 18 usc 1702
onc the mail ha been deliv howev then ordinari rule regard search appli
surveil
an employ in certain circumst can us monitor and surveil method to
uncov employe wrongdo variou feder and state law govern the avail and
method of surveil techniqu becaus of the complex of these law and the
differ interpret of them by state and feder court counsel should alwai be
consult beforehand for exampl if an employ monitor employe phone call without
follow the proper legal procedur the employ might violat feder or state wiretap
law the employ might also expos itself to substanti legal liabil for invas of
privaci
to lower the expect of privaci and to preserv the right to search ani and all area and
to monitor and survei employe conduct the employ should adopt a written polici which
provid that to maintain the secur of it oper the compani might gain access to
and search all work area and person belong includ desk file drawer locker
briefcas handbag pocket and person effect includ in the polici that workplac
area ar subject to surveil and that busi phone call might be monitor in
addit as discuss below the polici also should state that the employ could monitor all
electron commun such as email as well as monitor what site ar visit over the
internet
electron commun privaci act of 1986
the electron commun privaci act of 1986 ecpa codifi at 18 usc
25102521 27012710 31213126 is the primari feder statut that offer worker
protect in commun privaci
under the ecpa electron commun ar defin as ani transfer of sign signal
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2425
write imag sound data or intellig of ani natur transmit in whole or in part by
a wire radio electromagnet photolectron or photoopt system that affect
interst or foreign commerc
the ecpa is divid into three part the wiretap act which govern the intercept of
electron commun the store commun act which cover access to store
commun and record and the pen regi ter act which regul pen regist and
trap and trace devic
the wiretap act 18 usc 25102521
in respons to an increas number of privaci breach congress enact the wiretap act
which prohibit anyon from intention intercept or attempt to intercept ani wire
oral or electron commun
section 2511 prohibit covert spy on voic and data commun extend
protect from eavesdrop on mail and telephon commun to includ digit
data commun such as email and remot comput it doe not govern store
commun under the wiretap act an intercept occur by the acquisit of the
content of ani electron commun through the us of ani devic most court have
held that intercept occur onli when the protect commun ar obtain
contemporan with their transmiss
remedi for violat the wiretap act includ crimin sanction and civil relief a crimin
violat under the act is a feloni and is punish by up to five year imprison
andor fine under a privat caus of action a court mai award the plaintiff equit relief
actual damag punit damag and attornei fee
the store commun act 18 usc 2701
as part of the ecpa congress enact the store commun act sca to protect
store electron commun such as email and voicemail by prohibit the
unauthor access of such commun that ar in storag more specif the sca
prohibit unlaw access to a facil that provid an electron commun servic
and then obtain alter or prevent author access to a wire or electron
commun while it is electron store in such a system an electron
commun fall under the sca onc a system receiv and store it
individu right dure examin law
2426 2011 fraud examin manual
the sca includ both civil and crimin penalti concern civil penalti the sca
provid a privat right of action and allow appropri relief includ equit relief
damag and attornei fee regard crimin penalti the sca provid that if the first
offens is commit for purpos of commerci advantag malici destruct or
damag or privat commerci gain punish mai includ a fine andor imprison
for up to five year for ani subsequ offens penalti includ a fine andor
imprison for not more than ten year in ani other case where it is a first offens
court mai impos a fine or imprison for not more than six month or both for all
subsequ convict court mai impos a fine andor imprison for up to ten year
the pen regist act
pen regist ar devic that can detect the telephon number from which an incom call
ha been made titl 18 section 3121 of the us code gener prohibit the instal of
pen regist without a court order
except
although the ecpa impos sever rule about electron commun it also contain
sever except to these rule the except most relev to the workplac ar
the ordinari cours of busi except
the provid except
the consent except
ordinari cours of busi except
the ecpa definit of electron devic specif exclud devic that ar us by
an employ in the ordinari cours of busi ness therefor employ ar permit to
monitor their employe wire or electron commun includ phone call if done
for a legitim busi purpos
the provid except
the provid except allow supplier of wire or electron commun servic eg
telephon voic mail email or internet servic to intercept or access electron
commun in the normal cours of busi for exampl telephon provid can
monitor phone call when it is necessari to maintain and protect the system run qualiti
control check or to protect the servic against theft or harass most court hold that
employ qualifi as provid with respect to their intern email and voic mail system
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2427
consent except
the ecpa allow an entiti to intercept or access an electron commun if on of the
parti to the commun ha given prior consent thi except doe not appli if the
commun is intercept for the purpos of commit a crime
monitor employe phone call
to review the wiretap act provis of the ecpa limit an employ abil to monitor
employe phone call in addit to the ecpa a compani right to monitor employe
phone call is also limit by employe constitut and common law privaci right as
discuss abov
although intercept is gener forbidden under the wiretap act employ mai lawfulli
monitor phone call if thei fall under on of the statutori except includ the ordinari
cours of busi except and the consent except
ordinari cours of busi except
under the ordinari cours of busi except employ ar permit to monitor their
employe wire or electron commun includ phone call if done for a legitim
busi purpos
thi except could appli in variou scenario for exampl it would appli where the
employ routin monitor phone commun for purpos of qualiti control eg
monitor the phone call of oper telemarket custom servic personnel etc it
mai also appli where there is a legitim busi purpos for the monitor such as
prevent busi loss or employe misconduct keep in mind howev that there must
be a specif legitim busi purpos for the intercept blanket monitor probabl
will be found to violat the act in sander v robert bosch 38 f3d 736 4th cir 1994 an
employ who us a voic logger to record all telephon convers on certain
compani line did not fall within the ordinari cours of busi except becaus the
employ wa unabl to state a legitim busi purpos for the intercept
even if a compani ha a legitim busi purpos for monitor a phone call the
method us to intercept and monitor the call must be no more intrus than necessari to
achiev the purpos in deal v spear 980 f2d 1153 8th cir 1992 an employ who tape
record and listen to all call includ person call wa found to have violat the
statut even though the employ had legitim suspicion of theft onc it becom
individu right dure examin law
2428 2011 fraud examin manual
appar that a commun is person and not otherwis unauthor the employ
must immedi stop listen to the call overli broad effort to monitor employe call
mai give rise to a claim for invas of privaci
consent except
the ecpa allow an entiti to intercept an electron commun if that entiti is a parti
to the commun or if on of the parti to the commun ha given prior consent
to the intercept
for an employ to monitor an employe under thi except the employe must expressli
consent to the monitor gener employ must obtain written consent eg an
employ provid it employe with a written polici explain that phone call mai be
monitor and the employe sign the polici it is import to note that provid a
notif that employe might be monitor as oppos to be notifi that the phone
call or email will be monitor mai not satisfi the consent except for exampl in on
case notif to an employe that her phone call might be monitor wa not enough to
establish that she consent to the record of her phone call even when an employe
consent to monitor thi doe not give the employ unlimit access to the employe
commun monitor still should be c onduct onli for legitim busi purpos
and should be no more broad than necessari
us pen regist to monitor employe
in gener section 3121 prohibit the instal of pen regist without a court order but
there ar a number of except under which employ can us pen regist to track their
employe phone activ those except includ
phone servic provid can us pen regist to protect user employ from abus of
servic or unlaw us of servic
phone servic provid can us a pen regist to record the fact that a phone call wa
initi or complet to protect user of the servic employ from fraudul
unlaw or abus us of the servic
phone servic provid can us a pen regist where consent of the user of the servic
ha been obtain
monitor employe email and voicemail
the ecpa regul access to store email and voicemail it prohibit the unauthor
access of electron commun that ar in storag
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2429
although the sca gener prohibit third parti from access store commun
there ar two kei except the provid except and the consent except the provid
except exempt provid of electron commun servic from the restrict of
the sca in other word if a messag is store on an email or voic mail system that the
compani provid then the employ can access those messag as it see fit without
violat the ecpa note howev that thi except doe not allow the employ to
access messag store with an outsid provid such as yahoo googl or aol
the consent except permit access of store messag if such access is author by the
intend recipi of the commun thi mean that employ will be free to access
employe email and voic mail includ messag store with outsid provid as long as
the employe have given their consent thi except provid the safest haven for
employ who want to monitor their employe store messag to make sure the
consent except will appli compani should obtain express written consent from all
employe for such monitor as a condit of employ
in addit to the ecpa employ must also be awar of employe constitut and
common law privaci right in the content of their email as wa discuss abov it is a
good idea for all employ to establish a written polici which notifi employe that their
store messag ar the properti of the employ and that thei ar subject to monitor by
the employ at ani time
also keep in mind that as with other form of search and surveil the court will not
look kindli on overli broad monitor of store commun employ should onli
access their employe store voic mail or email when there is a legitim busi
purpos for do so and the access should be no more intrus than necessari to achiev
the purpos
monitor employe blog activ
becaus the blog trend is grow it is import for employ and employe to
understand their right and oblig with respect to such onlin activ as a gener rule
employ can monitor employe blog becaus employe have a limit expect of
privaci with respect to their blog post which ar post publicli howev the extent of an
employ right to monitor larg depend on whether the employe blog while onduti
us the employ comput system
individu right dure examin law
2430 2011 fraud examin manual
employe have no reason expect of privaci when blog on the employ
system becaus the system wa set up to provid busi commun if there is no
reason expect of privaci then there is no constitut or common law restrict
on monitor such activ therefor an employe who us an employ system to blog
about violat compani polici or illeg activ or who engag in other unaccept
conduct can gener be disciplin for such post howev employ should formal
their computerinternet us polici to cover blog and to effect maintain control
over such us
concern an employe offduti blog employ should carefulli examin the legal
consequ of us such conduct when discharg or disciplin an employe includ
those that ar at will becaus such action implic state and feder law in fact some
state california new york colorado montana and north dakota enact law that limit
an employ power to discharg an employe for offduti conduct furthermor an
employe who blog about certain topic relat to statu in a protect class mai also be
protect from discharg ie when employe reveal person inform about hi
disabl or religi belief or write about harass or discrimin in the workplac
therefor compani should enact and appli internetus polici consist and
uniformli
monitor employe internet activ
as with monitor employe email and blog activ employ should be awar of
feder protect against monitor employe internet us includ an employe
instant messag websit post etc thi is true even though feder law provid
employe littl protect from an employ electron monitor for exampl although
the ecpa prohibit the intent intercept of electron commun when
employe have a reason expect of privaci an employ mai monitor internet us
when there is employe consent when there ar legitim busi purpos or when an
employ ha reason to believ that the compani interest ar at risk in addit the
common law right to privaci also extend to employe in the workplac howev the
public natur of the workplac ha led mani court to reject most invas claim on the
basi that there wa no reason expect of privaci
video surveil of employe
in some scenario investig mai consid the us of video surveil equip as
part of an intern investig in gener video surveil is not permiss in area
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2431
where employe have a legitim expect of privaci for instanc an employ is not
allow to instal video camera in a restroom or dress room unless there ar special
circumst to justifi thi intrus on employe privaci convers an employ is
much more like to be allow to us video surveil in open area such as around cash
regist or in public hallwai these area ar open to the public and an employe could not
reason expect privaci there it is advis to provid written notic to employe
inform them that their activ ar subject to monitor in advanc of ani surveil
again the scope of the surveil should be no greater than necessari to fulfil the
employ legitim busi purpos
if video surveil were accompani by audio record then thi type of surveil
would be cover by wiretap act provis of the electron commun privaci act
which prohibit the intercept of wire electron or oral commun except in limit
circumst howev the ecpa doe not cover silent video monitor the question in
thi type of surveil is whether the surveil violat the employe constitut or
common law privaci right
effect of violat of employe right
illeg seiz evid will be exclud in crimin proceed a public employ cannot
us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an employe there is no fourth amend
prohibit against a privat employ us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an
employe howev the employ might be expos itself to litig for invas of
privaci trespass or other common law caus of action describ below
the exclusionari rule
under the exclusionari rule which is in effect in all feder and state court evid seiz in
violat of the fourth amend will be suppress that is it becom inadmiss in
ani prosecut against the suspect except under a few limit except in addit all
evid that is obtain as a result of the illeg obtain evid will also be exclud
an unlaw search and seizur doe not mean the suspect cannot be prosecut and it doe
not invalid a convict base on other evid but it doe prevent the wrongfulli
obtain evid and all evid deriv from it from be present at trial
gener thi rule appli onli in crimin case and doe not appli to privat individu
act for their own purpos howev the fourth amend doe appli to govern
individu right dure examin law
2432 2011 fraud examin manual
employ therefor a public employ cannot us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an
employe
there is howev no fourth amend prohibit against a privat employ us
illeg seiz evid to disciplin an employe thu evid illeg obtain by a
privat employ mai be admit in court but the employ might be expos itself to
litig for invas of privaci trespass or other common law caus of action describ
below
furthermor evid that ha been suppress under the exclusionari rule might still be
admiss in a civil trial or an administr proceed such as an employe disciplinari
hear the primari goal of the exclusionari rule is to deter polic misconduct if the
deterr effect of exclud the evid from a civil or administr proceed is
outweigh by the cost that would result from exclud the evid and if the parti
whose right were violat ha other form of redress for the violat then evid that
wa suppress in a crimin trial mai be admiss in a noncrimin proceed howev
there ar some circumst in which wrongfulli obtain evid will be exclud from
civil proceed so public employ should not feel free to disregard their employe
constitut right under the assumpt that ani illeg obtain evid can still be
us against an employe in a noncrimin matter
civil liabil for damag 42 usc 1983
section 1983 of titl 42 us code provid a remedi for violat of feder protect
right where state action is involv to prevail in a claim under section 1983 the plaintiff
must prove two critic issu 1 that he ha been deni a right guarante by the
constitut and the law of the unit state and 2 that the defend depriv him of
that right while act under the color of state law
the defend howev can rais certain defens to a section 1983 claim includ
qualifi immun and consent for public employ there might be a qualifi immun
from liabil if thei act in good faith on the basi of unsettl law qualifi immun
shield govern offici from both suit and liabil if their conduct did not violat ani
clearli establish right which a reason person would have known
in addit valid consent is a wellrecogn except to the fourth amend
prohibit against warrantless search consent to search can be voluntari involuntari or
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2433
inform consent is not voluntari if it requir a choic between constitut right
consent might not be voluntari if it requir a choic between exercis constitut
right and continu employ court ar split on thi issu publish search polici
as a barrier to expect of privaci is us to diminish or elimin the expect
altogeth
state constitut and statut
most state have enact constitut provis similar to the fourth amend and
mani of the same issu aris under the state constitut as under the feder constitut
in most state standard similar to those appli under the feder constitut appli most
state have enact law govern an employe right to privaci in the workplac mani
state have enact statut that restrict surveil includ wiretap or electron
surveil camera pen regist twowai mirror or surveil in particular area such
as locker room loung and rest area
surreptiti record
all but 12 state allow you to record a convers to which you ar a parti without
inform the other parti to the convers that you ar record it feder wiretap
statut also permit oneparti consent of telephon convers in most circumst
employe be the most notabl except see the materi on the electron
commun privaci act discuss previous in thi chapter
the 38 state that allow such record ar gener refer to as oneparti state the
district of columbia is also a oneparti jurisdict the other 12 state ar incorrectli
refer to as twoparti state be awar howev that thi is a misnom becaus consent
of all parti to the convers is requir current the follow state requir the
consent of all parti to a convers in most circumst
california
connecticut
delawar
florida
illinoi
maryland
massachusett
michigan
montana
individu right dure examin law
2434 2011 fraud examin manual
new hampshir
pennsylvania
washington
there ar howev variat among state regard the detail of such record and
their admiss in court befor you record a convers make sure you consult an
attornei or check the law for your jurisdict
addition there ar a number of differ law regard videotap at least fifteen
state have outlaw the us of hidden camera in privat place in some state howev
there is no prohibit on videotap anyon as long as there is no audio record due to
privaci concern a number of state have propos legisl to outlaw surreptiti
videotap in certain circumst sinc thi area of the law is chang constantli make
sure you check the law in your jurisdict
feder and state nondiscrimin statut
nondiscrimin statut such as the feder civil right act of 1866 and 1871 titl vii
of the civil right act of 1964 and the ag discrimin in employ act of 1970 as
well as similar state statut protect employe from be singl out for search on the
basi of such characterist as race nation origin sex religion and ag these law also
protect employe against dispar disciplin assess as a result of a search
common law protect in connect with search and surveil
employe also enjoi common law privaci protect that limit an employ right to
search and us surveil techniqu these common law right appli to privat as well as
govern employ no state action is requir to trigger their protect
some of the common law protect that appli in the interview set also appli to an
employ right to search and us surveil techniqu
invas of privaci
employe also have common law privaci interest that limit an employ right to search
these common law protect which ar similar in natur and scope to the fourth
amend protect discuss abov cover both public and privat employe as long
as an employe doe not have a reason expect of privaci in an area the employ
can search that area without violat an employe common law right to privaci
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2435
while modern tort law includ four categori of invas of privaci thi discuss onli
address two of those tort public of privat fact and intrus upon seclus
intrus into seclus
intrus upon seclus is the caus of action that is most frequent rais with regard to
workplac search as state befor intrus upon seclus occur when an individu
intention intrud upon the solitud or secl usion of anoth or hi privat affair or
concern and the intrus would be highli offens to a reason person thu
where there is an expect of privaci on the part of the employe a search without caus
might give rise to a claim of invas of privaci the mere gather of inform is not a
tort howev the gather of confidenti inform where the intrus is unreason
might be a tort there is no invas of privaci if the inform is open to public view or
ha been disclos to other
as with constitut action an intrus upon seclus claim can be base not onli on
physic intrus but also on wiretap eavesdrop and other form of surveil
an employ can elimin the potenti for claim of invas of privaci by publish and
follow a search polici in addit the follow measur can be taken
have a written polici regard search surveil and telephon monitor
retain a kei to all desk locker etc
requir employe to provid kei to all person lock
obtain consent to search
public disclosur of privat fact
the tort of public disclosur of privat fact occur when on parti make public statement
about anoth parti privat life that ar not of public concern the disclosur of those fact
must be highli offens to a reason person thi tort can exist even if the statement
ar true becaus give unreason public to true but privat inform about an
employe can give rise to a claim for invas of privaci the need to commun
inform about the employe must be balanc against the intrus into the employe
privaci
intent inflict of emot distress
again intent inflict of emot distress refer to ani unprivileg conduct which is
so outrag and egregi that it exce all bound usual toler by civil societi
individu right dure examin law
2436 2011 fraud examin manual
and which is intend to caus injuri or wa commit with reckless disregard for the
likelihood of it caus injuri to anoth
thi tort is signific particularli to privat employ whose search might not be subject
to the fourth amend or similar state constitut provis becaus damag for
pain and suffer and punit damag might be award
good faith and fair deal
to review sever state recogn a duti on the part of employ to deal with their
employe fairli and in good faith thi duti might includ abid by all compani polici
and provis in an employe handbook includ those relat to search eg how and
when thei can be conduct and expect of privaci on the part of employe
breach of impli contract
as note abov mani state now recogn an impli contract between employ and
employe aris out of employe handbook or oral promis for exampl an employ
with an employe handbook contain provis relat to search or employe
expect of privaci might find itself contractu bound by those provis and in
breach of contract if the provis ar not follow to the letter
fals imprison
again fals imprison is the restraint by on person of the physic liberti of anoth
without consent or legal justif a claim of fals imprison might be made if an
employe is detain in ani wai dure a search either of the employe himself or of the
employe desk locker and so on for more inform on fals imprison see the
interview section in thi chapter
trespass
trespass is the unauthor intent or neglig entri upon the properti of other a
claim of trespass might aris from a search of an employe locker but it is particularli
applic to surveil at an employe home
reduc employe expect of privaci
the singl most effect method of elimin potenti problem involv employe
right of privaci includ workplac search and the monitor or read of electron
commun is for a compani to adopt a written polici which provid that to maintain
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2437
the secur of it oper the compani mai gain access to and search all work area and
person belong includ desk file drawer locker briefcas handbag pocket and
person effect
the polici should also notifi employe that comput system includ the internet e
mail commun hardwar and file ar sole for busi us and that the compani
reserv the absolut right to review audit and disclos all matter sent over the system or
place in storag includ in the polici that workplac area ar subject to surveil and
that busi phone call mai be monitor
