2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Searches and Surveillance/The Warrant Requirement


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


The Warrant Requirement 
All searches and seizures must be reasonable. Whether it is reasonable to conduct a search 
and whether the activities were conducted in a reasonable manner is determined by the 
totality of the circumstances. A reasonable search is one carried out pursuant to a warrant 
(i.e., a court order that grants authorities the right to take a particular action) issued upon a 
showing of probable cause. Thus, in some circumstances, the Fourth Amendment requires 
that the government obtain a warrant before they conduct a search.  
 
Moreover, in Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967), the Supreme Court held that the 
Fourth Amendment “protects people, not places” (meaning that its provisions extend 
beyond the property line of the citizen), that the amendment applies wherever there is a 
“reasonable expectation of privacy,” and that a search without a warrant is “per se  
unreasonable,” in the absence of exigent circumstances. Thus, the police normally need to 
obtain a warrant not only to search a house, but also to intercept calls from a public 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.418  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
telephone booth, or inspect the contents of a safe deposit box, or to otherwise intrude into 
matters that the courts would reasonably consider to be private. 
 
In Johnson v. United States, 333 U.S. 10 (1948), the Supreme Court ruled that all warrants must 
be issued by a judge or magistrate (the latter a federal judicial officer empowered to hear 
misdemeanor cases), explaining that “the point  of the Fourth Amendment … is not that it 
denies law enforcement the support of the usual inferences which reasonable men draw 
from evidence. Its protection consists in requiring that those inferences be drawn by a 
neutral and detached magistrate instead of being judged by the officer engaged in the often 
competitive enterprise of ferreting out crime.” 
 
Additionally, all warrants must satisfy the requirements under the Fourth Amendment. That 
is, all warrants for searches must be judicially sanctioned and supported by “probable cause,” 
and they must “particularly” describe the place to be searched or things to be seized. 
 
The “probable cause” requirement of the Fourth Amendment is the central restraint on the 
power of the police to search. Probable cause has been defined as those facts and 
circumstances sufficient to cause a person of reasonable caution to believe that a crime has 
been committed and that the accused committed it. It requires more than mere suspicion or 
hunch, but less than virtual certainty. “Reasonable grounds to believe” is probably as good a 
definition as any. 
 
Furthermore, all warrants must particularly describe the place to be searched or the person 
or things to be seized. The particularity requirement was intended to prevent prevents “the 
issuance of warrants on loose, vague or doubtful bases of facts,”  an abuse that outraged the 
constitutional drafters. Go-Bart Importing Co. v. United States, 282 US 344, 357 (1931). In 
today’s terms, the clause would prohibit a search warrant in a white-collar investigation or a 
subpoena that commanded the production of all the defendant’s books and records whether 
or not relevant to the investigation or trial. 
 
But even if a warrant is technically required, there are a number of recognized exceptions to 
the warrant requirement, principally: 
• Workplace searches by government employers 
• Searches incident to arrest 
• Searches of motor vehicles 
• Exigent or emergency circumstances, to prevent the destruction of evidence, or while in 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.419 
“hot pursuit” of a suspect 
• When the search is conducted pursuant to a valid, voluntary consent 
• When the evidence is in “plain view” 
• Border, customs, and prison searches 
 
WORKPLACE SEARCHES BY GOVERNMENT EMPLOYERS 
Public employers are not generally required to obtain a warrant when they conduct searches 
for investigations of workplace misconduct. In O’Connor v. Ortega, 480 U.S. 709 (1987), the 
Supreme Court held that requiring warrants for all forms of public workplace searches 
would be unworkable and would impose intolerable burdens on public employers. 
Therefore, the Court ruled that workplace searches should be held to a lower standard.  
 
In reaching this decision, the Court stated that when public employers conduct a workplace 
investigation, their interest is substantially different from the normal interests of law 
enforcement. The goal of public employers is to ensure that their offices run efficiently, not 
to enforce the law. Requiring these employers to obtain a warrant for every workplace search 
would impede the effective administration of the government’s work.  
 
The Court also found that while public employees have some legitimate privacy interests in 
the workplace, these interests are less than in other places, such as their homes. Government 
offices are provided to public employees for the purpose of doing government work, and 
employees can avoid exposing truly personal belongings at work by simply leaving them at 
home. Thus, by balancing the strong government interest in maintaining an efficient 
workplace against the diminished privacy interests of government employees, the court 
justified the use of a lower standard for workplace searches by government employers. 
Instead of a warrant requirement based on probable cause, government employers are 
generally held to a standard of reasonableness under all the circumstances.  
 
THE REASONABLENESS STANDARD  
Workplace searches by government employers are subject to the reasonableness standard in 
two circumstances:  
• For noninvestigatory, work-related purposes, which are wholly unrelated to illegal 
conduct (such as retrieving a file from someone’s desk) 
• For investigations of work-related misconduct 
 
When a public employer conducts an investigation of work-related misconduct, and when 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.420  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that investigation necessitates a search of an employee’s workspace, the employer is not 
generally required to obtain a warrant to perform the search, nor is the employer required to 
make a showing of probable cause that the suspect has committed a crime. This does not 
mean, however, that there are no restrictions on the employer’s ability to conduct the search; 
it still must meet the test for “reasonableness under all the circumstances.”  
 
There is a two-part test to determine if a workplace search is reasonable:  
• The search must be justified at its inception 
• The search must be conducted in a way that is reasonably related in scope to the 
circumstances that justified the interference in the first place 
 
A search is justified at its inception if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the 
search will turn up evidence that the employee is guilty of work-related misconduct, or if the 
search is necessary for a noninvestigatory purpose such as to retrieve a file. A search is not 
justified at its inception simply because an employer thinks that the suspect might be 
engaged in workplace misconduct. The employer must be able to demonstrate a reasonable, 
clear suspicion, based on factual information, that the area to be searched contains evidence 
of misconduct.  
 
The second part of the test requires that the search be reasonable in scope. The fact that a 
search is justified at its inception does not give the employer carte blanche  authority to intrude 
upon the suspect’s privacy in all areas. The search must be no broader than is necessary to 
serve the organization’s legitimate, work-related purposes.  
 
REASONABLE EXPECTATIONS OF PRIVACY  
The Fourth Amendment only applies to workplace searches by government employers 
where an employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy. Thus, to determine if a 
workplace search will violate an employee’s Fourth Amendment rights, an employer must 
first determine if the employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy in the area to be 
searched. There is no bright-line rule for determining whether an employee has a reasonable 
privacy expectation in a particular area. Such a privacy interest can exist for a desk drawer, a 
file cabinet, a locker, or even an entire office, depending on the circumstances. The issue is 
whether a reasonable person would expect the area to be free from intrusion. The employee 
does not have to have an ownership interest in the area to have a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the area. Thus, even though a public employer may own the office where an 
employee works, that employee can still have a privacy interest in the office that prohibits 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.421 
the employer from conducting a search.  
 
The key factor to consider is whether the employee has exclusive control over the area in 
question. If so, this tends to show that the employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy 
in that area. For instance, assume that an employee has a file cabinet in his office; that he is 
the only person who uses that file cabinet; that the cabinet has a lock on it; that the 
employee is the only person with a key; and that the cabinet remains locked when the 
employee is not using it. These facts indicate that the employee has exclusive control over 
the contents of the file cabinet, and thus has a reasonable expectation of privacy in its 
contents. In other words, based on the circumstances, the employee would be justified in 
believing that others cannot and will not enter the file cabinet without his consent. The 
employee in this scenario has a constitutionally protected privacy interest in the contents of 
the file cabinet. A search of this file cabinet by the public employer would have to comport 
with the reasonableness  standard as discussed above.  
 
But if the file cabinet does not have a lock, if several employees store and retrieve files from 
that cabinet, and if it is generally understood that they can do so without employees’ 
consent, then the employee cannot reasonably expect that the contents of the file cabinet 
will be private. Under these facts, the employee would not have a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the file cabinet; therefore, a search of that file cabinet would not violate the 
employee’s Fourth Amendment rights.  
 
Reasonable privacy expectations can also attach to communications. Employees might 
reasonably expect personal phone conversations or e-mail messages to be private and free 
from monitoring.  
 
In terms of surveillance, employees are likely to have reasonable privacy expectations in 
bathrooms, changing rooms, and other personal areas within the workplace.  
 
Obviously, there are a lot of factors that go into determining whether an employee has a 
reasonable expectation of privacy. Before conducting a search or surveillance, employers 
should consult legal counsel to make sure they are not intruding upon an employee’s privacy 
interests. 
 
SEARCHES INCIDENT TO ARREST 
Police officers may, without a warrant, conduct a limited search incident to an a lawful arrest. 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.422  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The search, however, must be limited to the arrestee’s body and the area within his 
immediate control. This exception is designed to protect the officers and to prevent the 
destruction of evidence. For the search to be valid, the arrest must be valid (i.e., based on 
probable cause, and not merely a pretext to justify a search). If the arrest is unlawful when 
made, it cannot be justified by the fruits of the subsequent search, and all evidence obtained 
must be suppressed. 
 
SEARCHES OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
An automobile, airplane, or vessel may be searched without a warrant if there is probable 
cause to believe it contains contraband or other evidence of a crime. This is because of the 
mobility of the vehicles (hence the risk that evidence may be lost or destroyed while a 
warrant is being obtained) and the lower expectation of privacy associated with vehicles. If 
there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle contains contraband, the police are also 
permitted to remove the vehicle from the scene to a stationhouse to conduct a search 
without obtaining a warrant. Furthermore, the police also may conduct warrantless 
“inventory” searches of impounded vehicles  to secure and protect the owner’s personal 
property, and they may seize contraband or other evidence discovered as a result.  
 
It may also be permissible for law enforcement to make warrantless searches of containers 
and luggage found within a vehicle. This applies if the police have probable cause to believe 
there is contraband in the containers, or if they have probable cause to believe there is 
contraband in the car and that contraband could be hidden in the containers.  
 
The search incident to arrest exception also applies in the motor vehicle context. However, 
the boundaries of this search have changed with time. Most recently, on April 21, 2009, the 
Supreme Court imposed new restrictions on the exception in Arizona v. Gant, 556 U.S. ___ 
(2009). For many years, the rule had been that the police may search the entire passenger 
compartment of a vehicle incident to the custodial arrest of an occupant of the car. In Gant, 
however, the Supreme Court added a new limitation: Vehicle searches following an 
occupant’s arrest are legal “only when the arrestee is unsecured and within reaching distance 
of the passenger compartment at the time of the search” or when the officer has reason to 
believe the vehicle has evidence of the crime that forms the basis for the arrest.  
 
The motor vehicle exception to the warrant requirement does not extend to passengers in 
the car. Once a passenger has been arrested, however, the police are permitted to make a 
warrantless search of the suspect and the area within his control pursuant to the exception 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.423 
for searches incident to arrest, as discussed above.  
 
EXIGENT OR EMERGENCY CIRCUMSTANCES 
There is also an exception to the warrant requirement for exigent circumstances, which 
means where the officers must act quickly.  
 
CONSENT SEARCHES 
Individuals are always free to waive their Fourth Amendment rights. If a suspect consents to 
a search by police, this eliminates the need for a warrant. The courts, however, will closely 
scrutinize any such “consent” to make sure it was truly voluntary, particularly when it leads 
to the seizure of incriminating evidence. Consents obtained by deceit, bribery, or 
misrepresentations are generally held to be involuntary and invalid. (However, when an 
undercover police officer conceals his identity and, as a result, an individual allows the 
officer to enter an area, this amounts to consent, even though the person did not know 
permission was being granted to a police officer.) Consent might not be voluntary if it requires 
a choice between exercising constitutional rights and continued employment. There is also 
no requirement that suspects be informed of their right to refuse consent.  
 
Consent may be implied in circumstances in which the individual can choose between 
entering an area and submitting to a search or not entering, as when one enters a secured 
courthouse, boards an airplane, or crosses an international border. Consent may be given by 
third parties to searches of property over which the third parties have authority, such as a co-
 tenant in a leased apartment. 
 
EVIDENCE IN “PLAIN VIEW” 
Evidence in “plain view” of an officer who has a right to be in a position to observe it also 
may be seized without a warrant. This situation usually occurs when contraband or evidence 
of another crime is inadvertently discovered during a search or arrest for another offense. 
The discovery must be truly inadvertent; however, if discovery of the evidence is anticipated 
and no other exception applies, a warrant must first be obtained. 
 
BORDER, CUSTOMS, AND PRISON SEARCHES 
Border and customs searches are a long-standing exception to the Fourth Amendment and 
may be conducted without probable cause or a warrant. Searches of prison cells and the 
monitoring of inmates’ telephone conversations also may be conducted without a warrant or  
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.424  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
probable cause because of security concerns and the absence of a realistic expectation of 
privacy in prison. 
 



:


the warrant requir
all search and seizur must be reason whether it is reason to conduct a search
and whether the activ were conduct in a reason manner is determin by the
total of the circumst a reason search is on carri out pursuant to a warrant
ie a court order that grant author the right to take a particular action issu upon a
show of probabl caus thu in some circumst the fourth amend requir
that the govern obtain a warrant befor thei conduct a search
moreov in katz v unit state 389 us 347 1967 the suprem court held that the
fourth amend protect peopl not place mean that it provis extend
beyond the properti line of the citizen that the amend appli wherev there is a
reason expect of privaci and that a search without a warrant is per se
unreason in the absenc of exig circumst thu the polic normal need to
obtain a warrant not onli to search a hous but also to intercept call from a public
individu right dure examin law
2418 2011 fraud examin manual
telephon booth or inspect the content of a safe deposit box or to otherwis intrud into
matter that the court would reason consid to be privat
in johnson v unit state 333 us 10 1948 the suprem court rule that all warrant must
be issu by a judg or magistr the latter a feder judici offic empow to hear
misdemeanor case explain that the point of the fourth amend is not that it
deni law enforc the support of the usual infer which reason men draw
from evid it protect consist in requir that those infer be drawn by a
neutral and detach magistr instead of be judg by the offic engag in the often
competit enterpris of ferret out crime
addition all warrant must satisfi the requir under the fourth amend that
is all warrant for search must be judici sanction and support by probabl caus
and thei must particularli describ the place to be search or thing to be seiz
the probabl caus requir of the fourth amend is the central restraint on the
power of the polic to search probabl caus ha been defin as those fact and
circumst suffici to caus a person of reason caution to believ that a crime ha
been commit and that the accus commit it it requir more than mere suspicion or
hunch but less than virtual certainti reason ground to believ is probabl as good a
definit as ani
furthermor all warrant must particularli describ the place to be search or the person
or thing to be seiz the particular requir wa intend to prevent prevent the
issuanc of warrant on loos vagu or doubt base of fact an abus that outrag the
constitut drafter gobart import co v unit state 282 us 344 357 1931 in
todai term the claus would prohibit a search warrant in a whitecollar investig or a
subpoena that command the product of all the defend book and record whether
or not relev to the investig or trial
but even if a warrant is technic requir there ar a number of recogn except to
the warrant requir princip
workplac search by govern employ
search incid to arrest
search of motor vehicl
exig or emerg circumst to prevent the destruct of evid or while in
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2419
hot pursuit of a suspect
when the search is conduct pursuant to a valid voluntari consent
when the evid is in plain view
border custom and prison search
workplac search by govern employ
public employ ar not gener requir to obtain a warrant when thei conduct search
for investig of workplac misconduct in oconnor v ortega 480 us 709 1987 the
suprem court held that requir warrant for all form of public workplac search
would be unwork and would impos intoler burden on public employ
therefor the court rule that workplac search should be held to a lower standard
in reach thi decis the court state that when public employ conduct a workplac
investig their interest is substanti differ from the normal interest of law
enforc the goal of public employ is to ensur that their offic run effici not
to enforc the law requir these employ to obtain a warrant for everi workplac search
would imped the effect administr of the govern work
the court also found that while public employe have some legitim privaci interest in
the workplac these interest ar less than in other place such as their home govern
offic ar provid to public employe for the purpos of do govern work and
employe can avoid expos truli person belong at work by simpli leav them at
home thu by balanc the strong govern interest in maintain an effici
workplac against the diminish privaci interest of govern employe the court
justifi the us of a lower standard for workplac search by govern employ
instead of a warrant requir base on probabl caus govern employ ar
gener held to a standard of reason under all the circumst
the reason standard
workplac search by govern employ ar subject to the reason standard in
two circumst
for noninvestigatori workrel purpos which ar wholli unrel to illeg
conduct such as retriev a file from someon desk
for investig of workrel misconduct
when a public employ conduct an investig of workrel misconduct and when
individu right dure examin law
2420 2011 fraud examin manual
that investig necessit a search of an employe workspac the employ is not
gener requir to obtain a warrant to perform the search nor is the employ requir to
make a show of probabl caus that the suspect ha commit a crime thi doe not
mean howev that there ar no restrict on the employ abil to conduct the search
it still must meet the test for reason under all the circumst
there is a twopart test to determin if a workplac search is reason
the search must be justifi at it incept
the search must be conduct in a wai that is reason relat in scope to the
circumst that justifi the interfer in the first place
a search is justifi at it incept if there ar reason ground for suspect that the
search will turn up evid that the employe is guilti of workrel misconduct or if the
search is necessari for a noninvestigatori purpos such as to retriev a file a search is not
justifi at it incept simpli becaus an employ think that the suspect might be
engag in workplac misconduct the employ must be abl to demonstr a reason
clear suspicion base on factual inform that the area to be search contain evid
of misconduct
the second part of the test requir that the search be reason in scope the fact that a
search is justifi at it incept doe not give the employ cart blanch author to intrud
upon the suspect privaci in all area the search must be no broader than is necessari to
serv the organ legitim workrel purpos
reason expect of privaci
the fourth amend onli appli to workplac search by govern employ
where an employe ha a reason expect of privaci thu to determin if a
workplac search will violat an employe fourth amend right an employ must
first determin if the employe ha a reason expect of privaci in the area to be
search there is no brightlin rule for determin whether an employe ha a reason
privaci expect in a particular area such a privaci interest can exist for a desk drawer a
file cabinet a locker or even an entir offic depend on the circumst the issu is
whether a reason person would expect the area to be free from intrus the employe
doe not have to have an ownership interest in the area to have a reason expect of
privaci in the area thu even though a public employ mai own the offic where an
employe work that employe can still have a privaci interest in the offic that prohibit
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2421
the employ from conduct a search
the kei factor to consid is whether the employe ha exclus control over the area in
question if so thi tend to show that the employe ha a reason expect of privaci
in that area for instanc assum that an employe ha a file cabinet in hi offic that he is
the onli person who us that file cabinet that the cabinet ha a lock on it that the
employe is the onli person with a kei and that the cabinet remain lock when the
employe is not us it these fact indic that the employe ha exclus control over
the content of the file cabinet and thu ha a reason expect of privaci in it
content in other word base on the circumst the employe would be justifi in
believ that other cannot and will not enter the file cabinet without hi consent the
employe in thi scenario ha a constitution protect privaci interest in the content of
the file cabinet a search of thi file cabinet by the public employ would have to comport
with the reason standard as discuss abov
but if the file cabinet doe not have a lock if sever employe store and retriev file from
that cabinet and if it is gener understood that thei can do so without employe
consent then the employe cannot reason expect that the content of the file cabinet
will be privat under these fact the employe would not have a reason expect of
privaci in the file cabinet therefor a search of that file cabinet would not violat the
employe fourth amend right
reason privaci expect can also attach to commun employe might
reason expect person phone convers or email messag to be privat and free
from monitor
in term of surveil employe ar like to have reason privaci expect in
bathroom chang room and other person area within the workplac
obvious there ar a lot of factor that go into determin whether an employe ha a
reason expect of privaci befor conduct a search or surveil employ
should consult legal counsel to make sure thei ar not intrud upon an employe privaci
interest
search incid to arrest
polic offic mai without a warrant conduct a limit search incid to an a law arrest
individu right dure examin law
2422 2011 fraud examin manual
the search howev must be limit to the arreste bodi and the area within hi
immedi control thi except is design to protect the offic and to prevent the
destruct of evid for the search to be valid the arrest must be valid ie base on
probabl caus and not mere a pretext to justifi a search if the arrest is unlaw when
made it cannot be justifi by the fruit of the subsequ search and all evid obtain
must be suppress
search of motor vehicl
an automobil airplan or vessel mai be search without a warrant if there is probabl
caus to believ it contain contraband or other evid of a crime thi is becaus of the
mobil of the vehicl henc the risk that evid mai be lost or destroi while a
warrant is be obtain and the lower expect of privaci associ with vehicl if
there is probabl caus to believ that the vehicl contain contraband the polic ar also
permit to remov the vehicl from the scene to a stationhous to conduct a search
without obtain a warrant furthermor the polic also mai conduct warrantless
inventori search of impound vehicl to secur and protect the owner person
properti and thei mai seiz contraband or other evid discov as a result
it mai also be permiss for law enforc to make warrantless search of contain
and luggag found within a vehicl thi appli if the polic have probabl caus to believ
there is contraband in the contain or if thei have probabl caus to believ there is
contraband in the car and that contraband could be hidden in the contain
the search incid to arrest except also appli in the motor vehicl context howev
the boundari of thi search have chang with time most recent on april 21 2009 the
suprem court impos new restrict on the except in arizona v gant 556 us
2009 for mani year the rule had been that the polic mai search the entir passeng
compart of a vehicl incid to the custodi arrest of an occup of the car in gant
howev the suprem court ad a new limit vehicl search follow an
occup arrest ar legal onli when the arreste is unsecur and within reach distanc
of the passeng compart at the time of the search or when the offic ha reason to
believ the vehicl ha evid of the crime that form the basi for the arrest
the motor vehicl except to the warrant requir doe not extend to passeng in
the car onc a passeng ha been arrest howev the polic ar permit to make a
warrantless search of the suspect and the area within hi control pursuant to the except
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2423
for search incid to arrest as discuss abov
exig or emerg circumst
there is also an except to the warrant requir for exig circumst which
mean where the offic must act quickli
consent search
individu ar alwai free to waiv their fourth amend right if a suspect consent to
a search by polic thi elimin the need for a warrant the court howev will close
scrutin ani such consent to make sure it wa truli voluntari particularli when it lead
to the seizur of incrimin evid consent obtain by deceit briberi or
misrepresent ar gener held to be involuntari and invalid howev when an
undercov polic offic conceal hi ident and as a result an individu allow the
offic to enter an area thi amount to consent even though the person did not know
permiss wa be grant to a polic offic consent might not be voluntari if it requir
a choic between exercis constitut right and continu employ there is also
no requir that suspect be inform of their right to refus consent
consent mai be impli in circumst in which the individu can choos between
enter an area and submit to a search or not enter as when on enter a secur
courthous board an airplan or cross an intern border consent mai be given by
third parti to search of properti over which the third parti have author such as a co
tenant in a leas apart
evid in plain view
evid in plain view of an offic who ha a right to be in a posit to observ it also
mai be seiz without a warrant thi situat usual occur when contraband or evid
of anoth crime is inadvert discov dure a search or arrest for anoth offens
the discoveri must be truli inadvert howev if discoveri of the evid is anticip
and no other except appli a warrant must first be obtain
border custom and prison search
border and custom search ar a longstand except to the fourth amend and
mai be conduct without probabl caus or a warrant search of prison cell and the
monitor of inmat telephon convers also mai be conduct without a warrant or
individu right dure examin law
2424 2011 fraud examin manual
probabl caus becaus of secur concern and the absenc of a realist expect of
privaci in prison
