2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Searches and Surveillance/The Warrant Requirement/SEARCHES OF MOTOR VEHICLES


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


SEARCHES OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
An automobile, airplane, or vessel may be searched without a warrant if there is probable 
cause to believe it contains contraband or other evidence of a crime. This is because of the 
mobility of the vehicles (hence the risk that evidence may be lost or destroyed while a 
warrant is being obtained) and the lower expectation of privacy associated with vehicles. If 
there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle contains contraband, the police are also 
permitted to remove the vehicle from the scene to a stationhouse to conduct a search 
without obtaining a warrant. Furthermore, the police also may conduct warrantless 
“inventory” searches of impounded vehicles  to secure and protect the owner’s personal 
property, and they may seize contraband or other evidence discovered as a result.  
 
It may also be permissible for law enforcement to make warrantless searches of containers 
and luggage found within a vehicle. This applies if the police have probable cause to believe 
there is contraband in the containers, or if they have probable cause to believe there is 
contraband in the car and that contraband could be hidden in the containers.  
 
The search incident to arrest exception also applies in the motor vehicle context. However, 
the boundaries of this search have changed with time. Most recently, on April 21, 2009, the 
Supreme Court imposed new restrictions on the exception in Arizona v. Gant, 556 U.S. ___ 
(2009). For many years, the rule had been that the police may search the entire passenger 
compartment of a vehicle incident to the custodial arrest of an occupant of the car. In Gant, 
however, the Supreme Court added a new limitation: Vehicle searches following an 
occupant’s arrest are legal “only when the arrestee is unsecured and within reaching distance 
of the passenger compartment at the time of the search” or when the officer has reason to 
believe the vehicle has evidence of the crime that forms the basis for the arrest.  
 
The motor vehicle exception to the warrant requirement does not extend to passengers in 
the car. Once a passenger has been arrested, however, the police are permitted to make a 
warrantless search of the suspect and the area within his control pursuant to the exception 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.423 
for searches incident to arrest, as discussed above.  
 



:


search of motor vehicl
an automobil airplan or vessel mai be search without a warrant if there is probabl
caus to believ it contain contraband or other evid of a crime thi is becaus of the
mobil of the vehicl henc the risk that evid mai be lost or destroi while a
warrant is be obtain and the lower expect of privaci associ with vehicl if
there is probabl caus to believ that the vehicl contain contraband the polic ar also
permit to remov the vehicl from the scene to a stationhous to conduct a search
without obtain a warrant furthermor the polic also mai conduct warrantless
inventori search of impound vehicl to secur and protect the owner person
properti and thei mai seiz contraband or other evid discov as a result
it mai also be permiss for law enforc to make warrantless search of contain
and luggag found within a vehicl thi appli if the polic have probabl caus to believ
there is contraband in the contain or if thei have probabl caus to believ there is
contraband in the car and that contraband could be hidden in the contain
the search incid to arrest except also appli in the motor vehicl context howev
the boundari of thi search have chang with time most recent on april 21 2009 the
suprem court impos new restrict on the except in arizona v gant 556 us
2009 for mani year the rule had been that the polic mai search the entir passeng
compart of a vehicl incid to the custodi arrest of an occup of the car in gant
howev the suprem court ad a new limit vehicl search follow an
occup arrest ar legal onli when the arreste is unsecur and within reach distanc
of the passeng compart at the time of the search or when the offic ha reason to
believ the vehicl ha evid of the crime that form the basi for the arrest
the motor vehicl except to the warrant requir doe not extend to passeng in
the car onc a passeng ha been arrest howev the polic ar permit to make a
warrantless search of the suspect and the area within hi control pursuant to the except
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2423
for search incid to arrest as discuss abov
