2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Searches and Surveillance/Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986   
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA), codified at 18 U.S.C. §§ 
2510–2521, 2701–2710, 3121–3126, is the primary federal statute that offers workers 
protections in communications privacy. 
 
Under the ECPA, electronic communications are defined as “any transfer of signs, signals, 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.425 
writing, images, sounds, data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or in part by 
a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photolectronic, or photooptical system that affects 
interstate or foreign commerce.” 
 
The ECPA is divided into three parts: the Wiretap Act, which governs the interception of 
electronic communications, the Stored Communications Act, which covers access to stored 
communications and records; and the Pen Regis ter Act, which regulates pen registers and 
trap and trace devices.  
 
THE WIRETAP ACT (18 U.S.C. §§ 2510–2521) 
In response to an increasing number of privacy breaches, Congress enacted the Wiretap Act, 
which prohibits anyone from intentionally intercepting or attempting to intercept any wire, 
oral, or electronic communication.  
 
Section 2511 prohibits covert spying on voice and data communications, extending 
protection from eavesdropping on mail and telephone communications to include digital 
data communications, such as e-mail and remote computing; it does not govern stored 
communications. Under the Wiretap Act, an interception occurs by the acquisition of the 
contents of any electronic communication through the use of any device. Most courts have 
held that interception occurs only when the protected communications are obtained 
contemporaneously with their transmission.  
 
Remedies for violating the Wiretap Act include criminal sanctions and civil relief. A criminal 
violation under the Act is a felony and is punishable by up to five years imprisonment 
and/or fines. Under a private cause of action, a court may award the plaintiff equitable relief, 
actual damages, punitive damages, and attorneys’ fees. 
 
THE STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (18 U.S.C. § 2701) 
As part of the ECPA, Congress enacted the Stored Communications Act (SCA) to protect 
stored electronic communications, such as e-mail and voicemail, by prohibiting the 
unauthorized access of such communications that are in storage. More specifically, the SCA 
prohibits unlawful access to a facility that provides an electronic communication service, 
and, then, obtaining, altering, or preventing authorized access to a wire or electronic 
communication while it is electronically stored in such a system. An electronic 
communication falls under the SCA once a system receives and stores it.  
  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.426  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The SCA includes both civil and criminal penalties. Concerning civil penalties, the SCA 
provides a private right of action and allows appropriate relief, including equitable relief, 
damages, and attorneys fees. Regarding criminal penalties, the SCA provides that if the first 
offense is committed for purposes of commercial advantage, malicious destruction, or 
damage or private commercial gain, punishment may include a fine and/or imprisonment 
for up to five years. For any subsequent offense, penalties include a fine and/or 
imprisonment for not more than ten years. In any other case, where it is a first offense, 
courts may impose a fine or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. For all 
subsequent convictions, courts may impose a fine and/or imprisonment for up to ten years. 
 
THE PEN REGISTERS ACT 
Pen registers are devices that can detect the telephone number from which an incoming call 
has been made. Title 18, section 3121, of the U.S. Code generally prohibits the installation of 
pen registers without a court order.  
 
EXCEPTIONS 
Although the ECPA imposes several rules about electronic communications, it also contains 
several exceptions to these rules. The exceptions most relevant to the workplace are:  
• The ordinary course of business exception 
• The provider exception 
• The consent exception 
 
ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS EXCEPTION  
The ECPA’s definition of “electronic device” specifically excludes devices that are used by 
an employer in the “ordinary course of busi ness.” Therefore, employers are permitted to 
monitor their employees’ wire or electronic communications, including phone calls, if done 
for a legitimate business purpose.  
 
THE PROVIDER EXCEPTION  
The provider exception allows suppliers of wire or electronic communications services (e.g., 
telephone, voice mail, e-mail, or Internet services) to intercept or access electronic 
communications in the normal course of business. For example, telephone providers can 
monitor phone calls when it is necessary to maintain and protect the system, run quality 
control checks, or to protect the service against theft or harassment. Most courts hold that 
employers qualify as providers with respect to their internal e-mail and voice mail systems.   
 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.427 
CONSENT EXCEPTION  
The ECPA allows an entity to intercept or access an electronic communication if one of the 
parties to the communication has given prior consent. This exception does not apply if the 
communication is intercepted for the purpose of committing a crime. 
 



:


electron commun privaci act of 1986
the electron commun privaci act of 1986 ecpa codifi at 18 usc
25102521 27012710 31213126 is the primari feder statut that offer worker
protect in commun privaci
under the ecpa electron commun ar defin as ani transfer of sign signal
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2425
write imag sound data or intellig of ani natur transmit in whole or in part by
a wire radio electromagnet photolectron or photoopt system that affect
interst or foreign commerc
the ecpa is divid into three part the wiretap act which govern the intercept of
electron commun the store commun act which cover access to store
commun and record and the pen regi ter act which regul pen regist and
trap and trace devic
the wiretap act 18 usc 25102521
in respons to an increas number of privaci breach congress enact the wiretap act
which prohibit anyon from intention intercept or attempt to intercept ani wire
oral or electron commun
section 2511 prohibit covert spy on voic and data commun extend
protect from eavesdrop on mail and telephon commun to includ digit
data commun such as email and remot comput it doe not govern store
commun under the wiretap act an intercept occur by the acquisit of the
content of ani electron commun through the us of ani devic most court have
held that intercept occur onli when the protect commun ar obtain
contemporan with their transmiss
remedi for violat the wiretap act includ crimin sanction and civil relief a crimin
violat under the act is a feloni and is punish by up to five year imprison
andor fine under a privat caus of action a court mai award the plaintiff equit relief
actual damag punit damag and attornei fee
the store commun act 18 usc 2701
as part of the ecpa congress enact the store commun act sca to protect
store electron commun such as email and voicemail by prohibit the
unauthor access of such commun that ar in storag more specif the sca
prohibit unlaw access to a facil that provid an electron commun servic
and then obtain alter or prevent author access to a wire or electron
commun while it is electron store in such a system an electron
commun fall under the sca onc a system receiv and store it
individu right dure examin law
2426 2011 fraud examin manual
the sca includ both civil and crimin penalti concern civil penalti the sca
provid a privat right of action and allow appropri relief includ equit relief
damag and attornei fee regard crimin penalti the sca provid that if the first
offens is commit for purpos of commerci advantag malici destruct or
damag or privat commerci gain punish mai includ a fine andor imprison
for up to five year for ani subsequ offens penalti includ a fine andor
imprison for not more than ten year in ani other case where it is a first offens
court mai impos a fine or imprison for not more than six month or both for all
subsequ convict court mai impos a fine andor imprison for up to ten year
the pen regist act
pen regist ar devic that can detect the telephon number from which an incom call
ha been made titl 18 section 3121 of the us code gener prohibit the instal of
pen regist without a court order
except
although the ecpa impos sever rule about electron commun it also contain
sever except to these rule the except most relev to the workplac ar
the ordinari cours of busi except
the provid except
the consent except
ordinari cours of busi except
the ecpa definit of electron devic specif exclud devic that ar us by
an employ in the ordinari cours of busi ness therefor employ ar permit to
monitor their employe wire or electron commun includ phone call if done
for a legitim busi purpos
the provid except
the provid except allow supplier of wire or electron commun servic eg
telephon voic mail email or internet servic to intercept or access electron
commun in the normal cours of busi for exampl telephon provid can
monitor phone call when it is necessari to maintain and protect the system run qualiti
control check or to protect the servic against theft or harass most court hold that
employ qualifi as provid with respect to their intern email and voic mail system
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2427
consent except
the ecpa allow an entiti to intercept or access an electron commun if on of the
parti to the commun ha given prior consent thi except doe not appli if the
commun is intercept for the purpos of commit a crime
