2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Searches and Surveillance/Monitoring Employee Phone Calls


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Monitoring Employee Phone Calls 
To review, the Wiretap Act provisions of the ECPA limit an employer’s ability to monitor 
employee phone calls. In addition to the ECPA, a company’s right to monitor employee 
phone calls is also limited by employees’ constitutional and common law privacy rights, as 
discussed above. 
 
Although interception is generally forbidden under the Wiretap Act, employers may lawfully 
monitor phone calls if they fall under one of the statutory exceptions, including the ordinary 
course of business exception and the consent exception.  
 
ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS EXCEPTION 
Under the ordinary course of business exception, employers are permitted to monitor their 
employees’ wire or electronic communications, including phone calls, if done for a legitimate 
business purpose.  
 
This exception could apply in various scenarios. For example, it would apply where the 
employer routinely monitors phone communications for purposes of quality control (e.g., 
monitoring the phone calls of operators, telemarketers, customer service personnel, etc.). It 
may also apply where there is a legitimate business purpose for the monitoring, such as 
preventing business losses or employee misconduct. Keep in mind, however, that there must 
be a specific, legitimate business purpose for the interception. Blanket monitoring probably 
will be found to violate the act. In Sanders v. Robert Bosch, 38 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 1994), an 
employer who used a “voice logger” to record all telephone conversations on certain 
company lines did not fall within the ordinary course of business exception because the 
employer was unable to state a legitimate business purpose for the interceptions.  
 
Even if a company has a legitimate business purpose for monitoring a phone call, the 
method used to intercept and monitor the call must be no more intrusive than necessary to 
achieve the purpose. In Deal v. Spears, 980 F.2d 1153 (8th Cir. 1992), an employer who tape-
 recorded and listened to all calls, including personal calls, was found to have violated the 
statute even though the employer had legitimate suspicions of theft. Once it becomes 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.428  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
apparent that a communication is personal and not otherwise unauthorized, the employer 
must immediately stop listening to the call. Overly broad efforts to monitor employee calls 
may give rise to a claim for invasion of privacy.  
 
CONSENT EXCEPTION 
The ECPA allows an entity to intercept an electronic communication if that entity is a party 
to the communication, or if one of the parties to the communication has given prior consent 
to the interception.  
 
For an employer to monitor an employee under this exception, the employee must expressly 
consent to the monitoring. Generally, employers must obtain written consent (e.g., an 
employer provides its employees with a written policy explaining that phone calls may be 
monitored and the employees sign the policy). It is important to note that providing a 
notification that employees might be monitored (as opposed to being notified that the phone 
calls or e-mail will be monitored) may not satisfy the consent exception. For example, in one 
case, notification to an employee that her phone calls might be monitored was not enough to 
establish that she consented to the recording of her phone calls. Even when an employee 
consents to monitoring, this does not give the employer unlimited access to the employee’s 
communications. Monitoring still should be c onducted only for legitimate business purposes 
and should be no more broad than necessary.  
 



:


monitor employe phone call
to review the wiretap act provis of the ecpa limit an employ abil to monitor
employe phone call in addit to the ecpa a compani right to monitor employe
phone call is also limit by employe constitut and common law privaci right as
discuss abov
although intercept is gener forbidden under the wiretap act employ mai lawfulli
monitor phone call if thei fall under on of the statutori except includ the ordinari
cours of busi except and the consent except
ordinari cours of busi except
under the ordinari cours of busi except employ ar permit to monitor their
employe wire or electron commun includ phone call if done for a legitim
busi purpos
thi except could appli in variou scenario for exampl it would appli where the
employ routin monitor phone commun for purpos of qualiti control eg
monitor the phone call of oper telemarket custom servic personnel etc it
mai also appli where there is a legitim busi purpos for the monitor such as
prevent busi loss or employe misconduct keep in mind howev that there must
be a specif legitim busi purpos for the intercept blanket monitor probabl
will be found to violat the act in sander v robert bosch 38 f3d 736 4th cir 1994 an
employ who us a voic logger to record all telephon convers on certain
compani line did not fall within the ordinari cours of busi except becaus the
employ wa unabl to state a legitim busi purpos for the intercept
even if a compani ha a legitim busi purpos for monitor a phone call the
method us to intercept and monitor the call must be no more intrus than necessari to
achiev the purpos in deal v spear 980 f2d 1153 8th cir 1992 an employ who tape
record and listen to all call includ person call wa found to have violat the
statut even though the employ had legitim suspicion of theft onc it becom
individu right dure examin law
2428 2011 fraud examin manual
appar that a commun is person and not otherwis unauthor the employ
must immedi stop listen to the call overli broad effort to monitor employe call
mai give rise to a claim for invas of privaci
consent except
the ecpa allow an entiti to intercept an electron commun if that entiti is a parti
to the commun or if on of the parti to the commun ha given prior consent
to the intercept
for an employ to monitor an employe under thi except the employe must expressli
consent to the monitor gener employ must obtain written consent eg an
employ provid it employe with a written polici explain that phone call mai be
monitor and the employe sign the polici it is import to note that provid a
notif that employe might be monitor as oppos to be notifi that the phone
call or email will be monitor mai not satisfi the consent except for exampl in on
case notif to an employe that her phone call might be monitor wa not enough to
establish that she consent to the record of her phone call even when an employe
consent to monitor thi doe not give the employ unlimit access to the employe
commun monitor still should be c onduct onli for legitim busi purpos
and should be no more broad than necessari
