2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Obtaining Information About Employees


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Obtaining Information About Employees 
 
Introduction 
There is a surprising amount of information about individuals that can be accessed without 
legal process (e.g., a subpoena). In fact, the government is bound by law to facilitate the 
public’s access to government information and to  encourage a diversity of sources to acquire 
and use this information. But despite the public’s broad right of access, there are numerous 
laws that limit access to certain types of information, and a number of risks to privacy are 
raised by the collection of information. Therefore, fraud examiners must be certain that 
information obtained is done so legally.  
 
Federal Statutes 
Privacy Act of 1974 
The Privacy Act of 1974 establishes a code of information practices that regulates the 
collection, maintenance, consumption, and diffusion of personally identifiable information 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.439 
that is maintained by federal agencies. It restricts information about individuals, both 
employees and nonemployees, and it applies to government agencies and government 
contractors running a system of records on behalf of the government. The Privacy Act 
prohibits an agency from disclosing such information without the written consent of the 
subject individual. 
 
An agency, for example, might maintain records about a person containing information that 
is relevant and necessary to accomplish a purpose of the agency. This information might 
include a person’s education, finances, medical history, criminal history, employment history, 
and identifying information (fingerprint, voiceprint, or photograph). An agency employee 
might have access to the information unless it is investigatory material compiled for law 
enforcement purposes, statistical records, or material compiled solely for determining 
suitability, eligibility, or qualification for federal service or promotion. 
 
Fair Credit Reporting Act 
One of the primary statutes limiting access to information is the federal Fair Credit 
Reporting Act (FCRA). This statute regulates the dissemination of consumer information to 
third parties by consumer reporting agencies. Historically, the FCRA only applied to 
consumer credit reports, but due to amendments in 1997, the FCRA now applies to the 
gathering of many other types of information about an individual through third parties.  
 
The FCRA prohibits consumer reporting agencies from releasing personal information 
about an individual (e.g., information about the consumer’s character, general reputation, 
personal characteristics, or mode of living) to third parties without authorization, and limits 
disclosure of credit information to third parties with a purpose permitted by the statute. 
 
The FCRA applies in the employment context when an employer contracts with a third party 
(e.g., a private investigator or an online public records service) to collect credit information 
on current or potential employees. The FCRA, however, does not apply if the person or 
organization seeking the information gathers it directly from the source.  
 
If the FCRA does apply, it generally means that an examiner cannot use a third party to 
obtain certain information about a person unless that person has received certain notices and 
signed a consent form. The failure to do so can mean civil penalties.  
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.440  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
COVERAGE UNDER THE FCRA 
Coverage of the FCRA, however, turns largely on three terms: consumer, consumer reports, 
and consumer reporting agency.  
 
CONSUMER  
At its core, the FCRA protects those that fall within its definition of consumer. The Act 
defines a consumer as “an individual.” That is, only individuals have rights under the FCRA.   
 
CONSUMER REPORTS  
For the FCRA to apply, the information that is being obtained must be a “consumer report.” 
A consumer report  is defined as any written, oral, or other communication by a consumer-reporting 
agency bearing on a customer’s cred it worthiness, credit standing, character, 
general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living. 
 
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC), which is the federal agency responsible for 
enforcement of the FCRA, has interpreted this to mean basically any information collected 
on a person. It does not refer to just credit reports. It would also apply to public records 
such as criminal records and DMV searches. 
 
But in general, when faced with the question of whether a specific report is a consumer 
report, courts have focused on the purpose for which the person or organization collected 
the consumer information. 
 
CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCY  
Also, for the FCRA to apply, the information must be gathered from a “consumer reporting 
agency” (CRA). A CRA is defined as anyone who sells in formation about people. It could be 
an online service such as ChoicePoint or LexisNex is, or it could be a private investigator. 
 
COMPLYING WITH THE FCRA 
Before employers can get a consumer report about a current or prospective employee, they 
must comply with certain requirements; however, employers that are gathering such 
information in connection with a workplace investigation of misconduct may be excluded 
from the FCRA (see the section “Workplace Investigations of Fraud and Misconduct” 
below).  
 
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.441 
If the FCRA applies, the party seeking the information must comply with the following 
requirements:  
• Inform the consumer reporting agency that it will follow the FCRA. 
• Provide the individual with a separate written disclosure.  
• Obtain the individual’s written authorization.  
 
The disclosure and the authorization can be contained in the same document. 
 
If, however, an employer relies on a consumer report for an “adverse action” (e.g., denying a 
job application, reassigning or terminating an employee, or denying a promotion), it must 
provide the individual with a pre-adverse action disclosure before taking the adverse action. 
This disclosure must include a copy of the individual’s consumer report and a copy of “A 
Summary of Your Rights Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act,” which is available from the FTC. 
 
After adverse action is taken, the employer must notify the individual via an adverse action 
notice that the action has been taken. That notice must include the following: 
• Name, address, and phone number of the consumer reporting agency (CRA) that 
supplied the report 
• A statement that the CRA did not make the adverse action decision and cannot explain 
why the adverse action was taken 
• A notice of the individual’s right to di spute the accuracy or completeness of the 
information furnished, and his right to an additional free consumer report from the 
agency upon request within 60 days 
 
WORKPLACE INVESTIGATIONS OF FRAUD AND MISCONDUCT 
Furthermore, the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 amended the FCRA to 
exempt certain reports involving employee misconduct investigations. As a result of these 
amendments, an employer who uses a third party to conduct a workplace investigation no 
longer has to obtain the prior consent of an employee if the investigation involves suspected: 
• Misconduct 
• Violation of law or regulations 
• Violation of any pre-existing policy of the employer 
 
To qualify for this exception, the report from the third party must not be communicated to 
anyone other than the employer, an agent of the employer, or the government. 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.442  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If, however, adverse action is taken against the employee based on the results of the 
investigation, the FCRA still requires that the employer provide the employee with a 
summary of the report. Adverse action is broadly defined as any employment decision that 
adversely affects the employee. The summary must “contain the nature and substance of the 
communication upon which the adverse action is based.” However, it does not have to 
identify the individuals interviewed or the sources of the information. 
 
INVESTIGATIVE CONSUMER REPORT 
The FCRA also covers “investigative consumer reports.” Under the FCRA, an investigative 
consumer report is a report containing information about an individual’s character, general 
reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living that is obtained through personal 
interviews with neighbors, friends, or associates. If such a report is made, then other notices 
and consents may need to be obtained from the individual. For example, a separate 
disclosure must be used to inform the employee that an investigative consumer report is 
being obtained. The form must also state what sort of information will be collected. 
 
In addition, the company must disclose to the individual the nature and scope of the 
investigation (if he requests). If any adverse action is to be taken against the person, he can 
ask to receive a copy of the report before such action is taken. Further, the report given to 
the individual must not be redacted, meaning that if the report contains names of the people 
providing the information and what they reported, such information could not be deleted 
from the report. The person must also be given an opportunity to dispute the findings in the 
report. 
 
CONTACT YOUR ATTORNEY 
Unfortunately, for fraud examiners, the FCRA has created several more hoops that 
examiners must jump through before they can obtain certain types of information. The 
FCRA is not clearly written, but the Federal Trade Commission has published several letters 
giving its interpretation of the statute. These letters and the text of the FCRA can be 
obtained through their website at www.ftc.gov.  
 
The most important thing for the fraud examiner to remember is to consult his in-house or 
outside counsel. Your attorney will help you determine what procedures you need to 
institute to comply with the FCRA. 
 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.443 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB) was passed in 1999, and the rules implementing the 
Act became final in 2001. GLB was originally enacted to allow banks and other companies 
to offer previously forbidden services, such as insurance and securities brokerage services. 
Congress was worried that these “super banks” would share customers’ financial data with 
affiliates and other companies to hawk their new products. Therefore, Congress added a 
provision requiring a “financial intuition” to tell customers about its privacy policy, to notify 
them of private information the institution intends to share, and to give customers the 
chance to block such information-sharing. 
 
To implement the law, Congress ordered regulators to define financial institution in the 
broadest possible terms. Thus, financial institutions include not just banks, but also insurance 
companies, accountants, tax preparation and real estate settlement services, and investment 
advisors. The text of the rule can be found at 16 C.F.R. Part 313.1. Additional information 
about the rule can be found at the Federal Trade Commission’s website: www.ftc.gov. 
 
The problem for fraud examiners is that the privacy rules implemented as part of GLB have 
been interpreted to prevent the selling of credit header information. Under the FTC’s 
interpretation of the rule, credit header information cannot be sold except for the very 
limited purposes allowed under the Fair Credit Reporting Act. The agency reached this 
decision by concluding that such basic personal information, such as names and addresses, is 
“financial” information and therefore must be protected under GLB. Unfortunately, this 
prevents credit bureaus from selling credit header information (including names, addresses, 
phone numbers, and Social Security numbers) to private investigators, direct marketers, or 
other information brokers. 
 
GLB also made it a criminal offense to engage in “pretexting,” (i.e., the practice of obtaining 
or attempting to obtain, sell, or buy private information through the use of false pretenses). 
Some individuals used pretexting as a means to gather financial information about a subject. 
Pretexters would contact a financial institution and pretend to be the customer or someone 
else authorized to obtain financial information, thereby tricking the financial institution into 
providing information about the subject. 
 
Section 6821 of Title 15, U.S. Code, (added by GLB) makes it an offense to: 
• Use false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements or documents to get customer information 
from a financial institution or directly from a customer of a financial institution 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.444  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Use forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen documents to get customer information from a 
financial institution or directly from a customer of a financial institution 
• Ask another person to get someone else’s custom er information using false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent statements; using false, fictitious, or fraudulent documents; or using forged, 
counterfeit, lost, or stolen documents 
 
Violators can, under certain circumstances, be fined and/or imprisoned up to 10 years. 
 
Telephone Records and Privacy Protection Act of 2006 
The Telephone Records and Privacy Protection Act of 2006 (TRPPA) also criminalizes 
pretexting. In 2006, pretexting garnered much criticism after Hewlett-Packard admitted that 
to uncover board room leaks, its investigators obtained phone records of journalists and 
board members through pretexting. Within four months of the scandal’s public release, 
President Bush signed the TRPPA into law. 
 
Specifically, the TRPPA criminalizes the practice of obtaining and attempting to obtain, sell, 
or buy confidential phone records through the use of false statements, unless otherwise 
permitted by law. Violations of the Act are criminal, and, if convicted, a violator faces up to 
10 years in prison and up to $100,000 in fines. These fines and prison terms may be 
increased in case of violation compounded with other activities, or some egregious crimes. 
 
Before engaging in any type of pretexting activity, investigators should consult with an 
attorney to determine whether the information sought is protected by state or federal law, as 
well as whether the planned impersonation method is legally acceptable. 
 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (Public Law 104–191, Partially Codified in 45 C.F.R. §§ 160, 164) 
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) instituted several privacy 
rules concerning personal health information. While most of the rules do not directly affect 
investigations, fraud examiners should be aware of the rules because they may have an 
impact on the type of information that can be legally gathered on employees.  
 
The HIPAA privacy rules place restrictions on the availability and use of “protected health 
information.” The definition of this term is extremely broad and covers any information 
relating to an individual’s past, present, or future physical or mental health, payment for 
services, or health care operations. For example, a cancer center employee who stole a 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.445 
patient’s identification information to obtain credit cards violated HIPAA. This case marked 
a significant point in HIPAA legislation because it had more to do with identity theft than 
actual health information, yet it was still covered under the statute. 
 
If information about the health of an individual, or payments for services, becomes an issue 
during an investigation, the examiners should immediately contact the human resources 
(HR) department, which should have information about whether the entity is subject to the 
HIPAA rules and can assist you in compliance with those rules.  
 
The most important thing to note is that if the HIPAA rules apply, the party seeking the 
information is restricted as to the type of health information it can access without specific 
written authorization. Examiners should never contact the health care provider, the health 
plan administrator, or a medical billing services for copies of employee records without first 
consulting the employer’s legal counsel or HR department. 
 
Avoiding Liability for Obstruction of Justice and Witness Tampering 
It is assumed that no CFE would knowingly or intentionally suborn perjury, conceal 
evidence, or otherwise attempt to undermine a government investigation or a judicial 
proceeding. But it is important to understand the potential for liability for these offenses 
during a fraud examination. 
 
To understand what conduct could lead to accusations of impropriety or criminal liability, 
fraud examiners should be familiar with the following federal statutes. There may be 
additional state statutes that prohibit similar conduct in connection with state investigations 
or even state civil lawsuits. An attorney should be consulted for the law of a specific 
jurisdiction.  
 
Witness Tampering (18 U.S.C. § 1512 et seq.) 
The Victim and Witness Protection Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1512 et seq., makes it a felony to engage 
in “misleading conduct toward another person” with the intent to “influence, delay, or 
prevent” a witness’s testimony or to “cause or induce any person” to “withhold” testimony 
or documents.  
 
Section 1512(b)(2)(a) makes it a crime to (1) knowingly; (2) use intimidation or physical 
force, threats, or corrupt persuasion; (3) with the intent to induce another; (4) to withhold 
testimony, a record, document, or other object from an official proceeding; or (5) alter, 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.446  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
destroy, mutilate, or conceal; (6) an object; (7) with the intent to impair the object’s integrity 
or availability; (8) for use in an official proceeding. 
 
Section 1512(b)(2)(a) is the statute under which Arthur Andersen, LLP was charged 
following the Enron scandal. During the investigations into Enron misdeeds, it was found 
that Andersen directed its employees to destroy documents to prevent their retrieval by the 
SEC during the investigation of Enron. However, the Andersen conviction was overturned 
in 2005 because of errors in the jury instructions. 
 
Criminal sanctions have been added to section 1512 for the corrupt alteration or destruction 
of documents. Section 1512(c) makes it a crime to (1) corruptly; (2) alter, destroy, mutilate, 
conceal, or attempt thereto; (3) a record, document, or other object; (4) with the intent to 
impair the object’s integrity or availability for use; (5) in an official proceeding; or (6) 
otherwise obstruct, influence, impede, or attempt thereto, any official proceeding.  
 
Section 1512(c) originally criminalized those who knowingly and corruptly destroyed, or 
directed others to destroy, relevant evidence. However, the U.S. Supreme Court in Arthur 
Andersen LLP vs. United States narrowed the statute to exclude the term knowingly. 
 
Section 1515 provides definitions for certain provisions under obstruction of justice statutes. 
For example, it defines misleading conduct as including, among other things: 
• Knowingly making a false statement 
• Omitting or concealing information that renders a statement misleading 
• Knowingly inviting reliance on a writing that is false, forged, altered, or otherwise lacking 
in authenticity with intent to mislead 
• Knowingly inviting reliance on a materia lly misleading sample, specimen, map, 
photograph, or other object with intent to mislead 
• Knowingly using a trick, scheme, or device with intent to mislead 
 
Unlike obstruction of justice (see below), the Victim and Witness Protection Act statute can 
be violated without any corrupt purpose to obstruct justice, even if there is no grand jury or 
other judicial proceeding pending. Section 1512 only requires proof that the defendant acted 
intentionally with intent to “influence, delay, or prevent” testimony or the withholding of 
evidence. The Act applies to witnesses in a prospective or anticipated proceeding as well as a 
pending one. 
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.447 
In light of the Victim and Witness Protection Act, fraud examiners must take care as to how 
he instructs a witness with regard to the confidentiality of the investigation. Confidentiality is 
a legitimate concern, and the investigator needs to instruct a witness concerning how to 
preserve privileges and confidentiality. However, instructing a witness not to speak with 
government investigators or other parties to litigation — or giving instructions that could be 
misunderstood in that way — exposes the investigator and the company to potential witness 
tampering liability. 
 
The Victim and Witness Protection Act also makes it a misdemeanor to harass another 
person and thereby hinder, delay, prevent, or dissuade any person from attending or 
testifying in an official proceeding, reporting a federal offense, causing an arrest for a federal 
offense, or causing a criminal prosecution.  
 
Obstruction of Justice  
To review, obstruction of justice statutes punish efforts to impede or obstruct the 
investigation or trial of other substantive offenses. There are several federal criminal statutes 
that prohibit obstruction of justice. Many are specific to a particular setting or industry, or to 
a particular kind of proceeding such as the prohibition against obstructing a federal audit (18 
U.S.C. § 1516) or obstructing the examination of a financial institution by a federal agency (18 U.S.C. § 1517).   
 
These statutes are contained in Chapter 73 of the U.S. Code and prohibit impeding, 
influencing, or obstructing virtually any type of federal proceeding (including criminal 
investigations) through the destruction of documents, threats, bribes, or witness tampering. 
for more information, see the Obstruction of Justice section in “The Law Related to Fraud 
(Part 2)” chapter above. 
 
Spoliation of Evidence 
Spoliation of evidence is broadly defined as the act of destroying evidence or making it 
otherwise unavailable. The act of spoliation can surface in just about any type of case, 
criminal or civil, and by any party, plaintiff, or defendant. The theory behind spoliation of 
evidence presumes that the individual who makes evidence unavailable following the 
probable initiation of a lawsuit is aware of its detrimental effect upon a case. 
 
Although few jurisdictions have a separate cause of action for spoliation of evidence, almost 
every jurisdiction allows for sanctions resulting from such acts. Some courts require the 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.448  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
spoliation to be intentional, though others merely require negligence or reckless spoliation.  
 
Intentional spoliation claims usually involve elements similar to the following: (1) the 
existence of a potential lawsuit; (2) the defend ant’s knowledge of the potential lawsuit; (3) 
the destruction, mutilation, or significant alteration of potential evidence; (4) intent on the 
part of the defendant to disrupt or defeat the lawsuit; (5) a causal relationship between the 
act of spoliation and the inability to prove the lawsuit; and (6) damages. 
 
Negligent spoliation claims generally occur when a party unintentionally loses evidence 
valuable to his claim, or a third party loses or destroys evidence in a suit. An example of the 
required elements for a negligent spoliation claim include: (1) existence of a potential civil 
action; (2) a legal or contractual duty to preser ve evidence which is relevant to the potential 
civil action; (3) destruction of that evidence; (4) significant impairment in the ability to prove 
the lawsuit; (5) a causal relationship between the evidence destruction and the inability to 
prove the lawsuit; and (6) damages. 
 
Perjury and Subornation of Perjury 
Perjury is the willful giving of false material testimony under oath, and includes falsely 
claiming that one cannot remember a material fact. There are three general federal perjury 
laws. First, section 1621 of Title 18, U.S. Code, is the general federal perjury statute; it makes 
it a crime to present material false statements under oath in federal proceedings. Section 
1621 applies “in any case in which a law of the United States authorizes an oath to be 
administered.” All states have similar statutes.  
 
Second, section 1623 of Title 18, U.S. Code, makes it a crime to present false testimony or 
produce other false information under oath before, or ancillary to, a federal court or grand 
jury. 
 
Third, section 1622 of Title 18, U.S. Code, criminalizes subornation of perjury; it makes it a 
federal crime to induce or cause another to commit perjury. A person violates section 1622 if 
he induces another to commit perjury in violation of either section 1621 or section 1623. 
The most obvious example of subornation of perjury is telling a prospective witness to lie or 
to conceal the conduct that is the subject of the investigation. Similarly, subornation also has 
been found to exist where a person counseled a witness to give testimony, the truth of which 
he recklessly disregarded, even though he did not know for certain that the information was  
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.449 
untrue. Subornation is only an offense when the perjury has in fact occurred — proof of 
subornation requires proof of the perjury. 
 
 



:


obtain inform about employe
introduct
there is a surpris amount of inform about individu that can be access without
legal process eg a subpoena in fact the govern is bound by law to facilit the
public access to govern inform and to encourag a divers of sourc to acquir
and us thi inform but despit the public broad right of access there ar numer
law that limit access to certain type of inform and a number of risk to privaci ar
rais by the collect of inform therefor fraud examin must be certain that
inform obtain is done so legal
feder statut
privaci act of 1974
the privaci act of 1974 establish a code of inform practic that regul the
collect mainten consumpt and diffus of person identifi inform
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2439
that is maintain by feder agenc it restrict inform about individu both
employe and nonemploye and it appli to govern agenc and govern
contractor run a system of record on behalf of the govern the privaci act
prohibit an agenc from disclos such inform without the written consent of the
subject individu
an agenc for exampl might maintain record about a person contain inform that
is relev and necessari to accomplish a purpos of the agenc thi inform might
includ a person educ financ medic histori crimin histori employ histori
and identifi inform fingerprint voiceprint or photograph an agenc employe
might have access to the inform unless it is investigatori materi compil for law
enforc purpos statist record or materi compil sole for determin
suitabl elig or qualif for feder servic or promot
fair credit report act
on of the primari statut limit access to inform is the feder fair credit
report act fcra thi statut regul the dissemin of consum inform to
third parti by consum report agenc histor the fcra onli appli to
consum credit report but due to amend in 1997 the fcra now appli to the
gather of mani other type of inform about an individu through third parti
the fcra prohibit consum report agenc from releas person inform
about an individu eg inform about the consum charact gener reput
person characterist or mode of live to third parti without author and limit
disclosur of credit inform to third parti with a purpos permit by the statut
the fcra appli in the employ context when an employ contract with a third parti
eg a privat investig or an onlin public record servic to collect credit inform
on current or potenti employe the fcra howev doe not appli if the person or
organ seek the inform gather it directli from the sourc
if the fcra doe appli it gener mean that an examin cannot us a third parti to
obtain certain inform about a person unless that person ha receiv certain notic and
sign a consent form the failur to do so can mean civil penalti
individu right dure examin law
2440 2011 fraud examin manual
coverag under the fcra
coverag of the fcra howev turn larg on three term consum consum report
and consum report agenc
consum
at it core the fcra protect those that fall within it definit of consum the act
defin a consum as an individu that is onli individu have right under the fcra
consum report
for the fcra to appli the inform that is be obtain must be a consum report
a consum report is defin as ani written oral or other commun by a consumerreport
agenc bear on a custom cred it worthi credit stand charact
gener reput person characterist or mode of live
the feder trade commiss ftc which is the feder agenc respons for
enforc of the fcra ha interpret thi to mean basic ani inform collect
on a person it doe not refer to just credit report it would also appli to public record
such as crimin record and dmv search
but in gener when face with the question of whether a specif report is a consum
report court have focus on the purpos for which the person or organ collect
the consum inform
consum report agenc
also for the fcra to appli the inform must be gather from a consum report
agenc cra a cra is defin as anyon who sell in format about peopl it could be
an onlin servic such as choicepoint or lexisnex is or it could be a privat investig
compli with the fcra
befor employ can get a consum report about a current or prospect employe thei
must compli with certain requir howev employ that ar gather such
inform in connect with a workplac investig of misconduct mai be exclud
from the fcra see the section workplac investig of fraud and misconduct
below
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2441
if the fcra appli the parti seek the inform must compli with the follow
requir
inform the consum report agenc that it will follow the fcra
provid the individu with a separ written disclosur
obtain the individu written author
the disclosur and the author can be contain in the same document
if howev an employ reli on a consum report for an advers action eg deni a
job applic reassign or termin an employe or deni a promot it must
provid the individu with a preadvers action disclosur befor take the advers action
thi disclosur must includ a copi of the individu consum report and a copi of a
summari of your right under the fair credit report act which is avail from the ftc
after advers action is taken the employ must notifi the individu via an advers action
notic that the action ha been taken that notic must includ the follow
name address and phone number of the consum report agenc cra that
suppli the report
a statement that the cra did not make the advers action decis and cannot explain
why the advers action wa taken
a notic of the individu right to di spute the accuraci or complet of the
inform furnish and hi right to an addit free consum report from the
agenc upon request within 60 dai
workplac investig of fraud and misconduct
furthermor the fair and accur credit transact act of 2003 amend the fcra to
exempt certain report involv employe misconduct investig as a result of these
amend an employ who us a third parti to conduct a workplac investig no
longer ha to obtain the prior consent of an employe if the investig involv suspect
misconduct
violat of law or regul
violat of ani preexist polici of the employ
to qualifi for thi except the report from the third parti must not be commun to
anyon other than the employ an agent of the employ or the govern
individu right dure examin law
2442 2011 fraud examin manual
if howev advers action is taken against the employe base on the result of the
investig the fcra still requir that the employ provid the employe with a
summari of the report advers action is broadli defin as ani employ decis that
advers affect the employe the summari must contain the natur and substanc of the
commun upon which the advers action is base howev it doe not have to
identifi the individu interview or the sourc of the inform
investig consum report
the fcra also cover investig consum report under the fcra an investig
consum report is a report contain inform about an individu charact gener
reput person characterist or mode of live that is obtain through person
interview with neighbor friend or associ if such a report is made then other notic
and consent mai need to be obtain from the individu for exampl a separ
disclosur must be us to inform the employe that an investig consum report is
be obtain the form must also state what sort of inform will be collect
in addit the compani must disclos to the individu the natur and scope of the
investig if he request if ani advers action is to be taken against the person he can
ask to receiv a copi of the report befor such action is taken further the report given to
the individu must not be redact mean that if the report contain name of the peopl
provid the inform and what thei report such inform could not be delet
from the report the person must also be given an opportun to disput the find in the
report
contact your attornei
unfortun for fraud examin the fcra ha creat sever more hoop that
examin must jump through befor thei can obtain certain type of inform the
fcra is not clearli written but the feder trade commiss ha publish sever letter
give it interpret of the statut these letter and the text of the fcra can be
obtain through their websit at wwwftcgov
the most import thing for the fraud examin to rememb is to consult hi inhous or
outsid counsel your attornei will help you determin what procedur you need to
institut to compli with the fcra
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2443
grammleachblilei act
the grammleachblilei act glb wa pass in 1999 and the rule implement the
act becam final in 2001 glb wa origin enact to allow bank and other compani
to offer previous forbidden servic such as insur and secur brokerag servic
congress wa worri that these super bank would share custom financi data with
affili and other compani to hawk their new product therefor congress ad a
provis requir a financi intuit to tell custom about it privaci polici to notifi
them of privat inform the institut intend to share and to give custom the
chanc to block such informationshar
to implement the law congress order regul to defin financi institut in the
broadest possibl term thu financi institut includ not just bank but also insur
compani account tax prepar and real estat settlement servic and invest
advisor the text of the rule can be found at 16 cfr part 3131 addit inform
about the rule can be found at the feder trade commiss websit wwwftcgov
the problem for fraud examin is that the privaci rule implement as part of glb have
been interpret to prevent the sell of credit header inform under the ftc
interpret of the rule credit header inform cannot be sold except for the veri
limit purpos allow under the fair credit report act the agenc reach thi
decis by conclud that such basic person inform such as name and address is
financi inform and therefor must be protect under glb unfortun thi
prevent credit bureau from sell credit header inform includ name address
phone number and social secur number to privat investig direct market or
other inform broker
glb also made it a crimin offens to engag in pretext ie the practic of obtain
or attempt to obtain sell or bui privat inform through the us of fals pretens
some individu us pretext as a mean to gather financi inform about a subject
pretext would contact a financi institut and pretend to be the custom or someon
els author to obtain financi inform therebi trick the financi institut into
provid inform about the subject
section 6821 of titl 15 us code ad by glb make it an offens to
us fals fictiti or fraudul statement or document to get custom inform
from a financi institut or directli from a custom of a financi institut
individu right dure examin law
2444 2011 fraud examin manual
us forg counterfeit lost or stolen document to get custom inform from a
financi institut or directli from a custom of a financi institut
ask anoth person to get someon els custom er inform us fals fictiti or
fraudul statement us fals fictiti or fraudul document or us forg
counterfeit lost or stolen document
violat can under certain circumst be fine andor imprison up to 10 year
telephon record and privaci protect act of 2006
the telephon record and privaci protect act of 2006 trppa also crimin
pretext in 2006 pretext garner much critic after hewlettpackard admit that
to uncov board room leak it investig obtain phone record of journalist and
board member through pretext within four month of the scandal public releas
presid bush sign the trppa into law
specif the trppa crimin the practic of obtain and attempt to obtain sell
or bui confidenti phone record through the us of fals statement unless otherwis
permit by law violat of the act ar crimin and if convict a violat face up to
10 year in prison and up to 100000 in fine these fine and prison term mai be
increas in case of violat compound with other activ or some egregi crime
befor engag in ani type of pretext activ investig should consult with an
attornei to determin whether the inform sought is protect by state or feder law as
well as whether the plan imperson method is legal accept
health insur portabl and account act public law 104191 partial codifi in 45 cfr 160 164
the health insur portabl and account act hipaa institut sever privaci
rule concern person health inform while most of the rule do not directli affect
investig fraud examin should be awar of the rule becaus thei mai have an
impact on the type of inform that can be legal gather on employe
the hipaa privaci rule place restrict on the avail and us of protect health
inform the definit of thi term is extrem broad and cover ani inform
relat to an individu past present or futur physic or mental health payment for
servic or health care oper for exampl a cancer center employe who stole a
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2445
patient identif inform to obtain credit card violat hipaa thi case mark
a signific point in hipaa legisl becaus it had more to do with ident theft than
actual health inform yet it wa still cover under the statut
if inform about the health of an individu or payment for servic becom an issu
dure an investig the examin should immedi contact the human resourc
hr depart which should have inform about whether the entiti is subject to the
hipaa rule and can assist you in complianc with those rule
the most import thing to note is that if the hipaa rule appli the parti seek the
inform is restrict as to the type of health inform it can access without specif
written author examin should never contact the health care provid the health
plan administr or a medic bill servic for copi of employe record without first
consult the employ legal counsel or hr depart
avoid liabil for obstruct of justic and wit tamper
it is assum that no cfe would knowingli or intention suborn perjuri conceal
evid or otherwis attempt to undermin a govern investig or a judici
proceed but it is import to understand the potenti for liabil for these offens
dure a fraud examin
to understand what conduct could lead to accus of improprieti or crimin liabil
fraud examin should be familiar with the follow feder statut there mai be
addit state statut that prohibit similar conduct in connect with state investig
or even state civil lawsuit an attornei should be consult for the law of a specif
jurisdict
wit tamper 18 usc 1512 et seq
the victim and wit protect act 18 usc 1512 et seq make it a feloni to engag
in mislead conduct toward anoth person with the intent to influenc delai or
prevent a witnesss testimoni or to caus or induc ani person to withhold testimoni
or document
section 1512b2a make it a crime to 1 knowingli 2 us intimid or physic
forc threat or corrupt persuas 3 with the intent to induc anoth 4 to withhold
testimoni a record document or other object from an offici proceed or 5 alter
individu right dure examin law
2446 2011 fraud examin manual
destroi mutil or conceal 6 an object 7 with the intent to impair the object integr
or avail 8 for us in an offici proceed
section 1512b2a is the statut under which arthur andersen llp wa charg
follow the enron scandal dure the investig into enron misde it wa found
that andersen direct it employe to destroi document to prevent their retriev by the
sec dure the investig of enron howev the andersen convict wa overturn
in 2005 becaus of error in the juri instruct
crimin sanction have been ad to section 1512 for the corrupt alter or destruct
of document section 1512c make it a crime to 1 corruptli 2 alter destroi mutil
conceal or attempt thereto 3 a record document or other object 4 with the intent to
impair the object integr or avail for us 5 in an offici proceed or 6
otherwis obstruct influenc imped or attempt thereto ani offici proceed
section 1512c origin crimin those who knowingli and corruptli destroi or
direct other to destroi relev evid howev the us suprem court in arthur
andersen llp vs unit state narrow the statut to exclud the term knowingli
section 1515 provid definit for certain provis under obstruct of justic statut
for exampl it defin mislead conduct as includ among other thing
knowingli make a fals statement
omit or conceal inform that render a statement mislead
knowingli invit relianc on a write that is fals forg alter or otherwis lack
in authent with intent to mislead
knowingli invit relianc on a materia lly mislead sampl specimen map
photograph or other object with intent to mislead
knowingli us a trick scheme or devic with intent to mislead
unlik obstruct of justic see below the victim and wit protect act statut can
be violat without ani corrupt purpos to obstruct justic even if there is no grand juri or
other judici proceed pend section 1512 onli requir proof that the defend act
intention with intent to influenc delai or prevent testimoni or the withhold of
evid the act appli to wit in a prospect or anticip proceed as well as a
pend on
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2447
in light of the victim and wit protect act fraud examin must take care as to how
he instruct a wit with regard to the confidenti of the investig confidenti is
a legitim concern and the investig need to instruct a wit concern how to
preserv privileg and confidenti howev instruct a wit not to speak with
govern investig or other parti to litig or give instruct that could be
misunderstood in that wai expos the investig and the compani to potenti wit
tamper liabil
the victim and wit protect act also make it a misdemeanor to harass anoth
person and therebi hinder delai prevent or dissuad ani person from attend or
testifi in an offici proceed report a feder offens caus an arrest for a feder
offens or caus a crimin prosecut
obstruct of justic
to review obstruct of justic statut punish effort to imped or obstruct the
investig or trial of other substant offens there ar sever feder crimin statut
that prohibit obstruct of justic mani ar specif to a particular set or industri or to
a particular kind of proceed such as the prohibit against obstruct a feder audit 18
usc 1516 or obstruct the examin of a financi institut by a feder agenc 18 usc 1517
these statut ar contain in chapter 73 of the us code and prohibit imped
influenc or obstruct virtual ani type of feder proceed includ crimin
investig through the destruct of document threat bribe or wit tamper
for more inform see the obstruct of justic section in the law relat to fraud
part 2 chapter abov
spoliat of evid
spoliat of evid is broadli defin as the act of destroi evid or make it
otherwis unavail the act of spoliat can surfac in just about ani type of case
crimin or civil and by ani parti plaintiff or defend the theori behind spoliat of
evid presum that the individu who make evid unavail follow the
probabl initi of a lawsuit is awar of it detriment effect upon a case
although few jurisdict have a separ caus of action for spoliat of evid almost
everi jurisdict allow for sanction result from such act some court requir the
individu right dure examin law
2448 2011 fraud examin manual
spoliat to be intent though other mere requir neglig or reckless spoliat
intent spoliat claim usual involv element similar to the follow 1 the
exist of a potenti lawsuit 2 the defend ant knowledg of the potenti lawsuit 3
the destruct mutil or signific alter of potenti evid 4 intent on the
part of the defend to disrupt or defeat the lawsuit 5 a causal relationship between the
act of spoliat and the inabl to prove the lawsuit and 6 damag
neglig spoliat claim gener occur when a parti unintention lose evid
valuabl to hi claim or a third parti lose or destroi evid in a suit an exampl of the
requir element for a neglig spoliat claim includ 1 exist of a potenti civil
action 2 a legal or contractu duti to preser ve evid which is relev to the potenti
civil action 3 destruct of that evid 4 signific impair in the abil to prove
the lawsuit 5 a causal relationship between the evid destruct and the inabl to
prove the lawsuit and 6 damag
perjuri and suborn of perjuri
perjuri is the will give of fals materi testimoni under oath and includ fals
claim that on cannot rememb a materi fact there ar three gener feder perjuri
law first section 1621 of titl 18 us code is the gener feder perjuri statut it make
it a crime to present materi fals statement under oath in feder proceed section
1621 appli in ani case in which a law of the unit state author an oath to be
administ all state have similar statut
second section 1623 of titl 18 us code make it a crime to present fals testimoni or
produc other fals inform under oath befor or ancillari to a feder court or grand
juri
third section 1622 of titl 18 us code crimin suborn of perjuri it make it a
feder crime to induc or caus anoth to commit perjuri a person violat section 1622 if
he induc anoth to commit perjuri in violat of either section 1621 or section 1623
the most obviou exampl of suborn of perjuri is tell a prospect wit to lie or
to conceal the conduct that is the subject of the investig similarli suborn also ha
been found to exist where a person counsel a wit to give testimoni the truth of which
he recklessli disregard even though he did not know for certain that the inform wa
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2449
untru suborn is onli an offens when the perjuri ha in fact occur proof of
suborn requir proof of the perjuri
