2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Obtaining Information About Employees/Fair Credit Reporting Act


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Fair Credit Reporting Act 
One of the primary statutes limiting access to information is the federal Fair Credit 
Reporting Act (FCRA). This statute regulates the dissemination of consumer information to 
third parties by consumer reporting agencies. Historically, the FCRA only applied to 
consumer credit reports, but due to amendments in 1997, the FCRA now applies to the 
gathering of many other types of information about an individual through third parties.  
 
The FCRA prohibits consumer reporting agencies from releasing personal information 
about an individual (e.g., information about the consumer’s character, general reputation, 
personal characteristics, or mode of living) to third parties without authorization, and limits 
disclosure of credit information to third parties with a purpose permitted by the statute. 
 
The FCRA applies in the employment context when an employer contracts with a third party 
(e.g., a private investigator or an online public records service) to collect credit information 
on current or potential employees. The FCRA, however, does not apply if the person or 
organization seeking the information gathers it directly from the source.  
 
If the FCRA does apply, it generally means that an examiner cannot use a third party to 
obtain certain information about a person unless that person has received certain notices and 
signed a consent form. The failure to do so can mean civil penalties.  
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.440  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
COVERAGE UNDER THE FCRA 
Coverage of the FCRA, however, turns largely on three terms: consumer, consumer reports, 
and consumer reporting agency.  
 
CONSUMER  
At its core, the FCRA protects those that fall within its definition of consumer. The Act 
defines a consumer as “an individual.” That is, only individuals have rights under the FCRA.   
 
CONSUMER REPORTS  
For the FCRA to apply, the information that is being obtained must be a “consumer report.” 
A consumer report  is defined as any written, oral, or other communication by a consumer-reporting 
agency bearing on a customer’s cred it worthiness, credit standing, character, 
general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living. 
 
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC), which is the federal agency responsible for 
enforcement of the FCRA, has interpreted this to mean basically any information collected 
on a person. It does not refer to just credit reports. It would also apply to public records 
such as criminal records and DMV searches. 
 
But in general, when faced with the question of whether a specific report is a consumer 
report, courts have focused on the purpose for which the person or organization collected 
the consumer information. 
 
CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCY  
Also, for the FCRA to apply, the information must be gathered from a “consumer reporting 
agency” (CRA). A CRA is defined as anyone who sells in formation about people. It could be 
an online service such as ChoicePoint or LexisNex is, or it could be a private investigator. 
 
COMPLYING WITH THE FCRA 
Before employers can get a consumer report about a current or prospective employee, they 
must comply with certain requirements; however, employers that are gathering such 
information in connection with a workplace investigation of misconduct may be excluded 
from the FCRA (see the section “Workplace Investigations of Fraud and Misconduct” 
below).  
 
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.441 
If the FCRA applies, the party seeking the information must comply with the following 
requirements:  
• Inform the consumer reporting agency that it will follow the FCRA. 
• Provide the individual with a separate written disclosure.  
• Obtain the individual’s written authorization.  
 
The disclosure and the authorization can be contained in the same document. 
 
If, however, an employer relies on a consumer report for an “adverse action” (e.g., denying a 
job application, reassigning or terminating an employee, or denying a promotion), it must 
provide the individual with a pre-adverse action disclosure before taking the adverse action. 
This disclosure must include a copy of the individual’s consumer report and a copy of “A 
Summary of Your Rights Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act,” which is available from the FTC. 
 
After adverse action is taken, the employer must notify the individual via an adverse action 
notice that the action has been taken. That notice must include the following: 
• Name, address, and phone number of the consumer reporting agency (CRA) that 
supplied the report 
• A statement that the CRA did not make the adverse action decision and cannot explain 
why the adverse action was taken 
• A notice of the individual’s right to di spute the accuracy or completeness of the 
information furnished, and his right to an additional free consumer report from the 
agency upon request within 60 days 
 
WORKPLACE INVESTIGATIONS OF FRAUD AND MISCONDUCT 
Furthermore, the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 amended the FCRA to 
exempt certain reports involving employee misconduct investigations. As a result of these 
amendments, an employer who uses a third party to conduct a workplace investigation no 
longer has to obtain the prior consent of an employee if the investigation involves suspected: 
• Misconduct 
• Violation of law or regulations 
• Violation of any pre-existing policy of the employer 
 
To qualify for this exception, the report from the third party must not be communicated to 
anyone other than the employer, an agent of the employer, or the government. 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.442  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If, however, adverse action is taken against the employee based on the results of the 
investigation, the FCRA still requires that the employer provide the employee with a 
summary of the report. Adverse action is broadly defined as any employment decision that 
adversely affects the employee. The summary must “contain the nature and substance of the 
communication upon which the adverse action is based.” However, it does not have to 
identify the individuals interviewed or the sources of the information. 
 
INVESTIGATIVE CONSUMER REPORT 
The FCRA also covers “investigative consumer reports.” Under the FCRA, an investigative 
consumer report is a report containing information about an individual’s character, general 
reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living that is obtained through personal 
interviews with neighbors, friends, or associates. If such a report is made, then other notices 
and consents may need to be obtained from the individual. For example, a separate 
disclosure must be used to inform the employee that an investigative consumer report is 
being obtained. The form must also state what sort of information will be collected. 
 
In addition, the company must disclose to the individual the nature and scope of the 
investigation (if he requests). If any adverse action is to be taken against the person, he can 
ask to receive a copy of the report before such action is taken. Further, the report given to 
the individual must not be redacted, meaning that if the report contains names of the people 
providing the information and what they reported, such information could not be deleted 
from the report. The person must also be given an opportunity to dispute the findings in the 
report. 
 
CONTACT YOUR ATTORNEY 
Unfortunately, for fraud examiners, the FCRA has created several more hoops that 
examiners must jump through before they can obtain certain types of information. The 
FCRA is not clearly written, but the Federal Trade Commission has published several letters 
giving its interpretation of the statute. These letters and the text of the FCRA can be 
obtained through their website at www.ftc.gov.  
 
The most important thing for the fraud examiner to remember is to consult his in-house or 
outside counsel. Your attorney will help you determine what procedures you need to 
institute to comply with the FCRA. 
 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.443 



:


fair credit report act
on of the primari statut limit access to inform is the feder fair credit
report act fcra thi statut regul the dissemin of consum inform to
third parti by consum report agenc histor the fcra onli appli to
consum credit report but due to amend in 1997 the fcra now appli to the
gather of mani other type of inform about an individu through third parti
the fcra prohibit consum report agenc from releas person inform
about an individu eg inform about the consum charact gener reput
person characterist or mode of live to third parti without author and limit
disclosur of credit inform to third parti with a purpos permit by the statut
the fcra appli in the employ context when an employ contract with a third parti
eg a privat investig or an onlin public record servic to collect credit inform
on current or potenti employe the fcra howev doe not appli if the person or
organ seek the inform gather it directli from the sourc
if the fcra doe appli it gener mean that an examin cannot us a third parti to
obtain certain inform about a person unless that person ha receiv certain notic and
sign a consent form the failur to do so can mean civil penalti
individu right dure examin law
2440 2011 fraud examin manual
coverag under the fcra
coverag of the fcra howev turn larg on three term consum consum report
and consum report agenc
consum
at it core the fcra protect those that fall within it definit of consum the act
defin a consum as an individu that is onli individu have right under the fcra
consum report
for the fcra to appli the inform that is be obtain must be a consum report
a consum report is defin as ani written oral or other commun by a consumerreport
agenc bear on a custom cred it worthi credit stand charact
gener reput person characterist or mode of live
the feder trade commiss ftc which is the feder agenc respons for
enforc of the fcra ha interpret thi to mean basic ani inform collect
on a person it doe not refer to just credit report it would also appli to public record
such as crimin record and dmv search
but in gener when face with the question of whether a specif report is a consum
report court have focus on the purpos for which the person or organ collect
the consum inform
consum report agenc
also for the fcra to appli the inform must be gather from a consum report
agenc cra a cra is defin as anyon who sell in format about peopl it could be
an onlin servic such as choicepoint or lexisnex is or it could be a privat investig
compli with the fcra
befor employ can get a consum report about a current or prospect employe thei
must compli with certain requir howev employ that ar gather such
inform in connect with a workplac investig of misconduct mai be exclud
from the fcra see the section workplac investig of fraud and misconduct
below
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2441
if the fcra appli the parti seek the inform must compli with the follow
requir
inform the consum report agenc that it will follow the fcra
provid the individu with a separ written disclosur
obtain the individu written author
the disclosur and the author can be contain in the same document
if howev an employ reli on a consum report for an advers action eg deni a
job applic reassign or termin an employe or deni a promot it must
provid the individu with a preadvers action disclosur befor take the advers action
thi disclosur must includ a copi of the individu consum report and a copi of a
summari of your right under the fair credit report act which is avail from the ftc
after advers action is taken the employ must notifi the individu via an advers action
notic that the action ha been taken that notic must includ the follow
name address and phone number of the consum report agenc cra that
suppli the report
a statement that the cra did not make the advers action decis and cannot explain
why the advers action wa taken
a notic of the individu right to di spute the accuraci or complet of the
inform furnish and hi right to an addit free consum report from the
agenc upon request within 60 dai
workplac investig of fraud and misconduct
furthermor the fair and accur credit transact act of 2003 amend the fcra to
exempt certain report involv employe misconduct investig as a result of these
amend an employ who us a third parti to conduct a workplac investig no
longer ha to obtain the prior consent of an employe if the investig involv suspect
misconduct
violat of law or regul
violat of ani preexist polici of the employ
to qualifi for thi except the report from the third parti must not be commun to
anyon other than the employ an agent of the employ or the govern
individu right dure examin law
2442 2011 fraud examin manual
if howev advers action is taken against the employe base on the result of the
investig the fcra still requir that the employ provid the employe with a
summari of the report advers action is broadli defin as ani employ decis that
advers affect the employe the summari must contain the natur and substanc of the
commun upon which the advers action is base howev it doe not have to
identifi the individu interview or the sourc of the inform
investig consum report
the fcra also cover investig consum report under the fcra an investig
consum report is a report contain inform about an individu charact gener
reput person characterist or mode of live that is obtain through person
interview with neighbor friend or associ if such a report is made then other notic
and consent mai need to be obtain from the individu for exampl a separ
disclosur must be us to inform the employe that an investig consum report is
be obtain the form must also state what sort of inform will be collect
in addit the compani must disclos to the individu the natur and scope of the
investig if he request if ani advers action is to be taken against the person he can
ask to receiv a copi of the report befor such action is taken further the report given to
the individu must not be redact mean that if the report contain name of the peopl
provid the inform and what thei report such inform could not be delet
from the report the person must also be given an opportun to disput the find in the
report
contact your attornei
unfortun for fraud examin the fcra ha creat sever more hoop that
examin must jump through befor thei can obtain certain type of inform the
fcra is not clearli written but the feder trade commiss ha publish sever letter
give it interpret of the statut these letter and the text of the fcra can be
obtain through their websit at wwwftcgov
the most import thing for the fraud examin to rememb is to consult hi inhous or
outsid counsel your attornei will help you determin what procedur you need to
institut to compli with the fcra
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2443
