2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Discharging a Suspected Wrongdoer


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Discharging a Suspected Wrongdoer 
Many employers, when confronted with a possible wrongdoer or an employee who refuses 
to cooperate in the investigation, immediately want to fire the employee. Whether the 
employee can or should be discharged depends on the facts of the case and the law in the 
employer’s state. Public employers are governed by stricter standards than private employers. 
Constitutional and statutory laws govern the investigation and termination of public 
employees. For example, a public employee cannot be terminated for exercising his Fifth 
Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
 
Employers are generally permitted to discipline or terminate an employee who refuses to 
cooperate with a reasonable request to provide information. But if the employee has an 
employment contract for a specified term or is employed under a collective bargaining 
agreement that requires the employer to have good cause to terminate employment, then the 
question will be whether the refusal to cooperate amounted to good cause for the termination. 
This, in turn, depends on the nature and reasonableness of the request for information, the 
reasons for the refusal and the overall impact that the refusal has on the investigation. A 
good cause requirement can also arise if the company’s policies and practices create an 
implied employment contract. 
 
In contrast, employees who do not have an employment contract that imposes a good cause 
requirement — so-called at-will employees — can be discharged at any time and for any reason; 
that is, an employer does not need good cause to discharge an at-will employee. In some 
states, employment is considered at will in the absence of an employment contract.   
 
An employer, however, does not have a right to fire any employee — including an at-will 
employee — if the firing contravenes a fundamental public policy (for instance, firing an 
employee who refuses to commit an illegal act) or if it violates the company’s established or 
customary disciplinary practices and procedures. For more information, see the Discharge in 
Violation of Public Policy section below. 
 
  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.450  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Good Cause 
Before discharging an employee, it is best to document in the employee’s file that the 
employer has “good cause” to terminate employment. Although there is no exact definition 
of “good cause,” there are several questions that the company should ask before terminating 
an employee: 
• Did the employee know that the conduct would be subject to discipline? 
• Was the rule the employee violated reasonably related to the safe, efficient, or orderly 
operation of the business? 
• Did the company investigate to discover whether the employee violated the rule? 
• Did the company conduct a fair and objective investigation? 
• Did the company obtain significant evidence of a violation? 
• Was the decision nondiscriminatory? 
• Was the discipline related to the seriousness of the offense and the prior record of the 
employee? 
 
If the company feels that discharge of the employee is likely, it should make sure that the 
employee’s actions and the company’s actions  are well documented and placed in the 
employee’s personnel file. 
 
Negligent Discharge 
At least one state has recognized the right of an employee to sue for the employer’s failure to 
properly investigate charges against the employee before discharging him. Most of the courts 
that have addressed this issue have refused to recognize the claim. 
 
Breach of Implied Contract 
Even if there is no express employment contract between an employer and employee, many 
states recognize that an implied contract may be created under certain circumstances. An 
implied contract arises out of the conduct of the parties, even without any formal written or 
oral agreement. If a court finds that an implied contract exists, then the employee who is a 
party to the contract can usually only be fired for good cause.  
 
Implied contracts can be found to exist even when the employer was not aware that there 
was a contract. In fact, many states now recognize that an implied contract between 
employers and employees can arise out of employee handbooks. Handbook provisions 
might limit the right to discharge for “just cause,” and the issue might be whether the 
employer has enough evidence of wrongdoing to constitute “just cause.” 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.451 
Breach of the Duty of Good Faith and Fair Dealing 
A few states recognize a duty on the part of the employer to deal with its employees fairly 
and in good faith. This duty is implied in most contracts, including contracts of employment. 
The scope of this duty might also be shaped from specific obligations found in the 
provisions of an employee handbook or from company personnel policies or practices. 
Documenting that the employer had good cause to terminate the employee should defeat 
this claim. 
 
Discharge in Violation of Public Policy 
Some states recognize a public policy exception to at-will employment. Under this exception, 
an employer does not have the right to discharge an at-will employee if it contravenes a 
fundamental public policy. To qualify under this exception, the employee must prove that 
his conduct is favored by a relevant public policy and that the employer retaliated against 
him for engaging in this “protected” activity. Agai n, to counter this claim, the employer will 
need to show that it had good cause to fire the employee and that it was not retaliating 
against the employee because of the protected conduct. 
 
For example, if an employee is fired because he supported a particular political candidate in 
the last election, a court or jury might find that his termination is in violation of the general 
public policy allowing people to vote for whomever they please. But if the employee was 
conducting fund-raising activities on company time, the company would likely have good 
cause to terminate the employee and such termination would not be in retaliation of the 
employee’s support of a particular candidate. 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.501 



:


discharg a suspect wrongdoer
mani employ when confront with a possibl wrongdoer or an employe who refus
to cooper in the investig immedi want to fire the employe whether the
employe can or should be discharg depend on the fact of the case and the law in the
employ state public employ ar govern by stricter standard than privat employ
constitut and statutori law govern the investig and termin of public
employe for exampl a public employe cannot be termin for exercis hi fifth
amend right against selfincrimin
employ ar gener permit to disciplin or termin an employe who refus to
cooper with a reason request to provid inform but if the employe ha an
employ contract for a specifi term or is emploi under a collect bargain
agreement that requir the employ to have good caus to termin employ then the
question will be whether the refus to cooper amount to good caus for the termin
thi in turn depend on the natur and reason of the request for inform the
reason for the refus and the overal impact that the refus ha on the investig a
good caus requir can also aris if the compani polici and practic creat an
impli employ contract
in contrast employe who do not have an employ contract that impos a good caus
requir socal atwil employe can be discharg at ani time and for ani reason
that is an employ doe not need good caus to discharg an atwil employe in some
state employ is consid at will in the absenc of an employ contract
an employ howev doe not have a right to fire ani employe includ an atwil
employe if the fire contraven a fundament public polici for instanc fire an
employe who refus to commit an illeg act or if it violat the compani establish or
customari disciplinari practic and procedur for more inform see the discharg in
violat of public polici section below
individu right dure examin law
2450 2011 fraud examin manual
good caus
befor discharg an employe it is best to document in the employe file that the
employ ha good caus to termin employ although there is no exact definit
of good caus there ar sever question that the compani should ask befor termin
an employe
did the employe know that the conduct would be subject to disciplin
wa the rule the employe violat reason relat to the safe effici or orderli
oper of the busi
did the compani investig to discov whether the employe violat the rule
did the compani conduct a fair and object investig
did the compani obtain signific evid of a violat
wa the decis nondiscriminatori
wa the disciplin relat to the serious of the offens and the prior record of the
employe
if the compani feel that discharg of the employe is like it should make sure that the
employe action and the compani action ar well document and place in the
employe personnel file
neglig discharg
at least on state ha recogn the right of an employe to sue for the employ failur to
properli investig charg against the employe befor discharg him most of the court
that have address thi issu have refus to recogn the claim
breach of impli contract
even if there is no express employ contract between an employ and employe mani
state recogn that an impli contract mai be creat under certain circumst an
impli contract aris out of the conduct of the parti even without ani formal written or
oral agreement if a court find that an impli contract exist then the employe who is a
parti to the contract can usual onli be fire for good caus
impli contract can be found to exist even when the employ wa not awar that there
wa a contract in fact mani state now recogn that an impli contract between
employ and employe can aris out of employe handbook handbook provis
might limit the right to discharg for just caus and the issu might be whether the
employ ha enough evid of wrongdo to constitut just caus
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2451
breach of the duti of good faith and fair deal
a few state recogn a duti on the part of the employ to deal with it employe fairli
and in good faith thi duti is impli in most contract includ contract of employ
the scope of thi duti might also be shape from specif oblig found in the
provis of an employe handbook or from compani personnel polici or practic
document that the employ had good caus to termin the employe should defeat
thi claim
discharg in violat of public polici
some state recogn a public polici except to atwil employ under thi except
an employ doe not have the right to discharg an atwil employe if it contraven a
fundament public polici to qualifi under thi except the employe must prove that
hi conduct is favor by a relev public polici and that the employ retali against
him for engag in thi protect activ agai n to counter thi claim the employ will
need to show that it had good caus to fire the employe and that it wa not retali
against the employe becaus of the protect conduct
for exampl if an employe is fire becaus he support a particular polit candid in
the last elect a court or juri might find that hi termin is in violat of the gener
public polici allow peopl to vote for whomev thei pleas but if the employe wa
conduct fundrais activ on compani time the compani would like have good
caus to termin the employe and such termin would not be in retali of the
employe support of a particular candid
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2501
