2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


DIGITAL FORENSICS 
 
Conducting an Investigation Involving Computers 
The increasing usage of the Internet and other technology in all aspects of our personal and 
professional lives has created new opportunities for technology to be used in perpetrating 
almost every type of fraud, and in most fraud cases, investigators gather some type of digital 
evidence. 
 
Fraud examiners must therefore be prepared to address the myriad issues related to 
examinations involving digital evidence.  
 
Computer Investigation Versus Computer Forensics 
While at first, the term computer investigation may appear synonymous with computer 
forensics, there is an important distinction between the two. An investigator leading an 
investigation into a crime that involves a computer is not necessarily and, in most cases, 
should not be the forensic examiner. It is important to keep these areas separate. Combining 
the two, especially in cases in which the suspect is already named, invites questions about the 
objectivity of the forensic examination. It could also subject investigators to unwelcome 
scrutiny regarding whether they suppressed exculpatory evidence that may have been found 
during an examination by a more objective investigator. 
 
Digital Evidence 
Digital evidence, when boiled down to its basics, is simply binary data (ones and zeroes) that 
is interpreted by the computer. Everything that is digitally stored is made up of these ones 
and zeroes, from the programs themselves to the data with which the programs interact. 
Interpreters built into the program show these ones and zeroes as hex code. This hex code is 
then translated onto the page or website seen on the computer screen. 
 
As the professional use computer technology increases, so does the criminal use. Financial 
crimes and frauds committed are probably the most common types of computer crimes 
committed. The investigation of financial crimes generally requires a level of expertise not 
commonly held by all investigators; therefore,  there is additional knowledge and experience 
required when conducting a forensic computer examination in a financial or fraud case.  
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.702   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There are three types of situations in which computer evidence is generally discovered: (1) 
computers as the target of crime, (2) computers as the instrument of crime, and (3) 
computers as the repository of evidence. 
 
Computers themselves can be the targets of crime. Crimes committed against computers 
include computer and computer-component theft, system intrusions, software piracy, and 
software theft. 
 
Computers can also be used to facilitate a crime. When this occurs, the computer is known 
as the tool or instrument  of crime. In such cases, as one would expect, examiners commonly 
encounter computers that have been used in offenses such as the solicitation of minors in 
chat rooms, check fraud, and counterfeiting. 
 
Generally speaking, in all computer investigations the examiner attempts to locate the 
storage of potential digital evidence, in one form or another, on the computer system. The 
computer system involved in the investigation is a potential repository of evidence whether 
the user intended to store an item or not. Therefore, the examiner is interested in 
incriminating evidence that the user intentionally or unintentionally stored on the computer 
system. 
 
Integrity of Digital Evidence 
Electronic evidence is more volatile than paper information, and because it can be easily 
altered or destroyed, it must be handled properly. For example, computer files can be altered 
simply through the normal startup process. Most  of the Microsoft operating systems, such as 
Windows XP, change the time and date stamps on a number of files during startup and 
delete a number of temporary files during the shutdown process. These pieces of 
information could be critical to the investigation. 
 
The destruction of digital evidence through improper handling can result in a finding of 
spoliation of evidence by a judge or can raise questions about the alteration of exculpatory 
evidence by the defense.  
 
Additionally, if a judge determines that the authenticity of the evidence cannot be 
satisfactorily made, then he may rule that the evidence is inadmissible. Although digital 
evidence is different from tangible evidence, the rules regarding its admissibility in court is 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.703 
really no different from the admissibility of any other type of evidence. To be admissible, 
digital evidence must be: 
• Relevant  
• Supported by a foundation for its introduction into court 
• Legally obtained 
• Properly identified 
• Properly preserved 
 
Therefore, should the fraud examiner discover digital evidence, he must be able to state 
unequivocally that the evidence was not changed in any way by his actions. This requires that 
strict forensic methodologies be followed to satisfy the stringent evidentiary standards 
necessary to ensure the integrity of the evidence “beyond a reasonable doubt” for 
presentation in court. 
 
Forensic Experts 
Also, when conducting an examination involving computers, the examiner should determine 
whether an outside forensic examiner is needed or whether the expertise is available in-house. 
Some organizations have their own in-house personnel, whom they have trained and 
outfitted with the proper equipment and software tools to conduct the examination and 
analyze digital evidence while others may prefer the use of an outside examiner who will be 
able to conduct a thorough examination, prepare a proper report, and deliver expert 
testimony if needed in legal proceedings. 
 
Sometimes information retrieval is as easy as obtaining a warrant and searching the hard 
drive of the target computer. But many fraudsters anticipate their exposure and delete 
incriminating files from their machines. In these instances, it is important to know that there 
are a variety of ways of recovering deleted or hidden data from a target computer and its 
peripherals. 
 
A computer-forensic examiner is a trained professional who is capable of analyzing digital 
media at the hexadecimal level. The hexadecimal level means that every sector and all the 
bytes in those sectors are available for viewing. This includes deleted files, both purposefully 
deleted and those that were deleted through various Windows-automated processes. This 
can also include temporary auto-save files, print-spool files, deleted e-mails, and link files. 
The hexadecimal level also contains various items found in restore points and registry files 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.704   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that define hardware, such as external drives and websites visited, in addition to the 
document revisions and files created and maintained by the user. 
 
The increased sophistication of Windows allows the computer system to store more 
information about how people use their computers. The forensic examiner will be able to 
uncover a large amount of data that relates to the use of a computer, what is or has been 
stored on it, and the details about the user. In Micr osoft’s effort to “be all” to the user, it has 
incorporated ways to make computer use more secure, such as offering encryption and other 
methods to protect data from unwanted access. In the future, these types of innovations will 
stall the examiner and will sometimes successfully prevent system access. However, these 
encryption packages are not always foolproof. The Encrypted File System offered by 
Microsoft has in fact been cracked by a number  of password-cracking software makers. In 
addition to encryption files, other encryption algorithms exist that are easily installed and can 
be used to encrypt the entire hard drive. In situations such as this, it becomes necessary for 
the examiner to be able to identify whether a drive is encrypted before seizing and 
disconnecting the system. 
 
Moreover, computer-forensic examiners have special tools and software designed to 
facilitate a thorough and legally sufficient analysis of items that contain digital evidence. It is 
important to allow a trained examiner to conduct a proper seizure and examination on a 
piece of evidence so the investigator will have the best chance of using that evidence in a 
legal proceeding. Whether an agency or company is defending against an unlawful 
termination suit or filing a criminal complaint, it is vital that the digital evidence is handled 
properly. 
 
Furthermore, whether technical specialists are needed to assist with an investigation will 
depend on the complexity of the examination required. The more technical the nature of the 
crime, the more technical and specialized the analytical skills required. Some computer 
investigations, however, do not require extremely sophisticated technical skills. For example, 
in cases where the computer is the instrument used to commit the crime (e.g., scams 
involving payroll applications, cooking the books, fraudulent electronic funds transfers, 
insider trading, etc.), the fraud examiner need only know how to search a database and 
analyze the results. 
 
Additionally, this determination will depend on the examiners skill levels. Therefore, an 
examiner conducting an examination involving computers must have a basic understanding 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.705 
of his skill levels and must be aware of his limitations in the field of computer technology 
because, in many instances, one or more technical specialists are needed to assist with an 
investigation.  
 
Within the computer forensics field, there are several different types of special experts: 
• Operating and file system experts : These experts are proficient in certain operating systems 
(e.g., Windows 7, Unix, Solaris, OS X, or AS400) and the various file systems they 
employ (e.g., Joliet, NTFS, FAT, VFS, Ex t2), and they have the ability to convey 
operational characteristics and observe artifacts. 
• Data recovery experts : These experts operate clean rooms designed to magnetically extract 
information from a damaged media source. Using special tools and equipment, these 
experts can disassemble a hard disk, separate the platters, and extract and reassemble the 
information for subsequent examination. 
• Forensic accounting experts : A forensic accountant can prov ide various services, including 
audits, accountant performance reviews, and examinations of financial documents for 
fraud, misconduct, or industry standard violations. 
• Tape and archival extraction experts : These are experts in extracting information from tape or 
other system backups. Typically, backup solutions archive data in proprietary formats, 
making extraction very cumbersome. 
• Intrusion and malicious code experts : These experts specialize in investigating computer 
network intrusions. Specialists can determine attack vectors, the tools employed, what 
occurred during access, and what, if anything, was taken. 
 
But given the diversity of computer-related fraud, no person can be an expert in all aspects 
of computer technology. 
 
Locating Evidence 
To conduct a successful examination, examiners must know what to look for and where to 
look for it, but this can be difficult because digital data can be stored large volumes and in a 
number of different locations.  
 
The efficiency of computer technology has allowed users to create more voluminous pieces 
of data than was once possible. Computer hard drives are packed with digital data, and data 
storage now exceeds gigabytes. Therefore, it is necessary to reference larger storage 
capacities. Here is a chart that will help: 
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.706   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Name  Abbr.  Size  
Kilo K 2^10 = 1,024 
Mega M 2^20 = 1,048,576 
Giga G 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 
Tera T 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 
Peta P 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 
Exa E 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 
Zetta Z 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 
Yotta Y 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 
 
Furthermore, digital evidence may be located in a number of different locations. In addition 
to being stored on computers, evidence will be located in any form of technology that can be 
used to transmit or store data. Therefore, it is also important to investigate any suspect 
workstation, including any peripherals or other portable media devices that can be used to 
transmit or store data, and the information stored on the company’s network. 
 
Workstation 
In addition to investigating the suspect’s mainframe, it is also important to investigate the 
suspect’s workstation, including any peripherals or other portable media devices that can be 
used to transmit or store data. As data moves to and from peripheral devices, it leaves 
evidence of its presence and sometimes leaves full copies of its contents.  
 
Therefore, fraud examiners should consider the many different types of peripherals that 
might contain evidence. Items to be seized might include any or all of the following items 
listed below, depending upon the nature of the fraud case. 
 
PRINTERS 
Examiners must also be aware that it might be possible to recover previously printed 
documents. Although the odds of recovery can be low depending on a variety of factors, 
understanding how retrieval can be achieved can be of great value to the investigator.  
 
In addition to using printer-spool files to recover previously printed documents, many 
printers have internal hard drives that may contain information relevant to a fraud 
examination. In general, any information sent to and stored by a printer is recoverable unless 
the printer has overwritten the data.  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.707 
Furthermore, some printers have memory buffer — temporary storage area of jobs waiting to be 
printed — which may also contain important information. Information contained in memory 
buffer, however, is generally limited to recently created and stored data.  
 
COPIERS AND SCANNERS 
Like some printers, copiers and other multifunction machines may have internal storage 
devices that store relevant data. In fact, almost every copier built since 2002 has a hard drive 
that stores images of documents the machines have copied, scanned, or e-mailed. Some 
copiers store user access records and a history of copies made. And, as with most file 
systems, it may be possible to retrieve information from a copier’s hard drive that has been 
deleted. As a result, copiers may be brimming with important information.  
 
FAX MACHINES 
Although some kinds of stand-alone fax machines simply scan and send data without storing 
it, like many printers and copiers, some fax machines store faxing data on their own internal 
hard drive. This data may remain in the machine’s memory until overwritten.  
 
BACKUP TAPES  
Backup tapes are a type of removable media that stores data and can be easily removed from 
a computer system or device. Most computer users archive their activities on backup tapes 
or some other form of external storage devices, and most companies use backup tapes to 
store old data, including e-mail data, that was once stored on their servers.  
 
REMOVABLE STORAGE DEVICES 
In addition to backup tapes, a suspect’s removable storage devices should be examined. 
Removable storage devices such as CDs, DVDs, USB flash drives (also known as thumb 
drives), mp3 players, and various other devices provide users with the ability to store large 
amounts of data. Such devices can be used to facilitate a variety of frauds. They provide 
users with the ability to store files that go undetected by anyone accessing the computer. 
Removable media can also be used to store copies of files containing sensitive information in 
order to facilitate unapproved use.  
 
SMART PHONES 
The proliferation of smart phones has made them an extremely valuable source of 
information. Smart phones (e.g., the iPhone and Blackberry) are cell phones that also have 
the ability to store personal data, search the Internet, check e-mail, instant message (IM), 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.708   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
make video calls, download/upload content to and from the Internet, take pictures, and 
record video. The information that can be stored on these small devices can be very 
important in many cases.  
 
Network 
In addition to searching for evidence on the suspect’s operating system and workstation, it is 
also important to examine information stored on company servers. A wealth of information, 
which is separate from a user’s workstation, may be stored on company servers. Data stored 
on company networks may include documents posted to a suspect’s own home directory on 
the network; collaborative work saved to a shared folder or directory; e-mail messages that 
have been sent, received, deleted, or archived; calendars; contact lists; and so on.   
 
Law Enforcement Assistance 
Before conducting a forensic examination, examiners must consider whether a crime has in 
fact been committed. If, at the beginning of the investigation, it is determined that the victim 
company will make a formal referral to law enforcement or prosecuting agency, then the 
authorities must be notified before the investigation begins to determine whether law 
enforcement personnel should participate in the examination. In some jurisdictions, an 
examiner from the law enforcement community may not be available. 
 
  
Computer Investigations and Computer Forensics 
 
Preparation 
Before the examiner can seize evidence, he must take certain steps to help ensure that the 
evidence is admissible: he must determine whether an employee has a privacy interest in the 
item(s) to be searched, he must take certain steps to prepare for an investigation that 
involves the use of a search warrant, and he must take steps to ensure that his equipment is 
sound (e.g., only use licensed software applications, independently validate all forensic 
equipment, and maintain the validation on file). 
 
Privacy Issues  
Before searching and seizing an item, the examiner must determine whether an employee has 
a privacy interest in the item(s) to be searched. In every case where it becomes necessary to 
seize a computer or other device capable of storing digital evidence, the investigator should 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.709 
consult with legal counsel. It is imperative that legal counsel be involved in the seizure 
process and be knowledgeable of case law pertaining to workplace seizures.  
 
Case law governing workplace seizures in the private sector is different from case law 
governing seizures in the government workplace, but generally, it all comes down to the 
employee’s expectation of privacy. Although the Fourth Amendment constitutional right 
guarantees protection against unreasonable searches and seizures, typically, the Fourth 
Amendment does not protect private sector employees.  
 
In the private sector, disputes over unreasonable searches and seizures usually come down 
on the side of the corporation. The case law in the private sector tends to support the 
argument that corporations have the right to decrease the level of privacy employees can 
expect with regard to workplace searches of computers and other digital media. Thus, 
companies to adopt a written policy establishing that all computer systems (e.g., the Internet, 
e-mail communications, hardware, and files) are solely for business use and that the 
company reserves the absolute right to review, audit, and disclose all matters sent over the 
system or placed in storage. And as long as written policies are in effect that support 
management’s actions, the corporation can avoid liability for violating an employee’s right to 
privacy. 
 
Additionally, when conducting an internal investigation or inquiry into allegations of 
misconduct or illegal activities in both the private and governmental sector, it is important to 
be aware of what the employee policy protects against and what it allows. It should also be 
determined whether steps have been taken to nullify any expectations of privacy. 
 
Governmental employees, whether local, state, or federal, have been provided special 
protections that do not generally apply to employees in the private sector. In all cases where 
it becomes necessary to seize a governmental employee’s computer or other digital device, it 
is imperative that the investigator consult with the entity’s legal counsel.  
 
Bryan R. Lemons, Branch Chief of the Legal Di vision Office of Training Operations at the 
FLETC training center in Georgia, has written an excellent paper on the subject of 
governmental workplace searches and seizures, in which he summarizes a number of cases 
where the courts have rendered opinions on governmental workplace searches and seizures. 
In his paper, Mr. Lemons defined the term workplace to include those areas and items that are 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.710   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
related to work and are generally within the employer’s control, which includes file cabinets, 
desks, and computers. 
 
Case law on this issue has attempted to answer several questions. Can a government 
employee have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the workplace? If so, what standards 
should be followed to ensure that a supervisor is conducting a lawful search of an 
employee’s work space? Is there a lesser standa rd employed in the case of mere suspicion? 
 
The Supreme Court case of O’Conner v. Ortega  was the hallmark case in the argument about 
the reasonableness of searches and seizures, but there were a number of other issues that 
were decided at the lower-court level. In O’Conner, the Supreme Court held that “the 
realities of the workplace” made some exp ectations of privacy among public employees 
unreasonable when the intrusion was by a supervisor rather than a law enforcement official. 
Work-related searches, the Court found, were “m erely incident to the primary business of 
the agency,” and a warrant requirement would “seriously disrupt the routine conduct of 
business.” The Court thus held that a standard  of “reasonableness” was sufficient for work-
 related intrusions by public employers. 
 
To simplify the decision-making process when considering a workplace search, Lemons 
explains that there is a two-part analysis that will offer some guidance. The first part requires 
a determination of the employee’s reasonable ex pectation of privacy in the area to be 
searched. Second, if a reasonable expectation of privacy does exist, then any search that 
occurs in the workplace must be reasonable under the given circumstances.  
 
In United States v. Gonzalez 4, the court dealt with the search of a government employee’s 
personal belongings. In this case, the employee (Gonzalez), as a condition of employment, 
signed a paper that indicated, among other things, his personal belongings might be searched 
in an effort to discourage employee theft. Gonzalez worked at a military exchange. He was 
stopped one day during his departure from the store and his backpack was searched by store 
security. The search revealed that Gonzalez’s backpack contained merchandise stolen from 
the store. On appeal, Gonzalez claimed that his Fourth Amendment rights had been 
violated. The court looked to the paper that was originally signed by Gonzalez and stated 
                                                 
4  United States v. Gonzalez, 300 F.3d 1048 (9th Cir. 2002). 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.711 
that Gonzalez was put on notice that his personal belongings might be searched and as a 
result his expectation of privacy was limited by his knowledge of store policy. 
 
In Gossmeyer v. McDonald, the court dealt with the question of whether there was a reasonable 
expectation of privacy regarding personally purchased items that were used to store work-
 related materials in the government workplace. In this case, a local detective received an 
anonymous tip from one of Gossmeyer’s coworkers that Gossmeyer was storing illegal 
pornographic material in a storage container that was purchased at Gossmeyer’s own 
expense. The local detective relayed the information to Gossmeyer’s supervisor who 
proceeded to search Gossmeyer’s workplace, including the storage cabinet. The supervisor 
found evidence to substantiate the allegation but no charges were ever filed. Gossmeyer filed 
a lawsuit alleging that her Fourth Amendment rights had been violated by the search of her 
personal property. The court disagreed, stating that the cabinet was not merely an item of 
personal property such as a purse or briefcase brought into the workplace, but that it was 
being used to house work-related materials and therefore, the cabinet was a part of the 
workplace and not a part of her personal domain. 
 
In O’Conner, the Supreme Court ruled that it is possible to reduce the expectation of privacy 
on the part of government employees, for example, in the form of a written notice signed by 
the employee that gives the employer the right to access or inspect information stored on the 
employee’s computer. In the case of United States v. Simons,  the defendant, Simons, was found 
to have visited several illicit websites that were prohibited by agency policy. The policy 
specifically prohibited access to unlawful material and further prohibited any personal use of 
the agency’s Internet. A remote audit of the hard drive on Simons’s government-owned 
computer revealed that the computer contained several illegal images. In Simons’s challenge 
of the search under the Fourth Amendment, he claimed that his rights were violated when 
the hard drive was searched remotely. The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals held that Simons 
had no legitimate expectation of privacy because of the agency’s Internet use policy. The 
policy’s language placed employees on notice of  their diminished expectation of privacy. 
 
When determining whether to conduct a search of government-workplace computers it is 
important to determine whether a reasonable expectation of privacy exists. To answer that 
question, one must look at whether there was a prior notice that diminishes the expectation. 
One can also look at the policy practices of the agency. Having a policy and only selectively 
enforcing it tends to diminish the policy to the point that it may not negate the privacy 
expectation. One must also look to the openness and accessibility of the workplace to other 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.712   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employees. Finally, was there a written waiver of the employee’s expectati on of privacy? If an 
expectation of privacy does not exist, then the Fourth Amendment will not apply. If it is 
determined that an expectation of privacy does exist, then what is the purpose behind the 
search? Is it a work-related search, such as looking for a missing file, or is it due to an 
allegation of misconduct? If it is a work-related  search, the search must be justified based on 
the overall circumstances; it must be justified in its inception and permissible in scope. If the 
search under these conditions is solely for the purpose of a criminal investigation, then a 
probable cause warrant will generally be necessary in addition to the employee consent. 
 
It should also be noted that personal digital devices are becoming more common in the 
workplace. Employees often carry smart phones, thumb drives, or MP3 players into the 
office. Each of these devices is capable of storing large amounts of data and can easily be 
used to steal a company’s intellectual property. Because these devices are often purchased by 
the employee for personal use, a search warrant may be needed to seize or search these 
devices because employees may have a “reasonable expectation of privacy” in these types of 
personal devices. Therefore, it is extremely important to include such devices in the 
company’s search policy. The policy should cl early state that any personal electronic devices, 
including laptops, cell phones, smart phones, thumb drives, MP3 players, and so forth, are 
(just like handbags and briefcases) subject to search if brought onto the company’s premises. 
 
Search Warrants  
If, however, a search warrant is required, additional considerations must be addressed. A 
search warrant  is a court order that grants authorities the right to search a premises or property 
for information pertinent to the case. 
 
All warrants must satisfy the requirements under the Fourth Amendment. That is, all 
warrants for searches must be judicially sanctioned and supported by “probable cause,” and 
they must “particularly” describe the place to be searched or things to be seized. Only a 
judge can issue a search warrant and only law enforcement can seek and serve a search 
warrant. 
 
To obtain a valid search warrant, law enforcement officers prepare affidavits. The affidavits 
will detail the probable cause or legal reasoning behind the request for the warrant. Often 
law enforcement personnel will need guidance from the fraud examiner as they conduct pre-
 search preparation and construct the search warrant affidavit.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.713 
But because the requirements for these affidavits have been affected by technological 
innovations, fraud examiners must consider several new issues must when constructing a 
search warrant affidavit involving digital evidence. The fraud examiner must know how to 
write a warrant to seize tangible property that contains intangible evidence. Further, the 
fraud examiner must be allowed to convert that evidence into a human-readable form (e.g., 
storage devices such as disks, which contain information that cannot be viewed without the 
aid of some electronic device). Likewise, the warrant must allow for the ability to seize data 
files pertinent to the case that are mixed with data files, which have nothing to do with the 
case but reside on the same storage device.  
 
Additionally, the warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizure of all 
computer evidence relevant to the investigation, but narrow enough to exclude all material 
that is not, and this can be an extremely difficult standard to meet at times and might depend 
on the magistrate to whom the affidavit is presented. However, with some thought fraud 
examiners should be able to justify the search and seizure of everything that they need to 
complete the search for evidence. Items to be seized might contain any or all of the 
following, depending on the nature of the fraud case: 
• Computers 
• Computer components 
• Computer peripherals 
• Word-processing equipment 
• Modems 
• Monitors 
• Printers 
• Plotters 
• Optical scanners 
• Data storage devices 
? Magnetic 
? Laser 
? Optical 
? Tape 
? PCMCIA 
? Portable drives, such as flash or thumb drives 
? Cables, wiring, cords 
? Storage media 
? Disks 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.714   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Magnetic tape (reels) 
? PCMCIA RAM cards 
? CD-ROMs 
? Magnetic/optical disks 
? Digital audio tape (DAT) 
? Personal data managers 
? Flash RAM cards (consider digital-camera storage) 
? Computer programs 
? Operating systems 
? Application software 
? Utility programs 
? Compilers 
? Interpreters 
? Documents 
? Manuals 
? Printouts 
? File listings 
 
Moreover, to satisfy the “particularity” requirement of the Fourth Amendment, the affidavit 
must be able to justify each item that might contain evidence. For example, stating that “all 
printers” should be seized might be overly broad unless the fraud examiner can justify the 
need for each specific printer. But with some thought, fraud examiners should be able to 
justify the search and seizure of everything they need to complete the search for evidence.  
 
Also, all related documentation should also be seized with the target computer system, and, 
therefore, it should be covered by the search warrant’s wording. Such documentation is 
important because it may be critical when analyzing the system’s hardware and software. 
Documents could indicate system changes that will help to avoid damaging the system. 
Documents could also contain other helpful pieces of information (e.g., the fact that access 
control products have been added to a system might be a helpful piece of information).  
 
Thus, obtaining as much intelligence as possible regarding the location of the potential 
evidence is very desirable before writing the search warrant affidavit. Considerations include: 
• Determine the type of computer systems that will be involved in the search. What 
operating system is used? Are the computers networked together? 
• Determine how many people will be needed to conduct the search.  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.715 
• If expert witnesses with a specific expertise are required during the search, identify and 
clear them before the search warrant is written. Depending on the circumstances, their 
credentials should possibly be included in the warrant affidavit before they are approved 
by the magistrate issuing the search warrant.  
• Determine the resources that will be required to conduct the search. If a great deal of 
equipment is to be seized, consider how the equipment will be transported from the 
location. Obtain sufficient boxes, labels, bags, and other supplies at this time. 
• Consider the timing of the search.  
 
Four Phases 
There are several definitions and different schools of thought for investigations involving 
computer forensics, but all practitioners in the field will agree that investigations typically 
involve four phases: seizure, image acquisition, analysis, and reporting and testifying.  
 
Each phase is dependent on the phases that come before it. For instance, if the seizure phase 
is handled incorrectly, then each of the following phases can suffer and ultimately render the 
reporting and testifying phase moot. 
 
Seizing Digital Evidence 
Perhaps the most critical step in the forensics process is how data is collected or acquired. 
Acquisition of digital evidence must be completed in such a way as to ensure that all relevant 
evidence is seized and secured in a forensically sound manner so that the evidence is not 
tainted or destroyed.  
 
In fact, there are a number of practical considerations and procedures to employ when the 
decision is made to go forward with a computer seizure. One of the primary considerations 
that is often neglected is debriefing the subject, which involves asking the subject for 
passwords and whether any encrypted data exists on the target computer. 
 
The Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence (SWGDE) from the Organization of 
American States has published a document, titled Best Practices for Computer Forensics, 
which provides a good foundation for digital forensics examiners. Although a complete 
                                                 
5  Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence of the National Center for Forensic Science. Best Practices for 
Computer Forensics V2, 2006. http://www.oas.org/juridico/s panish/cyb_best_pract.pdf.  
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.716   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
review of the entire document is beyond the scope of this course, several guidelines deserve 
review. According to the SWGDE, examiners should adhere to the following guidelines: 
• Before obtaining evidence, ensure that there is legal authority to seize evidence and 
review the data associated with the evidence. This may require obtaining a warrant in a 
criminal matter or ensuring that internal policies authorize seizure for an internal 
investigation.  
• If removing evidence from the scene is impractical, copy or image the items of evidence 
according to established procedures. 
• Remove all suspects, witnesses, and bystanders from the proximity of the digital 
evidence. Keep in mind that remote access to computers can put potential evidence at 
risk even if no person has physical access to the computer. Also, consider the wide range 
of mobile data storage devices today (e.g., USB flash drives) that can be hidden. 
• Ensure that no suspects, witnesses, and bystanders possess any items containing 
potential evidence.   
• Thoroughly and systematically search the scene for potential evidence. Once again, 
consider the wide range of data storage media and devices.  
 
Unless completely unavoidable, data should not be analyzed on the machine from which it 
was collected. Instead, the examiner should make forensically sound copies of all data 
storage devices — primarily hard drives — and analyze the data on these copies.  
 
To ensure that a machine can be fully analyzed, the examiner should take the following 
steps: 
• Examine and document the machine’s surroundings. 
• Secure the evidence. 
• Power down carefully. 
• Inspect for traps. 
• Implement a system to manage the evidence. 
 
EXAMINE AND DOCUMENT THE MACHINE’S SURROUNDINGS 
The first step in the evidence collection process is to examine and document the machine’s 
surroundings. This includes collecting all printouts, disks, notes, and other physical evidence 
for further analysis. Document the scene with photographs or a diagram, depending on the 
complexity of the setup, remembering that it may be a year or longer before testimony about 
what the office looked like on the day of the seizure will be asked for in a legal proceeding.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.717 
When documenting the condition of the evidence, the examiner should consider: 
• Documenting what is on the screen, if the system is on. 
• Documenting any processes that are currently running. 
• Taking photographs of the various views of the equipment and media to document any 
damage or defects. 
• Taking photographs of the equipment’s physical connections. 
• Making a drawing of the location to document the layout and relative locations from 
which evidence was seized. 
 
Additionally, because many people have a habit of writing down or recording their 
passwords near their computers, examiners should look around for notes that may appear to 
be passwords. This may aid in discovering passwords needed to access encrypted data if the 
subject of the investigation is being uncooperative. 
 
Take good notes on the machine’s state at the ti me of the seizure. Record the time and date 
that the system was seized and the personnel involved in the seizure. The status of the 
system should also be noted. Was it on, off, or on standby? Was there anything unusual 
attached to the system? Was there any obvious damage? Did any files have to be saved? 
Also, if the computer was active, record any open applications. Make sure to start a chain of 
custody document and note each person and storage location through which each piece of 
evidence passes. 
 
In addition to documenting the machine’s state at the time of seizure, the examiners should 
document any serial numbers and other potential identifying markings (e.g., manufacturer, 
model number, asset tracking number, etc.), and he should photograph and diagram the 
system’s entire configuration. 
 
SECURE THE EVIDENCE 
When securing a computer system, follow the two golden rules. The first rule is, if the 
computer is off, don’t turn it on. Also, if a comp uter is on, an investigator will not want it to 
go through its normal shutdown routines because Windows is very good about cleaning up 
after itself. A number of temporary files will be deleted and possibly overwritten during a 
normal shutdown, and some of these files may be important to the investigation. In most 
cases, the investigator should simply unplug a running computer. Once the investigator takes 
possession of the computer he should not allow anyone access it, with the exception of a 
trained forensic examiner. 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.718   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There are other reasons to conduct the seizure in this way. By preserving the state of the 
system at the time of seizure one can help to defeat an argument by opposing counsel that 
exculpatory information was somehow tainted or erased due to mishandling of the system. If 
one bit is changed in the system’s data, it will ha ve a completely different hash value; that is 
to say, it would be different than the original, even though the average person may not be 
able to recognize any difference at all.  
 
All data is composed of bits (binary digits). It takes eight bits to make one byte, which is 
what we are commonly used to hearing when we talk about storage capacity, such as 256 
megabytes. One megabyte equals 1024 kilobytes, and one kilobyte equals 1024 bytes. As you 
can see, one bit is a relatively infinitesimal piece of data, but it is important that not even one 
bit of data be altered by the forensic process. 
 
The second golden rule when securing a computer is, do not peek through the files. This 
also applies to disks. If a system is running, the examiner may be tempted to click on the My 
Computer icon to look for evidence or copy files to a flash or optical storage device. This 
should never be done, because each file the investigator touches will have its original time 
stamps changed; once this is done the original time stamps cannot be recovered. It will be 
obvious to the forensic examiner that this has occurred. 
 
There are two methods for shutting down a running system, a hard shutdown and a graceful 
shutdown. Generally, the hard shutdown is preferred. There may be extenuating 
circumstances that would lead the investigator to perform a graceful shutdown, so it is 
important to evaluate the best shutdown option based on the type of data being preserved 
and the possible ramifications of a hard shutdown based on the type of operating system 
installed. A hard shutdown is basically pulling the power cord from the back of the PC. 
 
Laptop computers, however, require additional considerations. When seizing a laptop, it is 
important to remove the battery first and then pull the plug. It is essential when seizing a 
laptop to recover all of the components that belong to the laptop, such as flash drives, CD-ROMs 
and DVD–ROMs, and power supplies. Often, laptop computers must be imaged with their 
drives installed, and because of the proprietary nature of the laptops themselves, they will 
only function with their own components. Many  times these components can be located in 
the laptop carrying case. 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.719 
Similarly, networked computers also present unique considerations. When powering down a 
networked computer, remove the power supply from the back of the computer.  
 
When handling servers, however, it is important to use extreme caution when removing 
power from a server without using proper shut-down methods because this can damage the 
system and expose the examiner to liability.  
 
Once a computer is seized, it is necessary to secure it in such a way that will allow the 
investigator to testify, if need be, that no unauthorized access to the suspect system 
occurred. 
 
INSPECT FOR TRAPS 
Examiners should also inspect the computer’s chassis for traps, intrusion detection software, 
and self-destruct mechanisms. Although completely destroying a hard drive is extremely 
difficult, it is not difficult to make recovery very difficult.   
 
IMPLEMENT A SYSTEM TO MANAGE THE EVIDENCE 
Examiners should have a system to track and manage physical and digital evidence. The 
most common method used to track physical evidence is to assign each item a unique 
evidence number. Although this number can be in any format, it should be consistent and 
never repeated.  
 
Image Acquisition 
To avoid altering evidence, the examiner should make forensically sound image of the 
suspect system for analysis. Image acquisition involves using a standalone hard drive 
duplicator or similar device to duplicate a computer’s entire drive. This process is known as 
imaging because the hard drive can be imaged to another hard disk drive, a tape, or other 
media. 
 
The examiner has to be sure that the image is created and preserved in a manner that will 
withstand a legal challenge; therefore, before  imaging a hard drive, the examiner must 
determine the best method for acquiring an image and the proper procedures to facilitate the 
image capture.  
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.720   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
During the imaging process, examiners should use some type of write-protection device or 
application to ensure no information is written onto the original drive, and after the hard 
drive is duplicated, the original drive is moved to a secure location to prevent tampering. 
 
Analysis 
The analysis phase is arguably the most time-consuming phase, especially for a financial 
crime or fraud investigation. This phase involves the use of specialized software designed to 
give the examiner the means to locate and extract artifacts that will be used as evidence in 
the investigation. The evidence can serve to incriminate the subject of the investigation or it 
can be exculpatory by disproving the subject’s involvement. 
 
The primary concern when analyzing electronically stored information (ESI) is to maintain 
its integrity. Examiners must be careful with computer equipment because a careless 
investigator may inadvertently alter important evidence. Therefore, it is helpful to develop 
procedures to prevent the opposing party from raising allegations that the methodology used 
to collect or analyze data was improper and could have damaged or altered the evidence. It 
may also be helpful to use a hardware-based write-blocking device to protect the integrity of 
digital evidence. 
 
One method to help ensure the integrity of digi tal evidence is to maintain a chain of custody 
for all evidence gathered and analyzed. The chain of custody  is both a process and a document 
that memorializes (1) who has had possession of an object, and (2) what they have done with 
it; it is simply a means of establishing that there has not been a material change or alteration 
to a piece of evidence. Gaps in the chain of custody (e.g., when it is not clear what occurred 
with a set of records) or outright mishandling (e.g., a group of questioned documents was 
not properly sealed) can harm a case.  
 
At a minimum, the following chain of custody procedures should be followed for digital 
evidence: 
• Identify each item that contains relevant information.  
• Document each item, who it was received from, who authorized its removal, the location 
of the item, and the date and time the item was received.  
• Maintain a continuous record of the item’s custody as it changes hands.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.721 
Reporting and Testifying 
The reporting and testifying phase is where the hours of analysis are reported fairly and 
objectively. In this phase, a qualified computer forensics expert may be asked to render an 
opinion about the use or misuse of a computer system. This is where experience and training 
are tested and where examiners must know with certainty that their opinion is based on their 
research, knowledge, and experience and that an opposing expert will not find fault with 
their conclusions. 
 
 
Forensic Examination and Analysis 
While every fraud examiner should have basic knowledge of computer evidence and how to 
properly identify, collect, and store digital evidence, some fraud examiners may decide to 
pursue additional training in the area of computer forensic analysis. The process of 
developing the skill set necessary to be a computer-forensic examiner takes a considerable 
amount of time, training, and experience. Additionally, there are a number of software and 
hardware tools that are now available to conduct this type of work; the forensic examiner 
must be aware of these tools and understand how they work.  
 
Again, a forensic analysis of a computer could involve the examination of a tremendous 
volume of data. In 1993, the average hard disk was 60 megabytes (MB) in size. The standard 
size in 1999 was 8 gigabytes (GB), and currently, the average size of hard disks offered is 
between 120 GB and 1.9 terabytes. 
 
Forensic examiners will generally use at least two software tools on a project simultaneously 
to cross-validate their results. It is also important to note that many insufficiently trained 
examiners who use automated tools do not in fact understand what the automated process is 
doing. It is extremely important to understand and be able to articulate how a tool is 
conducting an automated process. This means that a forensic examiner who uses an 
automated tool should be able to explain how to conduct the same process manually.  
 
Because the primary concern when collecting and analyzing digital evidence is to maintain its 
integrity, forensic examiners must be careful with computer equipment. Therefore, it is 
helpful to develop procedures to prevent the opposing party from raising allegations that the 
methodology used to collect or analyze data was improper and could have damaged or 
altered the evidence. It may also be helpful to use a hardware or software write-blocking 
device to protect the integrity of digital evidence. These devices allow the user to acquire 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.722   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
information on a drive without damaging the drive contents by allowing read commands to 
pass and blocking write commands.  
 
A hardware write-blocking devise stops  any automated processes or incidental processes 
that an operating system or examiner may use to interact with a piece of digital media. That 
is, the devise tricks the operating system into believing that the interaction occurred so that it 
will not generate an error and thwart the acquisition process. What actually happens is that 
the write commands are intercepted and cached by the device instead of reaching the target; 
therefore, no writes to the media occur. The device allows only read permissions to the 
media.  
 
The software write blocker, however, denies access to media by prohibiting certain requests 
to the media by filtering out those requests. Only read requests are accepted and all write 
requests are denied. Software write blockers must operate at a separate level than a standard 
graphical user’s interface (GUI), such as in DOS mode. There are a number of these types of 
devices on the market today made for all applications and media types. 
 
Keyword Searches 
Once the collection process is complete, examiners are left with large volumes of digital data 
that may contain relevant or irrelevant information. At this point, the examiner must process 
and filter the digital information to reduce the amount of data (commonly known as data 
culling) that has been collected by performing keyword searches to identify relevant 
information. 
 
Keyword searches involve identifying relevant evidence by searching for words that are 
material to a case (e.g., names, dates, account numbers, etc.). This type of search will 
minimize the amount of time used to complete an analysis, and it will help protect the fraud 
examiner from allegations that his search was overly broad. 
 
Based on the information known about the case, the examiner should establish a list of 
relevant keywords. Because enormous amounts of data will need to be searched in most 
fraud examinations, examiners and investigators should take care in keeping the list as short 
and relevant as possible, and they should avoid common words or words that can be part of 
other words. As a case progresses, there is a strong likelihood that more keywords will be 
identified. Furthermore, search terms can be devised to look for patterns in data. 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.723 
Recovering Evidence 
In addition to live files, a wealth of information can be recovered and analyzed on seized 
systems. Because Windows operating systems are the most widely used, knowledge about the 
file systems—methods used to store and organi ze computer files and the data they contain 
for easy access—used by the Windows operating system is critical. Knowledge of the 
Windows operating system will help the examiner locate relevant evidence that is commonly 
found in files stored on hard drives, storage devices, and media.  
 
Common files containing evidence stored in the operating system include user-created files, 
user-protected files, and computer-created files.  
 
User-created Files 
User-created files are files created under the user’s direction, and include text-based 
documents, spreadsheets, databases, e-mail, address books, presentation slides, audio/video 
files, image files, Internet bookmarks, and so on.  
 
User-protected Files 
Often, users hide files to prevent them from being found. There are a variety of techniques 
to hide files, but some of the most common methods are detailed below. 
 
CAMOUFLAGED FILES 
A user might camouflage certain files under an innocent name or different file extension to 
prevent others from discovering them. For example, a suspect might change a file name 
from “evidence.doc” to “install. exe” and place the file in a directory that stores program 
files. Therefore, examiners should analyze a target’s hard drive to determine whether any file 
types have been camouflaged. This is done by analyzing the file header — the first bits of data 
in a file — which contains data identifying the file format. 
 
STEGANOGRAPHY 
Steganography is the process of hiding one piece of information within an apparently 
innocent file. For example, a user can use the least significant bits of a bitmap image to hide 
a message. By hiding the message in the least significant bits of an image, there is almost no 
perceivable change in the bitmap image itself. And without directly comparing the altered 
image to the original, it is practically impossible to tell that the image was altered.  
 
  
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.724   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
After a French defense contractor suspected that some of his critical designs were being 
compromised, the government conducted an invest igation. The investigation revealed that an 
employee had obtained his position at the company to steal the contractor’s trade secrets. To 
transmit the trade secrets out of the company, the employee imbedded them into graphic images 
used on the company’s public access website usin g steganography. Another party then copied the 
image files from the website and extracted the proprietary designs.  
 
Digitized audio files are another type of file that can be used to hide messages. For example, 
by encoding a message in the least significant bits of a .WAV file, a user can make the 
message almost impossible to detect. Messages can also be hidden in the unused sectors of a 
floppy disk. 
 
ENCRYPTION 
Encryption refers to procedures used to convert information using an algorithm (called cipher) 
that makes the information unreadable. Although there are many free and commercial 
encryption programs available, there are two primary ways to access encrypted information. 
First, there are numerous utility programs that can decrypt documents encrypted by many of 
the more common software applications. In addition, some encryption programs have a 
secret “key” for emergencies that may be very helpful in an investigation. There are also 
several companies that specialize in decryption. 
 
Second, there is precedent for forcing a suspect (or employee) to divulge his decryption 
code. The computer is only a container and encryption is an additional lock prohibiting the 
investigator from reviewing the files for potential evidence. An examiner with a legal right to 
examine encrypted data is no different than ordering a suspect or employee to unlock a file 
cabinet to inspect its contents.  
 
ALTERNATE DATA STREAMS 
Another method used to hide files in Windows systems is the use of the alternate data 
streams of a file or directory. This method, however, is only possible in Windows New 
Technology File System (NTFS) — one of two basic types of file systems used to organize 
data in Windows systems. Alternate data streams are a feature in the NTFS filesystem that 
offers the ability to put data into existing files and folders without affecting their 
functionality, size, or display in many traditional file-browsing utilities like command line or 
Windows Explorer. 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.725 
Although Windows Explorer does not provide a way to see what alternate data streams are 
in a file, they are easy to make and allow an individual with basic knowledge to hide files 
without having to resort to any third-party tools. 
 
Fortunately, there are forensic tools that can search NTFS partitions for alternative data 
streams.  
 
Computer-created Files 
Evidence may also be found in information generated by the operating systems. This type of 
information is important because it can identify that a certain activity has taken place, and, in 
most cases, the user is not aware that it is being written. Some common examples of 
computer-generated data available for examination include: metadata, registry, paging file, 
event logs, LNK files, Internet activity, temporary data, deleted data, and printer-spool files.  
 
METADATA 
Metadata is data about data, and these file tidbits contain a tremendous amount of 
information. It can help determine who wrote a document; who received, opened, copied, 
edited, moved, or printed the document; and when these events occurred. 
 
WINDOWS REGISTRY 
The Windows registry is a central database that stores settings and configuration for the 
operating system and most applications installed on the system. The registry is an important 
source of potential evidential data because it contains information on user accounts, typed 
URLs, networks shared, the run command history, and so on. Often, software used by the 
fraudster will create a footprint in the registry that can provide valuable insight into relevant 
activity that occurred in the system.  
 
WINDOWS PAGING FILE 
Operating systems have a limited supply of Random Access Memory (RAM), and if an 
operating system runs out of physical RAM and needs more memory, it will move some of 
the data outside physical memory and store it temporarily in a special file on the hard disk. 
This file, which is called a paging file or a swap file, is used to simulate RAM. 
 
WINDOWS EVENT LOGS 
Event logs are files that record significant events on a computer. In Windows systems, there 
are three types of events: system, applicat ion, and security. The system log tracks 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.726   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
miscellaneous system events, including events generated during system startup like hardware 
and controller failures. The application log tracks application-related events and application 
errors, such as failing to load a DLL. The security log, which is turned off by default, tracks 
security-related events like logon and logoff times and changes to access rights.  
 
LNK FILES 
LNK files, which are also called shortcuts, refer (or link) to target files that may be 
applications, documents, or system resources. Clicking on a LNK file will either cause the 
application to start or the document to open, and will prompt the applicable system 
resources to run. Although the user may create these files, the system generally creates them 
when a user performs certain tasks. These files, therefore, provide a “history” of previously 
opened documents and files.  
 
INTERNET ACTIVITY 
Web browsers create temporary files that store information about websites that a user has 
visited. These files can show websites that were recently visited and usually include time and 
date information relevant to the visit; they ca n also show images previously viewed online. 
This information allows the examiner to recover websites and images previously viewed by 
the system’s users. 
 
TEMPORARY FILES 
Applications will create temporary files like those created by Web browsers. For example, 
certain communication software like instant messaging (IM) and chat software will keep a 
history of the user’s conversations in a proprietary and sometimes encrypted format.  
 
DELETED DATA 
Deletion is a widely misunderstood function in computing because deleting data is not the 
same as destroying data. Choosing the delete option erases the file’s reference from the table 
of contents, but it does not erase the file; in fa ct, data is not erased from a computer’s hard 
drive until the file is overwritten. 
 
PRINTER-SPOOL FILES 
It is sometimes possible to recover an image of the last page printed on a printer. When 
computers running Windows operating systems print files, a print-spooling process occurs. 
The process involves writing the print job to files, allowing users to keep working while the 
print job runs in the background. After the user creates a print job, it is placed in a queue 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.727 
and is printed when the printer becomes available to perform the job. Once printing is 
complete, the operating system deletes the files;  but again, deleted files can be recovered. 
 
 
Digital Forensics Software 
In recent years, a number of products have emerged for digital forensic analysis. They range 
in complexity, features, and price. These products are continually updated as new technology 
requires new features. Below is a general listing of the most frequently used products on the 
market today. This is sure to be constantly changing. (Please note that the product 
descriptions are adapted from materials provided by the manufacturer, and the ACFE does 
not endorse any particular product.) 
 
EnCase Forensic  
EnCase Forensic is a computer forensics software program by Guidance Software. It gives 
investigators the ability to image a drive and preserve it in a forensic manner using the 
EnCase evidence file format (LEF or E01), a digital evidence container vetted by courts 
worldwide. 
 
EnCase Forensic also contains a full suite of analysis, bookmarking and reporting features. 
Guidance Software and third party vendors provide support for expanded capabilities to 
ensure that forensic examiners have the most comprehensive set of utilities.   
 
EnCase Forensic also offers powerful hidden volume detection and volume rebuilding 
capabilities, allowing investigators to review evidence that would have been irretrievable with 
other computer forensics applications. 
 
How EnCase Forensic Works 
OBTAIN FORENSICALLY SOUND ACQUISITIONS 
EnCase Forensic produces an exact binary duplicate of the original drive or media, then 
verifies it by generating MD5 hash values for related image files and assigning CRC values to 
the data. These checks and balances reveal when evidence has been tampered with or 
altered, helping to keep all digital evidence forensically sound for use in court proceedings. 
 
ADVANCED PRODUCTIVITY FEATURES 
Examiners can preview data while drives or other media are being acquired. Once the image 
files are created, examiners can search and analyze multiple drives or other media 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.728   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
simultaneously. EnCase Forensic also features a case indexer. This powerful tool builds a 
complete index in multiple languages, allowing for fast and easy queries. Indices can also be 
chained together to find keywords common to other investigations. This Unicode-supported 
index contains personal documents, deleted files, file system artifacts, file slack, swap files, 
unallocated space, emails and web pages. In addition, EnCase has extensive file system 
support, giving organizations the ability to analyze all types of data. 
 
ENSCRIPT PROGRAMMING 
EnCase forensic features EnScript programming capabilities. EnScript, an object-oriented 
programming language similar to Java or C++,  allows users create to custom programs to 
help them automate time-consuming investigative tasks, such as searching and analyzing 
specific document types or other labor-intensive processes and procedures.  
 
PROVIDE ACTIONABLE DATA  AND REPORT ON IT 
Once investigators have bookmarked relevant  data, they can create a report suitable for 
presentation in court, to management, or to another legal authority. Data can also be 
exported in multiple file formats for review. 
 
Key Features  
• Advanced search options 
• Internet and email support 
• Multiple viewers 
• Instant message analysis 
• EnScript programming 
• Bookmarking 
• Extensive system file support 
• Multiple acquisition options 
 
For more information about EnCase Forensic, visit www.guidancesoftware.com.  
 
Forensic ToolKit 
Created by AccessData, the AccessData Forensic Toolkit (FTK) offers law enforcement and 
corporate security professionals the ability to perform complete and thorough computer 
forensics examinations. The FTK features file  filtering and search functionality. FTK’s 
customizable filters allow investigators to sort through thousands of files to quickly find the 
evidence they need. FTK is also a forensic tool to perform e-mail analysis.  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.729 
Some of the main features of this product are discussed below.  
 
Integrated Computer Forensics 
• Create images, analyze the registry, conduct an investigation, decrypt files, crack 
passwords, identify steganography, and build a report all with a single solution.  
• Recover passwords from 100+ applications; harness idle CPUs across the network to 
decrypt files and perform robust dictionary attacks.  
• KFF hash library with 45 million hashes. 
 
Enterprise-Class Architecture 
• Supports large, complex datasets.  
• Because the FTK components are compartmentalized, the user will never lose work due 
to a crash (e.g., If the GUI crashes, the workers continue to process data). 
• Provides the ability to back up and archive cases. 
• Every copy of FTK 3 includes a total of four  workers to enable distributed processing  
• It incorporates Lab capabilities, such as the ability to leverage a centralized database 
infrastructure and shared distributed processing farm, as well as collaborative forensic 
analysis, central case/task management and Web review. This is of particular value to law 
enforcement and government computer forensics labs. 
 
Powerful Processing and Speed  
• Distributed processing allows the user to leverage up to three additional computers to 
reduce processing time and tackle massive data sets. 
• True multi-processor and multi-threading support that takes advantage of hardware 
advancements.  
• Pre- and post-processing refinement allows users to control how images are processed. 
• An advanced data-carving engine that allows users to carve allocated and unallocated 
data and specify criteria, such as file size, data type and pixel size to reduce the amount 
of irrelevant data carved while increasing overall thoroughness.  
• Optimized dtSearch integration delivers fast indexing and fast search results. 
 
Advanced Analytics  
• RAM dump analysis  
• An index search engine and a proper full-feature regular expression engine for binary 
searches. 
• Broad file system, compound file, and email support. 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.730   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Supports popular encryption technologies, such as Credant, SafeBoot, Utimaco, EFS, 
PGP and Guardian Edge. 
• Mac support  
 
Preview, Acquisition, and Analysis of Live Data  
• Perform network-based, secure, single-system forensic acquisition of physical devices, 
logical volumes and RAM. 
• Secure Remote Device Mounting 
 
For more information on AccessData, visit www.accessdata.com. 
 
Password Recovery Toolkit 
The Password Recovery Toolkit (PRTK) fr om AccessData is geared toward law 
enforcement and corporate security professionals. It allows examiners to find and identify 
encrypted files on handheld, desktop, and server computer systems. PRTK recovers lost, 
forgotten, or unavailable passwords. If users need access to locked files or if they have 
simply locked themselves out of their files, the PRTK can get them back in. 
 
Security Risk Assessment Tool  
How do hackers bypass an organization’s strongest security measures? Many people use the 
same password to gain access to different programs and networks. This could be one of the 
weakest links in an organization’s security profile. Some password-protected programs are 
easy to crack while others are virtually impossible. But what if the same password is used for 
both programs? By gaining access to the weakest one, fraudsters have gained access to the 
strongest one, without needing to crack both.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.731 
 
Recovery Properties & Status  
Features 
• Enables password management 
• Analyzes files and their passwords with an optional report file 
• Recovers all types of passwords regardless of password length 
• Analyzes multiple files at one time 
• Recovers multilingual passwords 
• Prevents unauthorized use with a personal security code 
 
For more information on AccessData, visit www.accessdata.com. 
 
ProDiscover Forensics  
Produced by Technology Pathways, ProDiscover Forensics is a computer security tool for 
law enforcement that enables computer professionals to find all the data on a computer disk 
while protecting evidence and creating evidentiary quality reports for use in legal 
proceedings. 
 
Features 
• Creates bit-stream copy of the disk to be analyzed, including a hidden HPA section 
(patent pending), to keep original evidence safe 
• Searches files or an entire disk including slack space, HPA section, and Windows 
NT/2000/XP Alternate Data Streams for complete disk forensic analysis 
• Previews all files, even if hidden or deleted, without altering the data on a disk, including 
file metadata 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.732   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Maintains multi-tool compatibility by reading and writing images in the pervasive UNIX 
dd format 
• Examines and cross references data at the file or cluster level to ensure nothing is 
hidden, even in slack space 
• Automatically generates and records MD5, SHA1, or SHA256 hashes to prove  
data integrity 
• Examines FAT12, FAT16, FAT 32, and all NTFS file systems, including Dynamic Disk 
and Software RAID, for maximum flexibility 
• Examines Sun Solaris UFS file system and Linux ext2/ext3 file systems 
• Integrates graphics thumbnail viewer and registry viewer 
• Integrates Windows event log viewer 
• Extracts Internet history 
• Utilizes Perl scripts to automate investigation tasks 
• Extracts EXIF information from JPEG files to identify file creators 
• Automated report generation in XML format saves time and improves accuracy and 
compatibility 
• GUI interface and integrated help function ensures a quick start and ease of use 
• Designed to NIST Disk Imaging Tool Specification 3.1.6 to ensure high quality 
 
ProDiscover Forensics is a tool for computer forensics analysis. It is not possible to hide 
data from ProDiscover Forensics as it reads the disk at the sector level. This least intrusive 
approach also allows the investigator to examine the files without altering any valuable 
metadata, such as last time accessed. ProDiscover Forensics will not alter any data on the 
disk. ProDiscover Forensics can recover deleted files, examine slack space, and access 
Windows Alternate Data Streams. It can even allow the investigator to preview, search, and 
image the Hardware Protected Area (HPA) of the disk with a patent-pending process. 
 
ProDiscover Forensics lets the investigator search through the entire disk for keywords and 
phrases with full Boolean search capability to find the data they want. Investigators can use 
the hash comparison capability to find known illegal files or to weed out known good files, 
such as standard operating system files, by employing the included data from the National 
Drug Intelligence Center in their Hashkeeper database. ProDiscover Forensics search 
capability allows searches for words or phrases anywhere on the disk, including the slack 
space.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.733 
 
 
ProDiscover Forensics automatically creates evidentiary quality reports needed to document 
results, complete with every file and hash signature where evidence was found. This saves 
time and prevents errors that might compromise an investigator’s case.  
 
For more information about Technology Pathways, visit at www.techpathways.com. 
 
Gargoyle Investigator Forensic Pro Edition  
Gargoyle Investigator is a software tool created by WetStone for digital investigations. It is 
used for performing incident responses, field investigations, digital forensic analysis, threat 
management, or compliance audits. Gargoyle Investigator performs a quick search on a 
stand-alone system for known contraband or hostile, or “bad,” programs. It also provides 
clues regarding the activities, motives, and intent of suspects or potential suspects. 
  
Gargoyle Investigator Forensic Pro Edition provides investigators with information 
regarding the contents of a suspect’s computer along with information about its owner’s 
computer use. Gargoyle performs searches for known bad or hostile programs, their 
associated files, and remnants of files. Once identified, Gargoyle also maps the detected files 
to the associated cyber weapons and classifies them into a category of malware.  
 
The Forensic Pro Edition is designed for forensic investigators, examiners, law enforcement 
personnel, private investigators, and forensic lab use.  
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.734   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Gargyole 
 
Gargoyle provides the investigator with the ability to gather suspect characteristics from the 
information revealed. The computer’s sophisticat ion, covert behaviors, and paranoia levels 
(has the suspect tried to delete incriminating programs?) can all be derived when searching 
for applications with a common theme. These behaviors can assist in assessing suspect 
capability, activities, intent, threat, or consciousness of guilt. 
 
For more information about Forensic Pro Edition and other products by WetStone, visit 
www.wetstonetech.com. 
 
Stego Suite 
The Stego Suite by WetStone is a software bundle available for the investigation, detection, 
analysis, and recovery of digital steganography. It identifies the presence of steganography 
without prior knowledge of the steganography algorithm that might have been used against 
the target file.  
 
WetStone’s Stego Suite comprises four products: Stego Watch, a steganography tool; Stego 
Analyst, an image and audio file analyzer; Stego Break, a password cracker; and the recently 
added Stego Hunter, a steganography application identifier. 
  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.735 
 
Stego Watch  
 
 
 
 
Stego Analysis 
 
 
Stego Break 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.736   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Postmortem analysis of data recovered from a digital crime scene can be a tedious process. 
When the digital data contains thousands of images, audio files, or digital video that may 
contain other hidden evidence, the process can be impossible without the aid of key 
technologies and expertise. Stego Suite’s tools provide the ability to quickly examine and 
evaluate digital image and/or audio data for the presence of hidden information  
or communications. 
 
Active Web scanning of a website to ensure that unauthorized people are not using the site 
to exchange innocuous-looking messages or smuggle proprietary data is also becoming a 
must. The tools of Stego Suite baseline a Web domain and continuously scan the domain for 
the presence of hidden data inside digital images.  
 
For more information about the Stego Suite and other products by WetStone, visit 
www.wetstonetech.com. 
 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.801 



:


digit forens
conduct an investig involv comput
the increas usag of the internet and other technolog in all aspect of our person and
profession live ha creat new opportun for technolog to be us in perpetr
almost everi type of fraud and in most fraud case investig gather some type of digit
evid
fraud examin must therefor be prepar to address the myriad issu relat to
examin involv digit evid
comput investig versu comput forens
while at first the term comput investig mai appear synonym with comput
forens there is an import distinct between the two an investig lead an
investig into a crime that involv a comput is not necessarili and in most case
should not be the forens examin it is import to keep these area separ combin
the two especi in case in which the suspect is alreadi name invit question about the
object of the forens examin it could also subject investig to unwelcom
scrutini regard whether thei suppress exculpatori evid that mai have been found
dure an examin by a more object investig
digit evid
digit evid when boil down to it basic is simpli binari data on and zero that
is interpret by the comput everyth that is digit store is made up of these on
and zero from the program themselv to the data with which the program interact
interpret built into the program show these on and zero as hex code thi hex code is
then translat onto the page or websit seen on the comput screen
as the profession us comput technolog increas so doe the crimin us financi
crime and fraud commit ar probabl the most common type of comput crime
commit the investig of financi crime gener requir a level of expertis not
commonli held by all investig therefor there is addit knowledg and experi
requir when conduct a forens comput examin in a financi or fraud case
digit forens investig
3702 2011 fraud examin manual
there ar three type of situat in which comput evid is gener discov 1
comput as the target of crime 2 comput as the instrument of crime and 3
comput as the repositori of evid
comput themselv can be the target of crime crime commit against comput
includ comput and computercompon theft system intrus softwar piraci and
softwar theft
comput can also be us to facilit a crime when thi occur the comput is known
as the tool or instrument of crime in such case as on would expect examin commonli
encount comput that have been us in offens such as the solicit of minor in
chat room check fraud and counterfeit
gener speak in all comput investig the examin attempt to locat the
storag of potenti digit evid in on form or anoth on the comput system the
comput system involv in the investig is a potenti repositori of evid whether
the user intend to store an item or not therefor the examin is interest in
incrimin evid that the user intention or unintention store on the comput
system
integr of digit evid
electron evid is more volatil than paper inform and becaus it can be easili
alter or destroi it must be handl properli for exampl comput file can be alter
simpli through the normal startup process most of the microsoft oper system such as
window xp chang the time and date stamp on a number of file dure startup and
delet a number of temporari file dure the shutdown process these piec of
inform could be critic to the investig
the destruct of digit evid through improp handl can result in a find of
spoliat of evid by a judg or can rais question about the alter of exculpatori
evid by the defens
addition if a judg determin that the authent of the evid cannot be
satisfactorili made then he mai rule that the evid is inadmiss although digit
evid is differ from tangibl evid the rule regard it admiss in court is
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3703
realli no differ from the admiss of ani other type of evid to be admiss
digit evid must be
relev
support by a foundat for it introduct into court
legal obtain
properli identifi
properli preserv
therefor should the fraud examin discov digit evid he must be abl to state
unequivoc that the evid wa not chang in ani wai by hi action thi requir that
strict forens methodolog be follow to satisfi the stringent evidentiari standard
necessari to ensur the integr of the evid beyond a reason doubt for
present in court
forens expert
also when conduct an examin involv comput the examin should determin
whether an outsid forens examin is need or whether the expertis is avail inhous
some organ have their own inhous personnel whom thei have train and
outfit with the proper equip and softwar tool to conduct the examin and
analyz digit evid while other mai prefer the us of an outsid examin who will be
abl to conduct a thorough examin prepar a proper report and deliv expert
testimoni if need in legal proceed
sometim inform retriev is as easi as obtain a warrant and search the hard
drive of the target comput but mani fraudster anticip their exposur and delet
incrimin file from their machin in these instanc it is import to know that there
ar a varieti of wai of recov delet or hidden data from a target comput and it
peripher
a computerforens examin is a train profession who is capabl of analyz digit
media at the hexadecim level the hexadecim level mean that everi sector and all the
byte in those sector ar avail for view thi includ delet file both purposefulli
delet and those that were delet through variou windowsautom process thi
can also includ temporari autosav file printspool file delet email and link file
the hexadecim level also contain variou item found in restor point and registri file
digit forens investig
3704 2011 fraud examin manual
that defin hardwar such as extern drive and websit visit in addit to the
document revis and file creat and maintain by the user
the increas sophist of window allow the comput system to store more
inform about how peopl us their comput the forens examin will be abl to
uncov a larg amount of data that relat to the us of a comput what is or ha been
store on it and the detail about the user in micr osoft effort to be all to the user it ha
incorpor wai to make comput us more secur such as offer encrypt and other
method to protect data from unwant access in the futur these type of innov will
stall the examin and will sometim successfulli prevent system access howev these
encrypt packag ar not alwai foolproof the encrypt file system offer by
microsoft ha in fact been crack by a number of passwordcrack softwar maker in
addit to encrypt file other encrypt algorithm exist that ar easili instal and can
be us to encrypt the entir hard drive in situat such as thi it becom necessari for
the examin to be abl to identifi whether a drive is encrypt befor seiz and
disconnect the system
moreov computerforens examin have special tool and softwar design to
facilit a thorough and legal suffici analysi of item that contain digit evid it is
import to allow a train examin to conduct a proper seizur and examin on a
piec of evid so the investig will have the best chanc of us that evid in a
legal proceed whether an agenc or compani is defend against an unlaw
termin suit or file a crimin complaint it is vital that the digit evid is handl
properli
furthermor whether technic specialist ar need to assist with an investig will
depend on the complex of the examin requir the more technic the natur of the
crime the more technic and special the analyt skill requir some comput
investig howev do not requir extrem sophist technic skill for exampl
in case where the comput is the instrument us to commit the crime eg scam
involv payrol applic cook the book fraudul electron fund transfer
insid trade etc the fraud examin need onli know how to search a databas and
analyz the result
addition thi determin will depend on the examin skill level therefor an
examin conduct an examin involv comput must have a basic understand
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3705
of hi skill level and must be awar of hi limit in the field of comput technolog
becaus in mani instanc on or more technic specialist ar need to assist with an
investig
within the comput forens field there ar sever differ type of special expert
oper and file system expert these expert ar profici in certain oper system
eg window 7 unix solari os x or as400 and the variou file system thei
emploi eg joliet ntf fat vf ex t2 and thei have the abil to convei
oper characterist and observ artifact
data recoveri expert these expert oper clean room design to magnet extract
inform from a damag media sourc us special tool and equip these
expert can disassembl a hard disk separ the platter and extract and reassembl the
inform for subsequ examin
forens account expert a forens account can prov id variou servic includ
audit account perform review and examin of financi document for
fraud misconduct or industri standard violat
tape and archiv extract expert these ar expert in extract inform from tape or
other system backup typic backup solut archiv data in proprietari format
make extract veri cumbersom
intrus and malici code expert these expert special in investig comput
network intrus specialist can determin attack vector the tool emploi what
occur dure access and what if anyth wa taken
but given the divers of computerrel fraud no person can be an expert in all aspect
of comput technolog
locat evid
to conduct a success examin examin must know what to look for and where to
look for it but thi can be difficult becaus digit data can be store larg volum and in a
number of differ locat
the effici of comput technolog ha allow user to creat more volumin piec
of data than wa onc possibl comput hard drive ar pack with digit data and data
storag now exce gigabyt therefor it is necessari to refer larger storag
capac here is a chart that will help
digit forens investig
3706 2011 fraud examin manual
name abbr size
kilo k 210 1024
mega m 220 1048576
giga g 230 1073741824
tera t 240 1099511627776
peta p 250 1125899906842624
exa e 260 1152921504606846976
zetta z 270 1180591620717411303424
yotta y 280 1208925819614629174706176
furthermor digit evid mai be locat in a number of differ locat in addit
to be store on comput evid will be locat in ani form of technolog that can be
us to transmit or store data therefor it is also import to investig ani suspect
workstat includ ani peripher or other portabl media devic that can be us to
transmit or store data and the inform store on the compani network
workstat
in addit to investig the suspect mainfram it is also import to investig the
suspect workstat includ ani peripher or other portabl media devic that can be
us to transmit or store data as data move to and from peripher devic it leav
evid of it presenc and sometim leav full copi of it content
therefor fraud examin should consid the mani differ type of peripher that
might contain evid item to be seiz might includ ani or all of the follow item
list below depend upon the natur of the fraud case
printer
examin must also be awar that it might be possibl to recov previous print
document although the odd of recoveri can be low depend on a varieti of factor
understand how retriev can be achiev can be of great valu to the investig
in addit to us printerspool file to recov previous print document mani
printer have intern hard drive that mai contain inform relev to a fraud
examin in gener ani inform sent to and store by a printer is recover unless
the printer ha overwritten the data
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3707
furthermor some printer have memori buffer temporari storag area of job wait to be
print which mai also contain import inform inform contain in memori
buffer howev is gener limit to recent creat and store data
copier and scanner
like some printer copier and other multifunct machin mai have intern storag
devic that store relev data in fact almost everi copier built sinc 2002 ha a hard drive
that store imag of document the machin have copi scan or email some
copier store user access record and a histori of copi made and as with most file
system it mai be possibl to retriev inform from a copier hard drive that ha been
delet as a result copier mai be brim with import inform
fax machin
although some kind of standalon fax machin simpli scan and send data without store
it like mani printer and copier some fax machin store fax data on their own intern
hard drive thi data mai remain in the machin memori until overwritten
backup tape
backup tape ar a type of remov media that store data and can be easili remov from
a comput system or devic most comput user archiv their activ on backup tape
or some other form of extern storag devic and most compani us backup tape to
store old data includ email data that wa onc store on their server
remov storag devic
in addit to backup tape a suspect remov storag devic should be examin
remov storag devic such as cd dvd usb flash drive also known as thumb
drive mp3 player and variou other devic provid user with the abil to store larg
amount of data such devic can be us to facilit a varieti of fraud thei provid
user with the abil to store file that go undetect by anyon access the comput
remov media can also be us to store copi of file contain sensit inform in
order to facilit unapprov us
smart phone
the prolifer of smart phone ha made them an extrem valuabl sourc of
inform smart phone eg the iphon and blackberri ar cell phone that also have
the abil to store person data search the internet check email instant messag im
digit forens investig
3708 2011 fraud examin manual
make video call downloadupload content to and from the internet take pictur and
record video the inform that can be store on these small devic can be veri
import in mani case
network
in addit to search for evid on the suspect oper system and workstat it is
also import to examin inform store on compani server a wealth of inform
which is separ from a user workstat mai be store on compani server data store
on compani network mai includ document post to a suspect own home directori on
the network collabor work save to a share folder or directori email messag that
have been sent receiv delet or archiv calendar contact list and so on
law enforc assist
befor conduct a forens examin examin must consid whether a crime ha in
fact been commit if at the begin of the investig it is determin that the victim
compani will make a formal referr to law enforc or prosecut agenc then the
author must be notifi befor the investig begin to determin whether law
enforc personnel should particip in the examin in some jurisdict an
examin from the law enforc commun mai not be avail
comput investig and comput forens
prepar
befor the examin can seiz evid he must take certain step to help ensur that the
evid is admiss he must determin whether an employe ha a privaci interest in the
item to be search he must take certain step to prepar for an investig that
involv the us of a search warrant and he must take step to ensur that hi equip is
sound eg onli us licens softwar applic independ valid all forens
equip and maintain the valid on file
privaci issu
befor search and seiz an item the examin must determin whether an employe ha
a privaci interest in the item to be search in everi case where it becom necessari to
seiz a comput or other devic capabl of store digit evid the investig should
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3709
consult with legal counsel it is imper that legal counsel be involv in the seizur
process and be knowledg of case law pertain to workplac seizur
case law govern workplac seizur in the privat sector is differ from case law
govern seizur in the govern workplac but gener it all come down to the
employe expect of privaci although the fourth amend constitut right
guarante protect against unreason search and seizur typic the fourth
amend doe not protect privat sector employe
in the privat sector disput over unreason search and seizur usual come down
on the side of the corpor the case law in the privat sector tend to support the
argument that corpor have the right to decreas the level of privaci employe can
expect with regard to workplac search of comput and other digit media thu
compani to adopt a written polici establish that all comput system eg the internet
email commun hardwar and file ar sole for busi us and that the
compani reserv the absolut right to review audit and disclos all matter sent over the
system or place in storag and as long as written polici ar in effect that support
manag action the corpor can avoid liabil for violat an employe right to
privaci
addition when conduct an intern investig or inquiri into alleg of
misconduct or illeg activ in both the privat and government sector it is import to
be awar of what the employe polici protect against and what it allow it should also be
determin whether step have been taken to nullifi ani expect of privaci
government employe whether local state or feder have been provid special
protect that do not gener appli to employe in the privat sector in all case where
it becom necessari to seiz a government employe comput or other digit devic it
is imper that the investig consult with the entiti legal counsel
bryan r lemon branch chief of the legal di vision offic of train oper at the
fletc train center in georgia ha written an excel paper on the subject of
government workplac search and seizur in which he summar a number of case
where the court have render opinion on government workplac search and seizur
in hi paper mr lemon defin the term workplac to includ those area and item that ar
digit forens investig
3710 2011 fraud examin manual
relat to work and ar gener within the employ control which includ file cabinet
desk and comput
case law on thi issu ha attempt to answer sever question can a govern
employe have a reason expect of privaci in the workplac if so what standard
should be follow to ensur that a supervisor is conduct a law search of an
employe work space is there a lesser standa rd emploi in the case of mere suspicion
the suprem court case of oconn v ortega wa the hallmark case in the argument about
the reason of search and seizur but there were a number of other issu that
were decid at the lowercourt level in oconn the suprem court held that the
realiti of the workplac made some exp ectat of privaci among public employe
unreason when the intrus wa by a supervisor rather than a law enforc offici
workrel search the court found were m er incid to the primari busi of
the agenc and a warrant requir would serious disrupt the routin conduct of
busi the court thu held that a standard of reason wa suffici for work
relat intrus by public employ
to simplifi the decisionmak process when consid a workplac search lemon
explain that there is a twopart analysi that will offer some guidanc the first part requir
a determin of the employe reason ex pectat of privaci in the area to be
search second if a reason expect of privaci doe exist then ani search that
occur in the workplac must be reason under the given circumst
in unit state v gonzalez 4 the court dealt with the search of a govern employe
person belong in thi case the employe gonzalez as a condit of employ
sign a paper that indic among other thing hi person belong might be search
in an effort to discourag employe theft gonzalez work at a militari exchang he wa
stop on dai dure hi departur from the store and hi backpack wa search by store
secur the search reveal that gonzalez backpack contain merchandis stolen from
the store on appeal gonzalez claim that hi fourth amend right had been
violat the court look to the paper that wa origin sign by gonzalez and state
4 unit state v gonzalez 300 f3d 1048 9th cir 2002
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3711
that gonzalez wa put on notic that hi person belong might be search and as a
result hi expect of privaci wa limit by hi knowledg of store polici
in gossmey v mcdonald the court dealt with the question of whether there wa a reason
expect of privaci regard person purchas item that were us to store work
relat materi in the govern workplac in thi case a local detect receiv an
anonym tip from on of gossmey cowork that gossmey wa store illeg
pornograph materi in a storag contain that wa purchas at gossmey own
expens the local detect relai the inform to gossmey supervisor who
proceed to search gossmey workplac includ the storag cabinet the supervisor
found evid to substanti the alleg but no charg were ever file gossmey file
a lawsuit alleg that her fourth amend right had been violat by the search of her
person properti the court disagre state that the cabinet wa not mere an item of
person properti such as a purs or briefcas brought into the workplac but that it wa
be us to hous workrel materi and therefor the cabinet wa a part of the
workplac and not a part of her person domain
in oconn the suprem court rule that it is possibl to reduc the expect of privaci
on the part of govern employe for exampl in the form of a written notic sign by
the employe that give the employ the right to access or inspect inform store on the
employe comput in the case of unit state v simon the defend simon wa found
to have visit sever illicit websit that were prohibit by agenc polici the polici
specif prohibit access to unlaw materi and further prohibit ani person us of
the agenc internet a remot audit of the hard drive on simonss governmentown
comput reveal that the comput contain sever illeg imag in simonss challeng
of the search under the fourth amend he claim that hi right were violat when
the hard drive wa search remot the fourth circuit court of appeal held that simon
had no legitim expect of privaci becaus of the agenc internet us polici the
polici languag place employe on notic of their diminish expect of privaci
when determin whether to conduct a search of governmentworkplac comput it is
import to determin whether a reason expect of privaci exist to answer that
question on must look at whether there wa a prior notic that diminish the expect
on can also look at the polici practic of the agenc have a polici and onli select
enforc it tend to diminish the polici to the point that it mai not negat the privaci
expect on must also look to the open and access of the workplac to other
digit forens investig
3712 2011 fraud examin manual
employe final wa there a written waiver of the employe expectati on of privaci if an
expect of privaci doe not exist then the fourth amend will not appli if it is
determin that an expect of privaci doe exist then what is the purpos behind the
search is it a workrel search such as look for a miss file or is it due to an
alleg of misconduct if it is a workrel search the search must be justifi base on
the overal circumst it must be justifi in it incept and permiss in scope if the
search under these condit is sole for the purpos of a crimin investig then a
probabl caus warrant will gener be necessari in addit to the employe consent
it should also be note that person digit devic ar becom more common in the
workplac employe often carri smart phone thumb drive or mp3 player into the
offic each of these devic is capabl of store larg amount of data and can easili be
us to steal a compani intellectu properti becaus these devic ar often purchas by
the employe for person us a search warrant mai be need to seiz or search these
devic becaus employe mai have a reason expect of privaci in these type of
person devic therefor it is extrem import to includ such devic in the
compani search polici the polici should cl earli state that ani person electron devic
includ laptop cell phone smart phone thumb drive mp3 player and so forth ar
just like handbag and briefcas subject to search if brought onto the compani premis
search warrant
if howev a search warrant is requir addit consider must be address a
search warrant is a court order that grant author the right to search a premis or properti
for inform pertin to the case
all warrant must satisfi the requir under the fourth amend that is all
warrant for search must be judici sanction and support by probabl caus and
thei must particularli describ the place to be search or thing to be seiz onli a
judg can issu a search warrant and onli law enforc can seek and serv a search
warrant
to obtain a valid search warrant law enforc offic prepar affidavit the affidavit
will detail the probabl caus or legal reason behind the request for the warrant often
law enforc personnel will need guidanc from the fraud examin as thei conduct pre
search prepar and construct the search warrant affidavit
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3713
but becaus the requir for these affidavit have been affect by technolog
innov fraud examin must consid sever new issu must when construct a
search warrant affidavit involv digit evid the fraud examin must know how to
write a warrant to seiz tangibl properti that contain intang evid further the
fraud examin must be allow to convert that evid into a humanread form eg
storag devic such as disk which contain inform that cannot be view without the
aid of some electron devic likewis the warrant must allow for the abil to seiz data
file pertin to the case that ar mix with data file which have noth to do with the
case but resid on the same storag devic
addition the warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizur of all
comput evid relev to the investig but narrow enough to exclud all materi
that is not and thi can be an extrem difficult standard to meet at time and might depend
on the magistr to whom the affidavit is present howev with some thought fraud
examin should be abl to justifi the search and seizur of everyth that thei need to
complet the search for evid item to be seiz might contain ani or all of the
follow depend on the natur of the fraud case
comput
comput compon
comput peripher
wordprocess equip
modem
monitor
printer
plotter
optic scanner
data storag devic
magnet
laser
optic
tape
pcmcia
portabl drive such as flash or thumb drive
cabl wire cord
storag media
disk
digit forens investig
3714 2011 fraud examin manual
magnet tape reel
pcmcia ram card
cdrom
magneticopt disk
digit audio tape dat
person data manag
flash ram card consid digitalcamera storag
comput program
oper system
applic softwar
util program
compil
interpret
document
manual
printout
file list
moreov to satisfi the particular requir of the fourth amend the affidavit
must be abl to justifi each item that might contain evid for exampl state that all
printer should be seiz might be overli broad unless the fraud examin can justifi the
need for each specif printer but with some thought fraud examin should be abl to
justifi the search and seizur of everyth thei need to complet the search for evid
also all relat document should also be seiz with the target comput system and
therefor it should be cover by the search warrant word such document is
import becaus it mai be critic when analyz the system hardwar and softwar
document could indic system chang that will help to avoid damag the system
document could also contain other help piec of inform eg the fact that access
control product have been ad to a system might be a help piec of inform
thu obtain as much intellig as possibl regard the locat of the potenti
evid is veri desir befor write the search warrant affidavit consider includ
determin the type of comput system that will be involv in the search what
oper system is us ar the comput network togeth
determin how mani peopl will be need to conduct the search
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3715
if expert wit with a specif expertis ar requir dure the search identifi and
clear them befor the search warrant is written depend on the circumst their
credenti should possibl be includ in the warrant affidavit befor thei ar approv
by the magistr issu the search warrant
determin the resourc that will be requir to conduct the search if a great deal of
equip is to be seiz consid how the equip will be transport from the
locat obtain suffici box label bag and other suppli at thi time
consid the time of the search
four phase
there ar sever definit and differ school of thought for investig involv
comput forens but all practition in the field will agre that investig typic
involv four phase seizur imag acquisit analysi and report and testifi
each phase is depend on the phase that come befor it for instanc if the seizur phase
is handl incorrectli then each of the follow phase can suffer and ultim render the
report and testifi phase moot
seiz digit evid
perhap the most critic step in the forens process is how data is collect or acquir
acquisit of digit evid must be complet in such a wai as to ensur that all relev
evid is seiz and secur in a forens sound manner so that the evid is not
taint or destroi
in fact there ar a number of practic consider and procedur to emploi when the
decis is made to go forward with a comput seizur on of the primari consider
that is often neglect is debrief the subject which involv ask the subject for
password and whether ani encrypt data exist on the target comput
the scientif work group on digit evid swgde from the organ of
american state ha publish a document titl best practic for comput forens
which provid a good foundat for digit forens examin although a complet
5 scientif work group on digit evid of the nation center for forens scienc best practic for
comput forens v2 2006 httpwwwoasorgjuridico panishcybbestpractpdf
digit forens investig
3716 2011 fraud examin manual
review of the entir document is beyond the scope of thi cours sever guidelin deserv
review accord to the swgde examin should adher to the follow guidelin
befor obtain evid ensur that there is legal author to seiz evid and
review the data associ with the evid thi mai requir obtain a warrant in a
crimin matter or ensur that intern polici author seizur for an intern
investig
if remov evid from the scene is impract copi or imag the item of evid
accord to establish procedur
remov all suspect wit and bystand from the proxim of the digit
evid keep in mind that remot access to comput can put potenti evid at
risk even if no person ha physic access to the comput also consid the wide rang
of mobil data storag devic todai eg usb flash drive that can be hidden
ensur that no suspect wit and bystand possess ani item contain
potenti evid
thoroughli and systemat search the scene for potenti evid onc again
consid the wide rang of data storag media and devic
unless complet unavoid data should not be analyz on the machin from which it
wa collect instead the examin should make forens sound copi of all data
storag devic primarili hard drive and analyz the data on these copi
to ensur that a machin can be fulli analyz the examin should take the follow
step
examin and document the machin surround
secur the evid
power down carefulli
inspect for trap
implement a system to manag the evid
examin and document the machin surround
the first step in the evid collect process is to examin and document the machin
surround thi includ collect all printout disk note and other physic evid
for further analysi document the scene with photograph or a diagram depend on the
complex of the setup rememb that it mai be a year or longer befor testimoni about
what the offic look like on the dai of the seizur will be ask for in a legal proceed
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3717
when document the condit of the evid the examin should consid
document what is on the screen if the system is on
document ani process that ar current run
take photograph of the variou view of the equip and media to document ani
damag or defect
take photograph of the equip physic connect
make a draw of the locat to document the layout and rel locat from
which evid wa seiz
addition becaus mani peopl have a habit of write down or record their
password near their comput examin should look around for note that mai appear to
be password thi mai aid in discov password need to access encrypt data if the
subject of the investig is be uncoop
take good note on the machin state at the ti me of the seizur record the time and date
that the system wa seiz and the personnel involv in the seizur the statu of the
system should also be note wa it on off or on standbi wa there anyth unusu
attach to the system wa there ani obviou damag did ani file have to be save
also if the comput wa activ record ani open applic make sure to start a chain of
custodi document and note each person and storag locat through which each piec of
evid pass
in addit to document the machin state at the time of seizur the examin should
document ani serial number and other potenti identifi mark eg manufactur
model number asset track number etc and he should photograph and diagram the
system entir configur
secur the evid
when secur a comput system follow the two golden rule the first rule is if the
comput is off dont turn it on also if a comp uter is on an investig will not want it to
go through it normal shutdown routin becaus window is veri good about clean up
after itself a number of temporari file will be delet and possibl overwritten dure a
normal shutdown and some of these file mai be import to the investig in most
case the investig should simpli unplug a run comput onc the investig take
possess of the comput he should not allow anyon access it with the except of a
train forens examin
digit forens investig
3718 2011 fraud examin manual
there ar other reason to conduct the seizur in thi wai by preserv the state of the
system at the time of seizur on can help to defeat an argument by oppos counsel that
exculpatori inform wa somehow taint or eras due to mishandl of the system if
on bit is chang in the system data it will ha ve a complet differ hash valu that is
to sai it would be differ than the origin even though the averag person mai not be
abl to recogn ani differ at all
all data is compos of bit binari digit it take eight bit to make on byte which is
what we ar commonli us to hear when we talk about storag capac such as 256
megabyt on megabyt equal 1024 kilobyt and on kilobyt equal 1024 byte as you
can see on bit is a rel infinitesim piec of data but it is import that not even on
bit of data be alter by the forens process
the second golden rule when secur a comput is do not peek through the file thi
also appli to disk if a system is run the examin mai be tempt to click on the my
comput icon to look for evid or copi file to a flash or optic storag devic thi
should never be done becaus each file the investig touch will have it origin time
stamp chang onc thi is done the origin time stamp cannot be recov it will be
obviou to the forens examin that thi ha occur
there ar two method for shut down a run system a hard shutdown and a grace
shutdown gener the hard shutdown is prefer there mai be extenu
circumst that would lead the investig to perform a grace shutdown so it is
import to evalu the best shutdown option base on the type of data be preserv
and the possibl ramif of a hard shutdown base on the type of oper system
instal a hard shutdown is basic pull the power cord from the back of the pc
laptop comput howev requir addit consider when seiz a laptop it is
import to remov the batteri first and then pull the plug it is essenti when seiz a
laptop to recov all of the compon that belong to the laptop such as flash drive cdrom
and dvdrom and power suppli often laptop comput must be imag with their
drive instal and becaus of the proprietari natur of the laptop themselv thei will
onli function with their own compon mani time these compon can be locat in
the laptop carri case
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3719
similarli network comput also present uniqu consider when power down a
network comput remov the power suppli from the back of the comput
when handl server howev it is import to us extrem caution when remov
power from a server without us proper shutdown method becaus thi can damag the
system and expos the examin to liabil
onc a comput is seiz it is necessari to secur it in such a wai that will allow the
investig to testifi if need be that no unauthor access to the suspect system
occur
inspect for trap
examin should also inspect the comput chassi for trap intrus detect softwar
and selfdestruct mechan although complet destroi a hard drive is extrem
difficult it is not difficult to make recoveri veri difficult
implement a system to manag the evid
examin should have a system to track and manag physic and digit evid the
most common method us to track physic evid is to assign each item a uniqu
evid number although thi number can be in ani format it should be consist and
never repeat
imag acquisit
to avoid alter evid the examin should make forens sound imag of the
suspect system for analysi imag acquisit involv us a standalon hard drive
duplic or similar devic to duplic a comput entir drive thi process is known as
imag becaus the hard drive can be imag to anoth hard disk drive a tape or other
media
the examin ha to be sure that the imag is creat and preserv in a manner that will
withstand a legal challeng therefor befor imag a hard drive the examin must
determin the best method for acquir an imag and the proper procedur to facilit the
imag captur
digit forens investig
3720 2011 fraud examin manual
dure the imag process examin should us some type of writeprotect devic or
applic to ensur no inform is written onto the origin drive and after the hard
drive is duplic the origin drive is move to a secur locat to prevent tamper
analysi
the analysi phase is arguabl the most timeconsum phase especi for a financi
crime or fraud investig thi phase involv the us of special softwar design to
give the examin the mean to locat and extract artifact that will be us as evid in
the investig the evid can serv to incrimin the subject of the investig or it
can be exculpatori by disprov the subject involv
the primari concern when analyz electron store inform esi is to maintain
it integr examin must be care with comput equip becaus a careless
investig mai inadvert alter import evid therefor it is help to develop
procedur to prevent the oppos parti from rais alleg that the methodolog us
to collect or analyz data wa improp and could have damag or alter the evid it
mai also be help to us a hardwarebas writeblock devic to protect the integr of
digit evid
on method to help ensur the integr of digi tal evid is to maintain a chain of custodi
for all evid gather and analyz the chain of custodi is both a process and a document
that memori 1 who ha had possess of an object and 2 what thei have done with
it it is simpli a mean of establish that there ha not been a materi chang or alter
to a piec of evid gap in the chain of custodi eg when it is not clear what occur
with a set of record or outright mishandl eg a group of question document wa
not properli seal can harm a case
at a minimum the follow chain of custodi procedur should be follow for digit
evid
identifi each item that contain relev inform
document each item who it wa receiv from who author it remov the locat
of the item and the date and time the item wa receiv
maintain a continu record of the item custodi as it chang hand
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3721
report and testifi
the report and testifi phase is where the hour of analysi ar report fairli and
object in thi phase a qualifi comput forens expert mai be ask to render an
opinion about the us or misus of a comput system thi is where experi and train
ar test and where examin must know with certainti that their opinion is base on their
research knowledg and experi and that an oppos expert will not find fault with
their conclus
forens examin and analysi
while everi fraud examin should have basic knowledg of comput evid and how to
properli identifi collect and store digit evid some fraud examin mai decid to
pursu addit train in the area of comput forens analysi the process of
develop the skill set necessari to be a computerforens examin take a consider
amount of time train and experi addition there ar a number of softwar and
hardwar tool that ar now avail to conduct thi type of work the forens examin
must be awar of these tool and understand how thei work
again a forens analysi of a comput could involv the examin of a tremend
volum of data in 1993 the averag hard disk wa 60 megabyt mb in size the standard
size in 1999 wa 8 gigabyt gb and current the averag size of hard disk offer is
between 120 gb and 19 terabyt
forens examin will gener us at least two softwar tool on a project simultan
to crossvalid their result it is also import to note that mani insuffici train
examin who us autom tool do not in fact understand what the autom process is
do it is extrem import to understand and be abl to articul how a tool is
conduct an autom process thi mean that a forens examin who us an
autom tool should be abl to explain how to conduct the same process manual
becaus the primari concern when collect and analyz digit evid is to maintain it
integr forens examin must be care with comput equip therefor it is
help to develop procedur to prevent the oppos parti from rais alleg that the
methodolog us to collect or analyz data wa improp and could have damag or
alter the evid it mai also be help to us a hardwar or softwar writeblock
devic to protect the integr of digit evid these devic allow the user to acquir
digit forens investig
3722 2011 fraud examin manual
inform on a drive without damag the drive content by allow read command to
pass and block write command
a hardwar writeblock devis stop ani autom process or incident process
that an oper system or examin mai us to interact with a piec of digit media that
is the devis trick the oper system into believ that the interact occur so that it
will not gener an error and thwart the acquisit process what actual happen is that
the write command ar intercept and cach by the devic instead of reach the target
therefor no write to the media occur the devic allow onli read permiss to the
media
the softwar write blocker howev deni access to media by prohibit certain request
to the media by filter out those request onli read request ar accept and all write
request ar deni softwar write blocker must oper at a separ level than a standard
graphic user interfac gui such as in do mode there ar a number of these type of
devic on the market todai made for all applic and media type
keyword search
onc the collect process is complet examin ar left with larg volum of digit data
that mai contain relev or irrelev inform at thi point the examin must process
and filter the digit inform to reduc the amount of data commonli known as data
cull that ha been collect by perform keyword search to identifi relev
inform
keyword search involv identifi relev evid by search for word that ar
materi to a case eg name date account number etc thi type of search will
minim the amount of time us to complet an analysi and it will help protect the fraud
examin from alleg that hi search wa overli broad
base on the inform known about the case the examin should establish a list of
relev keyword becaus enorm amount of data will need to be search in most
fraud examin examin and investig should take care in keep the list as short
and relev as possibl and thei should avoid common word or word that can be part of
other word as a case progress there is a strong likelihood that more keyword will be
identifi furthermor search term can be devis to look for pattern in data
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3723
recov evid
in addit to live file a wealth of inform can be recov and analyz on seiz
system becaus window oper system ar the most wide us knowledg about the
file systemsmethod us to store and organi ze comput file and the data thei contain
for easi accessus by the window oper system is critic knowledg of the
window oper system will help the examin locat relev evid that is commonli
found in file store on hard drive storag devic and media
common file contain evid store in the oper system includ usercr file
userprotect file and computercr file
usercr file
usercr file ar file creat under the user direct and includ textbas
document spreadsheet databas email address book present slide audiovideo
file imag file internet bookmark and so on
userprotect file
often user hide file to prevent them from be found there ar a varieti of techniqu
to hide file but some of the most common method ar detail below
camouflag file
a user might camouflag certain file under an innoc name or differ file extens to
prevent other from discov them for exampl a suspect might chang a file name
from evidencedoc to instal ex and place the file in a directori that store program
file therefor examin should analyz a target hard drive to determin whether ani file
type have been camouflag thi is done by analyz the file header the first bit of data
in a file which contain data identifi the file format
steganographi
steganographi is the process of hide on piec of inform within an appar
innoc file for exampl a user can us the least signific bit of a bitmap imag to hide
a messag by hide the messag in the least signific bit of an imag there is almost no
perceiv chang in the bitmap imag itself and without directli compar the alter
imag to the origin it is practic imposs to tell that the imag wa alter
digit forens investig
3724 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
after a french defens contractor suspect that some of hi critic design were be
compromis the govern conduct an invest igat the investig reveal that an
employe had obtain hi posit at the compani to steal the contractor trade secret to
transmit the trade secret out of the compani the employe imbed them into graphic imag
us on the compani public access websit usin g steganographi anoth parti then copi the
imag file from the websit and extract the proprietari design
digit audio file ar anoth type of file that can be us to hide messag for exampl
by encod a messag in the least signific bit of a wav file a user can make the
messag almost imposs to detect messag can also be hidden in the unus sector of a
floppi disk
encrypt
encrypt refer to procedur us to convert inform us an algorithm call cipher
that make the inform unread although there ar mani free and commerci
encrypt program avail there ar two primari wai to access encrypt inform
first there ar numer util program that can decrypt document encrypt by mani of
the more common softwar applic in addit some encrypt program have a
secret kei for emerg that mai be veri help in an investig there ar also
sever compani that special in decrypt
second there is preced for forc a suspect or employe to divulg hi decrypt
code the comput is onli a contain and encrypt is an addit lock prohibit the
investig from review the file for potenti evid an examin with a legal right to
examin encrypt data is no differ than order a suspect or employe to unlock a file
cabinet to inspect it content
altern data stream
anoth method us to hide file in window system is the us of the altern data
stream of a file or directori thi method howev is onli possibl in window new
technolog file system ntf on of two basic type of file system us to organ
data in window system altern data stream ar a featur in the ntf filesystem that
offer the abil to put data into exist file and folder without affect their
function size or displai in mani tradit filebrows util like command line or
window explor
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3725
although window explor doe not provid a wai to see what altern data stream ar
in a file thei ar easi to make and allow an individu with basic knowledg to hide file
without have to resort to ani thirdparti tool
fortun there ar forens tool that can search ntf partit for altern data
stream
computercr file
evid mai also be found in inform gener by the oper system thi type of
inform is import becaus it can identifi that a certain activ ha taken place and in
most case the user is not awar that it is be written some common exampl of
computergener data avail for examin includ metadata registri page file
event log lnk file internet activ temporari data delet data and printerspool file
metadata
metadata is data about data and these file tidbit contain a tremend amount of
inform it can help determin who wrote a document who receiv open copi
edit move or print the document and when these event occur
window registri
the window registri is a central databas that store set and configur for the
oper system and most applic instal on the system the registri is an import
sourc of potenti evidenti data becaus it contain inform on user account type
url network share the run command histori and so on often softwar us by the
fraudster will creat a footprint in the registri that can provid valuabl insight into relev
activ that occur in the system
window page file
oper system have a limit suppli of random access memori ram and if an
oper system run out of physic ram and need more memori it will move some of
the data outsid physic memori and store it temporarili in a special file on the hard disk
thi file which is call a page file or a swap file is us to simul ram
window event log
event log ar file that record signific event on a comput in window system there
ar three type of event system applicat ion and secur the system log track
digit forens investig
3726 2011 fraud examin manual
miscellan system event includ event gener dure system startup like hardwar
and control failur the applic log track applicationrel event and applic
error such as fail to load a dll the secur log which is turn off by default track
securityrel event like logon and logoff time and chang to access right
lnk file
lnk file which ar also call shortcut refer or link to target file that mai be
applic document or system resourc click on a lnk file will either caus the
applic to start or the document to open and will prompt the applic system
resourc to run although the user mai creat these file the system gener creat them
when a user perform certain task these file therefor provid a histori of previous
open document and file
internet activ
web browser creat temporari file that store inform about websit that a user ha
visit these file can show websit that were recent visit and usual includ time and
date inform relev to the visit thei ca n also show imag previous view onlin
thi inform allow the examin to recov websit and imag previous view by
the system user
temporari file
applic will creat temporari file like those creat by web browser for exampl
certain commun softwar like instant messag im and chat softwar will keep a
histori of the user convers in a proprietari and sometim encrypt format
delet data
delet is a wide misunderstood function in comput becaus delet data is not the
same as destroi data choos the delet option eras the file refer from the tabl
of content but it doe not eras the file in fa ct data is not eras from a comput hard
drive until the file is overwritten
printerspool file
it is sometim possibl to recov an imag of the last page print on a printer when
comput run window oper system print file a printspool process occur
the process involv write the print job to file allow user to keep work while the
print job run in the background after the user creat a print job it is place in a queue
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3727
and is print when the printer becom avail to perform the job onc print is
complet the oper system delet the file but again delet file can be recov
digit forens softwar
in recent year a number of product have emerg for digit forens analysi thei rang
in complex featur and price these product ar continu updat as new technolog
requir new featur below is a gener list of the most frequent us product on the
market todai thi is sure to be constantli chang pleas note that the product
descript ar adapt from materi provid by the manufactur and the acf doe
not endors ani particular product
encas forens
encas forens is a comput forens softwar program by guidanc softwar it give
investig the abil to imag a drive and preserv it in a forens manner us the
encas evid file format lef or e01 a digit evid contain vet by court
worldwid
encas forens also contain a full suit of analysi bookmark and report featur
guidanc softwar and third parti vendor provid support for expand capabl to
ensur that forens examin have the most comprehens set of util
encas forens also offer power hidden volum detect and volum rebuild
capabl allow investig to review evid that would have been irretriev with
other comput forens applic
how encas forens work
obtain forens sound acquisit
encas forens produc an exact binari duplic of the origin drive or media then
verifi it by gener md5 hash valu for relat imag file and assign crc valu to
the data these check and balanc reveal when evid ha been tamper with or
alter help to keep all digit evid forens sound for us in court proceed
advanc product featur
examin can preview data while drive or other media ar be acquir onc the imag
file ar creat examin can search and analyz multipl drive or other media
digit forens investig
3728 2011 fraud examin manual
simultan encas forens also featur a case index thi power tool build a
complet index in multipl languag allow for fast and easi queri indic can also be
chain togeth to find keyword common to other investig thi unicodesupport
index contain person document delet file file system artifact file slack swap file
unalloc space email and web page in addit encas ha extens file system
support give organ the abil to analyz all type of data
enscript program
encas forens featur enscript program capabl enscript an objectori
program languag similar to java or c allow user creat to custom program to
help them autom timeconsum investig task such as search and analyz
specif document type or other laborintens process and procedur
provid action data and report on it
onc investig have bookmark relev data thei can creat a report suitabl for
present in court to manag or to anoth legal author data can also be
export in multipl file format for review
kei featur
advanc search option
internet and email support
multipl viewer
instant messag analysi
enscript program
bookmark
extens system file support
multipl acquisit option
for more inform about encas forens visit wwwguidancesoftwarecom
forens toolkit
creat by accessdata the accessdata forens toolkit ftk offer law enforc and
corpor secur profession the abil to perform complet and thorough comput
forens examin the ftk featur file filter and search function ftk
customiz filter allow investig to sort through thousand of file to quickli find the
evid thei need ftk is also a forens tool to perform email analysi
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3729
some of the main featur of thi product ar discuss below
integr comput forens
creat imag analyz the registri conduct an investig decrypt file crack
password identifi steganographi and build a report all with a singl solut
recov password from 100 applic har idl cpu across the network to
decrypt file and perform robust dictionari attack
kff hash librari with 45 million hash
enterpriseclass architectur
support larg complex dataset
becaus the ftk compon ar compartment the user will never lose work due
to a crash eg if the gui crash the worker continu to process data
provid the abil to back up and archiv case
everi copi of ftk 3 includ a total of four worker to enabl distribut process
it incorpor lab capabl such as the abil to leverag a central databas
infrastructur and share distribut process farm as well as collabor forens
analysi central casetask manag and web review thi is of particular valu to law
enforc and govern comput forens lab
power process and speed
distribut process allow the user to leverag up to three addit comput to
reduc process time and tackl massiv data set
true multiprocessor and multithread support that take advantag of hardwar
advanc
pre and postprocess refin allow user to control how imag ar process
an advanc datacarv engin that allow user to carv alloc and unalloc
data and specifi criteria such as file size data type and pixel size to reduc the amount
of irrelev data carv while increas overal thorough
optim dtsearch integr deliv fast index and fast search result
advanc analyt
ram dump analysi
an index search engin and a proper fullfeatur regular express engin for binari
search
broad file system compound file and email support
digit forens investig
3730 2011 fraud examin manual
support popular encrypt technolog such as credant safeboot utimaco ef
pgp and guardian edg
mac support
preview acquisit and analysi of live data
perform networkbas secur singlesystem forens acquisit of physic devic
logic volum and ram
secur remot devic mount
for more inform on accessdata visit wwwaccessdatacom
password recoveri toolkit
the password recoveri toolkit prtk fr om accessdata is gear toward law
enforc and corpor secur profession it allow examin to find and identifi
encrypt file on handheld desktop and server comput system prtk recov lost
forgotten or unavail password if user need access to lock file or if thei have
simpli lock themselv out of their file the prtk can get them back in
secur risk assess tool
how do hacker bypass an organ strongest secur measur mani peopl us the
same password to gain access to differ program and network thi could be on of the
weakest link in an organ secur profil some passwordprotect program ar
easi to crack while other ar virtual imposs but what if the same password is us for
both program by gain access to the weakest on fraudster have gain access to the
strongest on without need to crack both
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3731
recoveri properti statu
featur
enabl password manag
analyz file and their password with an option report file
recov all type of password regardless of password length
analyz multipl file at on time
recov multilingu password
prevent unauthor us with a person secur code
for more inform on accessdata visit wwwaccessdatacom
prodiscov forens
produc by technolog pathwai prodiscov forens is a comput secur tool for
law enforc that enabl comput profession to find all the data on a comput disk
while protect evid and creat evidentiari qualiti report for us in legal
proceed
featur
creat bitstream copi of the disk to be analyz includ a hidden hpa section
patent pend to keep origin evid safe
search file or an entir disk includ slack space hpa section and window
nt2000xp altern data stream for complet disk forens analysi
preview all file even if hidden or delet without alter the data on a disk includ
file metadata
digit forens investig
3732 2011 fraud examin manual
maintain multitool compat by read and write imag in the pervas unix
dd format
examin and cross refer data at the file or cluster level to ensur noth is
hidden even in slack space
automat gener and record md5 sha1 or sha256 hash to prove
data integr
examin fat12 fat16 fat 32 and all ntf file system includ dynam disk
and softwar raid for maximum flexibl
examin sun solari uf file system and linux ext2ext3 file system
integr graphic thumbnail viewer and registri viewer
integr window event log viewer
extract internet histori
util perl script to autom investig task
extract exif inform from jpeg file to identifi file creator
autom report gener in xml format save time and improv accuraci and
compat
gui interfac and integr help function ensur a quick start and eas of us
design to nist disk imag tool specif 316 to ensur high qualiti
prodiscov forens is a tool for comput forens analysi it is not possibl to hide
data from prodiscov forens as it read the disk at the sector level thi least intrus
approach also allow the investig to examin the file without alter ani valuabl
metadata such as last time access prodiscov forens will not alter ani data on the
disk prodiscov forens can recov delet file examin slack space and access
window altern data stream it can even allow the investig to preview search and
imag the hardwar protect area hpa of the disk with a patentpend process
prodiscov forens let the investig search through the entir disk for keyword and
phrase with full boolean search capabl to find the data thei want investig can us
the hash comparison capabl to find known illeg file or to weed out known good file
such as standard oper system file by emploi the includ data from the nation
drug intellig center in their hashkeep databas prodiscov forens search
capabl allow search for word or phrase anywher on the disk includ the slack
space
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3733
prodiscov forens automat creat evidentiari qualiti report need to document
result complet with everi file and hash signatur where evid wa found thi save
time and prevent error that might compromis an investig case
for more inform about technolog pathwai visit at wwwtechpathwayscom
gargoyl investig forens pro edit
gargoyl investig is a softwar tool creat by wetston for digit investig it is
us for perform incid respons field investig digit forens analysi threat
manag or complianc audit gargoyl investig perform a quick search on a
standalon system for known contraband or hostil or bad program it also provid
clue regard the activ motiv and intent of suspect or potenti suspect
gargoyl investig forens pro edit provid investig with inform
regard the content of a suspect comput along with inform about it owner
comput us gargoyl perform search for known bad or hostil program their
associ file and remnant of file onc identifi gargoyl also map the detect file
to the associ cyber weapon and classifi them into a categori of malwar
the forens pro edit is design for forens investig examin law enforc
personnel privat investig and forens lab us
digit forens investig
3734 2011 fraud examin manual
gargyol
gargoyl provid the investig with the abil to gather suspect characterist from the
inform reveal the comput sophisticat ion covert behavior and paranoia level
ha the suspect tri to delet incrimin program can all be deriv when search
for applic with a common theme these behavior can assist in assess suspect
capabl activ intent threat or conscious of guilt
for more inform about forens pro edit and other product by wetston visit
wwwwetstonetechcom
stego suit
the stego suit by wetston is a softwar bundl avail for the investig detect
analysi and recoveri of digit steganographi it identifi the presenc of steganographi
without prior knowledg of the steganographi algorithm that might have been us against
the target file
wetston stego suit compris four product stego watch a steganographi tool stego
analyst an imag and audio file analyz stego break a password cracker and the recent
ad stego hunter a steganographi applic identifi
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3735
stego watch
stego analysi
stego break
digit forens investig
3736 2011 fraud examin manual
postmortem analysi of data recov from a digit crime scene can be a tediou process
when the digit data contain thousand of imag audio file or digit video that mai
contain other hidden evid the process can be imposs without the aid of kei
technolog and expertis stego suit tool provid the abil to quickli examin and
evalu digit imag andor audio data for the presenc of hidden inform
or commun
activ web scan of a websit to ensur that unauthor peopl ar not us the site
to exchang innocuouslook messag or smuggl proprietari data is also becom a
must the tool of stego suit baselin a web domain and continu scan the domain for
the presenc of hidden data insid digit imag
for more inform about the stego suit and other product by wetston visit
wwwwetstonetechcom
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3801
