2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Conducting an Investigation Involving Computers


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Conducting an Investigation Involving Computers 
The increasing usage of the Internet and other technology in all aspects of our personal and 
professional lives has created new opportunities for technology to be used in perpetrating 
almost every type of fraud, and in most fraud cases, investigators gather some type of digital 
evidence. 
 
Fraud examiners must therefore be prepared to address the myriad issues related to 
examinations involving digital evidence.  
 
Computer Investigation Versus Computer Forensics 
While at first, the term computer investigation may appear synonymous with computer 
forensics, there is an important distinction between the two. An investigator leading an 
investigation into a crime that involves a computer is not necessarily and, in most cases, 
should not be the forensic examiner. It is important to keep these areas separate. Combining 
the two, especially in cases in which the suspect is already named, invites questions about the 
objectivity of the forensic examination. It could also subject investigators to unwelcome 
scrutiny regarding whether they suppressed exculpatory evidence that may have been found 
during an examination by a more objective investigator. 
 
Digital Evidence 
Digital evidence, when boiled down to its basics, is simply binary data (ones and zeroes) that 
is interpreted by the computer. Everything that is digitally stored is made up of these ones 
and zeroes, from the programs themselves to the data with which the programs interact. 
Interpreters built into the program show these ones and zeroes as hex code. This hex code is 
then translated onto the page or website seen on the computer screen. 
 
As the professional use computer technology increases, so does the criminal use. Financial 
crimes and frauds committed are probably the most common types of computer crimes 
committed. The investigation of financial crimes generally requires a level of expertise not 
commonly held by all investigators; therefore,  there is additional knowledge and experience 
required when conducting a forensic computer examination in a financial or fraud case.  
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.702   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There are three types of situations in which computer evidence is generally discovered: (1) 
computers as the target of crime, (2) computers as the instrument of crime, and (3) 
computers as the repository of evidence. 
 
Computers themselves can be the targets of crime. Crimes committed against computers 
include computer and computer-component theft, system intrusions, software piracy, and 
software theft. 
 
Computers can also be used to facilitate a crime. When this occurs, the computer is known 
as the tool or instrument  of crime. In such cases, as one would expect, examiners commonly 
encounter computers that have been used in offenses such as the solicitation of minors in 
chat rooms, check fraud, and counterfeiting. 
 
Generally speaking, in all computer investigations the examiner attempts to locate the 
storage of potential digital evidence, in one form or another, on the computer system. The 
computer system involved in the investigation is a potential repository of evidence whether 
the user intended to store an item or not. Therefore, the examiner is interested in 
incriminating evidence that the user intentionally or unintentionally stored on the computer 
system. 
 
Integrity of Digital Evidence 
Electronic evidence is more volatile than paper information, and because it can be easily 
altered or destroyed, it must be handled properly. For example, computer files can be altered 
simply through the normal startup process. Most  of the Microsoft operating systems, such as 
Windows XP, change the time and date stamps on a number of files during startup and 
delete a number of temporary files during the shutdown process. These pieces of 
information could be critical to the investigation. 
 
The destruction of digital evidence through improper handling can result in a finding of 
spoliation of evidence by a judge or can raise questions about the alteration of exculpatory 
evidence by the defense.  
 
Additionally, if a judge determines that the authenticity of the evidence cannot be 
satisfactorily made, then he may rule that the evidence is inadmissible. Although digital 
evidence is different from tangible evidence, the rules regarding its admissibility in court is 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.703 
really no different from the admissibility of any other type of evidence. To be admissible, 
digital evidence must be: 
• Relevant  
• Supported by a foundation for its introduction into court 
• Legally obtained 
• Properly identified 
• Properly preserved 
 
Therefore, should the fraud examiner discover digital evidence, he must be able to state 
unequivocally that the evidence was not changed in any way by his actions. This requires that 
strict forensic methodologies be followed to satisfy the stringent evidentiary standards 
necessary to ensure the integrity of the evidence “beyond a reasonable doubt” for 
presentation in court. 
 
Forensic Experts 
Also, when conducting an examination involving computers, the examiner should determine 
whether an outside forensic examiner is needed or whether the expertise is available in-house. 
Some organizations have their own in-house personnel, whom they have trained and 
outfitted with the proper equipment and software tools to conduct the examination and 
analyze digital evidence while others may prefer the use of an outside examiner who will be 
able to conduct a thorough examination, prepare a proper report, and deliver expert 
testimony if needed in legal proceedings. 
 
Sometimes information retrieval is as easy as obtaining a warrant and searching the hard 
drive of the target computer. But many fraudsters anticipate their exposure and delete 
incriminating files from their machines. In these instances, it is important to know that there 
are a variety of ways of recovering deleted or hidden data from a target computer and its 
peripherals. 
 
A computer-forensic examiner is a trained professional who is capable of analyzing digital 
media at the hexadecimal level. The hexadecimal level means that every sector and all the 
bytes in those sectors are available for viewing. This includes deleted files, both purposefully 
deleted and those that were deleted through various Windows-automated processes. This 
can also include temporary auto-save files, print-spool files, deleted e-mails, and link files. 
The hexadecimal level also contains various items found in restore points and registry files 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.704   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that define hardware, such as external drives and websites visited, in addition to the 
document revisions and files created and maintained by the user. 
 
The increased sophistication of Windows allows the computer system to store more 
information about how people use their computers. The forensic examiner will be able to 
uncover a large amount of data that relates to the use of a computer, what is or has been 
stored on it, and the details about the user. In Micr osoft’s effort to “be all” to the user, it has 
incorporated ways to make computer use more secure, such as offering encryption and other 
methods to protect data from unwanted access. In the future, these types of innovations will 
stall the examiner and will sometimes successfully prevent system access. However, these 
encryption packages are not always foolproof. The Encrypted File System offered by 
Microsoft has in fact been cracked by a number  of password-cracking software makers. In 
addition to encryption files, other encryption algorithms exist that are easily installed and can 
be used to encrypt the entire hard drive. In situations such as this, it becomes necessary for 
the examiner to be able to identify whether a drive is encrypted before seizing and 
disconnecting the system. 
 
Moreover, computer-forensic examiners have special tools and software designed to 
facilitate a thorough and legally sufficient analysis of items that contain digital evidence. It is 
important to allow a trained examiner to conduct a proper seizure and examination on a 
piece of evidence so the investigator will have the best chance of using that evidence in a 
legal proceeding. Whether an agency or company is defending against an unlawful 
termination suit or filing a criminal complaint, it is vital that the digital evidence is handled 
properly. 
 
Furthermore, whether technical specialists are needed to assist with an investigation will 
depend on the complexity of the examination required. The more technical the nature of the 
crime, the more technical and specialized the analytical skills required. Some computer 
investigations, however, do not require extremely sophisticated technical skills. For example, 
in cases where the computer is the instrument used to commit the crime (e.g., scams 
involving payroll applications, cooking the books, fraudulent electronic funds transfers, 
insider trading, etc.), the fraud examiner need only know how to search a database and 
analyze the results. 
 
Additionally, this determination will depend on the examiners skill levels. Therefore, an 
examiner conducting an examination involving computers must have a basic understanding 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.705 
of his skill levels and must be aware of his limitations in the field of computer technology 
because, in many instances, one or more technical specialists are needed to assist with an 
investigation.  
 
Within the computer forensics field, there are several different types of special experts: 
• Operating and file system experts : These experts are proficient in certain operating systems 
(e.g., Windows 7, Unix, Solaris, OS X, or AS400) and the various file systems they 
employ (e.g., Joliet, NTFS, FAT, VFS, Ex t2), and they have the ability to convey 
operational characteristics and observe artifacts. 
• Data recovery experts : These experts operate clean rooms designed to magnetically extract 
information from a damaged media source. Using special tools and equipment, these 
experts can disassemble a hard disk, separate the platters, and extract and reassemble the 
information for subsequent examination. 
• Forensic accounting experts : A forensic accountant can prov ide various services, including 
audits, accountant performance reviews, and examinations of financial documents for 
fraud, misconduct, or industry standard violations. 
• Tape and archival extraction experts : These are experts in extracting information from tape or 
other system backups. Typically, backup solutions archive data in proprietary formats, 
making extraction very cumbersome. 
• Intrusion and malicious code experts : These experts specialize in investigating computer 
network intrusions. Specialists can determine attack vectors, the tools employed, what 
occurred during access, and what, if anything, was taken. 
 
But given the diversity of computer-related fraud, no person can be an expert in all aspects 
of computer technology. 
 
Locating Evidence 
To conduct a successful examination, examiners must know what to look for and where to 
look for it, but this can be difficult because digital data can be stored large volumes and in a 
number of different locations.  
 
The efficiency of computer technology has allowed users to create more voluminous pieces 
of data than was once possible. Computer hard drives are packed with digital data, and data 
storage now exceeds gigabytes. Therefore, it is necessary to reference larger storage 
capacities. Here is a chart that will help: 
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.706   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Name  Abbr.  Size  
Kilo K 2^10 = 1,024 
Mega M 2^20 = 1,048,576 
Giga G 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 
Tera T 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 
Peta P 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 
Exa E 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 
Zetta Z 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 
Yotta Y 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 
 
Furthermore, digital evidence may be located in a number of different locations. In addition 
to being stored on computers, evidence will be located in any form of technology that can be 
used to transmit or store data. Therefore, it is also important to investigate any suspect 
workstation, including any peripherals or other portable media devices that can be used to 
transmit or store data, and the information stored on the company’s network. 
 
Workstation 
In addition to investigating the suspect’s mainframe, it is also important to investigate the 
suspect’s workstation, including any peripherals or other portable media devices that can be 
used to transmit or store data. As data moves to and from peripheral devices, it leaves 
evidence of its presence and sometimes leaves full copies of its contents.  
 
Therefore, fraud examiners should consider the many different types of peripherals that 
might contain evidence. Items to be seized might include any or all of the following items 
listed below, depending upon the nature of the fraud case. 
 
PRINTERS 
Examiners must also be aware that it might be possible to recover previously printed 
documents. Although the odds of recovery can be low depending on a variety of factors, 
understanding how retrieval can be achieved can be of great value to the investigator.  
 
In addition to using printer-spool files to recover previously printed documents, many 
printers have internal hard drives that may contain information relevant to a fraud 
examination. In general, any information sent to and stored by a printer is recoverable unless 
the printer has overwritten the data.  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.707 
Furthermore, some printers have memory buffer — temporary storage area of jobs waiting to be 
printed — which may also contain important information. Information contained in memory 
buffer, however, is generally limited to recently created and stored data.  
 
COPIERS AND SCANNERS 
Like some printers, copiers and other multifunction machines may have internal storage 
devices that store relevant data. In fact, almost every copier built since 2002 has a hard drive 
that stores images of documents the machines have copied, scanned, or e-mailed. Some 
copiers store user access records and a history of copies made. And, as with most file 
systems, it may be possible to retrieve information from a copier’s hard drive that has been 
deleted. As a result, copiers may be brimming with important information.  
 
FAX MACHINES 
Although some kinds of stand-alone fax machines simply scan and send data without storing 
it, like many printers and copiers, some fax machines store faxing data on their own internal 
hard drive. This data may remain in the machine’s memory until overwritten.  
 
BACKUP TAPES  
Backup tapes are a type of removable media that stores data and can be easily removed from 
a computer system or device. Most computer users archive their activities on backup tapes 
or some other form of external storage devices, and most companies use backup tapes to 
store old data, including e-mail data, that was once stored on their servers.  
 
REMOVABLE STORAGE DEVICES 
In addition to backup tapes, a suspect’s removable storage devices should be examined. 
Removable storage devices such as CDs, DVDs, USB flash drives (also known as thumb 
drives), mp3 players, and various other devices provide users with the ability to store large 
amounts of data. Such devices can be used to facilitate a variety of frauds. They provide 
users with the ability to store files that go undetected by anyone accessing the computer. 
Removable media can also be used to store copies of files containing sensitive information in 
order to facilitate unapproved use.  
 
SMART PHONES 
The proliferation of smart phones has made them an extremely valuable source of 
information. Smart phones (e.g., the iPhone and Blackberry) are cell phones that also have 
the ability to store personal data, search the Internet, check e-mail, instant message (IM), 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.708   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
make video calls, download/upload content to and from the Internet, take pictures, and 
record video. The information that can be stored on these small devices can be very 
important in many cases.  
 
Network 
In addition to searching for evidence on the suspect’s operating system and workstation, it is 
also important to examine information stored on company servers. A wealth of information, 
which is separate from a user’s workstation, may be stored on company servers. Data stored 
on company networks may include documents posted to a suspect’s own home directory on 
the network; collaborative work saved to a shared folder or directory; e-mail messages that 
have been sent, received, deleted, or archived; calendars; contact lists; and so on.   
 
Law Enforcement Assistance 
Before conducting a forensic examination, examiners must consider whether a crime has in 
fact been committed. If, at the beginning of the investigation, it is determined that the victim 
company will make a formal referral to law enforcement or prosecuting agency, then the 
authorities must be notified before the investigation begins to determine whether law 
enforcement personnel should participate in the examination. In some jurisdictions, an 
examiner from the law enforcement community may not be available. 
 
  



:


conduct an investig involv comput
the increas usag of the internet and other technolog in all aspect of our person and
profession live ha creat new opportun for technolog to be us in perpetr
almost everi type of fraud and in most fraud case investig gather some type of digit
evid
fraud examin must therefor be prepar to address the myriad issu relat to
examin involv digit evid
comput investig versu comput forens
while at first the term comput investig mai appear synonym with comput
forens there is an import distinct between the two an investig lead an
investig into a crime that involv a comput is not necessarili and in most case
should not be the forens examin it is import to keep these area separ combin
the two especi in case in which the suspect is alreadi name invit question about the
object of the forens examin it could also subject investig to unwelcom
scrutini regard whether thei suppress exculpatori evid that mai have been found
dure an examin by a more object investig
digit evid
digit evid when boil down to it basic is simpli binari data on and zero that
is interpret by the comput everyth that is digit store is made up of these on
and zero from the program themselv to the data with which the program interact
interpret built into the program show these on and zero as hex code thi hex code is
then translat onto the page or websit seen on the comput screen
as the profession us comput technolog increas so doe the crimin us financi
crime and fraud commit ar probabl the most common type of comput crime
commit the investig of financi crime gener requir a level of expertis not
commonli held by all investig therefor there is addit knowledg and experi
requir when conduct a forens comput examin in a financi or fraud case
digit forens investig
3702 2011 fraud examin manual
there ar three type of situat in which comput evid is gener discov 1
comput as the target of crime 2 comput as the instrument of crime and 3
comput as the repositori of evid
comput themselv can be the target of crime crime commit against comput
includ comput and computercompon theft system intrus softwar piraci and
softwar theft
comput can also be us to facilit a crime when thi occur the comput is known
as the tool or instrument of crime in such case as on would expect examin commonli
encount comput that have been us in offens such as the solicit of minor in
chat room check fraud and counterfeit
gener speak in all comput investig the examin attempt to locat the
storag of potenti digit evid in on form or anoth on the comput system the
comput system involv in the investig is a potenti repositori of evid whether
the user intend to store an item or not therefor the examin is interest in
incrimin evid that the user intention or unintention store on the comput
system
integr of digit evid
electron evid is more volatil than paper inform and becaus it can be easili
alter or destroi it must be handl properli for exampl comput file can be alter
simpli through the normal startup process most of the microsoft oper system such as
window xp chang the time and date stamp on a number of file dure startup and
delet a number of temporari file dure the shutdown process these piec of
inform could be critic to the investig
the destruct of digit evid through improp handl can result in a find of
spoliat of evid by a judg or can rais question about the alter of exculpatori
evid by the defens
addition if a judg determin that the authent of the evid cannot be
satisfactorili made then he mai rule that the evid is inadmiss although digit
evid is differ from tangibl evid the rule regard it admiss in court is
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3703
realli no differ from the admiss of ani other type of evid to be admiss
digit evid must be
relev
support by a foundat for it introduct into court
legal obtain
properli identifi
properli preserv
therefor should the fraud examin discov digit evid he must be abl to state
unequivoc that the evid wa not chang in ani wai by hi action thi requir that
strict forens methodolog be follow to satisfi the stringent evidentiari standard
necessari to ensur the integr of the evid beyond a reason doubt for
present in court
forens expert
also when conduct an examin involv comput the examin should determin
whether an outsid forens examin is need or whether the expertis is avail inhous
some organ have their own inhous personnel whom thei have train and
outfit with the proper equip and softwar tool to conduct the examin and
analyz digit evid while other mai prefer the us of an outsid examin who will be
abl to conduct a thorough examin prepar a proper report and deliv expert
testimoni if need in legal proceed
sometim inform retriev is as easi as obtain a warrant and search the hard
drive of the target comput but mani fraudster anticip their exposur and delet
incrimin file from their machin in these instanc it is import to know that there
ar a varieti of wai of recov delet or hidden data from a target comput and it
peripher
a computerforens examin is a train profession who is capabl of analyz digit
media at the hexadecim level the hexadecim level mean that everi sector and all the
byte in those sector ar avail for view thi includ delet file both purposefulli
delet and those that were delet through variou windowsautom process thi
can also includ temporari autosav file printspool file delet email and link file
the hexadecim level also contain variou item found in restor point and registri file
digit forens investig
3704 2011 fraud examin manual
that defin hardwar such as extern drive and websit visit in addit to the
document revis and file creat and maintain by the user
the increas sophist of window allow the comput system to store more
inform about how peopl us their comput the forens examin will be abl to
uncov a larg amount of data that relat to the us of a comput what is or ha been
store on it and the detail about the user in micr osoft effort to be all to the user it ha
incorpor wai to make comput us more secur such as offer encrypt and other
method to protect data from unwant access in the futur these type of innov will
stall the examin and will sometim successfulli prevent system access howev these
encrypt packag ar not alwai foolproof the encrypt file system offer by
microsoft ha in fact been crack by a number of passwordcrack softwar maker in
addit to encrypt file other encrypt algorithm exist that ar easili instal and can
be us to encrypt the entir hard drive in situat such as thi it becom necessari for
the examin to be abl to identifi whether a drive is encrypt befor seiz and
disconnect the system
moreov computerforens examin have special tool and softwar design to
facilit a thorough and legal suffici analysi of item that contain digit evid it is
import to allow a train examin to conduct a proper seizur and examin on a
piec of evid so the investig will have the best chanc of us that evid in a
legal proceed whether an agenc or compani is defend against an unlaw
termin suit or file a crimin complaint it is vital that the digit evid is handl
properli
furthermor whether technic specialist ar need to assist with an investig will
depend on the complex of the examin requir the more technic the natur of the
crime the more technic and special the analyt skill requir some comput
investig howev do not requir extrem sophist technic skill for exampl
in case where the comput is the instrument us to commit the crime eg scam
involv payrol applic cook the book fraudul electron fund transfer
insid trade etc the fraud examin need onli know how to search a databas and
analyz the result
addition thi determin will depend on the examin skill level therefor an
examin conduct an examin involv comput must have a basic understand
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3705
of hi skill level and must be awar of hi limit in the field of comput technolog
becaus in mani instanc on or more technic specialist ar need to assist with an
investig
within the comput forens field there ar sever differ type of special expert
oper and file system expert these expert ar profici in certain oper system
eg window 7 unix solari os x or as400 and the variou file system thei
emploi eg joliet ntf fat vf ex t2 and thei have the abil to convei
oper characterist and observ artifact
data recoveri expert these expert oper clean room design to magnet extract
inform from a damag media sourc us special tool and equip these
expert can disassembl a hard disk separ the platter and extract and reassembl the
inform for subsequ examin
forens account expert a forens account can prov id variou servic includ
audit account perform review and examin of financi document for
fraud misconduct or industri standard violat
tape and archiv extract expert these ar expert in extract inform from tape or
other system backup typic backup solut archiv data in proprietari format
make extract veri cumbersom
intrus and malici code expert these expert special in investig comput
network intrus specialist can determin attack vector the tool emploi what
occur dure access and what if anyth wa taken
but given the divers of computerrel fraud no person can be an expert in all aspect
of comput technolog
locat evid
to conduct a success examin examin must know what to look for and where to
look for it but thi can be difficult becaus digit data can be store larg volum and in a
number of differ locat
the effici of comput technolog ha allow user to creat more volumin piec
of data than wa onc possibl comput hard drive ar pack with digit data and data
storag now exce gigabyt therefor it is necessari to refer larger storag
capac here is a chart that will help
digit forens investig
3706 2011 fraud examin manual
name abbr size
kilo k 210 1024
mega m 220 1048576
giga g 230 1073741824
tera t 240 1099511627776
peta p 250 1125899906842624
exa e 260 1152921504606846976
zetta z 270 1180591620717411303424
yotta y 280 1208925819614629174706176
furthermor digit evid mai be locat in a number of differ locat in addit
to be store on comput evid will be locat in ani form of technolog that can be
us to transmit or store data therefor it is also import to investig ani suspect
workstat includ ani peripher or other portabl media devic that can be us to
transmit or store data and the inform store on the compani network
workstat
in addit to investig the suspect mainfram it is also import to investig the
suspect workstat includ ani peripher or other portabl media devic that can be
us to transmit or store data as data move to and from peripher devic it leav
evid of it presenc and sometim leav full copi of it content
therefor fraud examin should consid the mani differ type of peripher that
might contain evid item to be seiz might includ ani or all of the follow item
list below depend upon the natur of the fraud case
printer
examin must also be awar that it might be possibl to recov previous print
document although the odd of recoveri can be low depend on a varieti of factor
understand how retriev can be achiev can be of great valu to the investig
in addit to us printerspool file to recov previous print document mani
printer have intern hard drive that mai contain inform relev to a fraud
examin in gener ani inform sent to and store by a printer is recover unless
the printer ha overwritten the data
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3707
furthermor some printer have memori buffer temporari storag area of job wait to be
print which mai also contain import inform inform contain in memori
buffer howev is gener limit to recent creat and store data
copier and scanner
like some printer copier and other multifunct machin mai have intern storag
devic that store relev data in fact almost everi copier built sinc 2002 ha a hard drive
that store imag of document the machin have copi scan or email some
copier store user access record and a histori of copi made and as with most file
system it mai be possibl to retriev inform from a copier hard drive that ha been
delet as a result copier mai be brim with import inform
fax machin
although some kind of standalon fax machin simpli scan and send data without store
it like mani printer and copier some fax machin store fax data on their own intern
hard drive thi data mai remain in the machin memori until overwritten
backup tape
backup tape ar a type of remov media that store data and can be easili remov from
a comput system or devic most comput user archiv their activ on backup tape
or some other form of extern storag devic and most compani us backup tape to
store old data includ email data that wa onc store on their server
remov storag devic
in addit to backup tape a suspect remov storag devic should be examin
remov storag devic such as cd dvd usb flash drive also known as thumb
drive mp3 player and variou other devic provid user with the abil to store larg
amount of data such devic can be us to facilit a varieti of fraud thei provid
user with the abil to store file that go undetect by anyon access the comput
remov media can also be us to store copi of file contain sensit inform in
order to facilit unapprov us
smart phone
the prolifer of smart phone ha made them an extrem valuabl sourc of
inform smart phone eg the iphon and blackberri ar cell phone that also have
the abil to store person data search the internet check email instant messag im
digit forens investig
3708 2011 fraud examin manual
make video call downloadupload content to and from the internet take pictur and
record video the inform that can be store on these small devic can be veri
import in mani case
network
in addit to search for evid on the suspect oper system and workstat it is
also import to examin inform store on compani server a wealth of inform
which is separ from a user workstat mai be store on compani server data store
on compani network mai includ document post to a suspect own home directori on
the network collabor work save to a share folder or directori email messag that
have been sent receiv delet or archiv calendar contact list and so on
law enforc assist
befor conduct a forens examin examin must consid whether a crime ha in
fact been commit if at the begin of the investig it is determin that the victim
compani will make a formal referr to law enforc or prosecut agenc then the
author must be notifi befor the investig begin to determin whether law
enforc personnel should particip in the examin in some jurisdict an
examin from the law enforc commun mai not be avail
