2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Conducting an Investigation Involving Computers/Workstation


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Workstation 
In addition to investigating the suspect’s mainframe, it is also important to investigate the 
suspect’s workstation, including any peripherals or other portable media devices that can be 
used to transmit or store data. As data moves to and from peripheral devices, it leaves 
evidence of its presence and sometimes leaves full copies of its contents.  
 
Therefore, fraud examiners should consider the many different types of peripherals that 
might contain evidence. Items to be seized might include any or all of the following items 
listed below, depending upon the nature of the fraud case. 
 
PRINTERS 
Examiners must also be aware that it might be possible to recover previously printed 
documents. Although the odds of recovery can be low depending on a variety of factors, 
understanding how retrieval can be achieved can be of great value to the investigator.  
 
In addition to using printer-spool files to recover previously printed documents, many 
printers have internal hard drives that may contain information relevant to a fraud 
examination. In general, any information sent to and stored by a printer is recoverable unless 
the printer has overwritten the data.  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.707 
Furthermore, some printers have memory buffer — temporary storage area of jobs waiting to be 
printed — which may also contain important information. Information contained in memory 
buffer, however, is generally limited to recently created and stored data.  
 
COPIERS AND SCANNERS 
Like some printers, copiers and other multifunction machines may have internal storage 
devices that store relevant data. In fact, almost every copier built since 2002 has a hard drive 
that stores images of documents the machines have copied, scanned, or e-mailed. Some 
copiers store user access records and a history of copies made. And, as with most file 
systems, it may be possible to retrieve information from a copier’s hard drive that has been 
deleted. As a result, copiers may be brimming with important information.  
 
FAX MACHINES 
Although some kinds of stand-alone fax machines simply scan and send data without storing 
it, like many printers and copiers, some fax machines store faxing data on their own internal 
hard drive. This data may remain in the machine’s memory until overwritten.  
 
BACKUP TAPES  
Backup tapes are a type of removable media that stores data and can be easily removed from 
a computer system or device. Most computer users archive their activities on backup tapes 
or some other form of external storage devices, and most companies use backup tapes to 
store old data, including e-mail data, that was once stored on their servers.  
 
REMOVABLE STORAGE DEVICES 
In addition to backup tapes, a suspect’s removable storage devices should be examined. 
Removable storage devices such as CDs, DVDs, USB flash drives (also known as thumb 
drives), mp3 players, and various other devices provide users with the ability to store large 
amounts of data. Such devices can be used to facilitate a variety of frauds. They provide 
users with the ability to store files that go undetected by anyone accessing the computer. 
Removable media can also be used to store copies of files containing sensitive information in 
order to facilitate unapproved use.  
 
SMART PHONES 
The proliferation of smart phones has made them an extremely valuable source of 
information. Smart phones (e.g., the iPhone and Blackberry) are cell phones that also have 
the ability to store personal data, search the Internet, check e-mail, instant message (IM), 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.708   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
make video calls, download/upload content to and from the Internet, take pictures, and 
record video. The information that can be stored on these small devices can be very 
important in many cases.  
 



:


workstat
in addit to investig the suspect mainfram it is also import to investig the
suspect workstat includ ani peripher or other portabl media devic that can be
us to transmit or store data as data move to and from peripher devic it leav
evid of it presenc and sometim leav full copi of it content
therefor fraud examin should consid the mani differ type of peripher that
might contain evid item to be seiz might includ ani or all of the follow item
list below depend upon the natur of the fraud case
printer
examin must also be awar that it might be possibl to recov previous print
document although the odd of recoveri can be low depend on a varieti of factor
understand how retriev can be achiev can be of great valu to the investig
in addit to us printerspool file to recov previous print document mani
printer have intern hard drive that mai contain inform relev to a fraud
examin in gener ani inform sent to and store by a printer is recover unless
the printer ha overwritten the data
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3707
furthermor some printer have memori buffer temporari storag area of job wait to be
print which mai also contain import inform inform contain in memori
buffer howev is gener limit to recent creat and store data
copier and scanner
like some printer copier and other multifunct machin mai have intern storag
devic that store relev data in fact almost everi copier built sinc 2002 ha a hard drive
that store imag of document the machin have copi scan or email some
copier store user access record and a histori of copi made and as with most file
system it mai be possibl to retriev inform from a copier hard drive that ha been
delet as a result copier mai be brim with import inform
fax machin
although some kind of standalon fax machin simpli scan and send data without store
it like mani printer and copier some fax machin store fax data on their own intern
hard drive thi data mai remain in the machin memori until overwritten
backup tape
backup tape ar a type of remov media that store data and can be easili remov from
a comput system or devic most comput user archiv their activ on backup tape
or some other form of extern storag devic and most compani us backup tape to
store old data includ email data that wa onc store on their server
remov storag devic
in addit to backup tape a suspect remov storag devic should be examin
remov storag devic such as cd dvd usb flash drive also known as thumb
drive mp3 player and variou other devic provid user with the abil to store larg
amount of data such devic can be us to facilit a varieti of fraud thei provid
user with the abil to store file that go undetect by anyon access the comput
remov media can also be us to store copi of file contain sensit inform in
order to facilit unapprov us
smart phone
the prolifer of smart phone ha made them an extrem valuabl sourc of
inform smart phone eg the iphon and blackberri ar cell phone that also have
the abil to store person data search the internet check email instant messag im
digit forens investig
3708 2011 fraud examin manual
make video call downloadupload content to and from the internet take pictur and
record video the inform that can be store on these small devic can be veri
import in mani case
