2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Computer Investigations and Computer Forensics


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Computer Investigations and Computer Forensics 
 
Preparation 
Before the examiner can seize evidence, he must take certain steps to help ensure that the 
evidence is admissible: he must determine whether an employee has a privacy interest in the 
item(s) to be searched, he must take certain steps to prepare for an investigation that 
involves the use of a search warrant, and he must take steps to ensure that his equipment is 
sound (e.g., only use licensed software applications, independently validate all forensic 
equipment, and maintain the validation on file). 
 
Privacy Issues  
Before searching and seizing an item, the examiner must determine whether an employee has 
a privacy interest in the item(s) to be searched. In every case where it becomes necessary to 
seize a computer or other device capable of storing digital evidence, the investigator should 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.709 
consult with legal counsel. It is imperative that legal counsel be involved in the seizure 
process and be knowledgeable of case law pertaining to workplace seizures.  
 
Case law governing workplace seizures in the private sector is different from case law 
governing seizures in the government workplace, but generally, it all comes down to the 
employee’s expectation of privacy. Although the Fourth Amendment constitutional right 
guarantees protection against unreasonable searches and seizures, typically, the Fourth 
Amendment does not protect private sector employees.  
 
In the private sector, disputes over unreasonable searches and seizures usually come down 
on the side of the corporation. The case law in the private sector tends to support the 
argument that corporations have the right to decrease the level of privacy employees can 
expect with regard to workplace searches of computers and other digital media. Thus, 
companies to adopt a written policy establishing that all computer systems (e.g., the Internet, 
e-mail communications, hardware, and files) are solely for business use and that the 
company reserves the absolute right to review, audit, and disclose all matters sent over the 
system or placed in storage. And as long as written policies are in effect that support 
management’s actions, the corporation can avoid liability for violating an employee’s right to 
privacy. 
 
Additionally, when conducting an internal investigation or inquiry into allegations of 
misconduct or illegal activities in both the private and governmental sector, it is important to 
be aware of what the employee policy protects against and what it allows. It should also be 
determined whether steps have been taken to nullify any expectations of privacy. 
 
Governmental employees, whether local, state, or federal, have been provided special 
protections that do not generally apply to employees in the private sector. In all cases where 
it becomes necessary to seize a governmental employee’s computer or other digital device, it 
is imperative that the investigator consult with the entity’s legal counsel.  
 
Bryan R. Lemons, Branch Chief of the Legal Di vision Office of Training Operations at the 
FLETC training center in Georgia, has written an excellent paper on the subject of 
governmental workplace searches and seizures, in which he summarizes a number of cases 
where the courts have rendered opinions on governmental workplace searches and seizures. 
In his paper, Mr. Lemons defined the term workplace to include those areas and items that are 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.710   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
related to work and are generally within the employer’s control, which includes file cabinets, 
desks, and computers. 
 
Case law on this issue has attempted to answer several questions. Can a government 
employee have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the workplace? If so, what standards 
should be followed to ensure that a supervisor is conducting a lawful search of an 
employee’s work space? Is there a lesser standa rd employed in the case of mere suspicion? 
 
The Supreme Court case of O’Conner v. Ortega  was the hallmark case in the argument about 
the reasonableness of searches and seizures, but there were a number of other issues that 
were decided at the lower-court level. In O’Conner, the Supreme Court held that “the 
realities of the workplace” made some exp ectations of privacy among public employees 
unreasonable when the intrusion was by a supervisor rather than a law enforcement official. 
Work-related searches, the Court found, were “m erely incident to the primary business of 
the agency,” and a warrant requirement would “seriously disrupt the routine conduct of 
business.” The Court thus held that a standard  of “reasonableness” was sufficient for work-
 related intrusions by public employers. 
 
To simplify the decision-making process when considering a workplace search, Lemons 
explains that there is a two-part analysis that will offer some guidance. The first part requires 
a determination of the employee’s reasonable ex pectation of privacy in the area to be 
searched. Second, if a reasonable expectation of privacy does exist, then any search that 
occurs in the workplace must be reasonable under the given circumstances.  
 
In United States v. Gonzalez 4, the court dealt with the search of a government employee’s 
personal belongings. In this case, the employee (Gonzalez), as a condition of employment, 
signed a paper that indicated, among other things, his personal belongings might be searched 
in an effort to discourage employee theft. Gonzalez worked at a military exchange. He was 
stopped one day during his departure from the store and his backpack was searched by store 
security. The search revealed that Gonzalez’s backpack contained merchandise stolen from 
the store. On appeal, Gonzalez claimed that his Fourth Amendment rights had been 
violated. The court looked to the paper that was originally signed by Gonzalez and stated 
                                                 
4  United States v. Gonzalez, 300 F.3d 1048 (9th Cir. 2002). 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.711 
that Gonzalez was put on notice that his personal belongings might be searched and as a 
result his expectation of privacy was limited by his knowledge of store policy. 
 
In Gossmeyer v. McDonald, the court dealt with the question of whether there was a reasonable 
expectation of privacy regarding personally purchased items that were used to store work-
 related materials in the government workplace. In this case, a local detective received an 
anonymous tip from one of Gossmeyer’s coworkers that Gossmeyer was storing illegal 
pornographic material in a storage container that was purchased at Gossmeyer’s own 
expense. The local detective relayed the information to Gossmeyer’s supervisor who 
proceeded to search Gossmeyer’s workplace, including the storage cabinet. The supervisor 
found evidence to substantiate the allegation but no charges were ever filed. Gossmeyer filed 
a lawsuit alleging that her Fourth Amendment rights had been violated by the search of her 
personal property. The court disagreed, stating that the cabinet was not merely an item of 
personal property such as a purse or briefcase brought into the workplace, but that it was 
being used to house work-related materials and therefore, the cabinet was a part of the 
workplace and not a part of her personal domain. 
 
In O’Conner, the Supreme Court ruled that it is possible to reduce the expectation of privacy 
on the part of government employees, for example, in the form of a written notice signed by 
the employee that gives the employer the right to access or inspect information stored on the 
employee’s computer. In the case of United States v. Simons,  the defendant, Simons, was found 
to have visited several illicit websites that were prohibited by agency policy. The policy 
specifically prohibited access to unlawful material and further prohibited any personal use of 
the agency’s Internet. A remote audit of the hard drive on Simons’s government-owned 
computer revealed that the computer contained several illegal images. In Simons’s challenge 
of the search under the Fourth Amendment, he claimed that his rights were violated when 
the hard drive was searched remotely. The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals held that Simons 
had no legitimate expectation of privacy because of the agency’s Internet use policy. The 
policy’s language placed employees on notice of  their diminished expectation of privacy. 
 
When determining whether to conduct a search of government-workplace computers it is 
important to determine whether a reasonable expectation of privacy exists. To answer that 
question, one must look at whether there was a prior notice that diminishes the expectation. 
One can also look at the policy practices of the agency. Having a policy and only selectively 
enforcing it tends to diminish the policy to the point that it may not negate the privacy 
expectation. One must also look to the openness and accessibility of the workplace to other 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.712   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employees. Finally, was there a written waiver of the employee’s expectati on of privacy? If an 
expectation of privacy does not exist, then the Fourth Amendment will not apply. If it is 
determined that an expectation of privacy does exist, then what is the purpose behind the 
search? Is it a work-related search, such as looking for a missing file, or is it due to an 
allegation of misconduct? If it is a work-related  search, the search must be justified based on 
the overall circumstances; it must be justified in its inception and permissible in scope. If the 
search under these conditions is solely for the purpose of a criminal investigation, then a 
probable cause warrant will generally be necessary in addition to the employee consent. 
 
It should also be noted that personal digital devices are becoming more common in the 
workplace. Employees often carry smart phones, thumb drives, or MP3 players into the 
office. Each of these devices is capable of storing large amounts of data and can easily be 
used to steal a company’s intellectual property. Because these devices are often purchased by 
the employee for personal use, a search warrant may be needed to seize or search these 
devices because employees may have a “reasonable expectation of privacy” in these types of 
personal devices. Therefore, it is extremely important to include such devices in the 
company’s search policy. The policy should cl early state that any personal electronic devices, 
including laptops, cell phones, smart phones, thumb drives, MP3 players, and so forth, are 
(just like handbags and briefcases) subject to search if brought onto the company’s premises. 
 
Search Warrants  
If, however, a search warrant is required, additional considerations must be addressed. A 
search warrant  is a court order that grants authorities the right to search a premises or property 
for information pertinent to the case. 
 
All warrants must satisfy the requirements under the Fourth Amendment. That is, all 
warrants for searches must be judicially sanctioned and supported by “probable cause,” and 
they must “particularly” describe the place to be searched or things to be seized. Only a 
judge can issue a search warrant and only law enforcement can seek and serve a search 
warrant. 
 
To obtain a valid search warrant, law enforcement officers prepare affidavits. The affidavits 
will detail the probable cause or legal reasoning behind the request for the warrant. Often 
law enforcement personnel will need guidance from the fraud examiner as they conduct pre-
 search preparation and construct the search warrant affidavit.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.713 
But because the requirements for these affidavits have been affected by technological 
innovations, fraud examiners must consider several new issues must when constructing a 
search warrant affidavit involving digital evidence. The fraud examiner must know how to 
write a warrant to seize tangible property that contains intangible evidence. Further, the 
fraud examiner must be allowed to convert that evidence into a human-readable form (e.g., 
storage devices such as disks, which contain information that cannot be viewed without the 
aid of some electronic device). Likewise, the warrant must allow for the ability to seize data 
files pertinent to the case that are mixed with data files, which have nothing to do with the 
case but reside on the same storage device.  
 
Additionally, the warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizure of all 
computer evidence relevant to the investigation, but narrow enough to exclude all material 
that is not, and this can be an extremely difficult standard to meet at times and might depend 
on the magistrate to whom the affidavit is presented. However, with some thought fraud 
examiners should be able to justify the search and seizure of everything that they need to 
complete the search for evidence. Items to be seized might contain any or all of the 
following, depending on the nature of the fraud case: 
• Computers 
• Computer components 
• Computer peripherals 
• Word-processing equipment 
• Modems 
• Monitors 
• Printers 
• Plotters 
• Optical scanners 
• Data storage devices 
? Magnetic 
? Laser 
? Optical 
? Tape 
? PCMCIA 
? Portable drives, such as flash or thumb drives 
? Cables, wiring, cords 
? Storage media 
? Disks 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.714   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Magnetic tape (reels) 
? PCMCIA RAM cards 
? CD-ROMs 
? Magnetic/optical disks 
? Digital audio tape (DAT) 
? Personal data managers 
? Flash RAM cards (consider digital-camera storage) 
? Computer programs 
? Operating systems 
? Application software 
? Utility programs 
? Compilers 
? Interpreters 
? Documents 
? Manuals 
? Printouts 
? File listings 
 
Moreover, to satisfy the “particularity” requirement of the Fourth Amendment, the affidavit 
must be able to justify each item that might contain evidence. For example, stating that “all 
printers” should be seized might be overly broad unless the fraud examiner can justify the 
need for each specific printer. But with some thought, fraud examiners should be able to 
justify the search and seizure of everything they need to complete the search for evidence.  
 
Also, all related documentation should also be seized with the target computer system, and, 
therefore, it should be covered by the search warrant’s wording. Such documentation is 
important because it may be critical when analyzing the system’s hardware and software. 
Documents could indicate system changes that will help to avoid damaging the system. 
Documents could also contain other helpful pieces of information (e.g., the fact that access 
control products have been added to a system might be a helpful piece of information).  
 
Thus, obtaining as much intelligence as possible regarding the location of the potential 
evidence is very desirable before writing the search warrant affidavit. Considerations include: 
• Determine the type of computer systems that will be involved in the search. What 
operating system is used? Are the computers networked together? 
• Determine how many people will be needed to conduct the search.  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.715 
• If expert witnesses with a specific expertise are required during the search, identify and 
clear them before the search warrant is written. Depending on the circumstances, their 
credentials should possibly be included in the warrant affidavit before they are approved 
by the magistrate issuing the search warrant.  
• Determine the resources that will be required to conduct the search. If a great deal of 
equipment is to be seized, consider how the equipment will be transported from the 
location. Obtain sufficient boxes, labels, bags, and other supplies at this time. 
• Consider the timing of the search.  
 
Four Phases 
There are several definitions and different schools of thought for investigations involving 
computer forensics, but all practitioners in the field will agree that investigations typically 
involve four phases: seizure, image acquisition, analysis, and reporting and testifying.  
 
Each phase is dependent on the phases that come before it. For instance, if the seizure phase 
is handled incorrectly, then each of the following phases can suffer and ultimately render the 
reporting and testifying phase moot. 
 
Seizing Digital Evidence 
Perhaps the most critical step in the forensics process is how data is collected or acquired. 
Acquisition of digital evidence must be completed in such a way as to ensure that all relevant 
evidence is seized and secured in a forensically sound manner so that the evidence is not 
tainted or destroyed.  
 
In fact, there are a number of practical considerations and procedures to employ when the 
decision is made to go forward with a computer seizure. One of the primary considerations 
that is often neglected is debriefing the subject, which involves asking the subject for 
passwords and whether any encrypted data exists on the target computer. 
 
The Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence (SWGDE) from the Organization of 
American States has published a document, titled Best Practices for Computer Forensics, 
which provides a good foundation for digital forensics examiners. Although a complete 
                                                 
5  Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence of the National Center for Forensic Science. Best Practices for 
Computer Forensics V2, 2006. http://www.oas.org/juridico/s panish/cyb_best_pract.pdf.  
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.716   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
review of the entire document is beyond the scope of this course, several guidelines deserve 
review. According to the SWGDE, examiners should adhere to the following guidelines: 
• Before obtaining evidence, ensure that there is legal authority to seize evidence and 
review the data associated with the evidence. This may require obtaining a warrant in a 
criminal matter or ensuring that internal policies authorize seizure for an internal 
investigation.  
• If removing evidence from the scene is impractical, copy or image the items of evidence 
according to established procedures. 
• Remove all suspects, witnesses, and bystanders from the proximity of the digital 
evidence. Keep in mind that remote access to computers can put potential evidence at 
risk even if no person has physical access to the computer. Also, consider the wide range 
of mobile data storage devices today (e.g., USB flash drives) that can be hidden. 
• Ensure that no suspects, witnesses, and bystanders possess any items containing 
potential evidence.   
• Thoroughly and systematically search the scene for potential evidence. Once again, 
consider the wide range of data storage media and devices.  
 
Unless completely unavoidable, data should not be analyzed on the machine from which it 
was collected. Instead, the examiner should make forensically sound copies of all data 
storage devices — primarily hard drives — and analyze the data on these copies.  
 
To ensure that a machine can be fully analyzed, the examiner should take the following 
steps: 
• Examine and document the machine’s surroundings. 
• Secure the evidence. 
• Power down carefully. 
• Inspect for traps. 
• Implement a system to manage the evidence. 
 
EXAMINE AND DOCUMENT THE MACHINE’S SURROUNDINGS 
The first step in the evidence collection process is to examine and document the machine’s 
surroundings. This includes collecting all printouts, disks, notes, and other physical evidence 
for further analysis. Document the scene with photographs or a diagram, depending on the 
complexity of the setup, remembering that it may be a year or longer before testimony about 
what the office looked like on the day of the seizure will be asked for in a legal proceeding.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.717 
When documenting the condition of the evidence, the examiner should consider: 
• Documenting what is on the screen, if the system is on. 
• Documenting any processes that are currently running. 
• Taking photographs of the various views of the equipment and media to document any 
damage or defects. 
• Taking photographs of the equipment’s physical connections. 
• Making a drawing of the location to document the layout and relative locations from 
which evidence was seized. 
 
Additionally, because many people have a habit of writing down or recording their 
passwords near their computers, examiners should look around for notes that may appear to 
be passwords. This may aid in discovering passwords needed to access encrypted data if the 
subject of the investigation is being uncooperative. 
 
Take good notes on the machine’s state at the ti me of the seizure. Record the time and date 
that the system was seized and the personnel involved in the seizure. The status of the 
system should also be noted. Was it on, off, or on standby? Was there anything unusual 
attached to the system? Was there any obvious damage? Did any files have to be saved? 
Also, if the computer was active, record any open applications. Make sure to start a chain of 
custody document and note each person and storage location through which each piece of 
evidence passes. 
 
In addition to documenting the machine’s state at the time of seizure, the examiners should 
document any serial numbers and other potential identifying markings (e.g., manufacturer, 
model number, asset tracking number, etc.), and he should photograph and diagram the 
system’s entire configuration. 
 
SECURE THE EVIDENCE 
When securing a computer system, follow the two golden rules. The first rule is, if the 
computer is off, don’t turn it on. Also, if a comp uter is on, an investigator will not want it to 
go through its normal shutdown routines because Windows is very good about cleaning up 
after itself. A number of temporary files will be deleted and possibly overwritten during a 
normal shutdown, and some of these files may be important to the investigation. In most 
cases, the investigator should simply unplug a running computer. Once the investigator takes 
possession of the computer he should not allow anyone access it, with the exception of a 
trained forensic examiner. 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.718   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There are other reasons to conduct the seizure in this way. By preserving the state of the 
system at the time of seizure one can help to defeat an argument by opposing counsel that 
exculpatory information was somehow tainted or erased due to mishandling of the system. If 
one bit is changed in the system’s data, it will ha ve a completely different hash value; that is 
to say, it would be different than the original, even though the average person may not be 
able to recognize any difference at all.  
 
All data is composed of bits (binary digits). It takes eight bits to make one byte, which is 
what we are commonly used to hearing when we talk about storage capacity, such as 256 
megabytes. One megabyte equals 1024 kilobytes, and one kilobyte equals 1024 bytes. As you 
can see, one bit is a relatively infinitesimal piece of data, but it is important that not even one 
bit of data be altered by the forensic process. 
 
The second golden rule when securing a computer is, do not peek through the files. This 
also applies to disks. If a system is running, the examiner may be tempted to click on the My 
Computer icon to look for evidence or copy files to a flash or optical storage device. This 
should never be done, because each file the investigator touches will have its original time 
stamps changed; once this is done the original time stamps cannot be recovered. It will be 
obvious to the forensic examiner that this has occurred. 
 
There are two methods for shutting down a running system, a hard shutdown and a graceful 
shutdown. Generally, the hard shutdown is preferred. There may be extenuating 
circumstances that would lead the investigator to perform a graceful shutdown, so it is 
important to evaluate the best shutdown option based on the type of data being preserved 
and the possible ramifications of a hard shutdown based on the type of operating system 
installed. A hard shutdown is basically pulling the power cord from the back of the PC. 
 
Laptop computers, however, require additional considerations. When seizing a laptop, it is 
important to remove the battery first and then pull the plug. It is essential when seizing a 
laptop to recover all of the components that belong to the laptop, such as flash drives, CD-ROMs 
and DVD–ROMs, and power supplies. Often, laptop computers must be imaged with their 
drives installed, and because of the proprietary nature of the laptops themselves, they will 
only function with their own components. Many  times these components can be located in 
the laptop carrying case. 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.719 
Similarly, networked computers also present unique considerations. When powering down a 
networked computer, remove the power supply from the back of the computer.  
 
When handling servers, however, it is important to use extreme caution when removing 
power from a server without using proper shut-down methods because this can damage the 
system and expose the examiner to liability.  
 
Once a computer is seized, it is necessary to secure it in such a way that will allow the 
investigator to testify, if need be, that no unauthorized access to the suspect system 
occurred. 
 
INSPECT FOR TRAPS 
Examiners should also inspect the computer’s chassis for traps, intrusion detection software, 
and self-destruct mechanisms. Although completely destroying a hard drive is extremely 
difficult, it is not difficult to make recovery very difficult.   
 
IMPLEMENT A SYSTEM TO MANAGE THE EVIDENCE 
Examiners should have a system to track and manage physical and digital evidence. The 
most common method used to track physical evidence is to assign each item a unique 
evidence number. Although this number can be in any format, it should be consistent and 
never repeated.  
 
Image Acquisition 
To avoid altering evidence, the examiner should make forensically sound image of the 
suspect system for analysis. Image acquisition involves using a standalone hard drive 
duplicator or similar device to duplicate a computer’s entire drive. This process is known as 
imaging because the hard drive can be imaged to another hard disk drive, a tape, or other 
media. 
 
The examiner has to be sure that the image is created and preserved in a manner that will 
withstand a legal challenge; therefore, before  imaging a hard drive, the examiner must 
determine the best method for acquiring an image and the proper procedures to facilitate the 
image capture.  
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.720   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
During the imaging process, examiners should use some type of write-protection device or 
application to ensure no information is written onto the original drive, and after the hard 
drive is duplicated, the original drive is moved to a secure location to prevent tampering. 
 
Analysis 
The analysis phase is arguably the most time-consuming phase, especially for a financial 
crime or fraud investigation. This phase involves the use of specialized software designed to 
give the examiner the means to locate and extract artifacts that will be used as evidence in 
the investigation. The evidence can serve to incriminate the subject of the investigation or it 
can be exculpatory by disproving the subject’s involvement. 
 
The primary concern when analyzing electronically stored information (ESI) is to maintain 
its integrity. Examiners must be careful with computer equipment because a careless 
investigator may inadvertently alter important evidence. Therefore, it is helpful to develop 
procedures to prevent the opposing party from raising allegations that the methodology used 
to collect or analyze data was improper and could have damaged or altered the evidence. It 
may also be helpful to use a hardware-based write-blocking device to protect the integrity of 
digital evidence. 
 
One method to help ensure the integrity of digi tal evidence is to maintain a chain of custody 
for all evidence gathered and analyzed. The chain of custody  is both a process and a document 
that memorializes (1) who has had possession of an object, and (2) what they have done with 
it; it is simply a means of establishing that there has not been a material change or alteration 
to a piece of evidence. Gaps in the chain of custody (e.g., when it is not clear what occurred 
with a set of records) or outright mishandling (e.g., a group of questioned documents was 
not properly sealed) can harm a case.  
 
At a minimum, the following chain of custody procedures should be followed for digital 
evidence: 
• Identify each item that contains relevant information.  
• Document each item, who it was received from, who authorized its removal, the location 
of the item, and the date and time the item was received.  
• Maintain a continuous record of the item’s custody as it changes hands.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.721 
Reporting and Testifying 
The reporting and testifying phase is where the hours of analysis are reported fairly and 
objectively. In this phase, a qualified computer forensics expert may be asked to render an 
opinion about the use or misuse of a computer system. This is where experience and training 
are tested and where examiners must know with certainty that their opinion is based on their 
research, knowledge, and experience and that an opposing expert will not find fault with 
their conclusions. 
 
 



:


comput investig and comput forens
prepar
befor the examin can seiz evid he must take certain step to help ensur that the
evid is admiss he must determin whether an employe ha a privaci interest in the
item to be search he must take certain step to prepar for an investig that
involv the us of a search warrant and he must take step to ensur that hi equip is
sound eg onli us licens softwar applic independ valid all forens
equip and maintain the valid on file
privaci issu
befor search and seiz an item the examin must determin whether an employe ha
a privaci interest in the item to be search in everi case where it becom necessari to
seiz a comput or other devic capabl of store digit evid the investig should
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3709
consult with legal counsel it is imper that legal counsel be involv in the seizur
process and be knowledg of case law pertain to workplac seizur
case law govern workplac seizur in the privat sector is differ from case law
govern seizur in the govern workplac but gener it all come down to the
employe expect of privaci although the fourth amend constitut right
guarante protect against unreason search and seizur typic the fourth
amend doe not protect privat sector employe
in the privat sector disput over unreason search and seizur usual come down
on the side of the corpor the case law in the privat sector tend to support the
argument that corpor have the right to decreas the level of privaci employe can
expect with regard to workplac search of comput and other digit media thu
compani to adopt a written polici establish that all comput system eg the internet
email commun hardwar and file ar sole for busi us and that the
compani reserv the absolut right to review audit and disclos all matter sent over the
system or place in storag and as long as written polici ar in effect that support
manag action the corpor can avoid liabil for violat an employe right to
privaci
addition when conduct an intern investig or inquiri into alleg of
misconduct or illeg activ in both the privat and government sector it is import to
be awar of what the employe polici protect against and what it allow it should also be
determin whether step have been taken to nullifi ani expect of privaci
government employe whether local state or feder have been provid special
protect that do not gener appli to employe in the privat sector in all case where
it becom necessari to seiz a government employe comput or other digit devic it
is imper that the investig consult with the entiti legal counsel
bryan r lemon branch chief of the legal di vision offic of train oper at the
fletc train center in georgia ha written an excel paper on the subject of
government workplac search and seizur in which he summar a number of case
where the court have render opinion on government workplac search and seizur
in hi paper mr lemon defin the term workplac to includ those area and item that ar
digit forens investig
3710 2011 fraud examin manual
relat to work and ar gener within the employ control which includ file cabinet
desk and comput
case law on thi issu ha attempt to answer sever question can a govern
employe have a reason expect of privaci in the workplac if so what standard
should be follow to ensur that a supervisor is conduct a law search of an
employe work space is there a lesser standa rd emploi in the case of mere suspicion
the suprem court case of oconn v ortega wa the hallmark case in the argument about
the reason of search and seizur but there were a number of other issu that
were decid at the lowercourt level in oconn the suprem court held that the
realiti of the workplac made some exp ectat of privaci among public employe
unreason when the intrus wa by a supervisor rather than a law enforc offici
workrel search the court found were m er incid to the primari busi of
the agenc and a warrant requir would serious disrupt the routin conduct of
busi the court thu held that a standard of reason wa suffici for work
relat intrus by public employ
to simplifi the decisionmak process when consid a workplac search lemon
explain that there is a twopart analysi that will offer some guidanc the first part requir
a determin of the employe reason ex pectat of privaci in the area to be
search second if a reason expect of privaci doe exist then ani search that
occur in the workplac must be reason under the given circumst
in unit state v gonzalez 4 the court dealt with the search of a govern employe
person belong in thi case the employe gonzalez as a condit of employ
sign a paper that indic among other thing hi person belong might be search
in an effort to discourag employe theft gonzalez work at a militari exchang he wa
stop on dai dure hi departur from the store and hi backpack wa search by store
secur the search reveal that gonzalez backpack contain merchandis stolen from
the store on appeal gonzalez claim that hi fourth amend right had been
violat the court look to the paper that wa origin sign by gonzalez and state
4 unit state v gonzalez 300 f3d 1048 9th cir 2002
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3711
that gonzalez wa put on notic that hi person belong might be search and as a
result hi expect of privaci wa limit by hi knowledg of store polici
in gossmey v mcdonald the court dealt with the question of whether there wa a reason
expect of privaci regard person purchas item that were us to store work
relat materi in the govern workplac in thi case a local detect receiv an
anonym tip from on of gossmey cowork that gossmey wa store illeg
pornograph materi in a storag contain that wa purchas at gossmey own
expens the local detect relai the inform to gossmey supervisor who
proceed to search gossmey workplac includ the storag cabinet the supervisor
found evid to substanti the alleg but no charg were ever file gossmey file
a lawsuit alleg that her fourth amend right had been violat by the search of her
person properti the court disagre state that the cabinet wa not mere an item of
person properti such as a purs or briefcas brought into the workplac but that it wa
be us to hous workrel materi and therefor the cabinet wa a part of the
workplac and not a part of her person domain
in oconn the suprem court rule that it is possibl to reduc the expect of privaci
on the part of govern employe for exampl in the form of a written notic sign by
the employe that give the employ the right to access or inspect inform store on the
employe comput in the case of unit state v simon the defend simon wa found
to have visit sever illicit websit that were prohibit by agenc polici the polici
specif prohibit access to unlaw materi and further prohibit ani person us of
the agenc internet a remot audit of the hard drive on simonss governmentown
comput reveal that the comput contain sever illeg imag in simonss challeng
of the search under the fourth amend he claim that hi right were violat when
the hard drive wa search remot the fourth circuit court of appeal held that simon
had no legitim expect of privaci becaus of the agenc internet us polici the
polici languag place employe on notic of their diminish expect of privaci
when determin whether to conduct a search of governmentworkplac comput it is
import to determin whether a reason expect of privaci exist to answer that
question on must look at whether there wa a prior notic that diminish the expect
on can also look at the polici practic of the agenc have a polici and onli select
enforc it tend to diminish the polici to the point that it mai not negat the privaci
expect on must also look to the open and access of the workplac to other
digit forens investig
3712 2011 fraud examin manual
employe final wa there a written waiver of the employe expectati on of privaci if an
expect of privaci doe not exist then the fourth amend will not appli if it is
determin that an expect of privaci doe exist then what is the purpos behind the
search is it a workrel search such as look for a miss file or is it due to an
alleg of misconduct if it is a workrel search the search must be justifi base on
the overal circumst it must be justifi in it incept and permiss in scope if the
search under these condit is sole for the purpos of a crimin investig then a
probabl caus warrant will gener be necessari in addit to the employe consent
it should also be note that person digit devic ar becom more common in the
workplac employe often carri smart phone thumb drive or mp3 player into the
offic each of these devic is capabl of store larg amount of data and can easili be
us to steal a compani intellectu properti becaus these devic ar often purchas by
the employe for person us a search warrant mai be need to seiz or search these
devic becaus employe mai have a reason expect of privaci in these type of
person devic therefor it is extrem import to includ such devic in the
compani search polici the polici should cl earli state that ani person electron devic
includ laptop cell phone smart phone thumb drive mp3 player and so forth ar
just like handbag and briefcas subject to search if brought onto the compani premis
search warrant
if howev a search warrant is requir addit consider must be address a
search warrant is a court order that grant author the right to search a premis or properti
for inform pertin to the case
all warrant must satisfi the requir under the fourth amend that is all
warrant for search must be judici sanction and support by probabl caus and
thei must particularli describ the place to be search or thing to be seiz onli a
judg can issu a search warrant and onli law enforc can seek and serv a search
warrant
to obtain a valid search warrant law enforc offic prepar affidavit the affidavit
will detail the probabl caus or legal reason behind the request for the warrant often
law enforc personnel will need guidanc from the fraud examin as thei conduct pre
search prepar and construct the search warrant affidavit
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3713
but becaus the requir for these affidavit have been affect by technolog
innov fraud examin must consid sever new issu must when construct a
search warrant affidavit involv digit evid the fraud examin must know how to
write a warrant to seiz tangibl properti that contain intang evid further the
fraud examin must be allow to convert that evid into a humanread form eg
storag devic such as disk which contain inform that cannot be view without the
aid of some electron devic likewis the warrant must allow for the abil to seiz data
file pertin to the case that ar mix with data file which have noth to do with the
case but resid on the same storag devic
addition the warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizur of all
comput evid relev to the investig but narrow enough to exclud all materi
that is not and thi can be an extrem difficult standard to meet at time and might depend
on the magistr to whom the affidavit is present howev with some thought fraud
examin should be abl to justifi the search and seizur of everyth that thei need to
complet the search for evid item to be seiz might contain ani or all of the
follow depend on the natur of the fraud case
comput
comput compon
comput peripher
wordprocess equip
modem
monitor
printer
plotter
optic scanner
data storag devic
magnet
laser
optic
tape
pcmcia
portabl drive such as flash or thumb drive
cabl wire cord
storag media
disk
digit forens investig
3714 2011 fraud examin manual
magnet tape reel
pcmcia ram card
cdrom
magneticopt disk
digit audio tape dat
person data manag
flash ram card consid digitalcamera storag
comput program
oper system
applic softwar
util program
compil
interpret
document
manual
printout
file list
moreov to satisfi the particular requir of the fourth amend the affidavit
must be abl to justifi each item that might contain evid for exampl state that all
printer should be seiz might be overli broad unless the fraud examin can justifi the
need for each specif printer but with some thought fraud examin should be abl to
justifi the search and seizur of everyth thei need to complet the search for evid
also all relat document should also be seiz with the target comput system and
therefor it should be cover by the search warrant word such document is
import becaus it mai be critic when analyz the system hardwar and softwar
document could indic system chang that will help to avoid damag the system
document could also contain other help piec of inform eg the fact that access
control product have been ad to a system might be a help piec of inform
thu obtain as much intellig as possibl regard the locat of the potenti
evid is veri desir befor write the search warrant affidavit consider includ
determin the type of comput system that will be involv in the search what
oper system is us ar the comput network togeth
determin how mani peopl will be need to conduct the search
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3715
if expert wit with a specif expertis ar requir dure the search identifi and
clear them befor the search warrant is written depend on the circumst their
credenti should possibl be includ in the warrant affidavit befor thei ar approv
by the magistr issu the search warrant
determin the resourc that will be requir to conduct the search if a great deal of
equip is to be seiz consid how the equip will be transport from the
locat obtain suffici box label bag and other suppli at thi time
consid the time of the search
four phase
there ar sever definit and differ school of thought for investig involv
comput forens but all practition in the field will agre that investig typic
involv four phase seizur imag acquisit analysi and report and testifi
each phase is depend on the phase that come befor it for instanc if the seizur phase
is handl incorrectli then each of the follow phase can suffer and ultim render the
report and testifi phase moot
seiz digit evid
perhap the most critic step in the forens process is how data is collect or acquir
acquisit of digit evid must be complet in such a wai as to ensur that all relev
evid is seiz and secur in a forens sound manner so that the evid is not
taint or destroi
in fact there ar a number of practic consider and procedur to emploi when the
decis is made to go forward with a comput seizur on of the primari consider
that is often neglect is debrief the subject which involv ask the subject for
password and whether ani encrypt data exist on the target comput
the scientif work group on digit evid swgde from the organ of
american state ha publish a document titl best practic for comput forens
which provid a good foundat for digit forens examin although a complet
5 scientif work group on digit evid of the nation center for forens scienc best practic for
comput forens v2 2006 httpwwwoasorgjuridico panishcybbestpractpdf
digit forens investig
3716 2011 fraud examin manual
review of the entir document is beyond the scope of thi cours sever guidelin deserv
review accord to the swgde examin should adher to the follow guidelin
befor obtain evid ensur that there is legal author to seiz evid and
review the data associ with the evid thi mai requir obtain a warrant in a
crimin matter or ensur that intern polici author seizur for an intern
investig
if remov evid from the scene is impract copi or imag the item of evid
accord to establish procedur
remov all suspect wit and bystand from the proxim of the digit
evid keep in mind that remot access to comput can put potenti evid at
risk even if no person ha physic access to the comput also consid the wide rang
of mobil data storag devic todai eg usb flash drive that can be hidden
ensur that no suspect wit and bystand possess ani item contain
potenti evid
thoroughli and systemat search the scene for potenti evid onc again
consid the wide rang of data storag media and devic
unless complet unavoid data should not be analyz on the machin from which it
wa collect instead the examin should make forens sound copi of all data
storag devic primarili hard drive and analyz the data on these copi
to ensur that a machin can be fulli analyz the examin should take the follow
step
examin and document the machin surround
secur the evid
power down carefulli
inspect for trap
implement a system to manag the evid
examin and document the machin surround
the first step in the evid collect process is to examin and document the machin
surround thi includ collect all printout disk note and other physic evid
for further analysi document the scene with photograph or a diagram depend on the
complex of the setup rememb that it mai be a year or longer befor testimoni about
what the offic look like on the dai of the seizur will be ask for in a legal proceed
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3717
when document the condit of the evid the examin should consid
document what is on the screen if the system is on
document ani process that ar current run
take photograph of the variou view of the equip and media to document ani
damag or defect
take photograph of the equip physic connect
make a draw of the locat to document the layout and rel locat from
which evid wa seiz
addition becaus mani peopl have a habit of write down or record their
password near their comput examin should look around for note that mai appear to
be password thi mai aid in discov password need to access encrypt data if the
subject of the investig is be uncoop
take good note on the machin state at the ti me of the seizur record the time and date
that the system wa seiz and the personnel involv in the seizur the statu of the
system should also be note wa it on off or on standbi wa there anyth unusu
attach to the system wa there ani obviou damag did ani file have to be save
also if the comput wa activ record ani open applic make sure to start a chain of
custodi document and note each person and storag locat through which each piec of
evid pass
in addit to document the machin state at the time of seizur the examin should
document ani serial number and other potenti identifi mark eg manufactur
model number asset track number etc and he should photograph and diagram the
system entir configur
secur the evid
when secur a comput system follow the two golden rule the first rule is if the
comput is off dont turn it on also if a comp uter is on an investig will not want it to
go through it normal shutdown routin becaus window is veri good about clean up
after itself a number of temporari file will be delet and possibl overwritten dure a
normal shutdown and some of these file mai be import to the investig in most
case the investig should simpli unplug a run comput onc the investig take
possess of the comput he should not allow anyon access it with the except of a
train forens examin
digit forens investig
3718 2011 fraud examin manual
there ar other reason to conduct the seizur in thi wai by preserv the state of the
system at the time of seizur on can help to defeat an argument by oppos counsel that
exculpatori inform wa somehow taint or eras due to mishandl of the system if
on bit is chang in the system data it will ha ve a complet differ hash valu that is
to sai it would be differ than the origin even though the averag person mai not be
abl to recogn ani differ at all
all data is compos of bit binari digit it take eight bit to make on byte which is
what we ar commonli us to hear when we talk about storag capac such as 256
megabyt on megabyt equal 1024 kilobyt and on kilobyt equal 1024 byte as you
can see on bit is a rel infinitesim piec of data but it is import that not even on
bit of data be alter by the forens process
the second golden rule when secur a comput is do not peek through the file thi
also appli to disk if a system is run the examin mai be tempt to click on the my
comput icon to look for evid or copi file to a flash or optic storag devic thi
should never be done becaus each file the investig touch will have it origin time
stamp chang onc thi is done the origin time stamp cannot be recov it will be
obviou to the forens examin that thi ha occur
there ar two method for shut down a run system a hard shutdown and a grace
shutdown gener the hard shutdown is prefer there mai be extenu
circumst that would lead the investig to perform a grace shutdown so it is
import to evalu the best shutdown option base on the type of data be preserv
and the possibl ramif of a hard shutdown base on the type of oper system
instal a hard shutdown is basic pull the power cord from the back of the pc
laptop comput howev requir addit consider when seiz a laptop it is
import to remov the batteri first and then pull the plug it is essenti when seiz a
laptop to recov all of the compon that belong to the laptop such as flash drive cdrom
and dvdrom and power suppli often laptop comput must be imag with their
drive instal and becaus of the proprietari natur of the laptop themselv thei will
onli function with their own compon mani time these compon can be locat in
the laptop carri case
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3719
similarli network comput also present uniqu consider when power down a
network comput remov the power suppli from the back of the comput
when handl server howev it is import to us extrem caution when remov
power from a server without us proper shutdown method becaus thi can damag the
system and expos the examin to liabil
onc a comput is seiz it is necessari to secur it in such a wai that will allow the
investig to testifi if need be that no unauthor access to the suspect system
occur
inspect for trap
examin should also inspect the comput chassi for trap intrus detect softwar
and selfdestruct mechan although complet destroi a hard drive is extrem
difficult it is not difficult to make recoveri veri difficult
implement a system to manag the evid
examin should have a system to track and manag physic and digit evid the
most common method us to track physic evid is to assign each item a uniqu
evid number although thi number can be in ani format it should be consist and
never repeat
imag acquisit
to avoid alter evid the examin should make forens sound imag of the
suspect system for analysi imag acquisit involv us a standalon hard drive
duplic or similar devic to duplic a comput entir drive thi process is known as
imag becaus the hard drive can be imag to anoth hard disk drive a tape or other
media
the examin ha to be sure that the imag is creat and preserv in a manner that will
withstand a legal challeng therefor befor imag a hard drive the examin must
determin the best method for acquir an imag and the proper procedur to facilit the
imag captur
digit forens investig
3720 2011 fraud examin manual
dure the imag process examin should us some type of writeprotect devic or
applic to ensur no inform is written onto the origin drive and after the hard
drive is duplic the origin drive is move to a secur locat to prevent tamper
analysi
the analysi phase is arguabl the most timeconsum phase especi for a financi
crime or fraud investig thi phase involv the us of special softwar design to
give the examin the mean to locat and extract artifact that will be us as evid in
the investig the evid can serv to incrimin the subject of the investig or it
can be exculpatori by disprov the subject involv
the primari concern when analyz electron store inform esi is to maintain
it integr examin must be care with comput equip becaus a careless
investig mai inadvert alter import evid therefor it is help to develop
procedur to prevent the oppos parti from rais alleg that the methodolog us
to collect or analyz data wa improp and could have damag or alter the evid it
mai also be help to us a hardwarebas writeblock devic to protect the integr of
digit evid
on method to help ensur the integr of digi tal evid is to maintain a chain of custodi
for all evid gather and analyz the chain of custodi is both a process and a document
that memori 1 who ha had possess of an object and 2 what thei have done with
it it is simpli a mean of establish that there ha not been a materi chang or alter
to a piec of evid gap in the chain of custodi eg when it is not clear what occur
with a set of record or outright mishandl eg a group of question document wa
not properli seal can harm a case
at a minimum the follow chain of custodi procedur should be follow for digit
evid
identifi each item that contain relev inform
document each item who it wa receiv from who author it remov the locat
of the item and the date and time the item wa receiv
maintain a continu record of the item custodi as it chang hand
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3721
report and testifi
the report and testifi phase is where the hour of analysi ar report fairli and
object in thi phase a qualifi comput forens expert mai be ask to render an
opinion about the us or misus of a comput system thi is where experi and train
ar test and where examin must know with certainti that their opinion is base on their
research knowledg and experi and that an oppos expert will not find fault with
their conclus
