2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Computer Investigations and Computer Forensics/Seizing Digital Evidence


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Seizing Digital Evidence 
Perhaps the most critical step in the forensics process is how data is collected or acquired. 
Acquisition of digital evidence must be completed in such a way as to ensure that all relevant 
evidence is seized and secured in a forensically sound manner so that the evidence is not 
tainted or destroyed.  
 
In fact, there are a number of practical considerations and procedures to employ when the 
decision is made to go forward with a computer seizure. One of the primary considerations 
that is often neglected is debriefing the subject, which involves asking the subject for 
passwords and whether any encrypted data exists on the target computer. 
 
The Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence (SWGDE) from the Organization of 
American States has published a document, titled Best Practices for Computer Forensics, 
which provides a good foundation for digital forensics examiners. Although a complete 
                                                 
5  Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence of the National Center for Forensic Science. Best Practices for 
Computer Forensics V2, 2006. http://www.oas.org/juridico/s panish/cyb_best_pract.pdf.  
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.716   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
review of the entire document is beyond the scope of this course, several guidelines deserve 
review. According to the SWGDE, examiners should adhere to the following guidelines: 
• Before obtaining evidence, ensure that there is legal authority to seize evidence and 
review the data associated with the evidence. This may require obtaining a warrant in a 
criminal matter or ensuring that internal policies authorize seizure for an internal 
investigation.  
• If removing evidence from the scene is impractical, copy or image the items of evidence 
according to established procedures. 
• Remove all suspects, witnesses, and bystanders from the proximity of the digital 
evidence. Keep in mind that remote access to computers can put potential evidence at 
risk even if no person has physical access to the computer. Also, consider the wide range 
of mobile data storage devices today (e.g., USB flash drives) that can be hidden. 
• Ensure that no suspects, witnesses, and bystanders possess any items containing 
potential evidence.   
• Thoroughly and systematically search the scene for potential evidence. Once again, 
consider the wide range of data storage media and devices.  
 
Unless completely unavoidable, data should not be analyzed on the machine from which it 
was collected. Instead, the examiner should make forensically sound copies of all data 
storage devices — primarily hard drives — and analyze the data on these copies.  
 
To ensure that a machine can be fully analyzed, the examiner should take the following 
steps: 
• Examine and document the machine’s surroundings. 
• Secure the evidence. 
• Power down carefully. 
• Inspect for traps. 
• Implement a system to manage the evidence. 
 
EXAMINE AND DOCUMENT THE MACHINE’S SURROUNDINGS 
The first step in the evidence collection process is to examine and document the machine’s 
surroundings. This includes collecting all printouts, disks, notes, and other physical evidence 
for further analysis. Document the scene with photographs or a diagram, depending on the 
complexity of the setup, remembering that it may be a year or longer before testimony about 
what the office looked like on the day of the seizure will be asked for in a legal proceeding.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.717 
When documenting the condition of the evidence, the examiner should consider: 
• Documenting what is on the screen, if the system is on. 
• Documenting any processes that are currently running. 
• Taking photographs of the various views of the equipment and media to document any 
damage or defects. 
• Taking photographs of the equipment’s physical connections. 
• Making a drawing of the location to document the layout and relative locations from 
which evidence was seized. 
 
Additionally, because many people have a habit of writing down or recording their 
passwords near their computers, examiners should look around for notes that may appear to 
be passwords. This may aid in discovering passwords needed to access encrypted data if the 
subject of the investigation is being uncooperative. 
 
Take good notes on the machine’s state at the ti me of the seizure. Record the time and date 
that the system was seized and the personnel involved in the seizure. The status of the 
system should also be noted. Was it on, off, or on standby? Was there anything unusual 
attached to the system? Was there any obvious damage? Did any files have to be saved? 
Also, if the computer was active, record any open applications. Make sure to start a chain of 
custody document and note each person and storage location through which each piece of 
evidence passes. 
 
In addition to documenting the machine’s state at the time of seizure, the examiners should 
document any serial numbers and other potential identifying markings (e.g., manufacturer, 
model number, asset tracking number, etc.), and he should photograph and diagram the 
system’s entire configuration. 
 
SECURE THE EVIDENCE 
When securing a computer system, follow the two golden rules. The first rule is, if the 
computer is off, don’t turn it on. Also, if a comp uter is on, an investigator will not want it to 
go through its normal shutdown routines because Windows is very good about cleaning up 
after itself. A number of temporary files will be deleted and possibly overwritten during a 
normal shutdown, and some of these files may be important to the investigation. In most 
cases, the investigator should simply unplug a running computer. Once the investigator takes 
possession of the computer he should not allow anyone access it, with the exception of a 
trained forensic examiner. 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.718   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There are other reasons to conduct the seizure in this way. By preserving the state of the 
system at the time of seizure one can help to defeat an argument by opposing counsel that 
exculpatory information was somehow tainted or erased due to mishandling of the system. If 
one bit is changed in the system’s data, it will ha ve a completely different hash value; that is 
to say, it would be different than the original, even though the average person may not be 
able to recognize any difference at all.  
 
All data is composed of bits (binary digits). It takes eight bits to make one byte, which is 
what we are commonly used to hearing when we talk about storage capacity, such as 256 
megabytes. One megabyte equals 1024 kilobytes, and one kilobyte equals 1024 bytes. As you 
can see, one bit is a relatively infinitesimal piece of data, but it is important that not even one 
bit of data be altered by the forensic process. 
 
The second golden rule when securing a computer is, do not peek through the files. This 
also applies to disks. If a system is running, the examiner may be tempted to click on the My 
Computer icon to look for evidence or copy files to a flash or optical storage device. This 
should never be done, because each file the investigator touches will have its original time 
stamps changed; once this is done the original time stamps cannot be recovered. It will be 
obvious to the forensic examiner that this has occurred. 
 
There are two methods for shutting down a running system, a hard shutdown and a graceful 
shutdown. Generally, the hard shutdown is preferred. There may be extenuating 
circumstances that would lead the investigator to perform a graceful shutdown, so it is 
important to evaluate the best shutdown option based on the type of data being preserved 
and the possible ramifications of a hard shutdown based on the type of operating system 
installed. A hard shutdown is basically pulling the power cord from the back of the PC. 
 
Laptop computers, however, require additional considerations. When seizing a laptop, it is 
important to remove the battery first and then pull the plug. It is essential when seizing a 
laptop to recover all of the components that belong to the laptop, such as flash drives, CD-ROMs 
and DVD–ROMs, and power supplies. Often, laptop computers must be imaged with their 
drives installed, and because of the proprietary nature of the laptops themselves, they will 
only function with their own components. Many  times these components can be located in 
the laptop carrying case. 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.719 
Similarly, networked computers also present unique considerations. When powering down a 
networked computer, remove the power supply from the back of the computer.  
 
When handling servers, however, it is important to use extreme caution when removing 
power from a server without using proper shut-down methods because this can damage the 
system and expose the examiner to liability.  
 
Once a computer is seized, it is necessary to secure it in such a way that will allow the 
investigator to testify, if need be, that no unauthorized access to the suspect system 
occurred. 
 
INSPECT FOR TRAPS 
Examiners should also inspect the computer’s chassis for traps, intrusion detection software, 
and self-destruct mechanisms. Although completely destroying a hard drive is extremely 
difficult, it is not difficult to make recovery very difficult.   
 
IMPLEMENT A SYSTEM TO MANAGE THE EVIDENCE 
Examiners should have a system to track and manage physical and digital evidence. The 
most common method used to track physical evidence is to assign each item a unique 
evidence number. Although this number can be in any format, it should be consistent and 
never repeated.  
 



:


seiz digit evid
perhap the most critic step in the forens process is how data is collect or acquir
acquisit of digit evid must be complet in such a wai as to ensur that all relev
evid is seiz and secur in a forens sound manner so that the evid is not
taint or destroi
in fact there ar a number of practic consider and procedur to emploi when the
decis is made to go forward with a comput seizur on of the primari consider
that is often neglect is debrief the subject which involv ask the subject for
password and whether ani encrypt data exist on the target comput
the scientif work group on digit evid swgde from the organ of
american state ha publish a document titl best practic for comput forens
which provid a good foundat for digit forens examin although a complet
5 scientif work group on digit evid of the nation center for forens scienc best practic for
comput forens v2 2006 httpwwwoasorgjuridico panishcybbestpractpdf
digit forens investig
3716 2011 fraud examin manual
review of the entir document is beyond the scope of thi cours sever guidelin deserv
review accord to the swgde examin should adher to the follow guidelin
befor obtain evid ensur that there is legal author to seiz evid and
review the data associ with the evid thi mai requir obtain a warrant in a
crimin matter or ensur that intern polici author seizur for an intern
investig
if remov evid from the scene is impract copi or imag the item of evid
accord to establish procedur
remov all suspect wit and bystand from the proxim of the digit
evid keep in mind that remot access to comput can put potenti evid at
risk even if no person ha physic access to the comput also consid the wide rang
of mobil data storag devic todai eg usb flash drive that can be hidden
ensur that no suspect wit and bystand possess ani item contain
potenti evid
thoroughli and systemat search the scene for potenti evid onc again
consid the wide rang of data storag media and devic
unless complet unavoid data should not be analyz on the machin from which it
wa collect instead the examin should make forens sound copi of all data
storag devic primarili hard drive and analyz the data on these copi
to ensur that a machin can be fulli analyz the examin should take the follow
step
examin and document the machin surround
secur the evid
power down carefulli
inspect for trap
implement a system to manag the evid
examin and document the machin surround
the first step in the evid collect process is to examin and document the machin
surround thi includ collect all printout disk note and other physic evid
for further analysi document the scene with photograph or a diagram depend on the
complex of the setup rememb that it mai be a year or longer befor testimoni about
what the offic look like on the dai of the seizur will be ask for in a legal proceed
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3717
when document the condit of the evid the examin should consid
document what is on the screen if the system is on
document ani process that ar current run
take photograph of the variou view of the equip and media to document ani
damag or defect
take photograph of the equip physic connect
make a draw of the locat to document the layout and rel locat from
which evid wa seiz
addition becaus mani peopl have a habit of write down or record their
password near their comput examin should look around for note that mai appear to
be password thi mai aid in discov password need to access encrypt data if the
subject of the investig is be uncoop
take good note on the machin state at the ti me of the seizur record the time and date
that the system wa seiz and the personnel involv in the seizur the statu of the
system should also be note wa it on off or on standbi wa there anyth unusu
attach to the system wa there ani obviou damag did ani file have to be save
also if the comput wa activ record ani open applic make sure to start a chain of
custodi document and note each person and storag locat through which each piec of
evid pass
in addit to document the machin state at the time of seizur the examin should
document ani serial number and other potenti identifi mark eg manufactur
model number asset track number etc and he should photograph and diagram the
system entir configur
secur the evid
when secur a comput system follow the two golden rule the first rule is if the
comput is off dont turn it on also if a comp uter is on an investig will not want it to
go through it normal shutdown routin becaus window is veri good about clean up
after itself a number of temporari file will be delet and possibl overwritten dure a
normal shutdown and some of these file mai be import to the investig in most
case the investig should simpli unplug a run comput onc the investig take
possess of the comput he should not allow anyon access it with the except of a
train forens examin
digit forens investig
3718 2011 fraud examin manual
there ar other reason to conduct the seizur in thi wai by preserv the state of the
system at the time of seizur on can help to defeat an argument by oppos counsel that
exculpatori inform wa somehow taint or eras due to mishandl of the system if
on bit is chang in the system data it will ha ve a complet differ hash valu that is
to sai it would be differ than the origin even though the averag person mai not be
abl to recogn ani differ at all
all data is compos of bit binari digit it take eight bit to make on byte which is
what we ar commonli us to hear when we talk about storag capac such as 256
megabyt on megabyt equal 1024 kilobyt and on kilobyt equal 1024 byte as you
can see on bit is a rel infinitesim piec of data but it is import that not even on
bit of data be alter by the forens process
the second golden rule when secur a comput is do not peek through the file thi
also appli to disk if a system is run the examin mai be tempt to click on the my
comput icon to look for evid or copi file to a flash or optic storag devic thi
should never be done becaus each file the investig touch will have it origin time
stamp chang onc thi is done the origin time stamp cannot be recov it will be
obviou to the forens examin that thi ha occur
there ar two method for shut down a run system a hard shutdown and a grace
shutdown gener the hard shutdown is prefer there mai be extenu
circumst that would lead the investig to perform a grace shutdown so it is
import to evalu the best shutdown option base on the type of data be preserv
and the possibl ramif of a hard shutdown base on the type of oper system
instal a hard shutdown is basic pull the power cord from the back of the pc
laptop comput howev requir addit consider when seiz a laptop it is
import to remov the batteri first and then pull the plug it is essenti when seiz a
laptop to recov all of the compon that belong to the laptop such as flash drive cdrom
and dvdrom and power suppli often laptop comput must be imag with their
drive instal and becaus of the proprietari natur of the laptop themselv thei will
onli function with their own compon mani time these compon can be locat in
the laptop carri case
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3719
similarli network comput also present uniqu consider when power down a
network comput remov the power suppli from the back of the comput
when handl server howev it is import to us extrem caution when remov
power from a server without us proper shutdown method becaus thi can damag the
system and expos the examin to liabil
onc a comput is seiz it is necessari to secur it in such a wai that will allow the
investig to testifi if need be that no unauthor access to the suspect system
occur
inspect for trap
examin should also inspect the comput chassi for trap intrus detect softwar
and selfdestruct mechan although complet destroi a hard drive is extrem
difficult it is not difficult to make recoveri veri difficult
implement a system to manag the evid
examin should have a system to track and manag physic and digit evid the
most common method us to track physic evid is to assign each item a uniqu
evid number although thi number can be in ani format it should be consist and
never repeat
