2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Computer Investigations and Computer Forensics/Seizing Digital Evidence/SECURE THE EVIDENCE


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


SECURE THE EVIDENCE 
When securing a computer system, follow the two golden rules. The first rule is, if the 
computer is off, don’t turn it on. Also, if a comp uter is on, an investigator will not want it to 
go through its normal shutdown routines because Windows is very good about cleaning up 
after itself. A number of temporary files will be deleted and possibly overwritten during a 
normal shutdown, and some of these files may be important to the investigation. In most 
cases, the investigator should simply unplug a running computer. Once the investigator takes 
possession of the computer he should not allow anyone access it, with the exception of a 
trained forensic examiner. 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.718   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There are other reasons to conduct the seizure in this way. By preserving the state of the 
system at the time of seizure one can help to defeat an argument by opposing counsel that 
exculpatory information was somehow tainted or erased due to mishandling of the system. If 
one bit is changed in the system’s data, it will ha ve a completely different hash value; that is 
to say, it would be different than the original, even though the average person may not be 
able to recognize any difference at all.  
 
All data is composed of bits (binary digits). It takes eight bits to make one byte, which is 
what we are commonly used to hearing when we talk about storage capacity, such as 256 
megabytes. One megabyte equals 1024 kilobytes, and one kilobyte equals 1024 bytes. As you 
can see, one bit is a relatively infinitesimal piece of data, but it is important that not even one 
bit of data be altered by the forensic process. 
 
The second golden rule when securing a computer is, do not peek through the files. This 
also applies to disks. If a system is running, the examiner may be tempted to click on the My 
Computer icon to look for evidence or copy files to a flash or optical storage device. This 
should never be done, because each file the investigator touches will have its original time 
stamps changed; once this is done the original time stamps cannot be recovered. It will be 
obvious to the forensic examiner that this has occurred. 
 
There are two methods for shutting down a running system, a hard shutdown and a graceful 
shutdown. Generally, the hard shutdown is preferred. There may be extenuating 
circumstances that would lead the investigator to perform a graceful shutdown, so it is 
important to evaluate the best shutdown option based on the type of data being preserved 
and the possible ramifications of a hard shutdown based on the type of operating system 
installed. A hard shutdown is basically pulling the power cord from the back of the PC. 
 
Laptop computers, however, require additional considerations. When seizing a laptop, it is 
important to remove the battery first and then pull the plug. It is essential when seizing a 
laptop to recover all of the components that belong to the laptop, such as flash drives, CD-ROMs 
and DVD–ROMs, and power supplies. Often, laptop computers must be imaged with their 
drives installed, and because of the proprietary nature of the laptops themselves, they will 
only function with their own components. Many  times these components can be located in 
the laptop carrying case. 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.719 
Similarly, networked computers also present unique considerations. When powering down a 
networked computer, remove the power supply from the back of the computer.  
 
When handling servers, however, it is important to use extreme caution when removing 
power from a server without using proper shut-down methods because this can damage the 
system and expose the examiner to liability.  
 
Once a computer is seized, it is necessary to secure it in such a way that will allow the 
investigator to testify, if need be, that no unauthorized access to the suspect system 
occurred. 
 



:


secur the evid
when secur a comput system follow the two golden rule the first rule is if the
comput is off dont turn it on also if a comp uter is on an investig will not want it to
go through it normal shutdown routin becaus window is veri good about clean up
after itself a number of temporari file will be delet and possibl overwritten dure a
normal shutdown and some of these file mai be import to the investig in most
case the investig should simpli unplug a run comput onc the investig take
possess of the comput he should not allow anyon access it with the except of a
train forens examin
digit forens investig
3718 2011 fraud examin manual
there ar other reason to conduct the seizur in thi wai by preserv the state of the
system at the time of seizur on can help to defeat an argument by oppos counsel that
exculpatori inform wa somehow taint or eras due to mishandl of the system if
on bit is chang in the system data it will ha ve a complet differ hash valu that is
to sai it would be differ than the origin even though the averag person mai not be
abl to recogn ani differ at all
all data is compos of bit binari digit it take eight bit to make on byte which is
what we ar commonli us to hear when we talk about storag capac such as 256
megabyt on megabyt equal 1024 kilobyt and on kilobyt equal 1024 byte as you
can see on bit is a rel infinitesim piec of data but it is import that not even on
bit of data be alter by the forens process
the second golden rule when secur a comput is do not peek through the file thi
also appli to disk if a system is run the examin mai be tempt to click on the my
comput icon to look for evid or copi file to a flash or optic storag devic thi
should never be done becaus each file the investig touch will have it origin time
stamp chang onc thi is done the origin time stamp cannot be recov it will be
obviou to the forens examin that thi ha occur
there ar two method for shut down a run system a hard shutdown and a grace
shutdown gener the hard shutdown is prefer there mai be extenu
circumst that would lead the investig to perform a grace shutdown so it is
import to evalu the best shutdown option base on the type of data be preserv
and the possibl ramif of a hard shutdown base on the type of oper system
instal a hard shutdown is basic pull the power cord from the back of the pc
laptop comput howev requir addit consider when seiz a laptop it is
import to remov the batteri first and then pull the plug it is essenti when seiz a
laptop to recov all of the compon that belong to the laptop such as flash drive cdrom
and dvdrom and power suppli often laptop comput must be imag with their
drive instal and becaus of the proprietari natur of the laptop themselv thei will
onli function with their own compon mani time these compon can be locat in
the laptop carri case
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3719
similarli network comput also present uniqu consider when power down a
network comput remov the power suppli from the back of the comput
when handl server howev it is import to us extrem caution when remov
power from a server without us proper shutdown method becaus thi can damag the
system and expos the examin to liabil
onc a comput is seiz it is necessari to secur it in such a wai that will allow the
investig to testifi if need be that no unauthor access to the suspect system
occur
