2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Forensic Examination and Analysis


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Forensic Examination and Analysis 
While every fraud examiner should have basic knowledge of computer evidence and how to 
properly identify, collect, and store digital evidence, some fraud examiners may decide to 
pursue additional training in the area of computer forensic analysis. The process of 
developing the skill set necessary to be a computer-forensic examiner takes a considerable 
amount of time, training, and experience. Additionally, there are a number of software and 
hardware tools that are now available to conduct this type of work; the forensic examiner 
must be aware of these tools and understand how they work.  
 
Again, a forensic analysis of a computer could involve the examination of a tremendous 
volume of data. In 1993, the average hard disk was 60 megabytes (MB) in size. The standard 
size in 1999 was 8 gigabytes (GB), and currently, the average size of hard disks offered is 
between 120 GB and 1.9 terabytes. 
 
Forensic examiners will generally use at least two software tools on a project simultaneously 
to cross-validate their results. It is also important to note that many insufficiently trained 
examiners who use automated tools do not in fact understand what the automated process is 
doing. It is extremely important to understand and be able to articulate how a tool is 
conducting an automated process. This means that a forensic examiner who uses an 
automated tool should be able to explain how to conduct the same process manually.  
 
Because the primary concern when collecting and analyzing digital evidence is to maintain its 
integrity, forensic examiners must be careful with computer equipment. Therefore, it is 
helpful to develop procedures to prevent the opposing party from raising allegations that the 
methodology used to collect or analyze data was improper and could have damaged or 
altered the evidence. It may also be helpful to use a hardware or software write-blocking 
device to protect the integrity of digital evidence. These devices allow the user to acquire 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.722   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
information on a drive without damaging the drive contents by allowing read commands to 
pass and blocking write commands.  
 
A hardware write-blocking devise stops  any automated processes or incidental processes 
that an operating system or examiner may use to interact with a piece of digital media. That 
is, the devise tricks the operating system into believing that the interaction occurred so that it 
will not generate an error and thwart the acquisition process. What actually happens is that 
the write commands are intercepted and cached by the device instead of reaching the target; 
therefore, no writes to the media occur. The device allows only read permissions to the 
media.  
 
The software write blocker, however, denies access to media by prohibiting certain requests 
to the media by filtering out those requests. Only read requests are accepted and all write 
requests are denied. Software write blockers must operate at a separate level than a standard 
graphical user’s interface (GUI), such as in DOS mode. There are a number of these types of 
devices on the market today made for all applications and media types. 
 
Keyword Searches 
Once the collection process is complete, examiners are left with large volumes of digital data 
that may contain relevant or irrelevant information. At this point, the examiner must process 
and filter the digital information to reduce the amount of data (commonly known as data 
culling) that has been collected by performing keyword searches to identify relevant 
information. 
 
Keyword searches involve identifying relevant evidence by searching for words that are 
material to a case (e.g., names, dates, account numbers, etc.). This type of search will 
minimize the amount of time used to complete an analysis, and it will help protect the fraud 
examiner from allegations that his search was overly broad. 
 
Based on the information known about the case, the examiner should establish a list of 
relevant keywords. Because enormous amounts of data will need to be searched in most 
fraud examinations, examiners and investigators should take care in keeping the list as short 
and relevant as possible, and they should avoid common words or words that can be part of 
other words. As a case progresses, there is a strong likelihood that more keywords will be 
identified. Furthermore, search terms can be devised to look for patterns in data. 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.723 
Recovering Evidence 
In addition to live files, a wealth of information can be recovered and analyzed on seized 
systems. Because Windows operating systems are the most widely used, knowledge about the 
file systems—methods used to store and organi ze computer files and the data they contain 
for easy access—used by the Windows operating system is critical. Knowledge of the 
Windows operating system will help the examiner locate relevant evidence that is commonly 
found in files stored on hard drives, storage devices, and media.  
 
Common files containing evidence stored in the operating system include user-created files, 
user-protected files, and computer-created files.  
 
User-created Files 
User-created files are files created under the user’s direction, and include text-based 
documents, spreadsheets, databases, e-mail, address books, presentation slides, audio/video 
files, image files, Internet bookmarks, and so on.  
 
User-protected Files 
Often, users hide files to prevent them from being found. There are a variety of techniques 
to hide files, but some of the most common methods are detailed below. 
 
CAMOUFLAGED FILES 
A user might camouflage certain files under an innocent name or different file extension to 
prevent others from discovering them. For example, a suspect might change a file name 
from “evidence.doc” to “install. exe” and place the file in a directory that stores program 
files. Therefore, examiners should analyze a target’s hard drive to determine whether any file 
types have been camouflaged. This is done by analyzing the file header — the first bits of data 
in a file — which contains data identifying the file format. 
 
STEGANOGRAPHY 
Steganography is the process of hiding one piece of information within an apparently 
innocent file. For example, a user can use the least significant bits of a bitmap image to hide 
a message. By hiding the message in the least significant bits of an image, there is almost no 
perceivable change in the bitmap image itself. And without directly comparing the altered 
image to the original, it is practically impossible to tell that the image was altered.  
 
  
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.724   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
After a French defense contractor suspected that some of his critical designs were being 
compromised, the government conducted an invest igation. The investigation revealed that an 
employee had obtained his position at the company to steal the contractor’s trade secrets. To 
transmit the trade secrets out of the company, the employee imbedded them into graphic images 
used on the company’s public access website usin g steganography. Another party then copied the 
image files from the website and extracted the proprietary designs.  
 
Digitized audio files are another type of file that can be used to hide messages. For example, 
by encoding a message in the least significant bits of a .WAV file, a user can make the 
message almost impossible to detect. Messages can also be hidden in the unused sectors of a 
floppy disk. 
 
ENCRYPTION 
Encryption refers to procedures used to convert information using an algorithm (called cipher) 
that makes the information unreadable. Although there are many free and commercial 
encryption programs available, there are two primary ways to access encrypted information. 
First, there are numerous utility programs that can decrypt documents encrypted by many of 
the more common software applications. In addition, some encryption programs have a 
secret “key” for emergencies that may be very helpful in an investigation. There are also 
several companies that specialize in decryption. 
 
Second, there is precedent for forcing a suspect (or employee) to divulge his decryption 
code. The computer is only a container and encryption is an additional lock prohibiting the 
investigator from reviewing the files for potential evidence. An examiner with a legal right to 
examine encrypted data is no different than ordering a suspect or employee to unlock a file 
cabinet to inspect its contents.  
 
ALTERNATE DATA STREAMS 
Another method used to hide files in Windows systems is the use of the alternate data 
streams of a file or directory. This method, however, is only possible in Windows New 
Technology File System (NTFS) — one of two basic types of file systems used to organize 
data in Windows systems. Alternate data streams are a feature in the NTFS filesystem that 
offers the ability to put data into existing files and folders without affecting their 
functionality, size, or display in many traditional file-browsing utilities like command line or 
Windows Explorer. 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.725 
Although Windows Explorer does not provide a way to see what alternate data streams are 
in a file, they are easy to make and allow an individual with basic knowledge to hide files 
without having to resort to any third-party tools. 
 
Fortunately, there are forensic tools that can search NTFS partitions for alternative data 
streams.  
 
Computer-created Files 
Evidence may also be found in information generated by the operating systems. This type of 
information is important because it can identify that a certain activity has taken place, and, in 
most cases, the user is not aware that it is being written. Some common examples of 
computer-generated data available for examination include: metadata, registry, paging file, 
event logs, LNK files, Internet activity, temporary data, deleted data, and printer-spool files.  
 
METADATA 
Metadata is data about data, and these file tidbits contain a tremendous amount of 
information. It can help determine who wrote a document; who received, opened, copied, 
edited, moved, or printed the document; and when these events occurred. 
 
WINDOWS REGISTRY 
The Windows registry is a central database that stores settings and configuration for the 
operating system and most applications installed on the system. The registry is an important 
source of potential evidential data because it contains information on user accounts, typed 
URLs, networks shared, the run command history, and so on. Often, software used by the 
fraudster will create a footprint in the registry that can provide valuable insight into relevant 
activity that occurred in the system.  
 
WINDOWS PAGING FILE 
Operating systems have a limited supply of Random Access Memory (RAM), and if an 
operating system runs out of physical RAM and needs more memory, it will move some of 
the data outside physical memory and store it temporarily in a special file on the hard disk. 
This file, which is called a paging file or a swap file, is used to simulate RAM. 
 
WINDOWS EVENT LOGS 
Event logs are files that record significant events on a computer. In Windows systems, there 
are three types of events: system, applicat ion, and security. The system log tracks 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.726   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
miscellaneous system events, including events generated during system startup like hardware 
and controller failures. The application log tracks application-related events and application 
errors, such as failing to load a DLL. The security log, which is turned off by default, tracks 
security-related events like logon and logoff times and changes to access rights.  
 
LNK FILES 
LNK files, which are also called shortcuts, refer (or link) to target files that may be 
applications, documents, or system resources. Clicking on a LNK file will either cause the 
application to start or the document to open, and will prompt the applicable system 
resources to run. Although the user may create these files, the system generally creates them 
when a user performs certain tasks. These files, therefore, provide a “history” of previously 
opened documents and files.  
 
INTERNET ACTIVITY 
Web browsers create temporary files that store information about websites that a user has 
visited. These files can show websites that were recently visited and usually include time and 
date information relevant to the visit; they ca n also show images previously viewed online. 
This information allows the examiner to recover websites and images previously viewed by 
the system’s users. 
 
TEMPORARY FILES 
Applications will create temporary files like those created by Web browsers. For example, 
certain communication software like instant messaging (IM) and chat software will keep a 
history of the user’s conversations in a proprietary and sometimes encrypted format.  
 
DELETED DATA 
Deletion is a widely misunderstood function in computing because deleting data is not the 
same as destroying data. Choosing the delete option erases the file’s reference from the table 
of contents, but it does not erase the file; in fa ct, data is not erased from a computer’s hard 
drive until the file is overwritten. 
 
PRINTER-SPOOL FILES 
It is sometimes possible to recover an image of the last page printed on a printer. When 
computers running Windows operating systems print files, a print-spooling process occurs. 
The process involves writing the print job to files, allowing users to keep working while the 
print job runs in the background. After the user creates a print job, it is placed in a queue 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.727 
and is printed when the printer becomes available to perform the job. Once printing is 
complete, the operating system deletes the files;  but again, deleted files can be recovered. 
 
 



:


forens examin and analysi
while everi fraud examin should have basic knowledg of comput evid and how to
properli identifi collect and store digit evid some fraud examin mai decid to
pursu addit train in the area of comput forens analysi the process of
develop the skill set necessari to be a computerforens examin take a consider
amount of time train and experi addition there ar a number of softwar and
hardwar tool that ar now avail to conduct thi type of work the forens examin
must be awar of these tool and understand how thei work
again a forens analysi of a comput could involv the examin of a tremend
volum of data in 1993 the averag hard disk wa 60 megabyt mb in size the standard
size in 1999 wa 8 gigabyt gb and current the averag size of hard disk offer is
between 120 gb and 19 terabyt
forens examin will gener us at least two softwar tool on a project simultan
to crossvalid their result it is also import to note that mani insuffici train
examin who us autom tool do not in fact understand what the autom process is
do it is extrem import to understand and be abl to articul how a tool is
conduct an autom process thi mean that a forens examin who us an
autom tool should be abl to explain how to conduct the same process manual
becaus the primari concern when collect and analyz digit evid is to maintain it
integr forens examin must be care with comput equip therefor it is
help to develop procedur to prevent the oppos parti from rais alleg that the
methodolog us to collect or analyz data wa improp and could have damag or
alter the evid it mai also be help to us a hardwar or softwar writeblock
devic to protect the integr of digit evid these devic allow the user to acquir
digit forens investig
3722 2011 fraud examin manual
inform on a drive without damag the drive content by allow read command to
pass and block write command
a hardwar writeblock devis stop ani autom process or incident process
that an oper system or examin mai us to interact with a piec of digit media that
is the devis trick the oper system into believ that the interact occur so that it
will not gener an error and thwart the acquisit process what actual happen is that
the write command ar intercept and cach by the devic instead of reach the target
therefor no write to the media occur the devic allow onli read permiss to the
media
the softwar write blocker howev deni access to media by prohibit certain request
to the media by filter out those request onli read request ar accept and all write
request ar deni softwar write blocker must oper at a separ level than a standard
graphic user interfac gui such as in do mode there ar a number of these type of
devic on the market todai made for all applic and media type
keyword search
onc the collect process is complet examin ar left with larg volum of digit data
that mai contain relev or irrelev inform at thi point the examin must process
and filter the digit inform to reduc the amount of data commonli known as data
cull that ha been collect by perform keyword search to identifi relev
inform
keyword search involv identifi relev evid by search for word that ar
materi to a case eg name date account number etc thi type of search will
minim the amount of time us to complet an analysi and it will help protect the fraud
examin from alleg that hi search wa overli broad
base on the inform known about the case the examin should establish a list of
relev keyword becaus enorm amount of data will need to be search in most
fraud examin examin and investig should take care in keep the list as short
and relev as possibl and thei should avoid common word or word that can be part of
other word as a case progress there is a strong likelihood that more keyword will be
identifi furthermor search term can be devis to look for pattern in data
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3723
recov evid
in addit to live file a wealth of inform can be recov and analyz on seiz
system becaus window oper system ar the most wide us knowledg about the
file systemsmethod us to store and organi ze comput file and the data thei contain
for easi accessus by the window oper system is critic knowledg of the
window oper system will help the examin locat relev evid that is commonli
found in file store on hard drive storag devic and media
common file contain evid store in the oper system includ usercr file
userprotect file and computercr file
usercr file
usercr file ar file creat under the user direct and includ textbas
document spreadsheet databas email address book present slide audiovideo
file imag file internet bookmark and so on
userprotect file
often user hide file to prevent them from be found there ar a varieti of techniqu
to hide file but some of the most common method ar detail below
camouflag file
a user might camouflag certain file under an innoc name or differ file extens to
prevent other from discov them for exampl a suspect might chang a file name
from evidencedoc to instal ex and place the file in a directori that store program
file therefor examin should analyz a target hard drive to determin whether ani file
type have been camouflag thi is done by analyz the file header the first bit of data
in a file which contain data identifi the file format
steganographi
steganographi is the process of hide on piec of inform within an appar
innoc file for exampl a user can us the least signific bit of a bitmap imag to hide
a messag by hide the messag in the least signific bit of an imag there is almost no
perceiv chang in the bitmap imag itself and without directli compar the alter
imag to the origin it is practic imposs to tell that the imag wa alter
digit forens investig
3724 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
after a french defens contractor suspect that some of hi critic design were be
compromis the govern conduct an invest igat the investig reveal that an
employe had obtain hi posit at the compani to steal the contractor trade secret to
transmit the trade secret out of the compani the employe imbed them into graphic imag
us on the compani public access websit usin g steganographi anoth parti then copi the
imag file from the websit and extract the proprietari design
digit audio file ar anoth type of file that can be us to hide messag for exampl
by encod a messag in the least signific bit of a wav file a user can make the
messag almost imposs to detect messag can also be hidden in the unus sector of a
floppi disk
encrypt
encrypt refer to procedur us to convert inform us an algorithm call cipher
that make the inform unread although there ar mani free and commerci
encrypt program avail there ar two primari wai to access encrypt inform
first there ar numer util program that can decrypt document encrypt by mani of
the more common softwar applic in addit some encrypt program have a
secret kei for emerg that mai be veri help in an investig there ar also
sever compani that special in decrypt
second there is preced for forc a suspect or employe to divulg hi decrypt
code the comput is onli a contain and encrypt is an addit lock prohibit the
investig from review the file for potenti evid an examin with a legal right to
examin encrypt data is no differ than order a suspect or employe to unlock a file
cabinet to inspect it content
altern data stream
anoth method us to hide file in window system is the us of the altern data
stream of a file or directori thi method howev is onli possibl in window new
technolog file system ntf on of two basic type of file system us to organ
data in window system altern data stream ar a featur in the ntf filesystem that
offer the abil to put data into exist file and folder without affect their
function size or displai in mani tradit filebrows util like command line or
window explor
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3725
although window explor doe not provid a wai to see what altern data stream ar
in a file thei ar easi to make and allow an individu with basic knowledg to hide file
without have to resort to ani thirdparti tool
fortun there ar forens tool that can search ntf partit for altern data
stream
computercr file
evid mai also be found in inform gener by the oper system thi type of
inform is import becaus it can identifi that a certain activ ha taken place and in
most case the user is not awar that it is be written some common exampl of
computergener data avail for examin includ metadata registri page file
event log lnk file internet activ temporari data delet data and printerspool file
metadata
metadata is data about data and these file tidbit contain a tremend amount of
inform it can help determin who wrote a document who receiv open copi
edit move or print the document and when these event occur
window registri
the window registri is a central databas that store set and configur for the
oper system and most applic instal on the system the registri is an import
sourc of potenti evidenti data becaus it contain inform on user account type
url network share the run command histori and so on often softwar us by the
fraudster will creat a footprint in the registri that can provid valuabl insight into relev
activ that occur in the system
window page file
oper system have a limit suppli of random access memori ram and if an
oper system run out of physic ram and need more memori it will move some of
the data outsid physic memori and store it temporarili in a special file on the hard disk
thi file which is call a page file or a swap file is us to simul ram
window event log
event log ar file that record signific event on a comput in window system there
ar three type of event system applicat ion and secur the system log track
digit forens investig
3726 2011 fraud examin manual
miscellan system event includ event gener dure system startup like hardwar
and control failur the applic log track applicationrel event and applic
error such as fail to load a dll the secur log which is turn off by default track
securityrel event like logon and logoff time and chang to access right
lnk file
lnk file which ar also call shortcut refer or link to target file that mai be
applic document or system resourc click on a lnk file will either caus the
applic to start or the document to open and will prompt the applic system
resourc to run although the user mai creat these file the system gener creat them
when a user perform certain task these file therefor provid a histori of previous
open document and file
internet activ
web browser creat temporari file that store inform about websit that a user ha
visit these file can show websit that were recent visit and usual includ time and
date inform relev to the visit thei ca n also show imag previous view onlin
thi inform allow the examin to recov websit and imag previous view by
the system user
temporari file
applic will creat temporari file like those creat by web browser for exampl
certain commun softwar like instant messag im and chat softwar will keep a
histori of the user convers in a proprietari and sometim encrypt format
delet data
delet is a wide misunderstood function in comput becaus delet data is not the
same as destroi data choos the delet option eras the file refer from the tabl
of content but it doe not eras the file in fa ct data is not eras from a comput hard
drive until the file is overwritten
printerspool file
it is sometim possibl to recov an imag of the last page print on a printer when
comput run window oper system print file a printspool process occur
the process involv write the print job to file allow user to keep work while the
print job run in the background after the user creat a print job it is place in a queue
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3727
and is print when the printer becom avail to perform the job onc print is
complet the oper system delet the file but again delet file can be recov
