2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Forensic Examination and Analysis/User-protected Files


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


User-protected Files 
Often, users hide files to prevent them from being found. There are a variety of techniques 
to hide files, but some of the most common methods are detailed below. 
 
CAMOUFLAGED FILES 
A user might camouflage certain files under an innocent name or different file extension to 
prevent others from discovering them. For example, a suspect might change a file name 
from “evidence.doc” to “install. exe” and place the file in a directory that stores program 
files. Therefore, examiners should analyze a target’s hard drive to determine whether any file 
types have been camouflaged. This is done by analyzing the file header — the first bits of data 
in a file — which contains data identifying the file format. 
 
STEGANOGRAPHY 
Steganography is the process of hiding one piece of information within an apparently 
innocent file. For example, a user can use the least significant bits of a bitmap image to hide 
a message. By hiding the message in the least significant bits of an image, there is almost no 
perceivable change in the bitmap image itself. And without directly comparing the altered 
image to the original, it is practically impossible to tell that the image was altered.  
 
  
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.724   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
After a French defense contractor suspected that some of his critical designs were being 
compromised, the government conducted an invest igation. The investigation revealed that an 
employee had obtained his position at the company to steal the contractor’s trade secrets. To 
transmit the trade secrets out of the company, the employee imbedded them into graphic images 
used on the company’s public access website usin g steganography. Another party then copied the 
image files from the website and extracted the proprietary designs.  
 
Digitized audio files are another type of file that can be used to hide messages. For example, 
by encoding a message in the least significant bits of a .WAV file, a user can make the 
message almost impossible to detect. Messages can also be hidden in the unused sectors of a 
floppy disk. 
 
ENCRYPTION 
Encryption refers to procedures used to convert information using an algorithm (called cipher) 
that makes the information unreadable. Although there are many free and commercial 
encryption programs available, there are two primary ways to access encrypted information. 
First, there are numerous utility programs that can decrypt documents encrypted by many of 
the more common software applications. In addition, some encryption programs have a 
secret “key” for emergencies that may be very helpful in an investigation. There are also 
several companies that specialize in decryption. 
 
Second, there is precedent for forcing a suspect (or employee) to divulge his decryption 
code. The computer is only a container and encryption is an additional lock prohibiting the 
investigator from reviewing the files for potential evidence. An examiner with a legal right to 
examine encrypted data is no different than ordering a suspect or employee to unlock a file 
cabinet to inspect its contents.  
 
ALTERNATE DATA STREAMS 
Another method used to hide files in Windows systems is the use of the alternate data 
streams of a file or directory. This method, however, is only possible in Windows New 
Technology File System (NTFS) — one of two basic types of file systems used to organize 
data in Windows systems. Alternate data streams are a feature in the NTFS filesystem that 
offers the ability to put data into existing files and folders without affecting their 
functionality, size, or display in many traditional file-browsing utilities like command line or 
Windows Explorer. 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.725 
Although Windows Explorer does not provide a way to see what alternate data streams are 
in a file, they are easy to make and allow an individual with basic knowledge to hide files 
without having to resort to any third-party tools. 
 
Fortunately, there are forensic tools that can search NTFS partitions for alternative data 
streams.  
 



:


userprotect file
often user hide file to prevent them from be found there ar a varieti of techniqu
to hide file but some of the most common method ar detail below
camouflag file
a user might camouflag certain file under an innoc name or differ file extens to
prevent other from discov them for exampl a suspect might chang a file name
from evidencedoc to instal ex and place the file in a directori that store program
file therefor examin should analyz a target hard drive to determin whether ani file
type have been camouflag thi is done by analyz the file header the first bit of data
in a file which contain data identifi the file format
steganographi
steganographi is the process of hide on piec of inform within an appar
innoc file for exampl a user can us the least signific bit of a bitmap imag to hide
a messag by hide the messag in the least signific bit of an imag there is almost no
perceiv chang in the bitmap imag itself and without directli compar the alter
imag to the origin it is practic imposs to tell that the imag wa alter
digit forens investig
3724 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
after a french defens contractor suspect that some of hi critic design were be
compromis the govern conduct an invest igat the investig reveal that an
employe had obtain hi posit at the compani to steal the contractor trade secret to
transmit the trade secret out of the compani the employe imbed them into graphic imag
us on the compani public access websit usin g steganographi anoth parti then copi the
imag file from the websit and extract the proprietari design
digit audio file ar anoth type of file that can be us to hide messag for exampl
by encod a messag in the least signific bit of a wav file a user can make the
messag almost imposs to detect messag can also be hidden in the unus sector of a
floppi disk
encrypt
encrypt refer to procedur us to convert inform us an algorithm call cipher
that make the inform unread although there ar mani free and commerci
encrypt program avail there ar two primari wai to access encrypt inform
first there ar numer util program that can decrypt document encrypt by mani of
the more common softwar applic in addit some encrypt program have a
secret kei for emerg that mai be veri help in an investig there ar also
sever compani that special in decrypt
second there is preced for forc a suspect or employe to divulg hi decrypt
code the comput is onli a contain and encrypt is an addit lock prohibit the
investig from review the file for potenti evid an examin with a legal right to
examin encrypt data is no differ than order a suspect or employe to unlock a file
cabinet to inspect it content
altern data stream
anoth method us to hide file in window system is the us of the altern data
stream of a file or directori thi method howev is onli possibl in window new
technolog file system ntf on of two basic type of file system us to organ
data in window system altern data stream ar a featur in the ntf filesystem that
offer the abil to put data into exist file and folder without affect their
function size or displai in mani tradit filebrows util like command line or
window explor
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3725
although window explor doe not provid a wai to see what altern data stream ar
in a file thei ar easi to make and allow an individu with basic knowledg to hide file
without have to resort to ani thirdparti tool
fortun there ar forens tool that can search ntf partit for altern data
stream
