2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Forensic Examination and Analysis/Computer-created Files


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Computer-created Files 
Evidence may also be found in information generated by the operating systems. This type of 
information is important because it can identify that a certain activity has taken place, and, in 
most cases, the user is not aware that it is being written. Some common examples of 
computer-generated data available for examination include: metadata, registry, paging file, 
event logs, LNK files, Internet activity, temporary data, deleted data, and printer-spool files.  
 
METADATA 
Metadata is data about data, and these file tidbits contain a tremendous amount of 
information. It can help determine who wrote a document; who received, opened, copied, 
edited, moved, or printed the document; and when these events occurred. 
 
WINDOWS REGISTRY 
The Windows registry is a central database that stores settings and configuration for the 
operating system and most applications installed on the system. The registry is an important 
source of potential evidential data because it contains information on user accounts, typed 
URLs, networks shared, the run command history, and so on. Often, software used by the 
fraudster will create a footprint in the registry that can provide valuable insight into relevant 
activity that occurred in the system.  
 
WINDOWS PAGING FILE 
Operating systems have a limited supply of Random Access Memory (RAM), and if an 
operating system runs out of physical RAM and needs more memory, it will move some of 
the data outside physical memory and store it temporarily in a special file on the hard disk. 
This file, which is called a paging file or a swap file, is used to simulate RAM. 
 
WINDOWS EVENT LOGS 
Event logs are files that record significant events on a computer. In Windows systems, there 
are three types of events: system, applicat ion, and security. The system log tracks 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.726   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
miscellaneous system events, including events generated during system startup like hardware 
and controller failures. The application log tracks application-related events and application 
errors, such as failing to load a DLL. The security log, which is turned off by default, tracks 
security-related events like logon and logoff times and changes to access rights.  
 
LNK FILES 
LNK files, which are also called shortcuts, refer (or link) to target files that may be 
applications, documents, or system resources. Clicking on a LNK file will either cause the 
application to start or the document to open, and will prompt the applicable system 
resources to run. Although the user may create these files, the system generally creates them 
when a user performs certain tasks. These files, therefore, provide a “history” of previously 
opened documents and files.  
 
INTERNET ACTIVITY 
Web browsers create temporary files that store information about websites that a user has 
visited. These files can show websites that were recently visited and usually include time and 
date information relevant to the visit; they ca n also show images previously viewed online. 
This information allows the examiner to recover websites and images previously viewed by 
the system’s users. 
 
TEMPORARY FILES 
Applications will create temporary files like those created by Web browsers. For example, 
certain communication software like instant messaging (IM) and chat software will keep a 
history of the user’s conversations in a proprietary and sometimes encrypted format.  
 
DELETED DATA 
Deletion is a widely misunderstood function in computing because deleting data is not the 
same as destroying data. Choosing the delete option erases the file’s reference from the table 
of contents, but it does not erase the file; in fa ct, data is not erased from a computer’s hard 
drive until the file is overwritten. 
 
PRINTER-SPOOL FILES 
It is sometimes possible to recover an image of the last page printed on a printer. When 
computers running Windows operating systems print files, a print-spooling process occurs. 
The process involves writing the print job to files, allowing users to keep working while the 
print job runs in the background. After the user creates a print job, it is placed in a queue 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.727 
and is printed when the printer becomes available to perform the job. Once printing is 
complete, the operating system deletes the files;  but again, deleted files can be recovered. 
 
 



:


computercr file
evid mai also be found in inform gener by the oper system thi type of
inform is import becaus it can identifi that a certain activ ha taken place and in
most case the user is not awar that it is be written some common exampl of
computergener data avail for examin includ metadata registri page file
event log lnk file internet activ temporari data delet data and printerspool file
metadata
metadata is data about data and these file tidbit contain a tremend amount of
inform it can help determin who wrote a document who receiv open copi
edit move or print the document and when these event occur
window registri
the window registri is a central databas that store set and configur for the
oper system and most applic instal on the system the registri is an import
sourc of potenti evidenti data becaus it contain inform on user account type
url network share the run command histori and so on often softwar us by the
fraudster will creat a footprint in the registri that can provid valuabl insight into relev
activ that occur in the system
window page file
oper system have a limit suppli of random access memori ram and if an
oper system run out of physic ram and need more memori it will move some of
the data outsid physic memori and store it temporarili in a special file on the hard disk
thi file which is call a page file or a swap file is us to simul ram
window event log
event log ar file that record signific event on a comput in window system there
ar three type of event system applicat ion and secur the system log track
digit forens investig
3726 2011 fraud examin manual
miscellan system event includ event gener dure system startup like hardwar
and control failur the applic log track applicationrel event and applic
error such as fail to load a dll the secur log which is turn off by default track
securityrel event like logon and logoff time and chang to access right
lnk file
lnk file which ar also call shortcut refer or link to target file that mai be
applic document or system resourc click on a lnk file will either caus the
applic to start or the document to open and will prompt the applic system
resourc to run although the user mai creat these file the system gener creat them
when a user perform certain task these file therefor provid a histori of previous
open document and file
internet activ
web browser creat temporari file that store inform about websit that a user ha
visit these file can show websit that were recent visit and usual includ time and
date inform relev to the visit thei ca n also show imag previous view onlin
thi inform allow the examin to recov websit and imag previous view by
the system user
temporari file
applic will creat temporari file like those creat by web browser for exampl
certain commun softwar like instant messag im and chat softwar will keep a
histori of the user convers in a proprietari and sometim encrypt format
delet data
delet is a wide misunderstood function in comput becaus delet data is not the
same as destroi data choos the delet option eras the file refer from the tabl
of content but it doe not eras the file in fa ct data is not eras from a comput hard
drive until the file is overwritten
printerspool file
it is sometim possibl to recov an imag of the last page print on a printer when
comput run window oper system print file a printspool process occur
the process involv write the print job to file allow user to keep work while the
print job run in the background after the user creat a print job it is place in a queue
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3727
and is print when the printer becom avail to perform the job onc print is
complet the oper system delet the file but again delet file can be recov
