2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Digital Forensics Software


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


Digital Forensics Software 
In recent years, a number of products have emerged for digital forensic analysis. They range 
in complexity, features, and price. These products are continually updated as new technology 
requires new features. Below is a general listing of the most frequently used products on the 
market today. This is sure to be constantly changing. (Please note that the product 
descriptions are adapted from materials provided by the manufacturer, and the ACFE does 
not endorse any particular product.) 
 
EnCase Forensic  
EnCase Forensic is a computer forensics software program by Guidance Software. It gives 
investigators the ability to image a drive and preserve it in a forensic manner using the 
EnCase evidence file format (LEF or E01), a digital evidence container vetted by courts 
worldwide. 
 
EnCase Forensic also contains a full suite of analysis, bookmarking and reporting features. 
Guidance Software and third party vendors provide support for expanded capabilities to 
ensure that forensic examiners have the most comprehensive set of utilities.   
 
EnCase Forensic also offers powerful hidden volume detection and volume rebuilding 
capabilities, allowing investigators to review evidence that would have been irretrievable with 
other computer forensics applications. 
 
How EnCase Forensic Works 
OBTAIN FORENSICALLY SOUND ACQUISITIONS 
EnCase Forensic produces an exact binary duplicate of the original drive or media, then 
verifies it by generating MD5 hash values for related image files and assigning CRC values to 
the data. These checks and balances reveal when evidence has been tampered with or 
altered, helping to keep all digital evidence forensically sound for use in court proceedings. 
 
ADVANCED PRODUCTIVITY FEATURES 
Examiners can preview data while drives or other media are being acquired. Once the image 
files are created, examiners can search and analyze multiple drives or other media 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.728   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
simultaneously. EnCase Forensic also features a case indexer. This powerful tool builds a 
complete index in multiple languages, allowing for fast and easy queries. Indices can also be 
chained together to find keywords common to other investigations. This Unicode-supported 
index contains personal documents, deleted files, file system artifacts, file slack, swap files, 
unallocated space, emails and web pages. In addition, EnCase has extensive file system 
support, giving organizations the ability to analyze all types of data. 
 
ENSCRIPT PROGRAMMING 
EnCase forensic features EnScript programming capabilities. EnScript, an object-oriented 
programming language similar to Java or C++,  allows users create to custom programs to 
help them automate time-consuming investigative tasks, such as searching and analyzing 
specific document types or other labor-intensive processes and procedures.  
 
PROVIDE ACTIONABLE DATA  AND REPORT ON IT 
Once investigators have bookmarked relevant  data, they can create a report suitable for 
presentation in court, to management, or to another legal authority. Data can also be 
exported in multiple file formats for review. 
 
Key Features  
• Advanced search options 
• Internet and email support 
• Multiple viewers 
• Instant message analysis 
• EnScript programming 
• Bookmarking 
• Extensive system file support 
• Multiple acquisition options 
 
For more information about EnCase Forensic, visit www.guidancesoftware.com.  
 
Forensic ToolKit 
Created by AccessData, the AccessData Forensic Toolkit (FTK) offers law enforcement and 
corporate security professionals the ability to perform complete and thorough computer 
forensics examinations. The FTK features file  filtering and search functionality. FTK’s 
customizable filters allow investigators to sort through thousands of files to quickly find the 
evidence they need. FTK is also a forensic tool to perform e-mail analysis.  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.729 
Some of the main features of this product are discussed below.  
 
Integrated Computer Forensics 
• Create images, analyze the registry, conduct an investigation, decrypt files, crack 
passwords, identify steganography, and build a report all with a single solution.  
• Recover passwords from 100+ applications; harness idle CPUs across the network to 
decrypt files and perform robust dictionary attacks.  
• KFF hash library with 45 million hashes. 
 
Enterprise-Class Architecture 
• Supports large, complex datasets.  
• Because the FTK components are compartmentalized, the user will never lose work due 
to a crash (e.g., If the GUI crashes, the workers continue to process data). 
• Provides the ability to back up and archive cases. 
• Every copy of FTK 3 includes a total of four  workers to enable distributed processing  
• It incorporates Lab capabilities, such as the ability to leverage a centralized database 
infrastructure and shared distributed processing farm, as well as collaborative forensic 
analysis, central case/task management and Web review. This is of particular value to law 
enforcement and government computer forensics labs. 
 
Powerful Processing and Speed  
• Distributed processing allows the user to leverage up to three additional computers to 
reduce processing time and tackle massive data sets. 
• True multi-processor and multi-threading support that takes advantage of hardware 
advancements.  
• Pre- and post-processing refinement allows users to control how images are processed. 
• An advanced data-carving engine that allows users to carve allocated and unallocated 
data and specify criteria, such as file size, data type and pixel size to reduce the amount 
of irrelevant data carved while increasing overall thoroughness.  
• Optimized dtSearch integration delivers fast indexing and fast search results. 
 
Advanced Analytics  
• RAM dump analysis  
• An index search engine and a proper full-feature regular expression engine for binary 
searches. 
• Broad file system, compound file, and email support. 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.730   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Supports popular encryption technologies, such as Credant, SafeBoot, Utimaco, EFS, 
PGP and Guardian Edge. 
• Mac support  
 
Preview, Acquisition, and Analysis of Live Data  
• Perform network-based, secure, single-system forensic acquisition of physical devices, 
logical volumes and RAM. 
• Secure Remote Device Mounting 
 
For more information on AccessData, visit www.accessdata.com. 
 
Password Recovery Toolkit 
The Password Recovery Toolkit (PRTK) fr om AccessData is geared toward law 
enforcement and corporate security professionals. It allows examiners to find and identify 
encrypted files on handheld, desktop, and server computer systems. PRTK recovers lost, 
forgotten, or unavailable passwords. If users need access to locked files or if they have 
simply locked themselves out of their files, the PRTK can get them back in. 
 
Security Risk Assessment Tool  
How do hackers bypass an organization’s strongest security measures? Many people use the 
same password to gain access to different programs and networks. This could be one of the 
weakest links in an organization’s security profile. Some password-protected programs are 
easy to crack while others are virtually impossible. But what if the same password is used for 
both programs? By gaining access to the weakest one, fraudsters have gained access to the 
strongest one, without needing to crack both.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.731 
 
Recovery Properties & Status  
Features 
• Enables password management 
• Analyzes files and their passwords with an optional report file 
• Recovers all types of passwords regardless of password length 
• Analyzes multiple files at one time 
• Recovers multilingual passwords 
• Prevents unauthorized use with a personal security code 
 
For more information on AccessData, visit www.accessdata.com. 
 
ProDiscover Forensics  
Produced by Technology Pathways, ProDiscover Forensics is a computer security tool for 
law enforcement that enables computer professionals to find all the data on a computer disk 
while protecting evidence and creating evidentiary quality reports for use in legal 
proceedings. 
 
Features 
• Creates bit-stream copy of the disk to be analyzed, including a hidden HPA section 
(patent pending), to keep original evidence safe 
• Searches files or an entire disk including slack space, HPA section, and Windows 
NT/2000/XP Alternate Data Streams for complete disk forensic analysis 
• Previews all files, even if hidden or deleted, without altering the data on a disk, including 
file metadata 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.732   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Maintains multi-tool compatibility by reading and writing images in the pervasive UNIX 
dd format 
• Examines and cross references data at the file or cluster level to ensure nothing is 
hidden, even in slack space 
• Automatically generates and records MD5, SHA1, or SHA256 hashes to prove  
data integrity 
• Examines FAT12, FAT16, FAT 32, and all NTFS file systems, including Dynamic Disk 
and Software RAID, for maximum flexibility 
• Examines Sun Solaris UFS file system and Linux ext2/ext3 file systems 
• Integrates graphics thumbnail viewer and registry viewer 
• Integrates Windows event log viewer 
• Extracts Internet history 
• Utilizes Perl scripts to automate investigation tasks 
• Extracts EXIF information from JPEG files to identify file creators 
• Automated report generation in XML format saves time and improves accuracy and 
compatibility 
• GUI interface and integrated help function ensures a quick start and ease of use 
• Designed to NIST Disk Imaging Tool Specification 3.1.6 to ensure high quality 
 
ProDiscover Forensics is a tool for computer forensics analysis. It is not possible to hide 
data from ProDiscover Forensics as it reads the disk at the sector level. This least intrusive 
approach also allows the investigator to examine the files without altering any valuable 
metadata, such as last time accessed. ProDiscover Forensics will not alter any data on the 
disk. ProDiscover Forensics can recover deleted files, examine slack space, and access 
Windows Alternate Data Streams. It can even allow the investigator to preview, search, and 
image the Hardware Protected Area (HPA) of the disk with a patent-pending process. 
 
ProDiscover Forensics lets the investigator search through the entire disk for keywords and 
phrases with full Boolean search capability to find the data they want. Investigators can use 
the hash comparison capability to find known illegal files or to weed out known good files, 
such as standard operating system files, by employing the included data from the National 
Drug Intelligence Center in their Hashkeeper database. ProDiscover Forensics search 
capability allows searches for words or phrases anywhere on the disk, including the slack 
space.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.733 
 
 
ProDiscover Forensics automatically creates evidentiary quality reports needed to document 
results, complete with every file and hash signature where evidence was found. This saves 
time and prevents errors that might compromise an investigator’s case.  
 
For more information about Technology Pathways, visit at www.techpathways.com. 
 
Gargoyle Investigator Forensic Pro Edition  
Gargoyle Investigator is a software tool created by WetStone for digital investigations. It is 
used for performing incident responses, field investigations, digital forensic analysis, threat 
management, or compliance audits. Gargoyle Investigator performs a quick search on a 
stand-alone system for known contraband or hostile, or “bad,” programs. It also provides 
clues regarding the activities, motives, and intent of suspects or potential suspects. 
  
Gargoyle Investigator Forensic Pro Edition provides investigators with information 
regarding the contents of a suspect’s computer along with information about its owner’s 
computer use. Gargoyle performs searches for known bad or hostile programs, their 
associated files, and remnants of files. Once identified, Gargoyle also maps the detected files 
to the associated cyber weapons and classifies them into a category of malware.  
 
The Forensic Pro Edition is designed for forensic investigators, examiners, law enforcement 
personnel, private investigators, and forensic lab use.  
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.734   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Gargyole 
 
Gargoyle provides the investigator with the ability to gather suspect characteristics from the 
information revealed. The computer’s sophisticat ion, covert behaviors, and paranoia levels 
(has the suspect tried to delete incriminating programs?) can all be derived when searching 
for applications with a common theme. These behaviors can assist in assessing suspect 
capability, activities, intent, threat, or consciousness of guilt. 
 
For more information about Forensic Pro Edition and other products by WetStone, visit 
www.wetstonetech.com. 
 
Stego Suite 
The Stego Suite by WetStone is a software bundle available for the investigation, detection, 
analysis, and recovery of digital steganography. It identifies the presence of steganography 
without prior knowledge of the steganography algorithm that might have been used against 
the target file.  
 
WetStone’s Stego Suite comprises four products: Stego Watch, a steganography tool; Stego 
Analyst, an image and audio file analyzer; Stego Break, a password cracker; and the recently 
added Stego Hunter, a steganography application identifier. 
  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.735 
 
Stego Watch  
 
 
 
 
Stego Analysis 
 
 
Stego Break 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.736   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Postmortem analysis of data recovered from a digital crime scene can be a tedious process. 
When the digital data contains thousands of images, audio files, or digital video that may 
contain other hidden evidence, the process can be impossible without the aid of key 
technologies and expertise. Stego Suite’s tools provide the ability to quickly examine and 
evaluate digital image and/or audio data for the presence of hidden information  
or communications. 
 
Active Web scanning of a website to ensure that unauthorized people are not using the site 
to exchange innocuous-looking messages or smuggle proprietary data is also becoming a 
must. The tools of Stego Suite baseline a Web domain and continuously scan the domain for 
the presence of hidden data inside digital images.  
 
For more information about the Stego Suite and other products by WetStone, visit 
www.wetstonetech.com. 
 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.801 



:


digit forens softwar
in recent year a number of product have emerg for digit forens analysi thei rang
in complex featur and price these product ar continu updat as new technolog
requir new featur below is a gener list of the most frequent us product on the
market todai thi is sure to be constantli chang pleas note that the product
descript ar adapt from materi provid by the manufactur and the acf doe
not endors ani particular product
encas forens
encas forens is a comput forens softwar program by guidanc softwar it give
investig the abil to imag a drive and preserv it in a forens manner us the
encas evid file format lef or e01 a digit evid contain vet by court
worldwid
encas forens also contain a full suit of analysi bookmark and report featur
guidanc softwar and third parti vendor provid support for expand capabl to
ensur that forens examin have the most comprehens set of util
encas forens also offer power hidden volum detect and volum rebuild
capabl allow investig to review evid that would have been irretriev with
other comput forens applic
how encas forens work
obtain forens sound acquisit
encas forens produc an exact binari duplic of the origin drive or media then
verifi it by gener md5 hash valu for relat imag file and assign crc valu to
the data these check and balanc reveal when evid ha been tamper with or
alter help to keep all digit evid forens sound for us in court proceed
advanc product featur
examin can preview data while drive or other media ar be acquir onc the imag
file ar creat examin can search and analyz multipl drive or other media
digit forens investig
3728 2011 fraud examin manual
simultan encas forens also featur a case index thi power tool build a
complet index in multipl languag allow for fast and easi queri indic can also be
chain togeth to find keyword common to other investig thi unicodesupport
index contain person document delet file file system artifact file slack swap file
unalloc space email and web page in addit encas ha extens file system
support give organ the abil to analyz all type of data
enscript program
encas forens featur enscript program capabl enscript an objectori
program languag similar to java or c allow user creat to custom program to
help them autom timeconsum investig task such as search and analyz
specif document type or other laborintens process and procedur
provid action data and report on it
onc investig have bookmark relev data thei can creat a report suitabl for
present in court to manag or to anoth legal author data can also be
export in multipl file format for review
kei featur
advanc search option
internet and email support
multipl viewer
instant messag analysi
enscript program
bookmark
extens system file support
multipl acquisit option
for more inform about encas forens visit wwwguidancesoftwarecom
forens toolkit
creat by accessdata the accessdata forens toolkit ftk offer law enforc and
corpor secur profession the abil to perform complet and thorough comput
forens examin the ftk featur file filter and search function ftk
customiz filter allow investig to sort through thousand of file to quickli find the
evid thei need ftk is also a forens tool to perform email analysi
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3729
some of the main featur of thi product ar discuss below
integr comput forens
creat imag analyz the registri conduct an investig decrypt file crack
password identifi steganographi and build a report all with a singl solut
recov password from 100 applic har idl cpu across the network to
decrypt file and perform robust dictionari attack
kff hash librari with 45 million hash
enterpriseclass architectur
support larg complex dataset
becaus the ftk compon ar compartment the user will never lose work due
to a crash eg if the gui crash the worker continu to process data
provid the abil to back up and archiv case
everi copi of ftk 3 includ a total of four worker to enabl distribut process
it incorpor lab capabl such as the abil to leverag a central databas
infrastructur and share distribut process farm as well as collabor forens
analysi central casetask manag and web review thi is of particular valu to law
enforc and govern comput forens lab
power process and speed
distribut process allow the user to leverag up to three addit comput to
reduc process time and tackl massiv data set
true multiprocessor and multithread support that take advantag of hardwar
advanc
pre and postprocess refin allow user to control how imag ar process
an advanc datacarv engin that allow user to carv alloc and unalloc
data and specifi criteria such as file size data type and pixel size to reduc the amount
of irrelev data carv while increas overal thorough
optim dtsearch integr deliv fast index and fast search result
advanc analyt
ram dump analysi
an index search engin and a proper fullfeatur regular express engin for binari
search
broad file system compound file and email support
digit forens investig
3730 2011 fraud examin manual
support popular encrypt technolog such as credant safeboot utimaco ef
pgp and guardian edg
mac support
preview acquisit and analysi of live data
perform networkbas secur singlesystem forens acquisit of physic devic
logic volum and ram
secur remot devic mount
for more inform on accessdata visit wwwaccessdatacom
password recoveri toolkit
the password recoveri toolkit prtk fr om accessdata is gear toward law
enforc and corpor secur profession it allow examin to find and identifi
encrypt file on handheld desktop and server comput system prtk recov lost
forgotten or unavail password if user need access to lock file or if thei have
simpli lock themselv out of their file the prtk can get them back in
secur risk assess tool
how do hacker bypass an organ strongest secur measur mani peopl us the
same password to gain access to differ program and network thi could be on of the
weakest link in an organ secur profil some passwordprotect program ar
easi to crack while other ar virtual imposs but what if the same password is us for
both program by gain access to the weakest on fraudster have gain access to the
strongest on without need to crack both
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3731
recoveri properti statu
featur
enabl password manag
analyz file and their password with an option report file
recov all type of password regardless of password length
analyz multipl file at on time
recov multilingu password
prevent unauthor us with a person secur code
for more inform on accessdata visit wwwaccessdatacom
prodiscov forens
produc by technolog pathwai prodiscov forens is a comput secur tool for
law enforc that enabl comput profession to find all the data on a comput disk
while protect evid and creat evidentiari qualiti report for us in legal
proceed
featur
creat bitstream copi of the disk to be analyz includ a hidden hpa section
patent pend to keep origin evid safe
search file or an entir disk includ slack space hpa section and window
nt2000xp altern data stream for complet disk forens analysi
preview all file even if hidden or delet without alter the data on a disk includ
file metadata
digit forens investig
3732 2011 fraud examin manual
maintain multitool compat by read and write imag in the pervas unix
dd format
examin and cross refer data at the file or cluster level to ensur noth is
hidden even in slack space
automat gener and record md5 sha1 or sha256 hash to prove
data integr
examin fat12 fat16 fat 32 and all ntf file system includ dynam disk
and softwar raid for maximum flexibl
examin sun solari uf file system and linux ext2ext3 file system
integr graphic thumbnail viewer and registri viewer
integr window event log viewer
extract internet histori
util perl script to autom investig task
extract exif inform from jpeg file to identifi file creator
autom report gener in xml format save time and improv accuraci and
compat
gui interfac and integr help function ensur a quick start and eas of us
design to nist disk imag tool specif 316 to ensur high qualiti
prodiscov forens is a tool for comput forens analysi it is not possibl to hide
data from prodiscov forens as it read the disk at the sector level thi least intrus
approach also allow the investig to examin the file without alter ani valuabl
metadata such as last time access prodiscov forens will not alter ani data on the
disk prodiscov forens can recov delet file examin slack space and access
window altern data stream it can even allow the investig to preview search and
imag the hardwar protect area hpa of the disk with a patentpend process
prodiscov forens let the investig search through the entir disk for keyword and
phrase with full boolean search capabl to find the data thei want investig can us
the hash comparison capabl to find known illeg file or to weed out known good file
such as standard oper system file by emploi the includ data from the nation
drug intellig center in their hashkeep databas prodiscov forens search
capabl allow search for word or phrase anywher on the disk includ the slack
space
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3733
prodiscov forens automat creat evidentiari qualiti report need to document
result complet with everi file and hash signatur where evid wa found thi save
time and prevent error that might compromis an investig case
for more inform about technolog pathwai visit at wwwtechpathwayscom
gargoyl investig forens pro edit
gargoyl investig is a softwar tool creat by wetston for digit investig it is
us for perform incid respons field investig digit forens analysi threat
manag or complianc audit gargoyl investig perform a quick search on a
standalon system for known contraband or hostil or bad program it also provid
clue regard the activ motiv and intent of suspect or potenti suspect
gargoyl investig forens pro edit provid investig with inform
regard the content of a suspect comput along with inform about it owner
comput us gargoyl perform search for known bad or hostil program their
associ file and remnant of file onc identifi gargoyl also map the detect file
to the associ cyber weapon and classifi them into a categori of malwar
the forens pro edit is design for forens investig examin law enforc
personnel privat investig and forens lab us
digit forens investig
3734 2011 fraud examin manual
gargyol
gargoyl provid the investig with the abil to gather suspect characterist from the
inform reveal the comput sophisticat ion covert behavior and paranoia level
ha the suspect tri to delet incrimin program can all be deriv when search
for applic with a common theme these behavior can assist in assess suspect
capabl activ intent threat or conscious of guilt
for more inform about forens pro edit and other product by wetston visit
wwwwetstonetechcom
stego suit
the stego suit by wetston is a softwar bundl avail for the investig detect
analysi and recoveri of digit steganographi it identifi the presenc of steganographi
without prior knowledg of the steganographi algorithm that might have been us against
the target file
wetston stego suit compris four product stego watch a steganographi tool stego
analyst an imag and audio file analyz stego break a password cracker and the recent
ad stego hunter a steganographi applic identifi
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3735
stego watch
stego analysi
stego break
digit forens investig
3736 2011 fraud examin manual
postmortem analysi of data recov from a digit crime scene can be a tediou process
when the digit data contain thousand of imag audio file or digit video that mai
contain other hidden evid the process can be imposs without the aid of kei
technolog and expertis stego suit tool provid the abil to quickli examin and
evalu digit imag andor audio data for the presenc of hidden inform
or commun
activ web scan of a websit to ensur that unauthor peopl ar not us the site
to exchang innocuouslook messag or smuggl proprietari data is also becom a
must the tool of stego suit baselin a web domain and continu scan the domain for
the presenc of hidden data insid digit imag
for more inform about the stego suit and other product by wetston visit
wwwwetstonetechcom
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3801
