2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Digital Forensics Software/How EnCase Forensic Works


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


How EnCase Forensic Works 
OBTAIN FORENSICALLY SOUND ACQUISITIONS 
EnCase Forensic produces an exact binary duplicate of the original drive or media, then 
verifies it by generating MD5 hash values for related image files and assigning CRC values to 
the data. These checks and balances reveal when evidence has been tampered with or 
altered, helping to keep all digital evidence forensically sound for use in court proceedings. 
 
ADVANCED PRODUCTIVITY FEATURES 
Examiners can preview data while drives or other media are being acquired. Once the image 
files are created, examiners can search and analyze multiple drives or other media 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.728   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
simultaneously. EnCase Forensic also features a case indexer. This powerful tool builds a 
complete index in multiple languages, allowing for fast and easy queries. Indices can also be 
chained together to find keywords common to other investigations. This Unicode-supported 
index contains personal documents, deleted files, file system artifacts, file slack, swap files, 
unallocated space, emails and web pages. In addition, EnCase has extensive file system 
support, giving organizations the ability to analyze all types of data. 
 
ENSCRIPT PROGRAMMING 
EnCase forensic features EnScript programming capabilities. EnScript, an object-oriented 
programming language similar to Java or C++,  allows users create to custom programs to 
help them automate time-consuming investigative tasks, such as searching and analyzing 
specific document types or other labor-intensive processes and procedures.  
 
PROVIDE ACTIONABLE DATA  AND REPORT ON IT 
Once investigators have bookmarked relevant  data, they can create a report suitable for 
presentation in court, to management, or to another legal authority. Data can also be 
exported in multiple file formats for review. 
 



:


how encas forens work
obtain forens sound acquisit
encas forens produc an exact binari duplic of the origin drive or media then
verifi it by gener md5 hash valu for relat imag file and assign crc valu to
the data these check and balanc reveal when evid ha been tamper with or
alter help to keep all digit evid forens sound for us in court proceed
advanc product featur
examin can preview data while drive or other media ar be acquir onc the imag
file ar creat examin can search and analyz multipl drive or other media
digit forens investig
3728 2011 fraud examin manual
simultan encas forens also featur a case index thi power tool build a
complet index in multipl languag allow for fast and easi queri indic can also be
chain togeth to find keyword common to other investig thi unicodesupport
index contain person document delet file file system artifact file slack swap file
unalloc space email and web page in addit encas ha extens file system
support give organ the abil to analyz all type of data
enscript program
encas forens featur enscript program capabl enscript an objectori
program languag similar to java or c allow user creat to custom program to
help them autom timeconsum investig task such as search and analyz
specif document type or other laborintens process and procedur
provid action data and report on it
onc investig have bookmark relev data thei can creat a report suitabl for
present in court to manag or to anoth legal author data can also be
export in multipl file format for review
