2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Interviews/National Labor Relations Act/CURRENT LAW: NON-UNION EMPLOYEES


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


CURRENT LAW: NON-UNION EMPLOYEES  
A representative may be present where the employer allows for such. 
 
No longer must an employer allow a representative to be present where an employee 
specifically requests representation. However, an employer is not precluded from allowing 
the employee to have representation upon request. 
 
Employers can always decide not to conduct an interview, but refusing to do so may cause 
problems of its own. If the company administers disciplinary action without first hearing the 
employee’s side of the story, then the company may be handing the employee a lawsuit for 
wrongful discharge or a discrimination claim. As a general rule, it is difficult to defend a 
termination action if the employer did not at least listen to the employee’s version of events 
prior to taking action. 
 
Where the employer allows for employee representation, the employer need not “bargain 
with” the employee’s representative.  
 
Presumably, the ruling in Weingarten will continue to control this issue. In Weingarten, the 
Supreme Court stated that the representative’s role is to assist the employee, and he “may do 
so by attempting to clarify facts or suggest other employees who may have knowledge of 
them.” The Court made it clear that the employer may insist on hearing the subject’s version 
of events, and the representative is not allowed to direct the subject not to answer a question 
or to tell the subject to answer questions only once. Therefore, the employer is allowed to 
conduct the interview without interference by the representative. 
 
Employees do not have a right to be represented at an interview by a private attorney.  
 
Under Epilepsy, where an employer failed to comply with the rules requiring representation 
upon employee request, it could have been subjected to an administrative cease-and-desist 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.413 
order and/or reinstatement of the employee with back pay. Due to the overturning of 
Epilepsy and reinstatement of Weingarten, however, these penalties will probably not apply 
unless the non-union employer agrees to allow employee representation. 
 
If an employee requests any type of representation at an interview, you should immediately 
consult your legal counsel. You should also consult counsel to review your existing policies 
and procedures to ensure that you are aware of the legal duties, ramifications, and remedies 
surrounding employee representation. 
 



:


current law nonunion employe
a repres mai be present where the employ allow for such
no longer must an employ allow a repres to be present where an employe
specif request represent howev an employ is not preclud from allow
the employe to have represent upon request
employ can alwai decid not to conduct an interview but refus to do so mai caus
problem of it own if the compani administ disciplinari action without first hear the
employe side of the stori then the compani mai be hand the employe a lawsuit for
wrong discharg or a discrimin claim as a gener rule it is difficult to defend a
termin action if the employ did not at least listen to the employe version of event
prior to take action
where the employ allow for employe represent the employ need not bargain
with the employe repres
presum the rule in weingarten will continu to control thi issu in weingarten the
suprem court state that the repres role is to assist the employe and he mai do
so by attempt to clarifi fact or suggest other employe who mai have knowledg of
them the court made it clear that the employ mai insist on hear the subject version
of event and the repres is not allow to direct the subject not to answer a question
or to tell the subject to answer question onli onc therefor the employ is allow to
conduct the interview without interfer by the repres
employe do not have a right to be repres at an interview by a privat attornei
under epilepsi where an employ fail to compli with the rule requir represent
upon employe request it could have been subject to an administr ceaseanddesist
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2413
order andor reinstat of the employe with back pai due to the overturn of
epilepsi and reinstat of weingarten howev these penalti will probabl not appli
unless the nonunion employ agre to allow employe represent
if an employe request ani type of represent at an interview you should immedi
consult your legal counsel you should also consult counsel to review your exist polici
and procedur to ensur that you ar awar of the legal duti ramif and remedi
surround employe represent
