2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD/Prosecution: The Government Employee’s Role/Overcoming the Reluctance to Investigate


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Public Sector Fraud


:


Overcoming the Reluctance to Investigate 
The auditor can best overcome reluctance of the investigator to work a case by using good 
salesmanship. In this regard, the following suggestions are helpful: 
• Present your case in person, not over the telephone. 
• Spend a little time establishing a relationship with the investigator if you don’t know him.  
• Summarize your case in one sentence. If you cannot, there is little realistic hope of 
prosecution. 
  
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1925 
• After summarizing the case, fill in the details. Do not overwhelm the investigator with 
minutia. 
• Pledge the resources of your agency in helping provide backup.  
• Follow up periodically with the investigator after the case has been referred, but be 
careful of making a pest of yourself.  
• Offer an expert witness if necessary. Remember, though, if you testify in a criminal case, 
you might be excluded from sitting in on your own case due to rules concerning 
witnesses.  
 
 



:


overcom the reluct to investig
the auditor can best overcom reluct of the investig to work a case by us good
salesmanship in thi regard the follow suggest ar help
present your case in person not over the telephon
spend a littl time establish a relationship with the investig if you dont know him
summar your case in on sentenc if you cannot there is littl realist hope of
prosecut
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11925
after summar the case fill in the detail do not overwhelm the investig with
minutia
pledg the resourc of your agenc in help provid backup
follow up period with the investig after the case ha been refer but be
care of make a pest of yourself
offer an expert wit if necessari rememb though if you testifi in a crimin case
you might be exclud from sit in on your own case due to rule concern
wit
