2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD/Interviewing Government Officials/The Warning Dilemma


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Public Sector Fraud


:


The Warning Dilemma 
A crucial element in interviewing a high official, as with the interview of any public 
employee, is proper regard for the Constitutional rights of the subject. A series of cases in 
the 1960s — such as Murphy v. Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor, 378 U.S. 52 (1964), 
Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493 (1967) and Gardner v. Broderick,  392 U.S. 273 (1968) — are 
instructive. In short, the United States Supreme Court held that a public employee cannot be 
compelled to answer job-related questions concerning his own possible criminal conduct 
under threat of disciplinary action, e.g., removal, without violating his rights under the Self-Incrimination 
Clause of the Fifth Amendment. The choice between job forfeiture and self-incrimination, 
said the Court, is inherently coercive and, in effect, a choice “between the 
rock and the whirlpool.” Put another way, a public employee cannot be put in a position 
wherein he will incriminate himself if he tells the truth, will subject himself to perjury 
prosecution if he lies, or will set himself up for a removal action if he refuses to cooperate. 
Thus, the issue of what warning(s), if any, to give the subject must be addressed. 
   
If the high official is reasonably believed to be merely a third-party witness, no warnings are 
required, and he is obligated to respond to the questions. In fact, most agencies have a 
provision in their policies and procedures manual that mandates cooperation. The following 
is typical: 
 
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1927 



:


the warn dilemma
a crucial element in interview a high offici as with the interview of ani public
employe is proper regard for the constitut right of the subject a seri of case in
the 1960 such as murphi v waterfront commiss of new york harbor 378 us 52 1964
garriti v new jersei 385 us 493 1967 and gardner v broderick 392 us 273 1968 ar
instruct in short the unit state suprem court held that a public employe cannot be
compel to answer jobrel question concern hi own possibl crimin conduct
under threat of disciplinari action eg remov without violat hi right under the selfincrimin
claus of the fifth amend the choic between job forfeitur and selfincrimin
said the court is inher coerciv and in effect a choic between the
rock and the whirlpool put anoth wai a public employe cannot be put in a posit
wherein he will incrimin himself if he tell the truth will subject himself to perjuri
prosecut if he li or will set himself up for a remov action if he refus to cooper
thu the issu of what warn if ani to give the subject must be address
if the high offici is reason believ to be mere a thirdparti wit no warn ar
requir and he is oblig to respond to the question in fact most agenc have a
provis in their polici and procedur manual that mandat cooper the follow
is typic
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11927
