2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Open Sources of Information


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Open Sources of Information 
Open source information is information in the public domain, or data that is legally available 
to anyone. Spies do not have to penetrate corporate security measures to obtain this type of 
information; it is available to anyone who wants to collect it. The term “public,” however, 
does not necessarily mean free. Many sources have access charges that may be simple low-
 cost copying fees or rather substantial database expenses.  
 
The dividing line between open source information and other targets of corporate 
intelligence (such as trade secrets) is the right to access. A member of the public can obtain 
open source data openly, without fear of legal consequences, and the provider of the data 
desires or has no objection to its release into the marketplace. Trade secrets are the exact 
opposite: no one but the owner has the right of access, and the owner has no desire to cast 
the trade secret freely upon the marketplace’s waters. The taking of trade secrets, without the 
owner’s permission, violates both state and federal law. Known as economic, industrial, or 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.804                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
corporate espionage, theft of trade secrets is a form of business intelligence that goes far 
beyond open source research. 
 
Most of the information sought on any topic, according to intelligence professionals, is 
publicly available. Estimates go as high as 95 percent as to what is discoverable in the  
public sector.  
 
There is only so much that security professionals can do to limit the open source 
information that is available on an organization. Some forms of information, such as 
financial statements of publicly traded companies, are legally required to be published. Other 
pieces of information such as product descriptions or job listings are posted out of business 
necessity. Corporate security professionals do not operate in a vacuum; the need to protect 
an organization’s secrets must always be ba lanced against the need or duty to publish 
information. One of the first things security prof essionals must do is realize that they cannot 
protect everything.  
 
With a thorough understanding of how CI practitioners use open source information, 
however, security officers can limit their company’s vulnerability to the disclosure of secrets 
through accident or negligence. The knowledgeable security professional will identify key 
information assets, then review the open source information that is available on the 
company from a spy’s perspective to see if the safety of those assets could be endangered. 
The security professional will also be able to work with other departments to limit or edit the 
information that is available on the organization so that no inadvertent gifts are made to 
potential intruders. Finally, if a theft of information should occur, understanding how open 
sources are used may help a security officer track down the perpetrator.  
 



:


open sourc of inform
open sourc inform is inform in the public domain or data that is legal avail
to anyon spi do not have to penetr corpor secur measur to obtain thi type of
inform it is avail to anyon who want to collect it the term public howev
doe not necessarili mean free mani sourc have access charg that mai be simpl low
cost copi fee or rather substanti databas expens
the divid line between open sourc inform and other target of corpor
intellig such as trade secret is the right to access a member of the public can obtain
open sourc data openli without fear of legal consequ and the provid of the data
desir or ha no object to it releas into the marketplac trade secret ar the exact
opposit no on but the owner ha the right of access and the owner ha no desir to cast
the trade secret freeli upon the marketplac water the take of trade secret without the
owner permiss violat both state and feder law known as econom industri or
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1804 2011 fraud examin manual
corpor espionag theft of trade secret is a form of busi intellig that goe far
beyond open sourc research
most of the inform sought on ani topic accord to intellig profession is
publicli avail estim go as high as 95 percent as to what is discover in the
public sector
there is onli so much that secur profession can do to limit the open sourc
inform that is avail on an organ some form of inform such as
financi statement of publicli trade compani ar legal requir to be publish other
piec of inform such as product descript or job list ar post out of busi
necess corpor secur profession do not oper in a vacuum the need to protect
an organ secret must alwai be ba lanc against the need or duti to publish
inform on of the first thing secur prof ession must do is realiz that thei cannot
protect everyth
with a thorough understand of how ci practition us open sourc inform
howev secur offic can limit their compani vulner to the disclosur of secret
through accid or neglig the knowledg secur profession will identifi kei
inform asset then review the open sourc inform that is avail on the
compani from a spy perspect to see if the safeti of those asset could be endang
the secur profession will also be abl to work with other depart to limit or edit the
inform that is avail on the organ so that no inadvert gift ar made to
potenti intrud final if a theft of inform should occur understand how open
sourc ar us mai help a secur offic track down the perpetr
