2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/How Information Is Lost/Accident


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Accident  
• Poor information security procedures   
• Recruited spies  
• Deception techniques 
• Physical penetration of the company   
• Surveillance 
• Computer system penetrations  
 
Accident  
Accidental losses of information are fairly common and occur in a number of ways. 
Publications such as newsletters or reports to shareholders that are printed by a company 
can inadvertently provide valuable information to its competitors. Also, speeches or papers 
that are presented at conferences are a danger point. Organizations should implement a 
system of review whereby technical and/or security staff review in advance all works up for 
publication or presentation. Another common source of accidental leaks is the press. 
Executives eager to brag about their companies often reveal more than they should about 
research, new products, sales levels, and so on. 
 
A company’s website may also be a source of accidental leaks. Corporate spies frequently 
visit the websites of their targets to gather information that these companies have 
unknowingly assembled for them. Information such as employee telephone and e-mail 
directories, financial information, biographical data on key employees, product features and 
release dates, details on research and development, and job postings can all be found on 
many corporate websites. In some cases this information gives an information thief direct 
access to company secrets; in other instances it helps the spy build a profile of his target that 
will be the basis of an intelligence campaign. Businesses should pay attention to the 
information that is placed on their websites and in other marketing materials. As a general 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.823 
rule of thumb, anything that does not forward the marketing mission of an organization 
should be removed.  
 



:


accid
poor inform secur procedur
recruit spi
decept techniqu
physic penetr of the compani
surveil
comput system penetr
accid
accident loss of inform ar fairli common and occur in a number of wai
public such as newslett or report to sharehold that ar print by a compani
can inadvert provid valuabl inform to it competitor also speech or paper
that ar present at confer ar a danger point organ should implement a
system of review wherebi technic andor secur staff review in advanc all work up for
public or present anoth common sourc of accident leak is the press
execut eager to brag about their compani often reveal more than thei should about
research new product sale level and so on
a compani websit mai also be a sourc of accident leak corpor spi frequent
visit the websit of their target to gather inform that these compani have
unknowingli assembl for them inform such as employe telephon and email
directori financi inform biograph data on kei employe product featur and
releas date detail on research and develop and job post can all be found on
mani corpor websit in some case thi inform give an inform thief direct
access to compani secret in other instanc it help the spy build a profil of hi target that
will be the basi of an intellig campaign busi should pai attent to the
inform that is place on their websit and in other market materi as a gener
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1823
rule of thumb anyth that doe not forward the market mission of an organ
should be remov
