2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Basic Principles of Spying/Phony Contract Bids


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Phony Contract Bids 
Another indirect method for obtaining intelligence from human sources is the call for phony 
bids. For instance, a spy might send out an impressive-looking Request for Proposals (RFP) 
package on a construction or manufacturing project. The RFP states that certain operational 
and financial data must be submitted as part of the bid. This ruse works very well when 
assessing the ability of a company to manufacture a certain product. The bigger the bait, the 
more information the target company is likely to reveal. The return address on the RFP is a 
mail drop, which insulates the spy from detection. The deadline set forth in the phony bid 
requirements helps ensure that the spy gets the information he needs by the date he needs it. 
 
One advantage of the scams discussed above is that the victims remain unaware that they 
have turned over sensitive information to a spy, even after the leak has sprung. If there is no 
follow-up over a job interview, for example, the applicant simply thinks he did not get the 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.834                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
job. If there is no feedback on a bid proposal, the victim thinks it failed to get the bid. In 
general, no feedback is expected on marketing research other than receipt of the promised 
gift. 
 
 



:


phoni contract bid
anoth indirect method for obtain intellig from human sourc is the call for phoni
bid for instanc a spy might send out an impressivelook request for propos rfp
packag on a construct or manufactur project the rfp state that certain oper
and financi data must be submit as part of the bid thi ruse work veri well when
assess the abil of a compani to manufactur a certain product the bigger the bait the
more inform the target compani is like to reveal the return address on the rfp is a
mail drop which insul the spy from detect the deadlin set forth in the phoni bid
requir help ensur that the spy get the inform he need by the date he need it
on advantag of the scam discuss abov is that the victim remain unawar that thei
have turn over sensit inform to a spy even after the leak ha sprung if there is no
followup over a job interview for exampl the applic simpli think he did not get the
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1834 2011 fraud examin manual
job if there is no feedback on a bid propos the victim think it fail to get the bid in
gener no feedback is expect on market research other than receipt of the promis
gift
