2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Infiltration Techniques/Stealing Badges


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Stealing Badges 
Stealing or counterfeiting employee badges is one fairly common infiltration method utilized 
by corporate spies. If badges are in use at the target’s site, the spy can generally fake a copy 
using a desktop publishing program. Contractor badge patterns can be viewed on workers 
eating lunch at local restaurants. Even if the badges have magnetic strips, the spy may still be 
able to enter the plant at a highly traveled entry point where a guard only makes a quick 
visual inspection of security badges as people enter the site, allowing anyone displaying a 
badge to enter. Even if the only method of entry is by an electronic badge scan, a spy can 
still piggyback in on another person’s badge. If the spy displays a badge, an employee of the 
target can be talked into letting him into the facility.  
 
Stealing badges is also an option. At bars and nightclubs, women might leave their purses 
and handbags lying about with security badges protruding in open view. Men do the same 
thing with jackets hung over bar stools. A badge purloined on Friday night will probably not 
be missed until Monday. Once a spy has the badge, he just pastes his picture on the front 
and he’s ready to go. More sophisticated techniques include having someone lift a badge 
from an employee’s purse or jacket. The card is  passed on to a colleague who runs it through 
a magnetic card reader. This can be done quickly, in the car in a parking lot, for example. 
The badge is then returned to the employee before anyone notices it is missing. Later, the 
magnetic image that was scanned from the stolen card is transferred onto blank ID card 
stock containing a magnetic strip. With the addition of an appropriate picture and printing, 
the spy now has a badge that will get him into the facility, and no one knows that security 
has been compromised.  
 



:


steal badg
steal or counterfeit employe badg is on fairli common infiltr method util
by corpor spi if badg ar in us at the target site the spy can gener fake a copi
us a desktop publish program contractor badg pattern can be view on worker
eat lunch at local restaur even if the badg have magnet strip the spy mai still be
abl to enter the plant at a highli travel entri point where a guard onli make a quick
visual inspect of secur badg as peopl enter the site allow anyon displai a
badg to enter even if the onli method of entri is by an electron badg scan a spy can
still piggyback in on anoth person badg if the spy displai a badg an employe of the
target can be talk into let him into the facil
steal badg is also an option at bar and nightclub women might leav their purs
and handbag ly about with secur badg protrud in open view men do the same
thing with jacket hung over bar stool a badg purloin on fridai night will probabl not
be miss until mondai onc a spy ha the badg he just past hi pictur on the front
and he readi to go more sophist techniqu includ have someon lift a badg
from an employe purs or jacket the card is pass on to a colleagu who run it through
a magnet card reader thi can be done quickli in the car in a park lot for exampl
the badg is then return to the employe befor anyon notic it is miss later the
magnet imag that wa scan from the stolen card is transfer onto blank id card
stock contain a magnet strip with the addit of an appropri pictur and print
the spy now ha a badg that will get him into the facil and no on know that secur
ha been compromis
