2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Infiltration Techniques/Storage Areas


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Storage Areas 
Spies frequently target storage areas for information because they are generally low traffic 
areas, thus the risk of being detected is minimal. If someone does come into the area while 
the spy is there, he will have a cover story handy; for example, he may say he is doing 
research or performing an audit. A prop like a clipboard will usually make the  
story convincing. 
 
For manual documents, the spy will check: 
• Unlocked file cabinets. 
• Unlocked closets and storage rooms. 
• Areas containing archived microfiche records and computer printouts. 
• Off-site, rented storage lockers. 
 
For computer media, he will be on the lookout for: 
• Unlocked storage areas for computer media (such as disks, tapes, and external drives). 
• Unsecured media libraries. 
 
For the open storage of critical equipment, parts, or raw materials, the spy will note amount, 
type, and transit information found on the merchandise. If the materials are kept in a secure 
area, the spy will try to obtain the access code by observing an employee as he enters the 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.838                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
area. It is also possible to spray entry keypads with an ultraviolet solution that remains 
invisible to the naked eye. The user unknowingly wipes the solution off the keys that he 
presses when entering the code. The spy can determine the keys the user punched by 
viewing the keypad with a portable ultraviolet lamp.  
 



:


storag area
spi frequent target storag area for inform becaus thei ar gener low traffic
area thu the risk of be detect is minim if someon doe come into the area while
the spy is there he will have a cover stori handi for exampl he mai sai he is do
research or perform an audit a prop like a clipboard will usual make the
stori convinc
for manual document the spy will check
unlock file cabinet
unlock closet and storag room
area contain archiv microfich record and comput printout
offsit rent storag locker
for comput media he will be on the lookout for
unlock storag area for comput media such as disk tape and extern drive
unsecur media librari
for the open storag of critic equip part or raw materi the spy will note amount
type and transit inform found on the merchandis if the materi ar kept in a secur
area the spy will try to obtain the access code by observ an employe as he enter the
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1838 2011 fraud examin manual
area it is also possibl to sprai entri keypad with an ultraviolet solut that remain
invis to the nake ey the user unknowingli wipe the solut off the kei that he
press when enter the code the spy can determin the kei the user punch by
view the keypad with a portabl ultraviolet lamp
