2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Telling Good Lies


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Telling Good Lies 
Rather than infiltrate a company to extract needed information, a spy might mislead 
employees of the target so that they are induced to divulge sensitive information. Given the 
nature of the data required, it may be simpler and safer to develop a cover story and simply 
coax the target’s employees into revealing information, rather than using an operative to steal 
the necessary data. This approach can be a powerful one, especially when the spy has a 
specialized knowledge or background. For example, if the spy has training as an electronic 
engineer, approaching people in the circuit design department of a high-tech company would 
have a natural flow or quality. The key to this type of attack is for the spy to be able to 
mislead the target about his intentions; in other words, the spy has to be able to tell  
good lies.  
 
Regardless of the spy’s background, the lie that he tells must contain a large measure of 
truth. Lies not built on a foundation of truth falter quickly under skeptical questioning. He 
must be familiar with the background of his story. Hence, he has to do his homework in 
advance. If he does not have a firm knowledge of electronic engineering, he has to learn 
enough about it to carry on a conversation well enough to convince others he knows what 
he is talking about. This does not mean the spy has to be able to solve complex electrical 
engineering equations. He just needs to know enough about the subject to keep a 
conversation going and to steer clear of areas of which he is obviously ignorant. 
 
Suppose the spy is after specifics on the design of a microprocessor. He poses as a sales 
engineer in a field office. In this position, he would not be expected to know all the details of 
microprocessor design. Nevertheless, he has a good pretext for contacting someone who is 
familiar with the design. He could claim, for example, that he is under a time constraint from 
a customer and he needs some details to help close a sale. To give the call a greater air of 
authenticity, he can have the “salesman” he’s supporting on the line too. He can also tie in 
the call to current events, dropping the name of a customer who has been written up in the 
trade press. In other words he creates an internally consistent lie that the employee in the 
design department can accept and believe. 
 
If the spy has to meet with the employee in person, rather than over the phone, he would 
bring the necessary props. These include: 
• Fake ID 
• Bogus business cards 
• Product displays 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.845 
• Associates she can call on the telephone during the meeting to back up his story 
 
The important factor is to make the target comfortable. In advance of the conversation, he 
prepares by studying technical details about the product and personal details about other 
people in the company or the industry. These facts are peppered into the conversation with 
the target, the goal being to get the target to let his guard down and divulge the sought after 
information. 
 
 



:


tell good li
rather than infiltr a compani to extract need inform a spy might mislead
employe of the target so that thei ar induc to divulg sensit inform given the
natur of the data requir it mai be simpler and safer to develop a cover stori and simpli
coax the target employe into reveal inform rather than us an oper to steal
the necessari data thi approach can be a power on especi when the spy ha a
special knowledg or background for exampl if the spy ha train as an electron
engin approach peopl in the circuit design depart of a hightech compani would
have a natur flow or qualiti the kei to thi type of attack is for the spy to be abl to
mislead the target about hi intent in other word the spy ha to be abl to tell
good li
regardless of the spy background the lie that he tell must contain a larg measur of
truth li not built on a foundat of truth falter quickli under skeptic question he
must be familiar with the background of hi stori henc he ha to do hi homework in
advanc if he doe not have a firm knowledg of electron engin he ha to learn
enough about it to carri on a convers well enough to convinc other he know what
he is talk about thi doe not mean the spy ha to be abl to solv complex electr
engin equat he just need to know enough about the subject to keep a
convers go and to steer clear of area of which he is obvious ignor
suppos the spy is after specif on the design of a microprocessor he pose as a sale
engin in a field offic in thi posit he would not be expect to know all the detail of
microprocessor design nevertheless he ha a good pretext for contact someon who is
familiar with the design he could claim for exampl that he is under a time constraint from
a custom and he need some detail to help close a sale to give the call a greater air of
authent he can have the salesman he support on the line too he can also tie in
the call to current event drop the name of a custom who ha been written up in the
trade press in other word he creat an intern consist lie that the employe in the
design depart can accept and believ
if the spy ha to meet with the employe in person rather than over the phone he would
bring the necessari prop these includ
fake id
bogu busi card
product displai
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1845
associ she can call on the telephon dure the meet to back up hi stori
the import factor is to make the target comfort in advanc of the convers he
prepar by studi technic detail about the product and person detail about other
peopl in the compani or the industri these fact ar pepper into the convers with
the target the goal be to get the target to let hi guard down and divulg the sought after
inform
