2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Cloaking and Misdirection/Travel Plans


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Travel Plans 
Travel by key executives and technical staff offers useful intelligence information to a spy. 
During periods of intense financial activity such as a possible acquisition or merger, meetings 
can be scheduled at neutral locations with short notice to any outside parties, such as hotels, 
travel agents, and rental car agencies. 
 
Use the names of low-profile employees or businesses when booking rooms and travel 
arrangements. Group travel by key executives should be minimized, and the company should 
be sure to stagger the arrival and departure of senior managers at the neutral site. Executives 
should be briefed not to discuss sensitive matters in their hotel rooms or on the telephones 
in those rooms. When feasible, security should be present in the executive’s room when the 
executive is out. If not feasible, the executives should be trained not to leave sensitive 
information unattended in their rooms.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.857 
Technical staff members traveling to research centers or facilities for fact-finding purposes 
should mix in some non-sensitive stops on their itinerary. The additional destinations will 
confuse onlookers in case of possible surveillance. Stops at technical or research libraries to 
do some non-sensitive personal research can leave a spy unsure about which facility on the 
trip was actually important. 
 



:


travel plan
travel by kei execut and technic staff offer us intellig inform to a spy
dure period of intens financi activ such as a possibl acquisit or merger meet
can be schedul at neutral locat with short notic to ani outsid parti such as hotel
travel agent and rental car agenc
us the name of lowprofil employe or busi when book room and travel
arrang group travel by kei execut should be minim and the compani should
be sure to stagger the arriv and departur of senior manag at the neutral site execut
should be brief not to discuss sensit matter in their hotel room or on the telephon
in those room when feasibl secur should be present in the execut room when the
execut is out if not feasibl the execut should be train not to leav sensit
inform unattend in their room
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1857
technic staff member travel to research center or facil for factfind purpos
should mix in some nonsensit stop on their itinerari the addit destin will
confus onlook in case of possibl surveil stop at technic or research librari to
do some nonsensit person research can leav a spy unsur about which facil on the
trip wa actual import
