2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Technical Surveillance/Preliminary Search Procedures/OTHER PLACES TO SEARCH


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


OTHER PLACES TO SEARCH 
Use a flashlight to look through the grill panels covering all air conditioning ducts for 
transmitters or listening devices. Carefully inspect all electrical outlets by removing the cover 
plates and looking inside with a flashlight. Examine any central utility closets for unusual 
wiring and electronic devices. Look for signs of  debris on the floor under outlets or light 
switches; this might indicate that someone has removed the wall plates to insert a listening 
device. Any time ducts, outlet plates, light fixtures, or similar items have been searched and 
replaced, their orientation and screw-head positions can be designated with ultra-violet 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.872                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
markers. By shining an ultra-violet light on the screws, it is easy to tell if the panels have 
been removed. This technique makes it much easier to determine if someone has tampered 
with those items since the last search.  
 
Look under desks and tables in all office spaces  for electronic devices or wires that seem out 
of place. Do not tear your office apart while conducting your search; feel your way around 
and explore with your hands. Look under and behind couches and sofas. It is especially 
important to closely examine furniture in areas where people are likely to sit and chat. The 
tables and credenzas in meeting rooms should be checked on a regular basis.  
 
Check any television sets, radios, lamps, telephones, computers, clocks, smoke detectors, or 
sprinkler heads in the room. If any areas are served by cable TV, be sure to check out the 
cable lines, converter box, line splitters, and connectors for anything that seems out of place. 
Any electronic items and wiring that are not essential should be removed, as unused wiring 
can be used for eavesdropping. 
 



:


other place to search
us a flashlight to look through the grill panel cover all air condit duct for
transmitt or listen devic carefulli inspect all electr outlet by remov the cover
plate and look insid with a flashlight examin ani central util closet for unusu
wire and electron devic look for sign of debri on the floor under outlet or light
switch thi might indic that someon ha remov the wall plate to insert a listen
devic ani time duct outlet plate light fixtur or similar item have been search and
replac their orient and screwhead posit can be design with ultraviolet
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1872 2011 fraud examin manual
marker by shine an ultraviolet light on the screw it is easi to tell if the panel have
been remov thi techniqu make it much easier to determin if someon ha tamper
with those item sinc the last search
look under desk and tabl in all offic space for electron devic or wire that seem out
of place do not tear your offic apart while conduct your search feel your wai around
and explor with your hand look under and behind couch and sofa it is especi
import to close examin furnitur in area where peopl ar like to sit and chat the
tabl and credenza in meet room should be check on a regular basi
check ani televis set radio lamp telephon comput clock smoke detector or
sprinkler head in the room if ani area ar serv by cabl tv be sure to check out the
cabl line convert box line splitter and connector for anyth that seem out of place
ani electron item and wire that ar not essenti should be remov as unus wire
can be us for eavesdrop
