2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Program for Safeguarding Proprietary Information (SPI)/Electronic Mail and Voicemail


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Electronic Mail and Voicemail 
For knowledgeable hackers, e-mail and voicemail systems are easy targets. 
 
Confidential information should not be left on a voicemail system. Likewise, it should never 
be left on a home answering machine. Hotels often offer voicemail for their guests. These 
systems require no passwords to gain access to and should never be used for sensitive 
information. Author Michael Stedman reports that when he wanted to interview Robert 
Gates, the former director of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), he called the hotel 
where Gates was staying and was given a room number. Stedman said he was astonished 
when he punched the room number into the phone and suddenly found himself listening to 
Gate’s messages that had been left on the hotel’s voicemail service. 
 
To prevent this kind of espionage, instruct staff, family, and friends to never leave anything 
but routine messages on voicemail. Tell them to only leave return numbers, or better yet, use 
a beeper or pager. Make sure voicemail is cleaned out daily. 
 



:


electron mail and voicemail
for knowledg hacker email and voicemail system ar easi target
confidenti inform should not be left on a voicemail system likewis it should never
be left on a home answer machin hotel often offer voicemail for their guest these
system requir no password to gain access to and should never be us for sensit
inform author michael stedman report that when he want to interview robert
gate the former director of the us central intellig agenc cia he call the hotel
where gate wa stai and wa given a room number stedman said he wa astonish
when he punch the room number into the phone and suddenli found himself listen to
gate messag that had been left on the hotel voicemail servic
to prevent thi kind of espionag instruct staff famili and friend to never leav anyth
but routin messag on voicemail tell them to onli leav return number or better yet us
a beeper or pager make sure voicemail is clean out daili
