2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Preventing Employee Theft of Proprietary Information


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Preventing Employee Theft of Proprietary Information 
A company can spend years developing a competitive advantage over its competitors. That 
advantage can be eliminated in an instant by employees walking out the door. 
 
When employees leave a company, there is usually little if any attention paid to where they 
go afterwards. However, if a company begins to notice that a rival is suddenly taking away its 
business, it should sit up and take notice. Often employees leave one company for another, 
and take with them the knowledge of how that particular company operates, its pricing 
policies, its manufacturing methods, its customers, and so on. When employees share what 
they have learned with a competitor, the competitive edge is lost. 
 
Today’s work force is extremely mobile. Employees rarely start with one company and stay 
until retirement. On top of that, companies are continually downsizing and laying off 
employees. In most cases, experienced employees have little choice but to go to work for a 
competitor or begin consulting in their field. Cutbacks and firings do little to foster an 
attitude of loyalty among employees. 
 



:


prevent employe theft of proprietari inform
a compani can spend year develop a competit advantag over it competitor that
advantag can be elimin in an instant by employe walk out the door
when employe leav a compani there is usual littl if ani attent paid to where thei
go afterward howev if a compani begin to notic that a rival is suddenli take awai it
busi it should sit up and take notic often employe leav on compani for anoth
and take with them the knowledg of how that particular compani oper it price
polici it manufactur method it custom and so on when employe share what
thei have learn with a competitor the competit edg is lost
todai work forc is extrem mobil employe rare start with on compani and stai
until retir on top of that compani ar continu downsiz and lai off
employe in most case experienc employe have littl choic but to go to work for a
competitor or begin consult in their field cutback and fire do littl to foster an
attitud of loyalti among employe
