2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Preventing Employee Theft of Proprietary Information/Employee Awareness


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Employee Awareness 
Employees must be educated as to what information is proprietary. It is hard to protect 
something if no one knows what needs protecting. A secret formula may be easy to identify, 
but employees are often not aware that subjects they may be discussing over lunch in a 
crowded restaurant are also trade secrets that would prove invaluable to a competitor. It 
does not help that the courts and legal scholars cannot decide on what constitutes 
proprietary information. Definitions of what is a trade secret depend on the organization and 
the industry. Examples of trade secrets include everything from notes in the margin of an 
employee manual to a procedure for tying a fishing lure. In addition, different jurisdictions 
have different laws defining what can or cannot potentially be a trade secret.  
 
Generally, to establish a trade secret, a company has to show that the information is not 
known in the industry, that the company has made efforts to keep it confidential, and that 
the information gives the company some sort of competitive edge. Just because information 
is confidential, does not make it a trade secret under the law. However, even though 
information may not be a “trade secret” as that term is defined under the statutes, it should 
be protected by employees. Again, the best test for deciding what is confidential information is 
to ask yourself if the information would provide an advantage to the competition.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.887 



:


employe awar
employe must be educ as to what inform is proprietari it is hard to protect
someth if no on know what need protect a secret formula mai be easi to identifi
but employe ar often not awar that subject thei mai be discuss over lunch in a
crowd restaur ar also trade secret that would prove invalu to a competitor it
doe not help that the court and legal scholar cannot decid on what constitut
proprietari inform definit of what is a trade secret depend on the organ and
the industri exampl of trade secret includ everyth from note in the margin of an
employe manual to a procedur for ty a fish lure in addit differ jurisdict
have differ law defin what can or cannot potenti be a trade secret
gener to establish a trade secret a compani ha to show that the inform is not
known in the industri that the compani ha made effort to keep it confidenti and that
the inform give the compani some sort of competit edg just becaus inform
is confidenti doe not make it a trade secret under the law howev even though
inform mai not be a trade secret as that term is defin under the statut it should
be protect by employe again the best test for decid what is confidenti inform is
to ask yourself if the inform would provid an advantag to the competit
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1887
