2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Preventing Employee Theft of Proprietary Information/Nondisclosure and Noncompetition Agreements


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Nondisclosure and Noncompetition Agreements 
A nondisclosure agreement is a written agreement that employees should sign as soon as 
they start work. It usually provides that all proprietary, confidential, or trade secret 
information the employees learn must be kept confidential and must not be disclosed to 
anyone. A noncompetition agreement is an agreement whereby the employees agree not to 
work for competing companies within a certain period of time after leaving.  
 
General Motors Corporation began requiring its senior-level executives to sign these 
agreements shortly after a well-publicized case against one of the company’s former 
purchasing executives. GM accused the executive  of taking millions of dollars worth of 
proprietary information to his new employer, Volkswagen. GM accused him of pushing up 
strategy meetings before he left so that he could gather even more data. The employee 
denied the charges. GM concluded after this happened that the use of noncompetition 
agreements could help prevent a similar occurrence. 
 
However, the use of nondisclosure and noncompetition agreements is not an overall 
solution. There are several legal problems with using these agreements. As mentioned earlier, 
there is no clear definition of what constitutes a trade secret. In some instances it can be 
extremely difficult to determine what belongs to the company and what belongs to the 
employee. 
 
Noncompetition agreements also have a variety of problems. First, courts in some 
jurisdictions have held that such agreements are against “public policy” because they limit 
the future employment of a person; theref ore, in these jurisdictions noncompetition 
agreements are unenforceable. Others uphold the agreements, but only if they are part of an 
otherwise valid employment agreement. In these cases, the employment agreement and the 
noncompetition agreement must be signed at the same time or the noncompetition 
agreement is unenforceable. In addition, if the employee is an “at will” employee who is not 
covered by an employment agreement, any noncompetition signed by such an employee 
would be unenforceable. 
 
Although nondisclosure and noncompetition agreements can be excellent tools for 
preventing the loss of confidential information to competitors, their use is limited, and legal 
counsel familiar with employment laws for the specific jurisdiction should be consulted. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.888                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
However, many professionals say that the real value of such agreements is not their legal 
power, but their ability to create the right image. This includes making certain that 
employees and outsiders clearly understand that the company is serious about preventing the 
loss of proprietary information and will do everything they can to pursue those individuals 
who are stealing information. 
 



:


nondisclosur and noncompetit agreement
a nondisclosur agreement is a written agreement that employe should sign as soon as
thei start work it usual provid that all proprietari confidenti or trade secret
inform the employe learn must be kept confidenti and must not be disclos to
anyon a noncompetit agreement is an agreement wherebi the employe agre not to
work for compet compani within a certain period of time after leav
gener motor corpor began requir it seniorlevel execut to sign these
agreement shortli after a wellpublic case against on of the compani former
purchas execut gm accus the execut of take million of dollar worth of
proprietari inform to hi new employ volkswagen gm accus him of push up
strategi meet befor he left so that he could gather even more data the employe
deni the charg gm conclud after thi happen that the us of noncompetit
agreement could help prevent a similar occurr
howev the us of nondisclosur and noncompetit agreement is not an overal
solut there ar sever legal problem with us these agreement as mention earlier
there is no clear definit of what constitut a trade secret in some instanc it can be
extrem difficult to determin what belong to the compani and what belong to the
employe
noncompetit agreement also have a varieti of problem first court in some
jurisdict have held that such agreement ar against public polici becaus thei limit
the futur employ of a person theref or in these jurisdict noncompetit
agreement ar unenforc other uphold the agreement but onli if thei ar part of an
otherwis valid employ agreement in these case the employ agreement and the
noncompetit agreement must be sign at the same time or the noncompetit
agreement is unenforc in addit if the employe is an at will employe who is not
cover by an employ agreement ani noncompetit sign by such an employe
would be unenforc
although nondisclosur and noncompetit agreement can be excel tool for
prevent the loss of confidenti inform to competitor their us is limit and legal
counsel familiar with employ law for the specif jurisdict should be consult
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1888 2011 fraud examin manual
howev mani profession sai that the real valu of such agreement is not their legal
power but their abil to creat the right imag thi includ make certain that
employe and outsid clearli understand that the compani is seriou about prevent the
loss of proprietari inform and will do everyth thei can to pursu those individu
who ar steal inform
