2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Federal and State Law/Seizures and Forfeitures/FORFEITURE OF FUNDS IN INTERBANK ACCOUNTS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


FORFEITURE OF FUNDS IN INTERBANK ACCOUNTS 
Section 319 of the PATRIOT Act amended 18, U.S.C., § 981, expanding the United States’ 
ability to seize the proceeds of money laundering activity by providing for forfeiture of funds 
held in United States interbank accounts. An interbank account is an account one financial 
institution holds at another financial institution.  
 
If funds involved in a money laundering transaction or the proceeds of any “specified 
unlawful activity” as defined by the money laundering statute are deposited in a foreign bank, 
and if that foreign bank has an interbank account in the United States, then the tainted funds 
will be deemed to have been deposited into the U.S. account. In other words, the funds in 
the foreign bank’s U.S. interbank account can be seized, even if the laundered money was 
not deposited in that account. The government does not have to trace the money in the U.S. 
interbank account to the money that was deposited in the foreign account. It is enough that 
the U.S. interbank account is held by the same financial institution in which the laundered 
money was deposited overseas.  
 



:


forfeitur of fund in interbank account
section 319 of the patriot act amend 18 usc 981 expand the unit state
abil to seiz the proce of monei launder activ by provid for forfeitur of fund
held in unit state interbank account an interbank account is an account on financi
institut hold at anoth financi institut
if fund involv in a monei launder transact or the proce of ani specifi
unlaw activ as defin by the monei launder statut ar deposit in a foreign bank
and if that foreign bank ha an interbank account in the unit state then the taint fund
will be deem to have been deposit into the us account in other word the fund in
the foreign bank us interbank account can be seiz even if the launder monei wa
not deposit in that account the govern doe not have to trace the monei in the us
interbank account to the monei that wa deposit in the foreign account it is enough that
the us interbank account is held by the same financi institut in which the launder
monei wa deposit oversea
