2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Special Problems for Insurance Companies/Red Flags


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Red Flags 
The following transactions might indicate money laundering is taking place. The list should be 
used to identify those transactions and customers that might require further investigation. 
• Large purchase of a lump sum contract when the customer typically purchases small, 
regular payment contracts. 
• Use of a third-party check to make a purchase or investment. 
• Lack of concern for the performance of an investment but great concern for the early 
cancellation of the contract. 
• Use of cash as payment for a transaction that is typically handled with checks or other 
forms of payment. 
• Lump sum payments made by wire transfer or with foreign currency. 
• Reluctance to provide normal information when setting up a policy or account or 
providing minimal information. 
• Purchase of investments in amounts considered beyond the customer’s apparent means. 
• Use of a letter of credit or other methods of trade finance to move money between 
countries where such trade is inconsistent with the customer’s usual pattern. 
• Establishment of a large investment policy and within a short time period, the customer 
requests cancellation of the policy and cash value paid to a third-party. 
• Use of wire transfers to move large amounts of money to or from a financial haven 
country such as the Cayman Islands, Colombia, Hong Kong, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Monaco, Panama, or Switzerland. 
• Request to borrow the maximum cash value of a single premium policy soon after 
paying for the policy. 
 



:


red flag
the follow transact might indic monei launder is take place the list should be
us to identifi those transact and custom that might requir further investig
larg purchas of a lump sum contract when the custom typic purchas small
regular payment contract
us of a thirdparti check to make a purchas or invest
lack of concern for the perform of an invest but great concern for the earli
cancel of the contract
us of cash as payment for a transact that is typic handl with check or other
form of payment
lump sum payment made by wire transfer or with foreign currenc
reluct to provid normal inform when set up a polici or account or
provid minim inform
purchas of invest in amount consid beyond the custom appar mean
us of a letter of credit or other method of trade financ to move monei between
countri where such trade is inconsist with the custom usual pattern
establish of a larg invest polici and within a short time period the custom
request cancel of the polici and cash valu paid to a thirdparti
us of wire transfer to move larg amount of monei to or from a financi haven
countri such as the cayman island colombia hong kong liechtenstein
luxembourg monaco panama or switzerland
request to borrow the maximum cash valu of a singl premium polici soon after
pai for the polici
