2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Surveillance/Three-Person Surveillance


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Three-Person Surveillance 
The “A-B-C” technique of surveillance is intended to keep two sides of the subject covered. 
A follows the subject. B follows A and concentrates on keeping him rather than the subject 
in sight. The normal position for B is behind A. C normally operates across the street from 
the subject and slightly to his rear, enabling C to observe the subject without turning his 
head. Variations, such as having both B and C ac ross the street or all three of the observers 
behind the subject on the same side of the street, might be necessary because of crowded 
conditions or traffic. In this technique, if the subject turns a corner, A continues in the 
original direction, crosses the intersecting street, and then signals instructions to the other 
observers from that vantage point. Either B or C can be given the A position and A might 
take up the original C position and continue his observation of the subject from across  
the street. 
 
In another variation of this technique, both A and B might continue in the original direction 
and cross the street. A signals C to take up the A position. B then recrosses the street and 
assumes his former B position. A assumes the C position. In the third situation, when C 
notices that the subject is about to turn a corner, C signals both A and B what positions  
to assume. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.309 



:


threeperson surveil
the abc techniqu of surveil is intend to keep two side of the subject cover
a follow the subject b follow a and concentr on keep him rather than the subject
in sight the normal posit for b is behind a c normal oper across the street from
the subject and slightli to hi rear enabl c to observ the subject without turn hi
head variat such as have both b and c ac ross the street or all three of the observ
behind the subject on the same side of the street might be necessari becaus of crowd
condit or traffic in thi techniqu if the subject turn a corner a continu in the
origin direct cross the intersect street and then signal instruct to the other
observ from that vantag point either b or c can be given the a posit and a might
take up the origin c posit and continu hi observ of the subject from across
the street
in anoth variat of thi techniqu both a and b might continu in the origin direct
and cross the street a signal c to take up the a posit b then recross the street and
assum hi former b posit a assum the c posit in the third situat when c
notic that the subject is about to turn a corner c signal both a and b what posit
to assum
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3309
