2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Sources and Informants/Objectives of Source and Informant Information


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Objectives of Source and Informant Information 
There are three essential procedures when using sources and informants. First, to keep the 
person’s identity as confidential as possible. Second, to independently verify the information 
provided by the source or informant. Third, to develop witness and documentary evidence 
from independently verified information.  
 
If the confidential source or informant has provided documents, names of potential 
witnesses, or other evidence, all reasonable steps must be taken to protect the identity of that 
source. Care should be taken to ensure that questioning of other witnesses is done in a 
manner that does not reveal its origin. This can usually be accomplished through the 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.314   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
phrasing of questions. For example, Mary Rodriguez De La Garza furnished confidential 
information about Linda Reed Collins. When the examiner confronts Collins, he does not 
want her to know that he has talked to Ms. De La Garza. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG 
“Ms. Collins, someone told me you were taking kickbacks.” 
 
RIGHT 
“Ms. Collins, I have information indicating  you are taking money from a vendor.” 
 
You have made the confrontation direct, but you have not revealed the origin of your 
information. If Collins presses to learn how you knew: 
 
Ms. Collins: 
“Who did you get that information from?”  
 
Examiner: 
“Documents I have from the company’s records, plus other inquiries conducted in this matter.” 
 
In this example, if need be, the examiner would display the evidence from witnesses and 
documents that would not reveal the source or informant’s identity. The information from 
the source or informant is basically useless unless the examiner can verify its authenticity and 
independently corroborate it. Suppose a source furnishes the examiner with copies of 
accounts payable documents showing that Bailey Books Incorporated’s cost of materials has 
increased by 16 percent since Linda Reed Collins took over the account at the Orion 
Corporation. This kind of evidence would corroborate the source’s story. If a source told the 
examiner that Collins frequently had drinks with Jim Nagel, the account representative for 
Orion, the examiner would want to find out some way to verify this report. The third 
objective when using sources is to develop the witness’s information and other evidence so 
that it makes a cohesive case.  
 



:


object of sourc and inform inform
there ar three essenti procedur when us sourc and inform first to keep the
person ident as confidenti as possibl second to independ verifi the inform
provid by the sourc or inform third to develop wit and documentari evid
from independ verifi inform
if the confidenti sourc or inform ha provid document name of potenti
wit or other evid all reason step must be taken to protect the ident of that
sourc care should be taken to ensur that question of other wit is done in a
manner that doe not reveal it origin thi can usual be accomplish through the
covert examin investig
3314 2011 fraud examin manual
phrase of question for exampl mari rodriguez de la garza furnish confidenti
inform about linda reed collin when the examin confront collin he doe not
want her to know that he ha talk to ms de la garza
exampl
wrong
ms collin someon told me you were take kickback
right
ms collin i have inform indic you ar take monei from a vendor
you have made the confront direct but you have not reveal the origin of your
inform if collin press to learn how you knew
ms collin
who did you get that inform from
examin
document i have from the compani record plu other inquiri conduct in thi matter
in thi exampl if need be the examin would displai the evid from wit and
document that would not reveal the sourc or inform ident the inform from
the sourc or inform is basic useless unless the examin can verifi it authent and
independ corrobor it suppos a sourc furnish the examin with copi of
account payabl document show that bailei book incorpor cost of materi ha
increas by 16 percent sinc linda reed collin took over the account at the orion
corpor thi kind of evid would corrobor the sourc stori if a sourc told the
examin that collin frequent had drink with jim nagel the account repres for
orion the examin would want to find out some wai to verifi thi report the third
object when us sourc is to develop the witnesss inform and other evid so
that it make a cohes case
