2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Sources and Informants/Recruitment of Sources and Informants


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Recruitment of Sources and Informants 
Fraud examiners should recall the need to develop sources. Business and financial institution 
executives, law enforcement and other governmental personnel, medical and educational 
professionals, and internal and external auditors are good contacts for fraud examiners.  
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.315 
The examiner should make contacts in the community well in advance of needing 
information; this is simply good public relations. If the fraud examiner receives an allegation 
and needs confidential information, perhaps a source cultivated earlier can assist. Sources 
need to feel confident that they can share information without being compromised. In 
theory, the source will never have to testify; he has no firsthand knowledge, his information 
comes from a witness or document. 
 
The examiner might also meet sources when tracking leads during a specific investigation. 
He might interview a stockbroker from whom the target purchased stock who does not want 
his identity revealed. The examiner should not encourage a person to provide confidential 
information, but rather try to get reports on the record. But if the source’s information must 
be kept confidential, abide by that promise.  
 
Active recruitment of informants is generally not desirable; it might appear untoward to a 
jury. It is better to encourage an informant to come forward. It is desirable to develop an 
informant relationship, but this situation must be handled carefully. The examiner must 
clearly document an adequate predication for informant’s involvement. The most serious 
question is the culpability of the informant. There have been cases where the informant is 
guiltier than the target. The court might rule that the informant’s information cannot be 
introduced.  
 



:


recruit of sourc and inform
fraud examin should recal the need to develop sourc busi and financi institut
execut law enforc and other government personnel medic and educ
profession and intern and extern auditor ar good contact for fraud examin
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3315
the examin should make contact in the commun well in advanc of need
inform thi is simpli good public relat if the fraud examin receiv an alleg
and need confidenti inform perhap a sourc cultiv earlier can assist sourc
need to feel confid that thei can share inform without be compromis in
theori the sourc will never have to testifi he ha no firsthand knowledg hi inform
come from a wit or document
the examin might also meet sourc when track lead dure a specif investig
he might interview a stockbrok from whom the target purchas stock who doe not want
hi ident reveal the examin should not encourag a person to provid confidenti
inform but rather try to get report on the record but if the sourc inform must
be kept confidenti abid by that promis
activ recruit of inform is gener not desir it might appear untoward to a
juri it is better to encourag an inform to come forward it is desir to develop an
inform relationship but thi situat must be handl carefulli the examin must
clearli document an adequ predic for inform involv the most seriou
question is the culpabl of the inform there have been case where the inform is
guiltier than the target the court might rule that the inform inform cannot be
introduc
