2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONTRACT AND PROCUREMENT FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Contract and Procurement Fraud


:


CONTRACT AND PROCUREMENT FRAUD 
 
The detection and proof of fraud in contract and procurement areas require expertise in the 
law of contracts, in company or agency policies and rules, and about industry standards  
and practices. 
 
 
Elements of a Contract 
A contract is a mutual agreement, oral or written, between two or more parties that must 
contain the following elements: 
• Competent parties 
• Lawful subject matter or objective 
• Legal consideration(s) 
• Mutual promises 
• Mutual obligations 
 
To be successful in detecting and proving fraud, the fraud examiner must establish objective 
criteria to evaluate the contract. The fraud examiner must have an understanding of proper 
contracting procedures at the presolicitation, solicitation and negotiation, and performance 
and administration phases. 
 
 
Phases of a Contract 
 
Presolicitation Phase 
The activities typically involved during presolicitation are: 
• Need recognition 
• Notice of intent to contract 
• Development of specifications 
• Award criteria 
 
The fraud examiner should look for variations from standard or accepted procedures and 
the absence of proper documentation. 
 
  
Contract and Procurement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.2002                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The most prominent schemes involved at this phase of contracting or procurement are: 
• Determining needs 
• Bid specifications 
 
Determining Needs 
The typical fraud in the need recognition phase of the contract negotiation is collusion 
between the buyer and contractor, where the buyer’s employee receives a gratuity or 
kickback for recognizing a need for a particular product or service. 
 
Bid Specifications 
Bid specifications and statements of work detailing the types and amounts of goods and 
services to be provided are prepared to assist in the selection process. They are intended to 
provide both potential bidders and the selecting officials with a firm basis for making and 
accepting bids. 
 
A well-written contract will contain specifications, standards, and statements of work that 
clearly detail the rights and entitlements of the contractor. Carelessly written specifications, 
standards, and statements of work make it easier for a contractor to claim at a later time that 
he is entitled to more money than the buyer intended to pay. 
 
Sometimes, the buyer’s personnel and the contractor deliberately collude to write vague 
specifications. At other times, there is an agreement to amend the contract to increase the 
price immediately after the award. One contractor actually developed a “cost enhancement 
plan,” which identified all the changes he would make in order to double the cost of the 
contract, before it was even signed. 
 
POORLY WRITTEN SPECIFICATIONS 
In some instances, the fraud is committed solely by the contractor based on poorly written 
specifications. In the instance of poorly written specifications, it is easy for the contractor to 
deliver a product or service that is priced higher than what was ordered. 
 
VAGUE SPECIFICATIONS 
In other instances, vague specifications are deliberately written by the buyer in collusion with 
the contractor, so that more money can be claimed later. 
 
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2003 
AGREEMENT TO AMEND CONTRACTS 
In situations where there is collusion between the buyer and supplier, there is sometimes an 
agreement to award the contract based on skimpy specifications, and then increase the price 
later once the contract has been awarded through amendments to the contract. 
 
DETECTION - BID SPECIFICATIONS  
The following is a list of potential red flags for frauds involving specifications: 
• Providing the contractor with information or advice on a preferential basis. 
• Using statements of work, specification, or sole source justifications developed by, or in 
consultation with, a contractor who will be permitted to bid. 
• Permitting consultants who assisted in the preparation of the statements of work, 
specifications, or design to perform on the contract as subcontractors or consultants. 
• Splitting costs into separate categories to avoid review. 
• Writing specifications not consistent with past similar procurement. 
 
Solicitation and Negotiation Phase 
Fraud schemes involved during this phase typically involve collusion between the buyer and 
contractor and contractors of competing companies in the bidding process. Schemes in this 
phase also involve defective pricing.  
 
Bid Submission Schemes 
Bid submission schemes can take on many forms. They can involve anyone in the contracting 
cycle such as a buyer or contracting official, engineer, technical representative, quality or 
product assurance representative, or subcontractor liaison employee — anyone who can 
influence the awarding of a contract. 
 
Examples of bid submission schemes are: 
• Premature opening of bids 
• Altering bids 
• Unjustifiable extension of bid opening dates 
• Controlled bid opening  
• Falsifying bid logs and documents 
 
  
Contract and Procurement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.2004                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
DETECTION - BID SUBMISSION SCHEMES
To detect bid submission schemes the fraud examiner should be aware of: 
• Acceptance of late bid 
• Falsification of documents or receipts to get a late bid accepted 
• Change in bid after other bidders prices are known 
• Change in bid dates 
• Receipt of late bids 
• Last bid usually receives the bid 
 
Bid-Rigging Schemes 
Most bid-rigging fraud schemes involve collusion between contractors of competing 
companies during the bidding process. 
 
BID ROTATION 
Collusive bidding occurs when a group of prospective vendors exchange information on 
contract solicitations, taking turns at submitting the low bid. 
 
BID SUPPRESSION 
In this type of scheme, one or more competitors agrees with at least one other competitor to 
refrain from bidding or agrees to withdraw a previously submitted bid so that a contractor’s 
bid will be accepted. Other forms of this activity involve agreements by competitors to 
fabricate bid protests or to coerce suppliers and subcontractors not to deal with 
nonconspirators who submit bids. 
 
A variation of bid suppression occurs when competitors make arrangements to refrain from 
competing in a designated portion of a market. This might be accomplished based on 
customer or geographic area. The result of such a division is that competing firms will not 
bid or will submit only complementary bids (discussed below) when requests for bids are 
issued in the competitor’s unassigned area. 
 
COMPLEMENTARY BIDS 
Complementary bidding, also known as “protective” or “shadow” bidding, occurs when 
competitors submit token bids that are too high to be accepted (or if competitive in price, 
then on special terms that will not be acceptable). Such bids are not intended to secure the 
buyer’s acceptance, but are merely designed to give the appearance of genuine bidding. 
 
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2005 
PHANTOM BIDS 
Several companies have been caught creating dummy companies to submit a variety of bids 
on a single contract. That way, they give the appearance of vigorous competition while 
actually bidding against themselves. 
 
DETECTION - BID RIGGING
To detect these types of fraud, the fraud examiner must be alert for: 
• “Unsuccessful” bidders who later become subcontractors. 
• Wide disparity in bid prices. 
• Same contractors who bid on all projects with rotating low bidders. 
• Other qualified vendors who fail to submit bids. 
• Bid protests from losing, qualified bidders. 
• Splitting up requirements so contractors can each get a “fair share,” and can rotate bids. 
• A rotational pattern to winning bidders. 
• A geographical pattern to winning bidders. 
• Joint venture bids by firms who could have bid individually. 
 
Defective Pricing Schemes 
Defective pricing occurs during the negotiated contracting process when contractors fail to 
disclose accurate cost or pricing data in their price proposals, resulting in an increased 
contract price. 
 
Examples of defective pricing schemes generally involve the submission of inflated labor 
costs and inflated material/parts costs. Other schemes involve: 
• The use of vendors other than the one proposed. 
• Not disclosing documents on vendor discounts. 
• Changing make or buy decisions. 
• Not disclosing residual material inventory. 
• Inflating costs by channeling work under contract through a dummy company. 
• Withholding information on batch purchases. 
 
DETECTION - DEFECTIVE PRICING SCHEMES
To detect defective pricing schemes, the fraud examiner should be alert for the following: 
• Failure to update cost or pricing data even though it is known that past activity showed 
that costs or prices have decreased. 
• Failure to correct known system deficiencies that can lead to defective pricing. 
Contract and Procurement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.2006                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Repeated denial by the contractor of the existence of historical records. 
• Delay in the release of data to the buyer to preclude possible price reductions. 
• Altered supporting data. 
 
Contract Performance and Administration Phase 
Contract performance activities include change orders; timely review of completed portions 
prior to sign-off and release of monies; and assessment of deliverables for compliance with 
the terms of the contract, including quality control. There are two basic schemes perpetrated 
during the performance phase: product substitution and mischarges (accounting, material, 
and labor). 
 
Product Substitution 
In order to increase profits, the contractor might employ a product substitution scheme, 
failing to meet the contract specifications in the areas of either quantity or quality of 
products. Examples of schemes involving product substitutions include: 
• Delivery of inferior/substandard material. 
• Delivery of materials that have not been tested. 
• Falsification of test results. 
• Delivery of used, surplus, or reworked parts. 
• Delivery of counterfeit products. 
• Submission of false certifications (certifications are statements that parts or materials are 
new, domestically manufactured, and meet the contract specifications concerning quality 
and quantity or that the company is minority owned). 
• Delivery of commercial equivalents hardware. 
• Passing off or specially creating samples for inspection. 
• Surreptitious movement of inspection tags to uninspected goods. 
• Substitution of look-alike goods. 
 
DETECTION - PRODUCT SUBSTITUTION SCHEMES
The following is a list of potential red flags for product substitution schemes: 
• High percentage of product returns to vendor for noncompliance with specifications. 
• Product compliance certificate missing. 
• Compliance certificates signed by low-level employee with no quality assurance 
responsibilities. 
• Materials testing done by supplier, using his own personnel and facilities. 
  
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2007 
• Laboratory test reports are identical as to sample descriptions and test results, varying 
only as to date and lot number tested. 
• Highest profit product lines have the highest number of material return authorizations or 
reshipments. 
 
In order to detect these types of frauds, the fraud examiner should consider the following 
audit procedures: 
• Conduct both routine and unannounced inspections and testing. 
• Carefully review the inspection and testing reports. 
• Request assistance from outside technical personnel to conduct after-the-fact tests. 
• Interview personnel and others for indications of noncompliance. 
• Review correspondence and contract files for indications of noncompliance. 
 
Mischarges 
ACCOUNTING MISCHARGES 
Accounting mischarges  are defined as knowingly charging unallowable costs to the buyer, 
concealing or misrepresenting them as allowable costs, or hiding them in accounts (such as 
office supplies) that are not usually audited closely. Another common variation involves 
charging types of costs or independent research and development to other cost categories. 
 
MATERIAL MISCHARGES 
Material mischarges are usually limited to raw materials that can be used on many different 
contract products or diverted for personal use. Numerous cases have been discovered where 
the buyer-owned material, which was used on a similar contract (for example, commercial), 
shows up on the accounting records as being used in the manufacturing process for the 
subject contract (for example, government). 
 
DETECTION - MATERIAL MISCHARGES 
Material mischarges can be detected by exam ining material cost transfers. These might 
include transfers: 
• From government contracts to commercial. 
• Via any type of suspense or holding account. 
• From ongoing jobs to jobs not scheduled for delivery until far into the future. 
• From prior lot work orders to current or future work orders. 
• To inventory write-off accounts. 
• To scrap accounts. 
Contract and Procurement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.2008                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Of materials ordered and charged in excess of contract requirements. 
• Of seemingly unrelated materials charged on routing slips. 
• In which material standards are not updated over periods of time when the contractor 
recognizes improvements in manufacturing technology or product design. 
• In which a significant variance exists between proposed versus negotiated vendor prices. 
 
LABOR MISCHARGES 
Labor costs are perhaps more susceptible to mischarging than are material costs, because 
employee labor can readily be charged to any contract. The only way to ensure that labor 
costs are charged to the correct account is to actually observe the work of each employee (to 
determine the contract on which he is working), then determine from the accounting records 
that the employee’s cost is charged to the proper contract. 
 
There are several schemes involving mischarged labor costs. Some of the more prominent 
ones are: 
• Transfer of labor costs. 
• Time and charges do not agree with contractor billing. 
• Fictitious time cards. 
• Changes made to individual time cards. 
• Time card charges by supervisors. 
 
DETECTION - LABOR MISCHARGES
Labor mischarges can sometimes be detected by examining the following: 
• Distinctive labor-charging patterns on research and development. 
• Significant increases in charging to overhead accounts (for example, idle time, down 
time, and nonapplied time). 
• Reclassification or reorganization of employees from indirect to direct charges. 
• Changes in the labor-charging relationships between certain tasks or types of labor. 
• Decrease in indirect expense pools. 
• Increased labor hours with no corresponding increases in materials used or units 
shipped. 
• Actual hours and dollars consistently at or near budgeted amounts. 
 
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2009 
COMPUTER PROGRAMS 
The computer can have a tremendous impact on fraud examinations. Generally, programs 
can be easily written that will identify suspicious activity without having to manually review a 
voluminous amount of data. This is more conducive to detecting fraud as well as  
being a more efficient use of a fraud examiner’s time. Computer programs can be written to 
identify the following: 
• Vendors with post office box addresses. 
• Vendors with addresses in common with employee addresses. 
• Contractors who were unsuccessful bidders who are now subcontractors. 
• Payments to a particular vendor over a specified period of time. 
• Vendor payments that were initiated or paid outside the normal system (for example, 
hand carried or approved). 
• Employees who are assigned to more than one contract on any given day. 

2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.101




:


contract and procur fraud
the detect and proof of fraud in contract and procur area requir expertis in the
law of contract in compani or agenc polici and rule and about industri standard
and practic
element of a contract
a contract is a mutual agreement oral or written between two or more parti that must
contain the follow element
compet parti
law subject matter or object
legal consider
mutual promis
mutual oblig
to be success in detect and prove fraud the fraud examin must establish object
criteria to evalu the contract the fraud examin must have an understand of proper
contract procedur at the presolicit solicit and negoti and perform
and administr phase
phase of a contract
presolicit phase
the activ typic involv dure presolicit ar
need recognit
notic of intent to contract
develop of specif
award criteria
the fraud examin should look for variat from standard or accept procedur and
the absenc of proper document
contract and procur fraud financi transact
12002 2011 fraud examin manual
the most promin scheme involv at thi phase of contract or procur ar
determin need
bid specif
determin need
the typic fraud in the need recognit phase of the contract negoti is collus
between the buyer and contractor where the buyer employe receiv a gratuiti or
kickback for recogn a need for a particular product or servic
bid specif
bid specif and statement of work detail the type and amount of good and
servic to be provid ar prepar to assist in the select process thei ar intend to
provid both potenti bidder and the select offici with a firm basi for make and
accept bid
a wellwritten contract will contain specif standard and statement of work that
clearli detail the right and entitl of the contractor carelessli written specif
standard and statement of work make it easier for a contractor to claim at a later time that
he is entitl to more monei than the buyer intend to pai
sometim the buyer personnel and the contractor deliber collud to write vagu
specif at other time there is an agreement to amend the contract to increas the
price immedi after the award on contractor actual develop a cost enhanc
plan which identifi all the chang he would make in order to doubl the cost of the
contract befor it wa even sign
poorli written specif
in some instanc the fraud is commit sole by the contractor base on poorli written
specif in the instanc of poorli written specif it is easi for the contractor to
deliv a product or servic that is price higher than what wa order
vagu specif
in other instanc vagu specif ar deliber written by the buyer in collus with
the contractor so that more monei can be claim later
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12003
agreement to amend contract
in situat where there is collus between the buyer and supplier there is sometim an
agreement to award the contract base on skimpi specif and then increas the price
later onc the contract ha been award through amend to the contract
detect bid specif
the follow is a list of potenti red flag for fraud involv specif
provid the contractor with inform or advic on a preferenti basi
us statement of work specif or sole sourc justif develop by or in
consult with a contractor who will be permit to bid
permit consult who assist in the prepar of the statement of work
specif or design to perform on the contract as subcontractor or consult
split cost into separ categori to avoid review
write specif not consist with past similar procur
solicit and negoti phase
fraud scheme involv dure thi phase typic involv collus between the buyer and
contractor and contractor of compet compani in the bid process scheme in thi
phase also involv defect price
bid submiss scheme
bid submiss scheme can take on mani form thei can involv anyon in the contract
cycl such as a buyer or contract offici engin technic repres qualiti or
product assur repres or subcontractor liaison employe anyon who can
influenc the award of a contract
exampl of bid submiss scheme ar
prematur open of bid
alter bid
unjustifi extens of bid open date
control bid open
falsifi bid log and document
contract and procur fraud financi transact
12004 2011 fraud examin manual
detect bid submiss scheme
to detect bid submiss scheme the fraud examin should be awar of
accept of late bid
falsif of document or receipt to get a late bid accept
chang in bid after other bidder price ar known
chang in bid date
receipt of late bid
last bid usual receiv the bid
bidrig scheme
most bidrig fraud scheme involv collus between contractor of compet
compani dure the bid process
bid rotat
collus bid occur when a group of prospect vendor exchang inform on
contract solicit take turn at submit the low bid
bid suppress
in thi type of scheme on or more competitor agre with at least on other competitor to
refrain from bid or agre to withdraw a previous submit bid so that a contractor
bid will be accept other form of thi activ involv agreement by competitor to
fabric bid protest or to coerc supplier and subcontractor not to deal with
nonconspir who submit bid
a variat of bid suppress occur when competitor make arrang to refrain from
compet in a design portion of a market thi might be accomplish base on
custom or geograph area the result of such a divis is that compet firm will not
bid or will submit onli complementari bid discuss below when request for bid ar
issu in the competitor unassign area
complementari bid
complementari bid also known as protect or shadow bid occur when
competitor submit token bid that ar too high to be accept or if competit in price
then on special term that will not be accept such bid ar not intend to secur the
buyer accept but ar mere design to give the appear of genuin bid
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12005
phantom bid
sever compani have been caught creat dummi compani to submit a varieti of bid
on a singl contract that wai thei give the appear of vigor competit while
actual bid against themselv
detect bid rig
to detect these type of fraud the fraud examin must be alert for
unsuccess bidder who later becom subcontractor
wide dispar in bid price
same contractor who bid on all project with rotat low bidder
other qualifi vendor who fail to submit bid
bid protest from lose qualifi bidder
split up requir so contractor can each get a fair share and can rotat bid
a rotat pattern to win bidder
a geograph pattern to win bidder
joint ventur bid by firm who could have bid individu
defect price scheme
defect price occur dure the negoti contract process when contractor fail to
disclos accur cost or price data in their price propos result in an increas
contract price
exampl of defect price scheme gener involv the submiss of inflat labor
cost and inflat materialpart cost other scheme involv
the us of vendor other than the on propos
not disclos document on vendor discount
chang make or bui decis
not disclos residu materi inventori
inflat cost by channel work under contract through a dummi compani
withhold inform on batch purchas
detect defect price scheme
to detect defect price scheme the fraud examin should be alert for the follow
failur to updat cost or price data even though it is known that past activ show
that cost or price have decreas
failur to correct known system defici that can lead to defect price
contract and procur fraud financi transact
12006 2011 fraud examin manual
repeat denial by the contractor of the exist of histor record
delai in the releas of data to the buyer to preclud possibl price reduct
alter support data
contract perform and administr phase
contract perform activ includ chang order time review of complet portion
prior to signoff and releas of moni and assess of deliver for complianc with
the term of the contract includ qualiti control there ar two basic scheme perpetr
dure the perform phase product substitut and mischarg account materi
and labor
product substitut
in order to increas profit the contractor might emploi a product substitut scheme
fail to meet the contract specif in the area of either quantiti or qualiti of
product exampl of scheme involv product substitut includ
deliveri of inferiorsubstandard materi
deliveri of materi that have not been test
falsif of test result
deliveri of us surplu or rework part
deliveri of counterfeit product
submiss of fals certif certif ar statement that part or materi ar
new domest manufactur and meet the contract specif concern qualiti
and quantiti or that the compani is minor own
deliveri of commerci equival hardwar
pass off or special creat sampl for inspect
surreptiti movement of inspect tag to uninspect good
substitut of lookalik good
detect product substitut scheme
the follow is a list of potenti red flag for product substitut scheme
high percentag of product return to vendor for noncompli with specif
product complianc certif miss
complianc certif sign by lowlevel employe with no qualiti assur
respons
materi test done by supplier us hi own personnel and facil
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12007
laboratori test report ar ident as to sampl descript and test result vari
onli as to date and lot number test
highest profit product line have the highest number of materi return author or
reship
in order to detect these type of fraud the fraud examin should consid the follow
audit procedur
conduct both routin and unannounc inspect and test
carefulli review the inspect and test report
request assist from outsid technic personnel to conduct afterthefact test
interview personnel and other for indic of noncompli
review correspond and contract file for indic of noncompli
mischarg
account mischarg
account mischarg ar defin as knowingli charg unallow cost to the buyer
conceal or misrepres them as allow cost or hide them in account such as
offic suppli that ar not usual audit close anoth common variat involv
charg type of cost or independ research and develop to other cost categori
materi mischarg
materi mischarg ar usual limit to raw materi that can be us on mani differ
contract product or divert for person us numer case have been discov where
the buyerown materi which wa us on a similar contract for exampl commerci
show up on the account record as be us in the manufactur process for the
subject contract for exampl govern
detect materi mischarg
materi mischarg can be detect by exam in materi cost transfer these might
includ transfer
from govern contract to commerci
via ani type of suspens or hold account
from ongo job to job not schedul for deliveri until far into the futur
from prior lot work order to current or futur work order
to inventori writeoff account
to scrap account
contract and procur fraud financi transact
12008 2011 fraud examin manual
of materi order and charg in excess of contract requir
of seemingli unrel materi charg on rout slip
in which materi standard ar not updat over period of time when the contractor
recogn improv in manufactur technolog or product design
in which a signific varianc exist between propos versu negoti vendor price
labor mischarg
labor cost ar perhap more suscept to mischarg than ar materi cost becaus
employe labor can readili be charg to ani contract the onli wai to ensur that labor
cost ar charg to the correct account is to actual observ the work of each employe to
determin the contract on which he is work then determin from the account record
that the employe cost is charg to the proper contract
there ar sever scheme involv mischarg labor cost some of the more promin
on ar
transfer of labor cost
time and charg do not agre with contractor bill
fictiti time card
chang made to individu time card
time card charg by supervisor
detect labor mischarg
labor mischarg can sometim be detect by examin the follow
distinct laborcharg pattern on research and develop
signific increas in charg to overhead account for exampl idl time down
time and nonappli time
reclassif or reorgan of employe from indirect to direct charg
chang in the laborcharg relationship between certain task or type of labor
decreas in indirect expens pool
increas labor hour with no correspond increas in materi us or unit
ship
actual hour and dollar consist at or near budget amount
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12009
comput program
the comput can have a tremend impact on fraud examin gener program
can be easili written that will identifi suspici activ without have to manual review a
volumin amount of data thi is more conduc to detect fraud as well as
be a more effici us of a fraud examin time comput program can be written to
identifi the follow
vendor with post offic box address
vendor with address in common with employe address
contractor who were unsuccess bidder who ar now subcontractor
payment to a particular vendor over a specifi period of time
vendor payment that were initi or paid outsid the normal system for exampl
hand carri or approv
employe who ar assign to more than on contract on ani given dai
2011 fraud examin manual 2101
