2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONTRACT AND PROCUREMENT FRAUD/Phases of a Contract/Bid-Rigging Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Contract and Procurement Fraud


:


Bid-Rigging Schemes 
Most bid-rigging fraud schemes involve collusion between contractors of competing 
companies during the bidding process. 
 
BID ROTATION 
Collusive bidding occurs when a group of prospective vendors exchange information on 
contract solicitations, taking turns at submitting the low bid. 
 
BID SUPPRESSION 
In this type of scheme, one or more competitors agrees with at least one other competitor to 
refrain from bidding or agrees to withdraw a previously submitted bid so that a contractor’s 
bid will be accepted. Other forms of this activity involve agreements by competitors to 
fabricate bid protests or to coerce suppliers and subcontractors not to deal with 
nonconspirators who submit bids. 
 
A variation of bid suppression occurs when competitors make arrangements to refrain from 
competing in a designated portion of a market. This might be accomplished based on 
customer or geographic area. The result of such a division is that competing firms will not 
bid or will submit only complementary bids (discussed below) when requests for bids are 
issued in the competitor’s unassigned area. 
 
COMPLEMENTARY BIDS 
Complementary bidding, also known as “protective” or “shadow” bidding, occurs when 
competitors submit token bids that are too high to be accepted (or if competitive in price, 
then on special terms that will not be acceptable). Such bids are not intended to secure the 
buyer’s acceptance, but are merely designed to give the appearance of genuine bidding. 
 
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2005 
PHANTOM BIDS 
Several companies have been caught creating dummy companies to submit a variety of bids 
on a single contract. That way, they give the appearance of vigorous competition while 
actually bidding against themselves. 
 
DETECTION - BID RIGGING
To detect these types of fraud, the fraud examiner must be alert for: 
• “Unsuccessful” bidders who later become subcontractors. 
• Wide disparity in bid prices. 
• Same contractors who bid on all projects with rotating low bidders. 
• Other qualified vendors who fail to submit bids. 
• Bid protests from losing, qualified bidders. 
• Splitting up requirements so contractors can each get a “fair share,” and can rotate bids. 
• A rotational pattern to winning bidders. 
• A geographical pattern to winning bidders. 
• Joint venture bids by firms who could have bid individually. 
 



:


bidrig scheme
most bidrig fraud scheme involv collus between contractor of compet
compani dure the bid process
bid rotat
collus bid occur when a group of prospect vendor exchang inform on
contract solicit take turn at submit the low bid
bid suppress
in thi type of scheme on or more competitor agre with at least on other competitor to
refrain from bid or agre to withdraw a previous submit bid so that a contractor
bid will be accept other form of thi activ involv agreement by competitor to
fabric bid protest or to coerc supplier and subcontractor not to deal with
nonconspir who submit bid
a variat of bid suppress occur when competitor make arrang to refrain from
compet in a design portion of a market thi might be accomplish base on
custom or geograph area the result of such a divis is that compet firm will not
bid or will submit onli complementari bid discuss below when request for bid ar
issu in the competitor unassign area
complementari bid
complementari bid also known as protect or shadow bid occur when
competitor submit token bid that ar too high to be accept or if competit in price
then on special term that will not be accept such bid ar not intend to secur the
buyer accept but ar mere design to give the appear of genuin bid
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12005
phantom bid
sever compani have been caught creat dummi compani to submit a varieti of bid
on a singl contract that wai thei give the appear of vigor competit while
actual bid against themselv
detect bid rig
to detect these type of fraud the fraud examin must be alert for
unsuccess bidder who later becom subcontractor
wide dispar in bid price
same contractor who bid on all project with rotat low bidder
other qualifi vendor who fail to submit bid
bid protest from lose qualifi bidder
split up requir so contractor can each get a fair share and can rotat bid
a rotat pattern to win bidder
a geograph pattern to win bidder
joint ventur bid by firm who could have bid individu
