2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONTRACT AND PROCUREMENT FRAUD/Phases of a Contract/Defective Pricing Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Contract and Procurement Fraud


:


Defective Pricing Schemes 
Defective pricing occurs during the negotiated contracting process when contractors fail to 
disclose accurate cost or pricing data in their price proposals, resulting in an increased 
contract price. 
 
Examples of defective pricing schemes generally involve the submission of inflated labor 
costs and inflated material/parts costs. Other schemes involve: 
• The use of vendors other than the one proposed. 
• Not disclosing documents on vendor discounts. 
• Changing make or buy decisions. 
• Not disclosing residual material inventory. 
• Inflating costs by channeling work under contract through a dummy company. 
• Withholding information on batch purchases. 
 
DETECTION - DEFECTIVE PRICING SCHEMES
To detect defective pricing schemes, the fraud examiner should be alert for the following: 
• Failure to update cost or pricing data even though it is known that past activity showed 
that costs or prices have decreased. 
• Failure to correct known system deficiencies that can lead to defective pricing. 
Contract and Procurement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.2006                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Repeated denial by the contractor of the existence of historical records. 
• Delay in the release of data to the buyer to preclude possible price reductions. 
• Altered supporting data. 
 



:


defect price scheme
defect price occur dure the negoti contract process when contractor fail to
disclos accur cost or price data in their price propos result in an increas
contract price
exampl of defect price scheme gener involv the submiss of inflat labor
cost and inflat materialpart cost other scheme involv
the us of vendor other than the on propos
not disclos document on vendor discount
chang make or bui decis
not disclos residu materi inventori
inflat cost by channel work under contract through a dummi compani
withhold inform on batch purchas
detect defect price scheme
to detect defect price scheme the fraud examin should be alert for the follow
failur to updat cost or price data even though it is known that past activ show
that cost or price have decreas
failur to correct known system defici that can lead to defect price
contract and procur fraud financi transact
12006 2011 fraud examin manual
repeat denial by the contractor of the exist of histor record
delai in the releas of data to the buyer to preclud possibl price reduct
alter support data
