2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONTRACT AND PROCUREMENT FRAUD/Phases of a Contract/Product Substitution


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Contract and Procurement Fraud


:


Product Substitution 
In order to increase profits, the contractor might employ a product substitution scheme, 
failing to meet the contract specifications in the areas of either quantity or quality of 
products. Examples of schemes involving product substitutions include: 
• Delivery of inferior/substandard material. 
• Delivery of materials that have not been tested. 
• Falsification of test results. 
• Delivery of used, surplus, or reworked parts. 
• Delivery of counterfeit products. 
• Submission of false certifications (certifications are statements that parts or materials are 
new, domestically manufactured, and meet the contract specifications concerning quality 
and quantity or that the company is minority owned). 
• Delivery of commercial equivalents hardware. 
• Passing off or specially creating samples for inspection. 
• Surreptitious movement of inspection tags to uninspected goods. 
• Substitution of look-alike goods. 
 
DETECTION - PRODUCT SUBSTITUTION SCHEMES
The following is a list of potential red flags for product substitution schemes: 
• High percentage of product returns to vendor for noncompliance with specifications. 
• Product compliance certificate missing. 
• Compliance certificates signed by low-level employee with no quality assurance 
responsibilities. 
• Materials testing done by supplier, using his own personnel and facilities. 
  
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2007 
• Laboratory test reports are identical as to sample descriptions and test results, varying 
only as to date and lot number tested. 
• Highest profit product lines have the highest number of material return authorizations or 
reshipments. 
 
In order to detect these types of frauds, the fraud examiner should consider the following 
audit procedures: 
• Conduct both routine and unannounced inspections and testing. 
• Carefully review the inspection and testing reports. 
• Request assistance from outside technical personnel to conduct after-the-fact tests. 
• Interview personnel and others for indications of noncompliance. 
• Review correspondence and contract files for indications of noncompliance. 
 



:


product substitut
in order to increas profit the contractor might emploi a product substitut scheme
fail to meet the contract specif in the area of either quantiti or qualiti of
product exampl of scheme involv product substitut includ
deliveri of inferiorsubstandard materi
deliveri of materi that have not been test
falsif of test result
deliveri of us surplu or rework part
deliveri of counterfeit product
submiss of fals certif certif ar statement that part or materi ar
new domest manufactur and meet the contract specif concern qualiti
and quantiti or that the compani is minor own
deliveri of commerci equival hardwar
pass off or special creat sampl for inspect
surreptiti movement of inspect tag to uninspect good
substitut of lookalik good
detect product substitut scheme
the follow is a list of potenti red flag for product substitut scheme
high percentag of product return to vendor for noncompli with specif
product complianc certif miss
complianc certif sign by lowlevel employe with no qualiti assur
respons
materi test done by supplier us hi own personnel and facil
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12007
laboratori test report ar ident as to sampl descript and test result vari
onli as to date and lot number test
highest profit product line have the highest number of materi return author or
reship
in order to detect these type of fraud the fraud examin should consid the follow
audit procedur
conduct both routin and unannounc inspect and test
carefulli review the inspect and test report
request assist from outsid technic personnel to conduct afterthefact test
interview personnel and other for indic of noncompli
review correspond and contract file for indic of noncompli
