2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONTRACT AND PROCUREMENT FRAUD/Phases of a Contract/Mischarges


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Contract and Procurement Fraud


:


Mischarges 
ACCOUNTING MISCHARGES 
Accounting mischarges  are defined as knowingly charging unallowable costs to the buyer, 
concealing or misrepresenting them as allowable costs, or hiding them in accounts (such as 
office supplies) that are not usually audited closely. Another common variation involves 
charging types of costs or independent research and development to other cost categories. 
 
MATERIAL MISCHARGES 
Material mischarges are usually limited to raw materials that can be used on many different 
contract products or diverted for personal use. Numerous cases have been discovered where 
the buyer-owned material, which was used on a similar contract (for example, commercial), 
shows up on the accounting records as being used in the manufacturing process for the 
subject contract (for example, government). 
 
DETECTION - MATERIAL MISCHARGES 
Material mischarges can be detected by exam ining material cost transfers. These might 
include transfers: 
• From government contracts to commercial. 
• Via any type of suspense or holding account. 
• From ongoing jobs to jobs not scheduled for delivery until far into the future. 
• From prior lot work orders to current or future work orders. 
• To inventory write-off accounts. 
• To scrap accounts. 
Contract and Procurement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.2008                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Of materials ordered and charged in excess of contract requirements. 
• Of seemingly unrelated materials charged on routing slips. 
• In which material standards are not updated over periods of time when the contractor 
recognizes improvements in manufacturing technology or product design. 
• In which a significant variance exists between proposed versus negotiated vendor prices. 
 
LABOR MISCHARGES 
Labor costs are perhaps more susceptible to mischarging than are material costs, because 
employee labor can readily be charged to any contract. The only way to ensure that labor 
costs are charged to the correct account is to actually observe the work of each employee (to 
determine the contract on which he is working), then determine from the accounting records 
that the employee’s cost is charged to the proper contract. 
 
There are several schemes involving mischarged labor costs. Some of the more prominent 
ones are: 
• Transfer of labor costs. 
• Time and charges do not agree with contractor billing. 
• Fictitious time cards. 
• Changes made to individual time cards. 
• Time card charges by supervisors. 
 
DETECTION - LABOR MISCHARGES
Labor mischarges can sometimes be detected by examining the following: 
• Distinctive labor-charging patterns on research and development. 
• Significant increases in charging to overhead accounts (for example, idle time, down 
time, and nonapplied time). 
• Reclassification or reorganization of employees from indirect to direct charges. 
• Changes in the labor-charging relationships between certain tasks or types of labor. 
• Decrease in indirect expense pools. 
• Increased labor hours with no corresponding increases in materials used or units 
shipped. 
• Actual hours and dollars consistently at or near budgeted amounts. 
 
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2009 
COMPUTER PROGRAMS 
The computer can have a tremendous impact on fraud examinations. Generally, programs 
can be easily written that will identify suspicious activity without having to manually review a 
voluminous amount of data. This is more conducive to detecting fraud as well as  
being a more efficient use of a fraud examiner’s time. Computer programs can be written to 
identify the following: 
• Vendors with post office box addresses. 
• Vendors with addresses in common with employee addresses. 
• Contractors who were unsuccessful bidders who are now subcontractors. 
• Payments to a particular vendor over a specified period of time. 
• Vendor payments that were initiated or paid outside the normal system (for example, 
hand carried or approved). 
• Employees who are assigned to more than one contract on any given day. 

2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.101




:


mischarg
account mischarg
account mischarg ar defin as knowingli charg unallow cost to the buyer
conceal or misrepres them as allow cost or hide them in account such as
offic suppli that ar not usual audit close anoth common variat involv
charg type of cost or independ research and develop to other cost categori
materi mischarg
materi mischarg ar usual limit to raw materi that can be us on mani differ
contract product or divert for person us numer case have been discov where
the buyerown materi which wa us on a similar contract for exampl commerci
show up on the account record as be us in the manufactur process for the
subject contract for exampl govern
detect materi mischarg
materi mischarg can be detect by exam in materi cost transfer these might
includ transfer
from govern contract to commerci
via ani type of suspens or hold account
from ongo job to job not schedul for deliveri until far into the futur
from prior lot work order to current or futur work order
to inventori writeoff account
to scrap account
contract and procur fraud financi transact
12008 2011 fraud examin manual
of materi order and charg in excess of contract requir
of seemingli unrel materi charg on rout slip
in which materi standard ar not updat over period of time when the contractor
recogn improv in manufactur technolog or product design
in which a signific varianc exist between propos versu negoti vendor price
labor mischarg
labor cost ar perhap more suscept to mischarg than ar materi cost becaus
employe labor can readili be charg to ani contract the onli wai to ensur that labor
cost ar charg to the correct account is to actual observ the work of each employe to
determin the contract on which he is work then determin from the account record
that the employe cost is charg to the proper contract
there ar sever scheme involv mischarg labor cost some of the more promin
on ar
transfer of labor cost
time and charg do not agre with contractor bill
fictiti time card
chang made to individu time card
time card charg by supervisor
detect labor mischarg
labor mischarg can sometim be detect by examin the follow
distinct laborcharg pattern on research and develop
signific increas in charg to overhead account for exampl idl time down
time and nonappli time
reclassif or reorgan of employe from indirect to direct charg
chang in the laborcharg relationship between certain task or type of labor
decreas in indirect expens pool
increas labor hour with no correspond increas in materi us or unit
ship
actual hour and dollar consist at or near budget amount
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12009
comput program
the comput can have a tremend impact on fraud examin gener program
can be easili written that will identifi suspici activ without have to manual review a
volumin amount of data thi is more conduc to detect fraud as well as
be a more effici us of a fraud examin time comput program can be written to
identifi the follow
vendor with post offic box address
vendor with address in common with employe address
contractor who were unsuccess bidder who ar now subcontractor
payment to a particular vendor over a specifi period of time
vendor payment that were initi or paid outsid the normal system for exampl
hand carri or approv
employe who ar assign to more than on contract on ani given dai
2011 fraud examin manual 2101
