2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONTRACT AND PROCUREMENT FRAUD/Phases of a Contract/Mischarges/MATERIAL MISCHARGES


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Contract and Procurement Fraud


:


MATERIAL MISCHARGES 
Material mischarges are usually limited to raw materials that can be used on many different 
contract products or diverted for personal use. Numerous cases have been discovered where 
the buyer-owned material, which was used on a similar contract (for example, commercial), 
shows up on the accounting records as being used in the manufacturing process for the 
subject contract (for example, government). 
 
DETECTION - MATERIAL MISCHARGES 
Material mischarges can be detected by exam ining material cost transfers. These might 
include transfers: 
• From government contracts to commercial. 
• Via any type of suspense or holding account. 
• From ongoing jobs to jobs not scheduled for delivery until far into the future. 
• From prior lot work orders to current or future work orders. 
• To inventory write-off accounts. 
• To scrap accounts. 
Contract and Procurement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.2008                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Of materials ordered and charged in excess of contract requirements. 
• Of seemingly unrelated materials charged on routing slips. 
• In which material standards are not updated over periods of time when the contractor 
recognizes improvements in manufacturing technology or product design. 
• In which a significant variance exists between proposed versus negotiated vendor prices. 
 



:


materi mischarg
materi mischarg ar usual limit to raw materi that can be us on mani differ
contract product or divert for person us numer case have been discov where
the buyerown materi which wa us on a similar contract for exampl commerci
show up on the account record as be us in the manufactur process for the
subject contract for exampl govern
detect materi mischarg
materi mischarg can be detect by exam in materi cost transfer these might
includ transfer
from govern contract to commerci
via ani type of suspens or hold account
from ongo job to job not schedul for deliveri until far into the futur
from prior lot work order to current or futur work order
to inventori writeoff account
to scrap account
contract and procur fraud financi transact
12008 2011 fraud examin manual
of materi order and charg in excess of contract requir
of seemingli unrel materi charg on rout slip
in which materi standard ar not updat over period of time when the contractor
recogn improv in manufactur technolog or product design
in which a signific varianc exist between propos versu negoti vendor price
