2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONTRACT AND PROCUREMENT FRAUD/Phases of a Contract/Mischarges/LABOR MISCHARGES


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Contract and Procurement Fraud


:


LABOR MISCHARGES 
Labor costs are perhaps more susceptible to mischarging than are material costs, because 
employee labor can readily be charged to any contract. The only way to ensure that labor 
costs are charged to the correct account is to actually observe the work of each employee (to 
determine the contract on which he is working), then determine from the accounting records 
that the employee’s cost is charged to the proper contract. 
 
There are several schemes involving mischarged labor costs. Some of the more prominent 
ones are: 
• Transfer of labor costs. 
• Time and charges do not agree with contractor billing. 
• Fictitious time cards. 
• Changes made to individual time cards. 
• Time card charges by supervisors. 
 
DETECTION - LABOR MISCHARGES
Labor mischarges can sometimes be detected by examining the following: 
• Distinctive labor-charging patterns on research and development. 
• Significant increases in charging to overhead accounts (for example, idle time, down 
time, and nonapplied time). 
• Reclassification or reorganization of employees from indirect to direct charges. 
• Changes in the labor-charging relationships between certain tasks or types of labor. 
• Decrease in indirect expense pools. 
• Increased labor hours with no corresponding increases in materials used or units 
shipped. 
• Actual hours and dollars consistently at or near budgeted amounts. 
 
Financial Transactions  Contract and Procurement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.2009 



:


labor mischarg
labor cost ar perhap more suscept to mischarg than ar materi cost becaus
employe labor can readili be charg to ani contract the onli wai to ensur that labor
cost ar charg to the correct account is to actual observ the work of each employe to
determin the contract on which he is work then determin from the account record
that the employe cost is charg to the proper contract
there ar sever scheme involv mischarg labor cost some of the more promin
on ar
transfer of labor cost
time and charg do not agre with contractor bill
fictiti time card
chang made to individu time card
time card charg by supervisor
detect labor mischarg
labor mischarg can sometim be detect by examin the follow
distinct laborcharg pattern on research and develop
signific increas in charg to overhead account for exampl idl time down
time and nonappli time
reclassif or reorgan of employe from indirect to direct charg
chang in the laborcharg relationship between certain task or type of labor
decreas in indirect expens pool
increas labor hour with no correspond increas in materi us or unit
ship
actual hour and dollar consist at or near budget amount
financi transact contract and procur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 12009
