2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ETHICS FOR FRAUD EXAMINERS/Morality, Ethics, and Legality/Means and Ends


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Means and Ends 
Everyone knows some saying like: “The ends j ustify the means,” or “Fight fire with fire.” 
Fraud examiners can be particularly influenced by this idea because they need to deal with 
people who do not exercise moral reasoning, follow ethical rules, or keep within the law. 
These sayings have the purpose of justifying actions that could otherwise be considered 
immoral, unethical, or illegal. (After all, the American colonists openly defied British law, 
fomented a rebellion, and fought a war. We now regard them as heroes.)  
 
 Is it all right to lie? No, except … 
 
When a moral rule appears to be inflexible, people can always think of situations in which 
they want to justify breaking the rule. For example, some people would easily conclude that 
it is all right to lie to catch a crook. After all, if the moral rules were followed by everyone, 
Ethics for Fraud Examiners  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.906   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
then there would be no crooks; thus, the fraudster’s dishonesty made it necessary for the 
fraud examiner to lie in return. The ends (catching crooks and upholding justice) justify the 
means (lying).  
 
The problem with means-ends analyses is that they are often superficial, ending with the 
needed justification but failing to consider other aspects and consequences of the actions. 
The justification of the undercover role of the fraud examiner must be carefully considered. 
In the previous example, the president of Mega corp must think about the moral, ethical, and 
legal climate of the company once it becomes known that an undercover agent was 
employed. (How many more are around? What happened to trust?)  
 
 



:


mean and end
everyon know some sai like the end j ustifi the mean or fight fire with fire
fraud examin can be particularli influenc by thi idea becaus thei need to deal with
peopl who do not exercis moral reason follow ethic rule or keep within the law
these sai have the purpos of justifi action that could otherwis be consid
immor uneth or illeg after all the american colonist openli defi british law
foment a rebellion and fought a war we now regard them as hero
is it all right to lie no except
when a moral rule appear to be inflex peopl can alwai think of situat in which
thei want to justifi break the rule for exampl some peopl would easili conclud that
it is all right to lie to catch a crook after all if the moral rule were follow by everyon
ethic for fraud examin fraud prevent and deterr
4906 2011 fraud examin manual
then there would be no crook thu the fraudster dishonesti made it necessari for the
fraud examin to lie in return the end catch crook and uphold justic justifi the
mean ly
the problem with meansend analys is that thei ar often superfici end with the
need justif but fail to consid other aspect and consequ of the action
the justif of the undercov role of the fraud examin must be carefulli consid
in the previou exampl the presid of mega corp must think about the moral ethic and
legal climat of the compani onc it becom known that an undercov agent wa
emploi how mani more ar around what happen to trust
