2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ETHICS FOR FRAUD EXAMINERS/Some Concluding Remarks


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Some Concluding Remarks 
This brief discussion of ethics provides some guide to the ways many people approach 
difficult decision problems. The greatest task is to take general principles of moral 
philosophy and apply them to a real decision. Their application through codes of 
professional ethics is where the challenge lies.  
 
Codes of professional ethics and statutory law have two things in common. They are both 
based, more or less, on pervasive moral principles and values, and they both represent the 
aspects of behavior that a committee or legislature has chosen to put in writing. In both 
professional ethics and law, not every relevant guide for behavior has been written. 
Therefore, professional people, including fraud examiners, might find themselves on their 
own when they have to decide a proper course of conduct in a particular fact situation.  
 
Two types of ethics operate in the professional environment — general ethics (the spirit) 
and professional ethics (the rules). In their book The Philosophy of Auditing, Robert K. Mautz 
and Hussein A. Sharaf contributed the following thoughts to the association of general 
ethics and professional ethics:  
 
The theory of ethics has been a subject of interest to philosophers since the beginnings of 
recorded thought. Because philosophers are concerned with the good of all mankind, their 
discussions have been concerned with that we might call general ethics rather than the ethics 
of small groups such as the members of a given profession. We cannot look, therefore, to 
their philosophical theories for direct solutions to our special problems. Nevertheless, their 
work with general ethics is of primary impo rtance to the developm ent of an appropriate 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.907 
concept in any special field. Ethical behavior in auditing or in any other activity is no more 
than a special application of the general notion  of ethical conduct devised by philosophers for 
people generally. Ethical conduct in auditing draws its justification and basic nature from 
the general theory of ethics. Thus, we are well- advised to give some attention to the ideas 
and reasoning of some of the great philosophers on this subject.  
 
We have attended to the ideas and reasoning of philosophers, and now we turn to the 
Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics and its particular rules. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1001 



:


some conclud remark
thi brief discuss of ethic provid some guid to the wai mani peopl approach
difficult decis problem the greatest task is to take gener principl of moral
philosophi and appli them to a real decis their applic through code of
profession ethic is where the challeng li
code of profession ethic and statutori law have two thing in common thei ar both
base more or less on pervas moral principl and valu and thei both repres the
aspect of behavior that a committe or legislatur ha chosen to put in write in both
profession ethic and law not everi relev guid for behavior ha been written
therefor profession peopl includ fraud examin might find themselv on their
own when thei have to decid a proper cours of conduct in a particular fact situat
two type of ethic oper in the profession environ gener ethic the spirit
and profession ethic the rule in their book the philosophi of audit robert k mautz
and hussein a sharaf contribut the follow thought to the associ of gener
ethic and profession ethic
the theori of ethic ha been a subject of interest to philosoph sinc the begin of
record thought becaus philosoph ar concern with the good of all mankind their
discuss have been concern with that we might call gener ethic rather than the ethic
of small group such as the member of a given profess we cannot look therefor to
their philosoph theori for direct solut to our special problem nevertheless their
work with gener ethic is of primari impo rtanc to the developm ent of an appropri
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4907
concept in ani special field ethic behavior in audit or in ani other activ is no more
than a special applic of the gener notion of ethic conduct devis by philosoph for
peopl gener ethic conduct in audit draw it justif and basic natur from
the gener theori of ethic thu we ar well advis to give some attent to the idea
and reason of some of the great philosoph on thi subject
we have attend to the idea and reason of philosoph and now we turn to the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic and it particular rule
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41001
