2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Commitment to Professionalism and Diligence/Social Recognition: A Reciprocal Relationship


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Social Recognition: A Reciprocal Relationship  
No group of practitioners can become a “profession” merely by declaring itself to be one. 
Society must acknowledge the group as a professional body. At present, fraud examiners are 
at the stage of becoming a self-declared profession. Historically, other professions had the 
same starting point. Modern medicine overcame  its roots in magic. Accountants rose from 
the level of bookkeepers. Internal auditors advanced social goals by presenting a responsible 
front to Congress and other public bodies. The list goes on.  
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1004   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Social recognition, however, is not necessarily permanent. Society will not continue to  
honor as professional any group that fails to serve a broad-based social and public interest. 
Thus the other side to the coin of recognition is: Certified Fraud Examiners must 
reciprocate and accept the social responsibility inherent in a professional status that serves 
the public interest.  
 



:


social recognit a reciproc relationship
no group of practition can becom a profess mere by declar itself to be on
societi must acknowledg the group as a profession bodi at present fraud examin ar
at the stage of becom a selfdeclar profess histor other profess had the
same start point modern medicin overcam it root in magic account rose from
the level of bookkeep intern auditor advanc social goal by present a respons
front to congress and other public bodi the list goe on
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41004 2011 fraud examin manual
social recognit howev is not necessarili perman societi will not continu to
honor as profession ani group that fail to serv a broadbas social and public interest
thu the other side to the coin of recognit is certifi fraud examin must
reciproc and accept the social respons inher in a profession statu that serv
the public interest
