2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Legal and Ethical Conduct and Conflict of Interest/Unethical Conduct


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Unethical Conduct 
The prohibition of unethical conduct is complicated. These materials have presented an 
array of issues in moral philosophy and ethical thinking — intertwining considerations of 
principles and values. This latter part is set forth in the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of 
Professional Ethics. Legitimate questions ar e: “What manner of unethical conduct is 
meant by this rule? Does it refer to general matters of moral philosophy and ethics, or is its 
applicability limited only to the rules in this code?”  
 
A narrow focus on fraud examiners’ professionalism would center attention only on the 
rules in the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics. A broader social-responsibility 
focus would go beyond the code to the interaction of the fraud examiner 
with other people affected by his choices. The broader focus is more consistent with the 
concept of professionalism because the code itself is a limited set of rules. A fraud 
examiner must take personal responsibility for decisions, and be aware that other 
professionals are often criticized for adhering too rigidly to their codes. Lawyers face harsh 
criticisms when they seem to hide knowledge of criminal acts in their privileged 
communications. Doctors are often criticized for the things they tell their patients about 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1007 
terminal illnesses. Professions are criticized for having specialized rules that seem to permit 
their members to act contrary to social expectations.  
 



:


uneth conduct
the prohibit of uneth conduct is complic these materi have present an
arrai of issu in moral philosophi and ethic think intertwin consider of
principl and valu thi latter part is set forth in the certifi fraud examin code of
profession ethic legitim question ar e what manner of uneth conduct is
meant by thi rule doe it refer to gener matter of moral philosophi and ethic or is it
applic limit onli to the rule in thi code
a narrow focu on fraud examin profession would center attent onli on the
rule in the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic a broader socialrespons
focu would go beyond the code to the interact of the fraud examin
with other peopl affect by hi choic the broader focu is more consist with the
concept of profession becaus the code itself is a limit set of rule a fraud
examin must take person respons for decis and be awar that other
profession ar often critic for adher too rigidli to their code lawyer face harsh
critic when thei seem to hide knowledg of crimin act in their privileg
commun doctor ar often critic for the thing thei tell their patient about
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41007
termin ill profess ar critic for have special rule that seem to permit
their member to act contrari to social expect
