2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Legal and Ethical Conduct and Conflict of Interest/Conflict of Interest and “Independence” Considerations


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Conflict of Interest and “Independence” Considerations  
The term conflict of interest in the rule begs for definition. Try to enumerate the parties 
whose “interests” might conflict: The Certified Fraud Examiner, the Certified Fraud 
Examiner’s clients (for example, Client A may conflict with Client B or with Client C), the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s employer, the public (“innocent bystanders”), and law 
enforcement agencies are the first to come to mind. These parties are involved in almost 
every investigation. The lines that connect these with each other and with the fraud 
examiner could look like a spaghetti bowl of multiple relationships. Deciding  
whether a conflict or a community of interests exists depends on the facts of each 
particular situation.  
 
Nevertheless, some conflicts to avoid are clear enough. A Certified Fraud Examiner 
employed full-time by a company should not engage in other jobs that create a hardship or 
loss to the employer. A fraud examiner should not be a “double agent” employed by one 
company, but retained by another company or person to infiltrate the employer and 
transmit inside information (unless, of course, the employing company agrees to the 
arrangement in order to apprehend other parties employed by the company). A Certified 
Fraud Examiner should not accept engagements from both sides to a controversy—just 
like lawyers are prohibited from representing both parties in a transaction, lawsuit, or trial.  
 
“Conflict of interest” and “independence” are related. The American Institute of Certified 
Public Accountants (AICPA) includes independence (and avoidance of conflict of interest) 
in its Code of Professional Conduct. Some particulars from the AICPA may be relevant, in 
part, for the Certified Fraud Examiner. Consider the following from the AICPA Code of 
Professional Conduct:  
 
Independence will be considered to be im paired for audit engagements if an AICPA 
member had any of the following transa ctions, interests, or relationships: 
? Any direct or material indirect financ ial interest in the enterprise under audit 
? Any joint, closely held business investment with the enterprise under audit or with any 
officer, director, or principal stockholder thereof that was material in relation to the 
member’s net worth to the net worth of the member’s firm 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1008   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
? Any loan to or from the enterprise under audit or any officer, director, or principal 
stockholder of the enterprise  (except immaterial loans, home mortgages, and loans 
secured by property) 
? Any managerial-type connection with the enterprise under audit, such as a promoter, 
underwriter, or voting trustee, director or officer, or in any capacity equivalent to that of 
a member of management or of an employee. 
 
These rules for auditors exist specifically to convey to the public a perception of 
independence. Independence and conflict avoidance are enhanced by refraining from having 
financial and managerial interests in clients or in joint co-operation with clients’ managers 
and directors. After all, they might be a suspect in an investigation. When a Certified Fraud 
Examiner works as an employee of a company, the prohibitions about employment are not 
relevant because the employer-employee relationship is known to the employer, who is the 
client and recipient of any reports. In such cases, independence and conflict should be 
considered in relation to all the other parties involved. Certainly, a mental condition of 
objectivity and honesty then governs the relation between the Certified Fraud Examiner and 
his employer. If the CFE does have a perceived conflict, it can usually be avoided through 
adequate disclosure. 
 
 



:


conflict of interest and independ consider
the term conflict of interest in the rule beg for definit try to enumer the parti
whose interest might conflict the certifi fraud examin the certifi fraud
examin client for exampl client a mai conflict with client b or with client c the
certifi fraud examin employ the public innoc bystand and law
enforc agenc ar the first to come to mind these parti ar involv in almost
everi investig the line that connect these with each other and with the fraud
examin could look like a spaghetti bowl of multipl relationship decid
whether a conflict or a commun of interest exist depend on the fact of each
particular situat
nevertheless some conflict to avoid ar clear enough a certifi fraud examin
emploi fulltim by a compani should not engag in other job that creat a hardship or
loss to the employ a fraud examin should not be a doubl agent emploi by on
compani but retain by anoth compani or person to infiltr the employ and
transmit insid inform unless of cours the emploi compani agre to the
arrang in order to apprehend other parti emploi by the compani a certifi
fraud examin should not accept engag from both side to a controversyjust
like lawyer ar prohibit from repres both parti in a transact lawsuit or trial
conflict of interest and independ ar relat the american institut of certifi
public account aicpa includ independ and avoid of conflict of interest
in it code of profession conduct some particular from the aicpa mai be relev in
part for the certifi fraud examin consid the follow from the aicpa code of
profession conduct
independ will be consid to be im pair for audit engag if an aicpa
member had ani of the follow transa ction interest or relationship
ani direct or materi indirect financ ial interest in the enterpris under audit
ani joint close held busi invest with the enterpris under audit or with ani
offic director or princip stockhold thereof that wa materi in relat to the
member net worth to the net worth of the member firm
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41008 2011 fraud examin manual
ani loan to or from the enterpris under audit or ani offic director or princip
stockhold of the enterpris except immateri loan home mortgag and loan
secur by properti
ani managerialtyp connect with the enterpris under audit such as a promot
underwrit or vote truste director or offic or in ani capac equival to that of
a member of manag or of an employe
these rule for auditor exist specif to convei to the public a percept of
independ independ and conflict avoid ar enhanc by refrain from have
financi and manageri interest in client or in joint cooper with client manag
and director after all thei might be a suspect in an investig when a certifi fraud
examin work as an employe of a compani the prohibit about employ ar not
relev becaus the employeremploye relationship is known to the employ who is the
client and recipi of ani report in such case independ and conflict should be
consid in relat to all the other parti involv certainli a mental condit of
object and honesti then govern the relat between the certifi fraud examin and
hi employ if the cfe doe have a perceiv conflict it can usual be avoid through
adequ disclosur
