2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS  
 
Asset misappropriations are by far the most common of all occupational frauds. There are 
three major categories of asset misappropriation schemes. Cash receipts schemes will be 
discussed in this section, fraudulent disbursements of cash will be addressed in the next 
section, and the following section will cover schemes involving the theft of inventory and 
other non-cash assets.  
 
Cash is the focal point of most accounting entries. Cash, both on deposit in banks and on 
hand as petty cash, can be misappropriated through many different schemes. These schemes 
can be either on-book or off-book, depending on where they occur.  
 
Cash receipts schemes fall into two categories, skimming  and larceny. The difference in the two 
types of fraud depends completely on when the cash is stolen. Cash larceny is the theft of 
money that has already appeared  on a victim organization’s books, while skimming is the theft 
of cash that has not yet been recorded  in the accounting system. The way in which an employee 
extracts the cash may be exactly the same for a cash larceny or skimming scheme.  
 
 



:


asset misappropri cash receipt
asset misappropri ar by far the most common of all occup fraud there ar
three major categori of asset misappropri scheme cash receipt scheme will be
discuss in thi section fraudul disburs of cash will be address in the next
section and the follow section will cover scheme involv the theft of inventori and
other noncash asset
cash is the focal point of most account entri cash both on deposit in bank and on
hand as petti cash can be misappropri through mani differ scheme these scheme
can be either onbook or offbook depend on where thei occur
cash receipt scheme fall into two categori skim and larceni the differ in the two
type of fraud depend complet on when the cash is stolen cash larceni is the theft of
monei that ha alreadi appear on a victim organ book while skim is the theft
of cash that ha not yet been record in the account system the wai in which an employe
extract the cash mai be exactli the same for a cash larceni or skim scheme
