2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Skimming 
Skimming is the removal of cash from a victim entity prior to its entry in an accounting 
system. Employees who skim from their companies steal sales or receivables before they are 
recorded in the company books. Skimming schemes are known as “off-book” frauds, 
meaning money is stolen before it is recorded in the victim organization’s accounts. This 
aspect of skimming schemes means they leave no direct audit trail. Because the stolen funds 
are never recorded, the victim organization may not be aware that the cash was ever 
received. Consequently, it may be very difficult to detect that the money has been stolen. 
This is the prime advantage of a skimming scheme to the fraudster.  
 
Skimming is one of the most common forms of occupational fraud. It can occur at any point 
where cash enters a business, so almost anyone who deals with the process of receiving cash 
may be in a position to skim money. This includes salespeople, tellers, waitpersons, and 
others who receive cash directly from customers.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.402                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In addition, many skimming schemes are perpetrated by employees whose duties include 
receiving and logging payments made by customers through the mail. These employees slip 
checks out of the incoming mail instead of posting those checks to the proper revenue or 
receivables accounts. Those who deal directly with customers or who handle customer 
payments are obviously the most likely candidates to skim funds.  
 



:


skim
skim is the remov of cash from a victim entiti prior to it entri in an account
system employe who skim from their compani steal sale or receiv befor thei ar
record in the compani book skim scheme ar known as offbook fraud
mean monei is stolen befor it is record in the victim organ account thi
aspect of skim scheme mean thei leav no direct audit trail becaus the stolen fund
ar never record the victim organ mai not be awar that the cash wa ever
receiv consequ it mai be veri difficult to detect that the monei ha been stolen
thi is the prime advantag of a skim scheme to the fraudster
skim is on of the most common form of occup fraud it can occur at ani point
where cash enter a busi so almost anyon who deal with the process of receiv cash
mai be in a posit to skim monei thi includ salespeopl teller waitperson and
other who receiv cash directli from custom
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1402 2011 fraud examin manual
in addit mani skim scheme ar perpetr by employe whose duti includ
receiv and log payment made by custom through the mail these employe slip
check out of the incom mail instead of post those check to the proper revenu or
receiv account those who deal directli with custom or who handl custom
payment ar obvious the most like candid to skim fund
