2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming/Check for Currency Substitutions


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Check for Currency Substitutions 
The intelligent criminal will generally prefer to steal currency rather than checks if given the 
opportunity. The reasons why are obvious. First, currency is harder to trace than a check. A 
cashed check eventually returns to the person who wrote it and may provide evidence of 
who cashed it or where it was spent. Endorsements, bank stamps, and so forth may indicate 
the identity of the thief. Currency, on the other hand, disappears into the economy once it is 
stolen.  
 
The second reason that currency is preferable to a check is the difficulty in converting the 
check. When currency is stolen it can be spent immediately. A check, on the other hand, 
must be endorsed and cashed or deposited before the thief can put his hands on the money 
it represents. To avoid this problem, employees who steal unrecorded checks will frequently 
substitute them for receipted currency. If, for example, an employee skims an incoming 
check worth $500, he can add the check to the day’s receipts and remove $500 in currency. 
The total receipts will match the amount of cash on hand, but payments in currency are 
replaced by the check.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee responsible for receipting ticket and fine payments on behalf of a municipality 
abused her position and stole incoming revenu es for nearly two years. When payments in 
currency were received by this individual, she issued receipts, but when checks were received 
she did not. The check payments were theref ore unrecorded revenues—ripe for skimming. 
These unrecorded checks were placed in the days’ receipts  and an equal amount of cash was 
removed. The receipts matched the amount of  money on hand except that payments in 
currency had been replaced with checks.  
 
The check for currency substitution is very common. While these substitutions make it easier 
for a crook to convert stolen payments, the problem of concealing the theft still remains. 
The fact that the stolen checks are not posted means that some customers’ accounts are in 
danger of becoming past due. If this happens, the perpetrator’s scheme is in danger because 
these customers will almost surely complain about the misapplication of their payments. 
However, the misapplied payments can be concealed on the books by forcing account totals, 
stealing customers’ account statements, lapping, and making other fraudulent accounting 
entries. These concealment techniques will be discussed in more detail in the Skimming 
Receivables section.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.412                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Check for currency substitutions are especially common when an employee has access to 
some unexpected source of funds such as a manufacturer’s refund that arrives outside the 
regular stream of sales and receivables payments. In these cases the check can be swapped 
for cash and there is usually no additional step required to conceal the crime. The refund 
check, an unexpected source of funds, will not be missed by the victim organization, and the 
party who issued the check expects no goods or services in return.  
 



:


check for currenc substitut
the intellig crimin will gener prefer to steal currenc rather than check if given the
opportun the reason why ar obviou first currenc is harder to trace than a check a
cash check eventu return to the person who wrote it and mai provid evid of
who cash it or where it wa spent endors bank stamp and so forth mai indic
the ident of the thief currenc on the other hand disappear into the economi onc it is
stolen
the second reason that currenc is prefer to a check is the difficulti in convert the
check when currenc is stolen it can be spent immedi a check on the other hand
must be endors and cash or deposit befor the thief can put hi hand on the monei
it repres to avoid thi problem employe who steal unrecord check will frequent
substitut them for receipt currenc if for exampl an employe skim an incom
check worth 500 he can add the check to the dai receipt and remov 500 in currenc
the total receipt will match the amount of cash on hand but payment in currenc ar
replac by the check
exampl
an employe respons for receipt ticket and fine payment on behalf of a municip
abus her posit and stole incom revenu es for nearli two year when payment in
currenc were receiv by thi individu she issu receipt but when check were receiv
she did not the check payment were theref or unrecord revenuesrip for skim
these unrecord check were place in the dai receipt and an equal amount of cash wa
remov the receipt match the amount of monei on hand except that payment in
currenc had been replac with check
the check for currenc substitut is veri common while these substitut make it easier
for a crook to convert stolen payment the problem of conceal the theft still remain
the fact that the stolen check ar not post mean that some custom account ar in
danger of becom past due if thi happen the perpetr scheme is in danger becaus
these custom will almost sure complain about the misappl of their payment
howev the misappli payment can be conceal on the book by forc account total
steal custom account statement lap and make other fraudul account
entri these conceal techniqu will be discuss in more detail in the skim
receiv section
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1412 2011 fraud examin manual
check for currenc substitut ar especi common when an employe ha access to
some unexpect sourc of fund such as a manufactur refund that arriv outsid the
regular stream of sale and receiv payment in these case the check can be swap
for cash and there is usual no addit step requir to conceal the crime the refund
check an unexpect sourc of fund will not be miss by the victim organ and the
parti who issu the check expect no good or servic in return
