2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming/Lapping


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Lapping 
Lapping customer payments is one of the most common methods of concealing receivables 
skimming. Lapping is the crediting of one a ccount through the abstraction of money from 
another account. It is the fraudster’s version of “robbing Peter to pay Paul.”   
 
Suppose a company has three customers, A, B, and C. When A’s payment is received, the 
fraudster steals it instead of posting it to A’s account. Customer A expects that his account 
will be credited with the payment he has made. If the payment has not been posted by the 
time A’s next statement is mailed, he will see that the payment was not applied to his 
account and will almost certainly complain. To avoid this, the thief must take some action to 
make it appear that the payment was posted.  
 
When B’s check arrives, the thief posts this money to A’s account. Payments now appear to 
be up-to-date on A’s account, but B’s account is behind. When C’s payment is received, the 
perpetrator applies it to B’s account. This process continues indefinitely until one of three 
things happens: (1) someone discovers the scheme, (2) restitution is made to the accounts, or 
(3) some concealing entry is made to adjust the accounts receivable balances.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A clerk working for a government agency committed a lapping scheme that involved the 
theft of more than 150 customer payments, causing a total misappropriation of more than 
$30,000 in government funds. This individual stole taxes, fees, and other incoming 
payments from customers to cover his personal expenses. When a customer’s payment was 
stolen, the documentation on that payment would be hidden until a later payment was 
received. The later payment would be applied to the earlier customer’s records.  
 
As the rotating schedule of applying and misapplying payments became more and more 
complicated, the perpetrator insisted on exerting more and more control over the receipting 
process. He insisted on handling all incoming mail, preparing the deposit and delivering the 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.414                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
deposit to the bank so that he could continue to delay the posting of payments. The fraud 
was detected in large part because several consumers complained that they had not received 
confirmation of their payments, even though their checks had cleared months earlier. 
 
Because lapping schemes can become very intricate, fraudsters sometimes keep a second set 
of books on hand detailing the true nature of the payments received. In many skimming 
cases, a search of the fraudster’s work area will reveal a set of records tracking the actual 
payments and how they have been misapplied to conceal the theft. It may seem odd that 
people would keep records of their illegal activity on hand, but many lapping schemes 
become extremely complicated as more and more payments are misapplied. The second set 
of records helps the perpetrator keep track of the funds that were stolen and which accounts 
need to be credited to conceal the fraud. Uncovering these records, if they exist, will greatly 
facilitate the investigation of a lapping scheme.  
 
While lapping is more commonly used to conceal receivables skimming, it can also be used 
to disguise the skimming of sales. Employees sometimes steal all or part of one day’s receipts 
and replace them with the receipts from the following day. This type of concealment 
requires the employee to delay making the company deposit until enough money can be 
collected to recoup the stolen funds. If an organization rigidly adheres to a deposit schedule, 
it is unlikely that lapping will be effective in concealing this type of fraud.  
 



:


lap
lap custom payment is on of the most common method of conceal receiv
skim lap is the credit of on a ccount through the abstract of monei from
anoth account it is the fraudster version of rob peter to pai paul
suppos a compani ha three custom a b and c when as payment is receiv the
fraudster steal it instead of post it to as account custom a expect that hi account
will be credit with the payment he ha made if the payment ha not been post by the
time as next statement is mail he will see that the payment wa not appli to hi
account and will almost certainli complain to avoid thi the thief must take some action to
make it appear that the payment wa post
when bs check arriv the thief post thi monei to as account payment now appear to
be uptod on as account but bs account is behind when cs payment is receiv the
perpetr appli it to bs account thi process continu indefinit until on of three
thing happen 1 someon discov the scheme 2 restitut is made to the account or
3 some conceal entri is made to adjust the account receiv balanc
exampl
a clerk work for a govern agenc commit a lap scheme that involv the
theft of more than 150 custom payment caus a total misappropri of more than
30000 in govern fund thi individu stole tax fee and other incom
payment from custom to cover hi person expens when a custom payment wa
stolen the document on that payment would be hidden until a later payment wa
receiv the later payment would be appli to the earlier custom record
as the rotat schedul of appli and misappli payment becam more and more
complic the perpetr insist on exert more and more control over the receipt
process he insist on handl all incom mail prepar the deposit and deliv the
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1414 2011 fraud examin manual
deposit to the bank so that he could continu to delai the post of payment the fraud
wa detect in larg part becaus sever consum complain that thei had not receiv
confirm of their payment even though their check had clear month earlier
becaus lap scheme can becom veri intric fraudster sometim keep a second set
of book on hand detail the true natur of the payment receiv in mani skim
case a search of the fraudster work area will reveal a set of record track the actual
payment and how thei have been misappli to conceal the theft it mai seem odd that
peopl would keep record of their illeg activ on hand but mani lap scheme
becom extrem complic as more and more payment ar misappli the second set
of record help the perpetr keep track of the fund that were stolen and which account
need to be credit to conceal the fraud uncov these record if thei exist will greatli
facilit the investig of a lap scheme
while lap is more commonli us to conceal receiv skim it can also be us
to disguis the skim of sale employe sometim steal all or part of on dai receipt
and replac them with the receipt from the follow dai thi type of conceal
requir the employe to delai make the compani deposit until enough monei can be
collect to recoup the stolen fund if an organ rigidli adher to a deposit schedul
it is unlik that lap will be effect in conceal thi type of fraud
