2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming/Stolen Statements


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Stolen Statements  
When employees skim receivables, they may let the targeted accounts age instead of 
attempting to force the balances. In other words, they steal an incoming check intended as 
payment on a receivable, and they simply act as if the check never arrived. This method 
keeps the victim organization’s cash account in balance, because the stolen payment is never 
posted.  
 
Of course, if the customer’s payment is not posted, the receivable will eventually become 
past due. The customer will have proof in the form of a canceled check that a payment was 
made on the account. The question will arise: where did the payment go? The answer, of 
course, is that it went into the fraudster’s pocket. So the goal of the fraudster must be to 
keep the customer from realizing that his account was not credited with the payment. If this 
can be accomplished, the customer will not complain about the missing payment, and the 
victim organization will not realize that skimming has occurred.  
 
Financial Transactions Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.415 
One way fraudsters attempt to conceal the fact that they have skimmed a payment from a 
customer is to intercept the customer’s account statement and/or late notices. In some 
cases, the perpetrator intercepts the account statement by changing the customer’s address in 
the billing system so that statements are sent directly to the perpetrator’s home or to an 
address where he can retrieve them. In other instances, the perpetrator physically intercepts 
the statements before they are mailed.  
 
Once the real statement indicating that the payment was not received has been intercepted, 
the fraudster usually alters the statement or produces a counterfeit. The false statements 
indicate that the customer’s payment was properly posted. This leads the customer to believe 
that his account is up-to-date and keeps the customer from complaining about stolen 
payments.  
 



:


stolen statement
when employe skim receiv thei mai let the target account ag instead of
attempt to forc the balanc in other word thei steal an incom check intend as
payment on a receiv and thei simpli act as if the check never arriv thi method
keep the victim organ cash account in balanc becaus the stolen payment is never
post
of cours if the custom payment is not post the receiv will eventu becom
past due the custom will have proof in the form of a cancel check that a payment wa
made on the account the question will aris where did the payment go the answer of
cours is that it went into the fraudster pocket so the goal of the fraudster must be to
keep the custom from realiz that hi account wa not credit with the payment if thi
can be accomplish the custom will not complain about the miss payment and the
victim organ will not realiz that skim ha occur
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1415
on wai fraudster attempt to conceal the fact that thei have skim a payment from a
custom is to intercept the custom account statement andor late notic in some
case the perpetr intercept the account statement by chang the custom address in
the bill system so that statement ar sent directli to the perpetr home or to an
address where he can retriev them in other instanc the perpetr physic intercept
the statement befor thei ar mail
onc the real statement indic that the payment wa not receiv ha been intercept
the fraudster usual alter the statement or produc a counterfeit the fals statement
indic that the custom payment wa properli post thi lead the custom to believ
that hi account is uptod and keep the custom from complain about stolen
payment
