2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Corporate Organization and Criminal Behavior/Clinard and Yeager


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


Clinard and Yeager 
In a comprehensive study of corporate law-breaking, Marshall Clinard (a recipient of the 
Association’s Donald Cressey Award) and Peter Yeager examined over a two-year period the 
records of 562 companies (477 of which were on the Fortune 500  list) and found that l,553 
white-collar crime cases had been filed against them. Some 60 percent of the firms had at 
least one case against them; for those companies, the average number of violations was 4.4. 
The oil, pharmaceutical, and motor vehicle industries were the most likely to be charged for 
wrongdoing, a matter that may be a function of enforcement priorities or a true reflection of 
their activities.  
 
In a study by Irwin Ross, he analyzed 1,043 companies that at one time or another had 
appeared on the Fortune  list of large industrial companies. Included in his study were five 
kinds of offenses: bribe-taking or bribe-giving by  high-level executives, criminal fraud, illegal 
campaign contributions, tax evasion, and anti-trust violations. One hundred seventeen, or 11 
percent of the corporations, were violators. 
 
The costs of corporate crimes not only include financial losses, but also injuries, deaths, and 
health hazards. Such crimes destroy public confidence in businesses and hurt the image of 
corporations. Clinard and Yeager say price-fixing offenses victimize the consumer and 
federal, state, and municipal governments while income tax crimes deprive the government 
and those dependent on it for needed revenue. 
 
Clinard and Yeager believe that corporate violations are increasingly difficult to discover, 
investigate, or prosecute successfully because of their growing complexity and intricacy. This 
is particularly true, they believe, of anti-trust cases, foreign payoffs, computer fraud, and 
illegal political contributions. In the last category, some corporations pay bonuses to their 
executives, with the understanding that part of that reward will be turned over to the coffers 
of a candidate that the corporation favors. 
 
Criminal activities involving corporations are often rooted in organizational subcultures 
and values and are developed over time. A particularly comprehensive examination of how 
                                                 
5Marshall B. Clinard and Peter C. Yeager, Corporate Crime (New York: Free Press, 1980). 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.505  
matters of life and death become embedded in routine decision-making and ultimately can 
lead to tragedy is provided in a book titled The Challenger Space Shuttle Disaster  by Diane 
Vaughan, another Cressey Award winner. 6 
 
Legal responses have been slow and ineffectual when dealing with economic organizational 
change. The law has emphasized the role of the individual actor in criminality, but has not 
examined the role of the organization in crime. Criminal activities are often rooted in 
organizational subculture and attitudes developed over time and cannot be traced to 
individuals or groups within the organization. While individuals still carry out the criminal 
enterprise, their attitudes and characteristics are of little importance, as an organization will 
replace those employees unwilling to participate in a criminal activity. 
 
 



:


clinard and yeager
in a comprehens studi of corpor lawbreak marshal clinard a recipi of the
associ donald cressei award and peter yeager examin over a twoyear period the
record of 562 compani 477 of which were on the fortun 500 list and found that l553
whitecollar crime case had been file against them some 60 percent of the firm had at
least on case against them for those compani the averag number of violat wa 44
the oil pharmaceut and motor vehicl industri were the most like to be charg for
wrongdo a matter that mai be a function of enforc prioriti or a true reflect of
their activ
in a studi by irwin ross he analyz 1043 compani that at on time or anoth had
appear on the fortun list of larg industri compani includ in hi studi were five
kind of offens bribetak or bribegiv by highlevel execut crimin fraud illeg
campaign contribut tax evas and antitrust violat on hundr seventeen or 11
percent of the corpor were violat
the cost of corpor crime not onli includ financi loss but also injuri death and
health hazard such crime destroi public confid in busi and hurt the imag of
corpor clinard and yeager sai pricefix offens victim the consum and
feder state and municip govern while incom tax crime depriv the govern
and those depend on it for need revenu
clinard and yeager believ that corpor violat ar increasingli difficult to discov
investig or prosecut successfulli becaus of their grow complex and intricaci thi
is particularli true thei believ of antitrust case foreign payoff comput fraud and
illeg polit contribut in the last categori some corpor pai bonus to their
execut with the understand that part of that reward will be turn over to the coffer
of a candid that the corpor favor
crimin activ involv corpor ar often root in organiz subcultur
and valu and ar develop over time a particularli comprehens examin of how
5marshal b clinard and peter c yeager corpor crime new york free press 1980
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4505
matter of life and death becom embed in routin decisionmak and ultim can
lead to tragedi is provid in a book titl the challeng space shuttl disast by dian
vaughan anoth cressei award winner 6
legal respons have been slow and ineffectu when deal with econom organiz
chang the law ha emphas the role of the individu actor in crimin but ha not
examin the role of the organ in crime crimin activ ar often root in
organiz subcultur and attitud develop over time and cannot be trace to
individu or group within the organ while individu still carri out the crimin
enterpris their attitud and characterist ar of littl import as an organ will
replac those employe unwil to particip in a crimin activ
