2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD 
 
Check Fraud 
Check fraud is one of the fastest-growing problems affecting the nation’s financial system,  
producing estimated yearly losses of up to $20 billion. Not only is the dollar amount 
involved in check fraud increasing yearly, the complexity of fraud tools is growing as well. 
With increased sophistication in laser printers, more accurate color copiers and desktop 
publishing capabilities, duplicating and forging checks has become more accurate and thus 
more difficult to detect.  
 
Due to demands of law enforcement, prosecutors fail to pursue 75 percent of bank check 
fraud cases. According to the U.S. Government Accountability Office, in large cities where a 
majority of resources are used to prosecute violent crime the percentage rises to 90 percent. 
Law enforcement officials may neglect reports of check fraud, feeling that businesses ought 
to be more vigilant in detecting bad checks. Many merchants have tried to use the police and 
prosecutors as check collection agencies; therefore, law enforcement and prosecutors are 
often not eager to pursue these cases. Many bad-check-passers are constantly on the move, 
as well, making prosecution even more difficult. 
 
The best solution for financial institutions and merchants, then, is to educate employees to 
recognize forged and fraudulent checks and the schemes behind them. Merchants and 
financial institutions should have a strict check acceptance policy with which all employees 
are familiar. When accepting checks, employees should always ask for identification and 
make sure it is valid. Many check passers mollify store personnel by showing them a small 
laminated rectangular document with a picture. After looking at several hundred of these, 
most employees tend not to scrutinize them. Check passers count on this. It is important for 
employees to examine each piece of identification closely every time they are presented 
 with one. 
 
Employers must also watch for behavior among employees that could be red flags of inside 
check fraud. Dissatisfaction with job, pay rate, or home life; a lack of recognition or lavish 
lifestyle; or a problem with gambling, alcohol, or drugs are indications that an employee may 
be committing internal fraud. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1002                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Counterfeiting Checks 
An effective check counterfeiting operation can turn a simple $5,000 investment into a 
$1,000,000 windfall within a 30-day timeframe. This can be done without high levels of 
computer expertise or programming. Simple check printing software can be purchased in 
almost any office supply store along with blank paper stock and magnetic ink cartridges. The 
overall initial investment consists of a quality computer, color inkjet printer, check format 
and MICR font software, magnetic ink cartridges, and paper stock. After making the initial 
investment, the printers only have to concern themselves with purchasing additional ink  
and paper. 
 
Signs of Counterfeit and Forged Checks 
A counterfeiter will go to great lengths to make his check appear to be the genuine article. 
However, there are a few giveaways that a check is counterfeit. If the printing on the check 
does not seem uniform in texture and color, or slants up or down, the check is not good. 
Also, the transit number in the top right corner must match the electronically encoded 
number at the bottom of the check. These numbers normally do not coincide on altered 
checks. The first three of the electronically encoded numbers indicate the state and district 
office of the issuer. Again, on forged checks, these numbers do not always match properly. 
The check number itself should be found in the encoded serial number at the bottom.  
 
Knowing that many merchants regard checks with low check numbers as suspect, forgers 
often attempt to add a digit. Here again, they may have difficulty matching the ink used to 
produce the check. A simple and effective method of detecting bad checks is to fan a group 
of checks. Counterfeit checks will sometimes stand out as a slightly different color. 
 
Check Fraud Vulnerabilities 
A particular institution may be targeted for check frauds because of its location, inadequate 
internal controls, or marketing strategies that present opportunities to savvy check fraud 
artists. Some mutual funds companies, for example, regularly allow customers to open 
accounts by mail, a form of communication with many security vulnerabilities. A significant 
number of check fraud complaints from a particular geographic area may indicate the 
presence of an active, organized group, which warrants law enforcement attention. 
 
Investigators assigned to a region or institution should keep regular contact with businesses 
and regulators. Specific inquiries aim to identify weaknesses, develop controls, and prevent 
future losses. Analyzing the complaints filed by other victims of check fraud — including 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1003 
retail operations, check cashing establishments and food stores—may reveal common 
elements of schemes that might not otherwise seem related. 
 
Check Theft 
Three types of check theft are:  using stolen canceled checks to obtain new checks, check 
washing, and stealing blank check stock. 
• Stolen canceled checks and statements — Although a stolen canceled check can’t be negotiated, 
it does have fraud implications. Using a stolen canceled check, a check thief can order 
checks from a mail-order check printer and have them sent to a mail drop address. 
Checks can then be written on the new stock and cashed once false identifications are 
acquired. 
• Check washing — Check washing takes place to the tu ne of $815 million every year in the 
U.S., and it is increasing at an alarming rate. Checks are stolen from mailrooms and 
mailboxes, and then the check is inserted into a solution of chemicals that can be 
purchased at a hardware store. Once the check is dried, the fraudster can write in any 
amount and the checks are usually cashed without question. Most check washers alter 
checks for relatively small amounts. 
• Stolen check stock — Professional thieves using sophisticated methods steal blank check 
stock already encoded with customer account information, which makes passing the 
check even easier. Corporate checks are the most likely target since they are easily cashed 
and deposited. 
 
Check Fraud Schemes 
Paperhangers 
Paperhangers are the experts of phony check passing. They frequently pick a particular 
establishment or store and observe its security methods. Any store that scrutinizes check 
writers’ identification is not a good target for a paperhanger. However, they will observe and 
select the least experienced or most lackadaisical of store employees to whom to pass the 
check. The paperhanger will then ask the clerk for cash back from the transaction and make 
the check out for an amount greater than the price of the purchase. In some cases, the 
checks being written are counterfeit; however, in other cases the checks are purposefully 
being written on a closed account. A variation of this scam is making a fraudulent deposit at 
a bank and asking for cash back.  
 
These experts will go to great lengths to blend in with the clientele. Standing out in a crowd 
is not to their advantage. Women are often quite good as paperhangers. A mother with 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1004                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
crying children paying with a check is usually not the profile one expects for a bad- 
check-passer.  
 
Stop Payment Orders 
This scheme is quite simple. A “customer” purc hases an expensive item with a check, and 
then notifies his bank to stop payment. Savvy check passers may even contact the merchant, 
saying the item was defective, and that they should expect to hear from the customer’s 
attorney. Meanwhile, the check passer sells the item for a tidy profit.  
 
Another scenario is that, after purchasing the item and notifying the bank to stop payment, 
the fraudster goes back to the store, wishing to return the item and receive a full refund. The 
merchant refunds the amount in cash and the scheme is successful. 
 
Check Kiting 
Check kiting is one of the original white-collar crimes. It continues to survive even with a 
financial institution’s ability to detect kiting. In a kiting scheme, multiple bank accounts are 
opened and money is “deposited” from acco unt to account, although the money  
never exists.  
 
Floating makes check kiting possible. Floating is the additional value of funds generated in 
the process of collection and arises because the current holder of funds has been given credit 
for the funds before it clears the financial institution upon which it is drawn. Businesses are 
most susceptible to check kiting, if they have employees who are authorized to write checks 
or make deposits in more than one bank account. Today, check kiting is more difficult 
because electronic technologies are making the float smaller all the time. In many cases, 
electronic debiting to an account occurs simultaneously with the transaction. Unless 
detected, this process can continue indefinitely, covering one check written against 
insufficient funds with another check. 
 
Demand Drafts 
Demand drafts can also be used to commit check fraud. This practice involves the misuse of 
account information to obtain funds from a person’s bank account without that person’s 
signature on a negotiable instrument. Other terms for demand drafts are “preauthorized 
drafts” and “telephone drafts.” While there are many legitimate business uses for demand 
drafts, such as quick-turnaround telephone transactions initiated by airlines and car rental 
companies, demand drafts have been used by deceptive telemarketers who obtain bank 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1005 
account information and withdraw unauthorized funds from consumers’ bank accounts, 
without their realizing that such withdrawals are occurring. 
 
Third-Party Bill Paying Services 
The checks produced by these third-party bill paying service providers do not include the 
payor signature. Instead, the signature line reflects something such as “signature on file.” 
Unauthorized checks produced by third-party payment services are not usually detected until 
the customer reviews the monthly bank statement. By the time the customer identifies the 
unauthorized check, it is often too late to recover the funds, since the “24-hour window” 
(actually until midnight of the next banking day) for the timely return of checks has long 
since passed. These checks usually sail right through the check sorting operation, since they 
include good account information and sometimes even include good serial numbers. Too 
often, both business and individual account holders seem unaware of how their account 
information, given too freely to a requesting party, can be used for fraudulent purposes. 
 
Traveler’s Checks 
The use of traveler’s checks is declining signif icantly and will likely eventually be replaced by 
electronic options. In fact, an increasing number of vendors in locations throughout 
Europe—and in other parts of the world—no long er accept traveler’s checks as a valid form 
of payment. However, for many travelers, traveler’s checks continue to provide a convenient 
payment method while abroad. 
 
Anyone familiar with traveler’s checks knows that $100 checks are quite common. Some 
check rings specialize in the production and distribution of this type of check. Commonly, 
check passers of this type make small purchases using a fake $100 traveler’s check, and 
receive the bulk of the amount back in cash. Naturally, this scheme works well in areas that 
have a lot of tourist business. Rings often pull this scam several times in one area in rapid 
succession.  
 
Traveler’s checks have several distinguishing features. Watermarks and holograms are 
common, as well as microprinting and ultraviolet ink. There are basically two methods of 
counterfeiting traveler’s checks: color copyin g and offset lithography/printing. Color copied 
checks lack the raised ink texture that the intaglio printing press gives most traveler’s checks. 
Instead of a textured feel, a phony check will appear slick and flat. Offset lithographic 
reproductions of actual checks are of higher quality than color-copied checks. However, 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1006                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
neither will have the texture, watermarks, microprinting, or holograms that the genuine 
articles have.  
 
Payroll Check Fraud 
Check procurers employed by payroll check processing companies print duplicate payroll 
checks that are sold to third parties or are cashed by members of the procurer’s organization. 
To avoid the security employed by financial institutions, the checks are cashed at grocery 
stores and check-cashing operations with loose controls. The checks are usually written for 
amounts of $300 or less to avoid suspicion. Of course, check procurers have access to 
personal information on the legitimate recipients of the payroll checks and make use of it in 
the future. 
 
Dumpster Diving 
Often, check fraud can be as simple as retrieving bank materials from a trash receptacle. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Thirty people were charged in a $10 millio n fraud scheme that involved counterfeiting 
checks, bank statements, and credit card receipts pulled out of the trash. The defendants, 
who defrauded people in 17 states, used checks, bank statements, credit card receipts, and 
other documents from garbage bins to create counterfeit checks, false driver’s licenses, and 
false credit reports, officials said. Counterfeit  blank checks, printed on high-quality color 
printers, allegedly were used to  defraud banks of $2 million. 
 
Obviously, this type of fraud is easily preventable through proper disposal by banks, 
merchants, and individuals of sensitive and confidential materials.  
 
Scanning 
Scanning requires a scanner and a legitimate check. Scanners can be purchased for less than 
$200 and checks are readily available without having to actually steal the check. Checks can 
then be manufactured by scanning a corporate logo from a business card onto a simple 
business-sized check. 
 
System Password Security Compromised 
People having legitimate access to sensitive account and daily code information for a limited 
time (for example, computer consultants) effect improper transfers through unauthorized 
access. 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1007 
Check Fraud Rings 
Since the late 1980s, foreign crime rings have been the cause of the majority of check fraud 
in the U.S. Most major financial institutions attribute more than 50 percent of all check fraud 
to organized crime rings. In 2007, an international task force monitored the mail in Africa, 
Europe, and North America and intercepted billions of dollars worth (face-value) of 
counterfeit checks.  
 
The perpetrators of organized check fraud activity are often based in Nigeria, Russia, 
Vietnam, and Mexico. Most of the Vietnamese and Mexican rings operate in California, 
notably San Francisco, Orange County, and Sa cramento. The Russian and Nigerian rings, 
centered in the Northeast, spread their criminal activities over a wide area and can be found 
passing through any part of the U.S. at any time. While most of these gangs are involved in 
drug trafficking and violent crimes, check and credit card fraud are considered “safe” crimes. 
The chances of being arrested and prosecuted are relatively low and the penalties are not 
very harsh. 
 
The equipment essential to a check fraud ring are a laser scanner, laser printer and a personal 
computer, easily obtainable items, the total cost of which is about $1,500. These rings use 
digital scanners and offset printing to counterfeit checks. The checks are cashed by members 
of the ring or sold to third parties. 
 
Most rings specialize in payroll or other institutional checks, written for amounts less than 
$300. But some groups infiltrate financial institutions, collecting corporate payroll checks, 
money orders, and master original bank checks, cashing the duplicates for between $2,000 
and $5,000. 
 
In recent years, members of Nigerian and Vi etnamese rings have infiltrated or obtained 
accomplices in financial institutions. There they gather personal information on customers, 
passing the information to counterfeiters who produce falsified identification (driver’s 
licenses, credit cards, etc.), which is used to open accounts, establish lines of credit, and 
secure loans. An organized group may include a counterfeiter or printer, a distributor, one or 
more providers of false identification, and several “smurfs,” who open false bank accounts 
or visit check-cashing establishments to negotiate fraudulent checks.  
 
Foreign crime rings that practice check fraud are ethnically homogenous and usually not 
rigidly structured. It is common for only the leaders of these rings to know the extent of the 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1008                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
participation of their subordinates. The leaders of such groups are usually quite intelligent 
and educated. Often, they have an extensive criminal or business background and direct the 
group’s activities. Gangs have been known to share members and cooperate with one 
another in the past. 
 
Check Fraud Detection 
FBI Profile of Check Fraud Activity 
According to an analysis by FBI investigators in the New York City area, fraudulent check 
passers use the following common techniques: 
• Customer attempts to open an account with a corporate check or other third- 
party check. 
• Customer tries to flatter, hurry, or confuse the teller to draw attention away from  
the transaction. 
• Customer delays endorsing a check or producing identification during peak hours to 
frustrate the teller and hurry the transaction. 
• Customer presents for cash a low-numbered check drawn on a new account. 
• Customer offers foreign documentation (birth certificate, passport, visa) or non-photo 
identification (Social Security card, credit card) in lieu of photo identification to open an 
account or cash a check. 
• Customer offers altered or damaged identification to open an account or cash a check. 
• Customer attempts to cash or convert several small checks into wire transfer, gold, or 
other tender. 
• Customer requests an exception to established rules to force the transaction. 
 
Detection Techniques 
The cashier or teller is the front-line defense in preventing check fraud. It is important that 
they receive the training necessary to identify fraudulent checks. They should: 
• Be aware of magnetic routing numbers. 
• Use extra care in examining a check drawn from a non-local bank and require  
positive identification. 
• Examine the date on the check for accuracy of day, month, and year. Do not accept the 
check if it is not dated, if it is postdated, or if it is more than 30 days old. 
• Look for checks with a check number less than 400 on personal checks or below 1,500 
on business checks (90 percent of bad checks are written on accounts less than one 
year old). 
• Be aware of fonts used to print the customer’s  name that are visibly different from the 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1009 
font used to print the address. 
• Be aware that the magnetic ink (MICR) used for routing codes should appear non-
 reflective and dull. 
• Look for MICR coding that does not match the bank district and the routing symbol in 
the upper right-hand corner of the check. 
• Be aware of the date that the account was opened. 
• Be aware of stains or discolorations on the check possibly caused by erasures or 
alterations. 
• Have easy access to the signature card. 
• Look for perforated edges of the checks. 
• Be aware that a color copy might reflect odd colors at times due to a failure of the toner 
to mix satisfactorily. 
• Notice absence of any design in the background of the check paper. 
• Notice absence of bank logo and the printing of the bank name in the regular lettering. 
• Notice absence of the address of the bank on the check. 
• Be cautious of information that is typed or stamped. 
• Do not accept a check that is not legibly written. It should be written and signed in ink 
and must not have any erasures or written-over amounts.  
• Be aware of what is acceptable identification. 
• Recognize forged/altered information. 
• Recognize forged negotiable instruments. 
• Tellers should telephone the business or account officer for approval on suspicious 
requests. 
• Be familiar with patterns of behavior related to potential culprits: 
? Overly polite 
? Nervous 
? Aggressive and hurried 
 
Check Fraud Prevention and Investigation 
Since the Federal Reserve’s Regulation CC was implemented, mandating accelerated 
availability of customers’ funds, check fraud at banks has increased. Most bank customers’ 
funds are available for withdrawal a day after deposit, leaving the bank little time to verify 
the validity of the transaction. Regulation CC, however, allows banks two days to make 
funds available. Most banks provide next-day withdrawal in order to stay competitive. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1010                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Additionally, special security printing techniques have been developed to make 
counterfeiting blank checks more difficult. One of the features is the use of a pattern of 
colors that is difficult to separate even with special cameras, filters, and film. Another 
technique used is scrambled indicia printing, which is a seemingly random pattern of tiny 
colored dots printed on the paper. Using a colored filter to view the check will make a word 
or pattern develop.  
 
Still another technique, which is also used by credit card issuers, is to print a “micro-line” on 
the check, which appears as a solid line when viewed normally. But using a magnifying glass 
will show that the line is actually very small words or letters, which are very difficult to 
recreate with the normal printing process. Other security measures include using a three 
dimensional hologram, which is easily identifiable by the human eye, but is impossible to 
reproduce via ordinary copying or printing. Some checks have a security seal on the back of 
the check that is visible when held up to a light. Reproductions, even good ones, will not 
have a seal.  
 
Check Fraud Investigations 
During a check fraud investigation, look for the following: 
• Frequent deposits and checks: 
? In the same amounts. 
? In round numbers. 
? With checks written on the same (other) bank. 
• Frequent ATM account balance inquiries. 
• Many large deposits made on Thursday or Friday to take advantage of the weekend. 
• Large periodic balances in individual  accounts with no apparent business. 
• Low average balance compared to high level of deposits. 
• Many checks made payable to other banks. 
• Bank willingness to pay against uncollected funds. 
• Deposits not made daily or intact. 
• Entity uses receipts that do not indicate mode of payment. 
• One or more personal checks in the cash drawer by the fund custodian. 
• Deposit timing lags. 
• Irregular check endorsements. 
• Amount of deposit does not agree with daily activity report. 
• Inappropriate access to signature plate. 
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1011 
• Check numbers, payee name, date, and amount don’t agree with entries in the  
check register. 
• Voided checks are not retained. 
• Checks are issued to individuals for large, even dollar amounts. 
• Supporting documentation for checks is not available or has been prematurely destroyed. 
• Cash withdrawal with deposit checks drawn on another bank. 
 
There are several tips for businesses to use when cashing business and payroll checks: 
• Examine all checks. Insist that the check be signed in front of the clerk. Compare the 
signature written on the check with the signature on the driver’s license or state 
identification. 
• Be particularly careful with large-dollar checks presented by noncustomers.  
• Examine all checks for signs of counterfeiting, such as a glossy, “crayonish” appearance 
and any lack of detail and sharpness. 
• Look for signs of alterations or erasures, es pecially in the signature or numerical and 
written amounts.  
• Compare the bank identification and routing numbers for a match. 
• The texture of the check should appear smooth; a rough document might signal 
erasures. 
• Be cautious of information that is typed or stamped. 
• All checks, except government issue, should have at least one perforated edge. 
• The magnetic ink used for routing codes should appear nonreflective and dull. 
• Look for faded colored paper, which can indicate that the check has been chemically 
bleached. 
• A color copy might reflect odd colors at times due to a failure of the toner to mix 
satisfactorily. 
• Black lettering might have a slightly greenish cast when examined under a magnifying 
glass. 
• A light colored or delicate background might fade out when copied. 
• Absence of any design in background of check paper. 
• Absence of bank logo and the printing of the bank name in regular lettering. 
• Absence of the address of the bank on the check. 
• Overall appearance of poor quality of printing and paper. 
• A payroll check will usually be for an odd amount and will appear neat, clean, and  
usually unfolded. 
  
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1012                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Tellers should telephone the business or account officer for approval on suspicious 
requests. 
 
Check Fraud Prevention Tools 
CHECK WRITING PENS 
When a check is written, a special pen designed to prevent check washing should be used. 
These pens are called “check writing” pens and can be found at just about any office supply 
store. These pens have special ink that will prevent criminals from using solvents to remove 
ink from the check. When someone tries to wash a check written from these pens, it will 
either not work, thereby leaving the check intact, or smear the ink and make it apparent that 
a check has been washed. 
 
Individuals with business accounts are a much greater risk when it comes to check washing. 
Businesses have much stricter requirements in terms of what the company must do to 
protect their checks. If the business doesn’t follow a strict plan to protect their checks, it’s 
likely that if any money is stolen from their accounts, the bank will not return their money. If 
an individual has a business account, they should make sure that the checks are locked 
securely when not in use. Make sure not to leave blank computer-printed checks in the 
printer or the business will be equally liable for the money that could potentially be stolen.  
 
FINGERPRINT IDENTIFIERS 
A biometric fingerprint identifier  requires the check writer to match fingerprints with the account 
holder’s, which are on file. Banks reported reductions in check fraud of 40 percent after the 
machine was introduced in the mid-1990s. 
 
Non-account holders who want checks cashed at banks that have implemented this system 
are required to put an inkless fingerprint on their check. If the check does prove false, law 
enforcement will already have evidence regarding the fraudster’s identity. The cost to a bank 
of implementing the inkless fingerprint system could be redeemed by preventing a single 
instance of check fraud. Banks throughout the nation now use this technique to cut  
fraud losses. 
 
FORENSIC DOCUMENT EXAMINATION 
Through handwriting, an individual can be positively identified, as is the case with DNA or 
fingerprinting. When investigating check fraud, a forensic document examiner focuses on 
the signature and the handwriting itself.  
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1013 
SIGNATURE 
If the examiner were investigating a forged signature, he would compare the suspicious 
signature to a sample of the actual one, noting discrepancies between the two. While one’s 
signature may change over time, it would be close to impossible for a forger to duplicate a 
signature with one hundred percent accuracy;  minute identifying characteristics mark 
people’s writing and are not reproducible. 
 
The eBank ™ Discovery System, developed by ASV Technologies, employs signature 
verification software. Using “multiple feat ure set extraction” technology drawn from 
forensic science, the state and quality of a signature’s two-dimensional characteristics are 
analyzed and verified against samples. The program identifies flourishes, arcs, distances 
between letters, and up to 100 other features. Rejected signatures, along with the reason for 
rejection and signature samples, are forwarded to a human for visual verification. ASV 
Technologies claim its results match those of the most highly trained and accurate signature 
verifier. 
 
HANDWRITING 
Like fingerprints, handwriting is unique to an individual. Consequently, if the narrative 
portion of the check is handwritten, it offers a document examiner a greater opportunity to 
identify a forgery. 
 
VIDEO SPECTRAL COMPARATOR 
Forensic examiners use this tool to test questionable documents. The document is examined 
for photocopying and liquid paper under a controlled light source. Lettering added to a 
document can be detected with this device. 
 
ELECTROSTATIC DETECTION APPARATUS 
This tool allows examiners to detect indented writing from the top page of a pad of paper up 
to five pages below the original. The Electrostatic Detection Apparatus uses photocopier 
toner to develop the areas of indentation after a document has been covered with an 
electrically charged plastic film. In the best of cases, when the document is processed with 
the electrostatic device and the toner image is developed, the writing impressions are clearly 
defined and highly contrasted. If the developed writing is to be used in an investigation or to 
demonstrate results for the courts, the examiner must turn to electronic image processing 
technology for further enhancement. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1014                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Credit Card Fraud 
Credit card fraud is the misuse of a credit card to make purchases without authorization, or 
counterfeiting a credit card. The use of credit cards as a form of payment has grown 
dramatically over the past decades, with more than 80 percent of U.S. households having at 
least one credit card. As the industry continues to expand and offer credit to more and more 
consumers, fraud will also grow. 
 
Credit card fraud is successful because the chances of being caught are small and 
prosecution is not assured. Retail stores have identified credit card thieves and contacted law 
enforcement only to be turned down for action. 
 
Credit Card Schemes 
There are many different types of credit card schemes including selling the cards to thieves, 
family members using the credit cards without authorization, and fraudulently obtaining a 
card. Statutes relating to the misuse of credit cards generally prohibit the obtaining of 
property or services through the use of a credit card if the use of the card is for any reason 
unauthorized. The federal statute prohibiting the use of fraudulent credit cards is found at 15 
U.S.C. § 1664. This statute prohibits using a fraudulently obtained credit card to obtain 
anything of value aggregating $1,000 or more, and it prohibits receiving anything of value 
purchased with an illegal credit card. A violator may be fined up to $10,000 and/or 
imprisoned for up to 10 years.  
  
Unauthorized Use of a Lost or Stolen Card 
Fraudulent activity normally occurs within hours of the loss or theft, before most victims 
have called to report the loss. Increasingly, victims aren’t even aware that their credit cards 
are being fraudulently used until they receive their monthly statement. It is extremely 
important that victims report the loss or theft of their card within 60 days of receiving the 
statement with the fraudulent charges, as they will not be held responsible for any charges 
(beyond $50) that occur during that time frame.  If the credit card company is not notified of 
the theft and the card is used, the customer will be liable. 
 
Organized Crime Rings 
Nigerian rings are especially notorious for stealing credit card and bank information from 
the mail. These articles are used to generate false identification documents, such as driver’s 
licenses and Social Security cards. The credit cards themselves are duplicated and distributed 
to members of the rings. The false IDs are then displayed during purchases made with the 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1015 
stolen cards. Members of the ring go on spending sprees, ending only when the credit has 
dried up or the legitimate owner reports their card as stolen. Often, counterfeit and stolen 
cards are express-mailed to members of the ring in other parts of the country. 
 
Advance Payments
Consumer regulations require credit card issuers to credit customers’ accounts immediately 
upon receipt of payment. This means deducting from the balance of the account before the 
check or other payment instrument has actually cleared the bank. A loophole such as this is 
easily exploited by experienced fraud rings. 
 
Using a forged or counterfeit check, an advance or overpayment is made on a stolen credit 
card. Since the issuer must credit the payment at the time it is made, there is no time to 
verify the authenticity of the check. Consequently, cash advances and purchases can be made 
immediately. This scheme can be extremely lucrative to the perpetrators.  
 
Stolen Card Numbers 
The Internet has become a breeding ground for individuals to obtain stolen credit card 
information. The thieves who steal this information find credit cards or lists of credit card 
holders and the corresponding numbers to their accounts. They then make the numbers 
available to a larger group, which uses the information to obtain goods and services in the 
name of the cardholder. Wrongfully obtained information may be posted on websites that 
originate in foreign countries. The international nature of the fraud makes it arduous to deter 
or punish. One report involved a Romanian website that displayed stolen credit card 
numbers of more than 450 individuals, most from the United States. The list contained 
identifying information of cardholders and was available for several weeks before being shut 
down.  
 
Shave and Paste 
Any number of alphanumeric characters is sliced from the card surface and other characters 
are attached, utilizing fast drying epoxy-type glues. This might be done to put an entirely 
different but valid account number on the card or to change the name.  
 
De-Emboss/Re-Emboss 
In this scheme, the credit card is exposed to heat, usually from a household iron, a candle, or 
hot water in the microwave. Plastic cards, primarily composed of polyvinylchloride, become 
more elastic when heated, and the embossed alphanumeric characters are removed. An 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1016                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
embosser puts new numbers and names on the cards. This process will generally create a 
“ghost image.” 
 
Counterfeit Cards 
Another type of bankcard fraud involves the illegal counterfeiting of credit cards. Known as 
“white plastic” cards, this scheme utilizes credit-card-sized plastic with embossed account 
numbers and names. This scheme works in conjunction with a corrupt and collusive 
merchant or a merchant’s employee. Other counterfeit cards are manufactured from scratch 
using high speed printing facilities and used in association with organized crime groups. 
Manufacturing facilities have been traced to the Far East. 
 
Counterfeiting operations are centered in Taiwan, China, and Hong Kong, where the 
specialty is producing the holograms and magnetic strips that appear on many cards. Forged 
holograms are smuggled into the U.S. and Canada by ring members from Asia and 
distributed throughout both countries. A substantial amount of them end up in California, 
where most of the Asian counterfeiting operations in the U.S. are located. Not surprisingly, 
California, notably Orange County, experiences more credit card fraud than any area in  
the country.  
 
The actual counterfeiting process has been immeasurably eased by technology that allows for 
more accurate duplication. Duplicating legitimate cards is still an intricate operation, 
however. Magnetic strips, numbers, holograms, and logos must all appear authentic. 
Desktop computers, embossers, tipping foil, and laminators are common tools in the 
reproduction process. Perhaps most difficult of all to accurately reproduce, however, is the 
hologram. Most phony holograms can be sold for between $5 and $15. True holograms use 
a “lenticular refraction” process; counterfeits are generally only reflected materials, usually a 
foil with an image stamped on it. These decals are attached to the surface of the card, rather 
than fixed into the plastic, as is the case with legitimate cards. Some holograms do not 
change colors, as legitimate ones do, when viewed from various angles. Counterfeit credit 
cards are the most damaging scheme of those mentioned here. However, with the increasing 
use of chips inside the cards and the addition of a PIN (Personal Identification Number), 
counterfeiting cards has decreased significantly as a method of bank card fraud in the U.S., 
U.K., and other countries implementing this technology. 
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1017 
Telephone/Mail Order Fraud 
The fraudster might offer a free trip or other nice prize, with the only catch being that the 
winner must have a credit card. Once the thief has the number, he can order merchandise or 
have money wired to himself. 
 
A great deal of credit card fraud is childishly simple to complete. Many crooks have great 
success by simply selecting a name from the phone book, calling, and pretending to be a 
Visa/MasterCard representative. The victim is told that his card number may have been 
obtained and used illegally by criminals. Or, a representative of a travel agency may call, 
claiming the victim has won a discount travel package. In any case, the victim is asked to 
read the card number off for verification or inclusion in the discount deal. A surprisingly 
large amount of people fall for this scheme and give out their credit card information. 
Purchases through catalogues and mail order are then made using the victim’s card number. 
They may select an unoccupied address to which their merchandise can be delivered, 
perhaps leaving a note asking the delivery service to simply put the package by the  
back door. 
 
Mail Theft  
A thief may steal credit cards already applied for by a bank’s customer and issued by the 
bank. The thief will then attempt to use the card by posing as the intended recipient. 
 
False Applications 
Perpetrators might apply for a new card using information stolen from a wallet, purse, or the 
trash, or by stealing a pre-approved credit card application out of the mail or trash. Also 
“take-one” applications that are prominent in stores offering credit cards to the public are 
ripe for fraud. 
 
Credit “Doctors” 
Credit doctor is the term used for fraudsters who sell stolen credit card account numbers via 
newspaper ads to people unable to get credit cards. 
 
True Name Fraud 
New credit card accounts can be opened by individuals possessing a victim’s true name 
identification such as a driver’s license or Social Security number. The true identification was 
either obtained as a secondary objective in the commission of a more aggressive offense 
such as robbery or as the primary target of a lesser crime such as pick pocketing. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1018                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Non-Receipt Fraud 
A form of credit card fraud in which the perpetrator intercepts credit cards that are in transit 
between the credit issuer and the authorized account holder. Losses attributable to mail theft 
have declined significantly as a result of “c ard activation” programs, where the cardholder 
must call their financial institution and confirm their identity before the card is activated. 
 
Key-Enter Counterfeiting 
When banks began using the CVV (for Visa) and CVC (for MasterCard) security system, 
fraudsters came up with this clever ruse in response. The CVV system uses a three-digit 
number embedded in the magnetic strip of a credit card, identifying it as a legitimately issued 
credit instrument. Credit card counterfeiters figured out a way to beat the system, however. 
By leaving the magnetic strip uncoded or making it unreadable, fraudsters force merchants 
handling the transaction to enter the credit card number manually. This means the 
transaction never falls under the scope of the CVV system.  
 
Clever bank and credit card officials very quickly found a patch for this scheme though. The 
CVV2 and CVC2 systems use a three-digit security code that is printed on the backs of 
cards. It is designed to validate that a genuine card is being used during a transaction. When 
a point-of-sale (POS) terminal reads a card’s ma gnetic stripe, Visa’s card Verification Value 
(CVV) or MasterCard’s Card Validation Code (CVC) can be verified during the 
authorization. Merchants using CVV2/CVC2 can expect to reduce their chargebacks by as 
much as 26 percent. The number appears in reverse italic at the top of the signature panel at 
the end. The CVV2 and CVC2 programs can also be used to reduce fraud in card-not-
 present transactions.  
 
Creditmaster 
This software program, downloadable from the Internet, allows the user to produce valid 
credit card numbers. Counterfeiters can then put these numbers to use in phony cards.  
 
Probing
The fraudster sets up a computer program that lets him run stolen numbers through various 
financial institutions in the hopes that one of them will still honor the number. Numbers 
that clear are often sold en masse to counterfeiters.  
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1019 
Skimming 
This scheme requires a device known as a wedge, which stores up to 200 credit card 
numbers. Credit card skimming is more frequent in businesses where an employee must 
leave the customer’s presence in order to ru n the transaction. A restaurant patron, for 
example, hands his credit card to a waiter who swipes the card into a wedge while 
conducting the legitimate transaction. Once the waiter has collected enough numbers, he can 
either sell them to a counterfeiter or simply produce his own fake cards using the stolen 
information. It may be months before the customer notices phony transactions on his 
statement, making the point of loss very difficult to determine. It follows that the guilty 
waiter is, therefore, unlikely to get caught. Skimming can also occur by tapping into a line 
used to transport credit card data.  
 
Pretext Calling 
Some fraudulent actors will call unsuspecting customers and pose as bank or credit card 
agents. The actor will request account information or other identifying information from the 
victim and use the information to apply for additional credit cards or to use the credit cards 
to purchase goods or services. 
 
Account Takeover 
The fake actor may take over a victim’s acco unt by requesting a change of address on the 
account and then calling to report the card lost or stolen. The issuing bank will then send the 
replacement card to the new address. 
 
Institutional Identity Theft and “Spoof” Sites  
Fraudulent actors may create false Internet sites, pretending to sell goods to buyers who 
must enter their credit card information and other personal information in order to make 
purchases. The “seller” then uses the information to make fraudulent purchases in the name 
of the buyer. More recently, fraudulent actors have begun creating “affiliate” sites of actual 
sellers or other creditors, such as banks. The perpetrator of the fraud then sends e-mails to 
existing customers of the actual seller or creator. These e-mails inform the unsuspecting 
customer that there is a problem with his account and asks the customer to log on to the site 
of the company that the wrongdoer has copied and to re-enter their personal and credit card 
information. The fraudulent actor then uses the information to make purchases. 
 
Information on how to commit credit card fraud is readily available to anyone willing to 
make the effort to look. Postings on the Internet give step-by-step instructions on how to 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1020                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
obtain carbon paper receipts and call credit-reporting agencies using merchant numbers. The 
latter is done in order to verify that the card is valid and to obtain the amount of credit 
available. The fraudster usually watches a store employee dial the number of the agency, 
noting the numbers as they are dialed. They then listen to the employee give the merchant 
number. This number can often be found next to registers and can be copied down if in 
plain sight. The fraudster now has an excellent avenue to test stolen cards. 
 
The Law Concerning Credit Card Fraud 
Federal law deals with legal principles surrounding losses from the fraudulent use of credit 
cards. Unlike check fraud, which is primarily governed by state law, credit card fraud is 
governed by federal law. Even so, the federal laws and regulations governing credit cards, 
however, pertain only to the relationship between the card issuer and the cardholder. Thus, 
contract law and the contractual agreement between the merchant and the merchant’s bank, 
as well as the merchant’s bank and the issuing bank, are typically what regulates the outcome 
of fraudulent credit card usage.  
 
The most important legal principles concerning the allocation of losses between credit card 
issuers and credit card holders come from Regulation Z of the Federal Reserve System, 
which was promulgated pursuant to the federal Truth-In-Lending Act (TILA).  
 
Congress designed TILA to protect consumers; therefore, its provisions generally do not 
apply to creditors that extend credit primarily for business, agricultural, or commercial 
purposes. TILA, however, defers to any state la w that gives greater protection and benefit to 
consumers, so state law that provides consumer cardholders more rights than federal law will 
prevail where there is a conflict.  
 
The provisions of Regulation Z that are most re levant to credit card fraud place limitations 
on a cardholder’s liability for unauthorized use. Under TILA, the term “cardholder” includes 
any person or organization to which a card is issued for any purpose—including a business, 
agricultural, or commercial purpose. This constitutes an exception to the general rule that 
most TILA provisions do not apply to credit card transactions for business, agricultural, or 
commercial purposes. 
 
The basic liability rule provides that the cardholder is not liable for unauthorized use of the 
card. The card issuer can shift from unauthorized use back to the cardholder only if: 
• The card is an “accepted” credit card (i.e., one that the cardholder has requested and 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1021 
signed, used, or has authorized another person to use). 
• The cardholder’s liability is not more than $50. 
• The card issuer has given notice to the cardholder of the potential liability. 
• The card issuer has provided the cardholder with a description of the means by which 
the card issuer may be notified of loss or theft of the card, either on the periodic 
statement that the issuer sends to the consumer or on a separate notice that accompanies 
that statement. 
• The unauthorized use occurs before the card issuer has been notified that an 
unauthorized use of the credit card. 
• The card issuer has provided a method by which the user of the card can be identified as 
the person authorized to use it. 
 
The Federal Reserve Board staff has interpreted Regulation Z to impose the $50 limit to a 
“series of unauthorized uses.” Assume, for instance, that a thief steals a credit card and, 
within a relatively short period of time, uses the credit card to make separate $100 purchases 
at three different stores. The consumer may maintain that, under the Federal Reserve Board 
staff interpretation, the card issuer may only impose one $50 charge because the transactions 
were all part of the same series. 
 
Guidance for Cardholders  
It is in the interest of both the issuing bank and the cardholder to minimize credit card fraud. 
Although the cardholder’s monetary liability for unauthorized use of a credit card cannot 
exceed $50, and many issuing banks do not ev en impose that charge on their customers, 
cardholders may have to spend significant time and money, sometimes including legal 
expenses, to refute allegations that they opened credit card accounts, used cards in particular 
ways, or otherwise authorized transactions about which they have no knowledge and with 
which they have no connection. Although cardholders may be aware of the pervasiveness of 
identity of theft, they may be unaware of the consequences or of ways to prevent it or 
minimize its effects. Since issuing banks will not often bear the losses related to identity theft 
that involves credit cards, banks should inform cardholders of ways to protect both physical 
cards and the risk of identity theft. 
 
Banks should send cardholders occasional reminders of steps that can be taken to safeguard 
their credit card identities, including the following: 
• Always carry the least amount of credit cards with you as necessary. 
• Sign credit slips and new credit cards as soon as you receive them. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1022                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Do not supply credit card information to unauthorized people. 
• Do not leave credit card unattended with merchants. 
• Make it a habit to review credit card  statements and immediately report any 
unrecognizable charges. 
• Immediately report the loss or theft of any credit card to the card issuer. 
• Obtain credit reports annually in order to detect any suspicious activity in which credit 
cards or other extensions of credit have been granted or applied for without  
your consent. 
• Never reveal account numbers or other credit card account information to persons 
attempting to gain your information on the telephone after they represent themselves as 
agents of a bank. 
• If you are aware of suspicious activity, immediately inform the relevant credit reporting 
agencies and have a “Fraud Alert” placed  on your account. This will prevent any 
potential new creditor from granting new credit without first contacting you personally. 
The major credit reporting agencies and their telephone numbers are Experian (888-397-
 3742), Equifax (888-766-0008), and the TransUnion (800-860-7289). 
• Always keep credit card receipts in a safe place, and destroy them after you have received 
the billing statement that reflects the charges. 
• If you receive a credit card you didn’t apply for, call the issuer and determine why they 
sent the card. Someone may have applied in your name and missed the opportunity to 
steal the card from your mailbox when it arrived. 
• Void incorrect receipts and destroy carbons of credit card slips.  
• Keep a record of account numbers, expi ration dates and phone numbers and addresses 
of each card issuer so that you can contact them in the event of the loss or theft of your 
credit card. 
• Do not lend your card to another person. 
• Do not write your account number on a postcard or the outside of an envelope. 
 
Merchant Scams 
Collusion occurs between the sales people and the credit card fraudster to process valid 
credit card numbers on white plastic cards. They might also make several imprints on sales 
tickets and fill them in later on.  
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1023 
Magnetic Stripe Diagram  
 
 
As shown in the above Magnetic Stripe Diagram above, two tracks appear on the credit 
card’s magnetic stripe. Track two is the most widely read. It is 40 characters in length, is 
strictly numeric containing the account number, expiration date, a security code, and 
discretionary bank data. Track one is 79 characters in length, is alpha numeric, and contains 
the above information plus the cardholder’s name. 
 
Magnetic stripe compromise is a more sophisticated method of obtaining account 
information for fraudulent purposes. It requires the transfer, or encoding, of legitimate 
account information, along with a security code, from the legitimate magnetic stripe to a 
counterfeited card with a magnetic stripe. The full, unaltered, legitimate magnetic stripe must 
be obtained to accomplish fraud by this method.  
 
Skimmers are becoming prevalent in credit card and ATM/debit card frauds. A skimmer is a 
card-reading device similar to the swipe machine used by cashiers to validate credit cards. It 
can be purchased at electronic stores and used by credit card thieves to read data imprinted 
on information tracks within the magnetic strip located on the card. In addition, criminals 
are using the device to swipe credit information from one credit card and put it on another.  
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1024                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Nowadays, criminals have gotten even more sophisticated by placing pinhole cameras on the 
ATMs to capture the card number as well to watch as the victim enter his PIN into the 
keypad. 
 
Company Credit Cards 
Company credit cards are provided to employees for convenience in conduction of company 
business. No personal expenses may be charged on the company credit card except as 
specifically authorized by company procedures. The employee must pay any charged 
personal expenses promptly. Company credit cards should not be used to avoid preparing 
documentation for direct payment to vendors. Where allowed by local law, charges on 
company credit cards for which a properly approved expense report has not been received at 
the time of an employee’s termination of employment may be deducted from the employee’s 
last paycheck. The company will pursue repayment by the employee of any amounts it has to 
pay on the employee’s behalf. 
 
 
Prevention and Detection of Credit Card Fraud 
The essential part of any detection program is the education of the tellers and merchants 
who are responsible for handling the transactions. In a study by Money Magazine, it was 
found that 95 percent of store clerks and cashiers did not check credit card signatures.  
 
While any of the following can occur in a perfectly legitimate transaction, these 
characteristics are frequently present during fraudulent transactions. Tellers and merchants 
should be advised to be alert for the customer who: 
• Takes a card from a pocket instead of a wallet or purse.  
• Purchases an unusual number of expensive items. 
• Makes random purchases, selecting items with  little regard to size, quality, or value. 
• Makes several small purchases to stay under the floor limit, or asks what the floor  
limit is. 
• Does not ask questions on major purchases. 
• Signs the sales draft slowly or awkwardly. 
• Charges expensive items on a newly valid credit card. 
• Cannot provide photo identification when asked. 
• Rushes the merchant or teller. 
• Purchases a large item, such as a television console, and insists on taking it at the time, 
even when delivery is included in the price. 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1025 
• Makes purchases and leaves the store but then returns to make more purchases. 
• Becomes argumentative with the teller or merchant while waiting for the transaction to 
be completed. 
• Makes large purchases just after the store’s opening or as the store is closing. 
 
Merchants should also be aware of potential signs of fraud in card-not-present transactions: 
• Larger than normal orders. 
• Orders that include several of the same item. 
• Orders made up of big-ticket items. 
• Rush or overnight shipping. 
• Shipping to an international address. 
• Transactions with similar account numbers. 
• Shipping to a single address, but transactions placed on multiple cards. 
• Multiple transactions on one card over a very short period of time. 
• Multiple transactions on one card or a similar card with a single billing. 
• In online transactions, multiple cards used from a single IP (Internet protocol) address. 
• Orders from Internet addresses that make use of a free e-mail service. 
 
Tellers and merchants should be aware of the common signs of forged credit cards: 
• Holograms crudely stamped or badly faked with tiny bits of aluminum foil 
• Misspelled words on the card 
• Altered signature panel 
• Discolored 
• Glued 
• Painted 
• Covered with white tape 
• Cards that appear to have been flattened and restamped 
 
At the consumer level, the credit card user should remember the following: 
• Know where your card is at all times. 
• Never leave your card unattended at work—the re are more credit card thefts in the 
workplace than in any other single situation. 
• Don’t leave the store or ATM without all of the copies and carbons. 
• Don’t leave your card in plain sight where others can get the number. 
• Don’t leave receipts in a public trash can, hotel, or shopping bag. 
• Review monthly statements for accuracy and any items that you might not have charged. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1026                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Review your statements via electronic means rather than waiting for paper statements. If 
possible, cancel paper statements altogether since most fraudsters still practice 
“dumpster diving” and will riffle through your trash for old receipts and credit card 
statements. 
• Sign the back of a new card as soon as you get it and destroy old cards that are outdated 
or no longer used. 
• Make a list of all of your cards and their numbers. This key information is helpful when 
reporting lost or stolen cards. Store this list in a highly secured area. 
• Be wary of offers that come through the mail. 
• Never reveal your card number over the phone to anyone who has offered you a prize 
• Report missing cards immediately. 
• Don’t reveal personal information such as your address and telephone number. 
• Don’t allow a salesperson to record your credit card number on your check. 
• Keep your card out of the view of others in a store or at a public telephone so they 
cannot read the name and account number. 
• Use a tiered, see-through container in your wallet for credit cards, so it will be easier to 
notice missing cards. 
• Always check your card when returned to you after a purchase. Make sure it is your card. 
 
If you become suspicious of a telephone call offer or mail solicitations, report the activity 
using the National Consumers League’s Fraud Center Online Fraud Report Form at 
https://secure.nclforms.org/nficweb/nfic.htm.  
 
Prevention 
Prevention is the key to reducing credit card losses. Several programs can and are in place to 
reduce losses. Some of them are: 
 
Education Programs 
Tellers and merchants should be trained to be familiar with the security features of the credit 
card. Although the majority of counterfeit cards contain some of the security features, they 
are usually not complete and offer indicators that the card is not legitimate. Credit card 
issuers should take measures to inform their customers about credit card fraud, what the 
financial institution is doing about fraud, and how the consumer can help. 
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1027 
Liaison with Law Enforcement 
Companies should develop strong liaison with law enforcement. When a company receives 
intelligence of hot frauds, law enforcement should be notified immediately.  
 
Credit Card Company Security Initiatives 
Both Visa and MasterCard have initiated security measures to help combat online theft. The 
Verified by Visa program protects merchants from fraud-related chargebacks on all Visa 
personal debit and credit card transactions, even when processing transactions from non-
 participating issuers. Verified by Visa also protects consumers by requiring a password in the 
Verified by Visa window during purchases with participating online stores, helping ensure 
that no one else can use their Visa card onlin e. At online stores not yet participating in 
Verified by Visa, the Visa credit card will continue to work the same as usual. Additionally, 
Visa works alongside financial institutions and merchants to continually monitor consumer’s 
accounts to detect suspicious or unusual activity. By taking these steps, Visa is able to work 
proactively to reduce fraudulent transactions. 
 
Here are some of the red flags that may indicate fraudulent activity:  
• Shipping address is different from the billing address, or the shipping address has 
suddenly changed.  
• Unusually large purchase compared to normal purchase patterns for the account in 
question.  
• Change in name on the account.  
• Change in date of birth or Social Security number.  
 
MasterCard’s SecureCode allows credit card holders to register and set up their own private 
SecureCode number. Users of SecureCode will be automatically prompted by their financial 
institution at checkout to provide their SecureCode each time they make a purchase with a 
participating online merchant. The SecureCode is quickly confirmed by the financial 
institution and then the purchase is completed. The SecureCode will never be shared with 
the merchant. It’s just like entering a PIN at an ATM. MasterCard has also initiated the 
PayPass system in which cardholders can make purchases with a simple tap, rather than 
swiping or dipping their card. This adds a level of security since the card or PayPass device 
never leaves the cardholder’s hand. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1028                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Physical Security Features 
In response to the counterfeiting problems, credit card companies are mastering the 
possibilities of making credit card fraud more difficult. Some of their programs are  
discussed below. 
 
VISA CARD FEATURES 
• The Visa logo should have micro-printing around the border. The fine print is barely 
readable without magnification. 
• The flying dove hologram should appear to be three-dimensional and appear to move 
when the card is tilted back and forth. 
• Visa’s embossed account numbers begin with a 4 and contain 16 digits. All digits must 
be clean, even and the same size and shape. If a card has been re-embossed, the numbers 
may appear to be fuzzy. As a general rule of thumb always check the hologram. It is 
easier to spot a re-embossed number there. 
• A flying “V” is an embossed security character  beside the “Good Thru” date. If the “V” 
is not italicized or it is missing, the card is counterfeit. However, this is not a required 
security feature and may or may not be present on the card. 
• If there are “ghost images” of the numbers behind the embossing on either the front or 
back of the card, it has been re-embossed. If the card has been re-embossed the 
hologram might be damaged. 
• A four-digit number must be printed below the embossed account number. This four-
 digit number must match exactly with the first four digits of the account number. Both 
must begin with 4. 
• The Visa brand mark appears in blue and gold on a white background. It must appear in 
either the bottom right, top left, or top right corner. 
• An ultraviolet sensitive dove is visible on the face of the card when the card is placed 
under an ultraviolet light. 
• If someone has tried to erase the signature panel, the word “VOID” will be displayed. 
• Card Verification Value 2 (CVV2) is a three-digit code that appears on the back of the 
card in the signature panel. Typically the signature panel will have a series of numbers 
but only the last three digits make up the CVV2 code. CVV2 is used primarily in card-
 not-present transactions to verify that the customer is in possession of a valid Visa card 
at the time of the sale. Merchants will request the CVV2 from the cardholder at 
checkout, and the information is sent electronically to the card-issuing bank to verify its 
validity. Within seconds the CVV2 results are returned with authorization. If it’s returned 
as invalid, merchants have the right to stop the transaction. For added protection, 
merchants are prohibited from keeping or storing the CVV2 number after the 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1029 
transaction has been completed.  
• Check the valid dates for evidence of tampering. Do not accept an expired card. 
 
For more information about Visa’s security features, visit their website at: 
http://www.visa.ca/en/merchant/fraudprevention/cardfeatures.cfm.  
 
MASTERCARD CARD FEATURES 
• A large “MC” is visible under ultraviol et light for MasterCard. The “MC” security 
character is no longer permitted on newly issued cards (effective June 1, 2006), but may 
continue to appear on cards through June 2010. 
• All cards must include the full-color MasterCard Brand Mark. This mark may be below 
or above the Global Hologram. Merchants should be aware that the MasterCard card 
design and the MasterCard Brand Mark may be oriented vertically. 
• The hologram (whether on global or debit cards) can be located on the front or back of 
the card based on the design/type unless HoloMag tape is used. 
• MasterCard’s embossed account numbers begin with a 5 and contain 16 digits. The 
number must be clear and uniform in size and spacing and must appear on one line. 
• The first four numbers of the account number must be the same digits as those printed 
directly below (pre-printed BIN). 
• The front of the card must include a valid expiration date. 
• The signature panel located on the back of the card must include the word “MasterCard” 
printed in multicolors at a 45 degree angle. The last four digits of the account number 
must be printed in reverse italics in the upper right corner of the signature panel (this is 
required as of June 1, 2006, prior to this the reverse italics could be found at the upper 
center of the signature panel). 
• Magnetic tape must be present and appear smooth and straight with no signs of 
tampering. HoloMag tape may be used in place of the traditional magnetic tape. 
• The HoloMag tape or MasterCard hologram must  be included on the back of the card if 
it cannot be found on the front. 
• CVC2 number (three-digit validation number) must be printed in reverse italics to the 
right of the last four digits of the account number. As of June 1, 2006, the CVC2 
number was required to be printed in reverse italics in an adjacent white box to the right 
of the signature panel. 
 
For more information about MasterCard’s security features, visit their website at: 
http://www.mastercard.com/us/merchant/security/what_can_do/card_features.html.  
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1030                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
AMERICAN EXPRESS FEATURES 
• Ultraviolet inks are used such that when a genuine card is examined with a black light, 
the letters AMEX, as well as phosphorescence in the portrait of the Centurion are 
visible.  
• The portrait of the Centurion is printed with a high degree of clarity and detail such as 
the portraits on U.S. currency. 
• Erasure or tampering with the signature panel will cause the waved print background to 
appear white or smudged. 
• The card member account number is 15 digits beginning with 37. The embossing should 
be clear and uniform in size and spacing. 
• A duplicate account number is on the reverse of the card to ensure the card number 
appearing on the front of the card has not been altered. 
• The pre-printed (non-embossed) Card Identification Number (CID), which is a four-
 digit number printed on the front of the card that is used to ensure that the individual 
using the card is actually the owner of the card, should always appear above  the account 
number, on either the right or the left edge of the card. 
• The card number or cardmember name should be printed in the same typeface as the 
American Express typeface.  
• All American Express cards, including Network, Optima and Corporate, will bear the 
same security features outlined here. 
 
For more information on American Express’s security features, visit their website at: 
https://www209.americanexpress.com/merchant/singlevoice/USEng/FrontServlet?request
 _type=n avigate&page=cardSecurityFeatures.  
 
Technological Deterrents 
Banks can take advantage of technological developments to deter credit card fraud. These 
developments can make both the counterfeiting of cards and use of valid cards more 
difficult. Some of these developments require very little technology. For instance, most 
credit cards now include verification codes on the back to help merchants match cards used 
in purchase transactions with authorized cardholders. Card networks also maintain address 
and zip code verification services so that merchants, especially those involved in Internet or 
telephone transactions, can determine whether the supposed cardholder lives at the address 
given by the person placing the order.  
 
  
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1031 
Photographs 
Photographs of the legitimate cardholder will deter counterfeiting to a degree, though they 
have become increasingly easy for counterfeiters to purchase. Photographs can be altered, 
but technological advancements permit digital encoding of the cardholder’s image on the 
magnetic strip of the credit card. Use of this technology would require specialized processing 
terminals that would add to the cost of fraud detection. 
 
Holograms  
Holograms have been used by issuers as security devices since the early 1980s. Not long after 
implementation of this feature, however, it was found that a very accurate counterfeiting 
industry was emerging in Asia. If one assesses the average credit limit of fraudulent cards at a 
conservative $2,000, it takes few in circulation to  add up to considerable losses to the issuer.  
 
Signature Panel 
Signature panels usually contain images of the issuer’s logo. Blank or damaged signature 
panels are red flags of forged credit cards. Signatures on the panel and the sales receipt 
should always be compared for consistency. While it may be most merchants’ policy that 
employees compare these signatures, it is often ignored.  
 
Activation of Cards 
In an effort to curb credit card fraud perpetrated using the mail, companies sending new 
cards in the mail do not activate them until the customer contacts the credit card company. 
Upon contact, the credit card issuer then asks the caller for personal information such as 
their mother’s maiden name and birth date, or other information that the ordinary thief 
probably would not have. Once the information has been satisfactorily answered, the card is 
activated for use. 
 
Advanced Authorization 
Visa recently unveiled technology for analyzing card transactions both individually and 
collectively across its network in order to detect emerging fraud patterns. When a credit card 
is swiped, Advanced Authorization provides an instantaneous rating of the transaction’s 
potential for fraud to the card-issuing financial institution, including whether the card 
number was among those lost or stolen in a data-security incident. The system is designed to 
spot situations where multiple accounts are associated with fraudulent testing or some other 
type of coordinated attack involving multiple accounts.  
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1032                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CyberSource Advanced Fraud Screen 
CyberSource Advanced Fraud Screen enhanced by Visa is the first e-commerce fraud 
detection system enabled with current worldwide fraud trends and global payment-card 
usage patterns that provides a comprehensive transaction risk assessment of activity. 
Combining this with CyberSource’s hybrid  system (neural network and rules-based 
technology) and merchant-activity data provides e-commerce merchants with targeted fraud 
detection ability. CyberSource Advanced Fraud Screen operates around the clock, 7 days a 
week, 24 hours a day. It effectively screens shoppers located anywhere in the world and 
works with all payment cards. 
 
The CyberSource Advanced Fraud Screen’s risk-management tool uses frequently updated 
intelligence about global payment-card usage patterns, including online and offline 
purchasing profiles, to provide an accurate fraud detection service. This advantage can help 
merchants lower fraud-related costs by identifying risky transactions, and increase consumer 
goodwill by eliminating unintentional “insults” that may occur from incorrectly declined 
orders. 
 
Computer Edits 
Computer edits are built into some credit cards such that if the card is usually used five times 
per month, and it is used 25 times in one day, the system will prohibit authorization of 
further purchases. 
 
Card Scrutiny at Point of Sale 
How often do merchants scrutinize your card? In many stores, they never get the chance. 
Consumers use the credit/debit card machines at the sales counter and the cards never leave 
their possession. While this makes things more convenient for the consumer, it often means 
that the merchant is left holding the bag when a transaction is returned. If one of the key 
authorization components is missing (signature, expiration date, authorization number, card 
imprint) the merchant has to swallow the loss.  
 
Internet/Telephone Orders 
With these transactions, vendors never have the opportunity to see the customer’s credit 
card. The only fail-safe, self-protective measure open to them is to postpone delivery until 
the transaction has cleared the customer’s account. In our next-day-delivery society, 
however, this is may be detrimental to business for some vendors. There are a couple of 
other options open to merchants: 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1033 
• Beware of orders with different “bill to” and “ship to” addresses unless the item is 
intended as a gift.  
• Setting up free e-mail accounts with companies like Hotmail or Yahoo is very simple and 
allows the user anonymity. Orders received from free e-mail accounts should be treated 
with extra scrutiny.  
 
Potential signs of card-not-present fraud: 
• First-time shopper — Criminals are always looking for new victims. 
• Larger-than-normal orders — Because stolen cards or account numbers have a limited life 
span, crooks need to maximize the size of their purchase. 
• Orders that include several of the same item—Having multiples of the same item 
increases a criminal’s profits. 
• Orders made up of big-ticket item — These items have maximum resale value and 
therefore maximum profit potential. 
• “Rush” or “overnight” shipping — Fraudsters want these fraudulently obtained items as 
soon as possible for the quickest possible resale, and aren’t concerned about extra 
delivery charges. 
• Shipping to an international address — A significant number of fraudulent transactions 
are shipped to fraudulent cardholders outside of the U.S. 
• Transactions with similar account numbers — Particularly useful if the account numbers 
used have been generated using software available on the Internet (such as 
CreditMaster). 
• Shipping to a single address, but transactions placed on multiple cards—Could involve 
an account number generated using special software or the use of several of stolen cards. 
• Multiple transactions on one card over a very short period of time—Could be an attempt 
to “run a card” until the account is closed. 
• Multiple transactions on one card or a similar card with a single IP (Internet Protocol) 
address — More than one or two cards could indicate a fraud scheme. 
• Orders from Internet addresses that make  use of free e-mail services—These e-mail 
services involve no billing relationships, and therefore provide neither an audit trail nor 
verification that a legitimate cardholder has opened the account. 
 
Financial Institution Measures 
Banks and other financial institutions have great resources at their disposal to prevent 
fraudulent transactions. Many of them need me rely to enforce their existing policies.  
• New account screening — Educate personnel to thoroughly check applicants’ 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1034                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
information, comparing ID information, addresses, and credit reports for accuracy.  
• PIN activation — Bank customers are often required to provide personal identification 
numbers in order to activate their cards over the phone. Callers who are not able to 
provide the PIN number may have manufactured or stolen the card in question.  
• Caller ID — Most people calling to activate their card will do so from home. If the 
number on Caller ID does not match any of the telephone numbers listed in the 
customer’s account information bank personnel should ask some identifying questions.  
• CVV2/CVC2 — Implement these systems as soon as possible. They are among the best 
defenses financial institutions have against credit card fraud.  
 
Smart Cards 
Smart Cards contain a microprocessor memory chip instead of holograms. These cards are 
able to identify the user through encrypted information on the chip, and must be inserted 
into a “card reader” attached to the computer. That means the card cannot be used unless 
the purchaser is currently holding it. A PIN is also required for the card so the thief needs to 
physically have the card and the security code in order to use it. This allows cardholders 
more purchasing options as well as increased security. 
 
Judging from the past, credit opportunities for consumers will increase over time and, 
consequently, more will fall victim to fraud. In the future, the trend will be one card for all 
types of financial transactions. Prototypes are currently being developed and tested by the 
major credit card issuers. Fraud rings will adjust accordingly, and new counterfeiting 
methods will emerge. Law enforcement and investigators must maintain a global outlook 
when facing this type of fraud, as much of it originates outside the U.S.  
 
 
Electronic Bill Payment and Person-to-Person Payments 
Increasingly, consumers are using electronic funds transfers, rather than actual currency or 
paper, to pay bills or make online purchases. Through online services offered by many 
financial institutions, an individual can make banking transactions using a system called 
electronic bill payment and presentment, or EBPP. Individuals can pay each other for goods or 
services through this same electronic form, which is known as the person-to-person, or P2P, 
system.  
 
Although these systems are still young, some experts suggest that they will play an important 
part in the way payments are made, according to the Sheshunoff and A.S. Pratt’s publication, 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1035 
“Electronic Fund Transfer Fraud Protection: Identity Theft to Wire Transfer Fraud.” There 
is relatively low processing and customer service costs for billers, while customers can 
reduce time and costs in making payments. With some EBPP systems, some customers may 
even be able to manage their funds more effectively. Electronic bill payment has received 
faster acceptance than bill presentment, though acceptance appears to be dependent on the 
prices of these services. As the EBPP method of payment continues to increase, it is 
important to be prepared to combat fraud that may surface in this area.  
 
Electronic Fund Trans fer 
The Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA) is intended to protect the rights of consumers. 
Unlike the state law that governs checks or wholesale wire transfers, the law concerning 
electronic fund transfers initiated from consumer accounts is federal law.  
 
As defined in the EFTA, an “electronic fund transfer” is any transfer of funds, other than 
one originated by a check or similar paper instrument, that is initiated through an electronic 
terminal, telephonic instrument, or computer or magnetic tape that orders or purports to 
authorize a financial institution to debit or credit an account. Each of the following would 
constitute an electronic fund transfer for purposes of federal law: 
• A customer’s withdrawal of funds from the customer’s own account by use of an ATM. 
• A customer’s transfer of funds from the c ustomer’s checking account to the customer’s 
savings account at the same financial institution initiated by the customer through his 
personal computer.  
• A customer’s transfer of funds from the customer’s checking account to the customer’s 
savings account at the same financial institution initiated by the customer through the 
bank’s automated telephone service. 
• A customer’s use of a debit card to purchase goods from a merchant who swipes the 
customer’s card through a point-of-sale (POS) device to authorize deduction of the 
amount of the sale from the customer’s checking account. 
• A customer’s transfer of funds from his bank account to a third-party initiated by the 
customer through his personal computer. 
• An employer’s instruction, initiated by computer or through a magnetic tape, to a 
financial institution to deposit funds representing an employee’s pay into the  
employee’s account. 
• A noncustomer’s instruction, initiated by computer or through a magnetic tape, to a 
financial institution to withdraw funds from the checking account of a customer and 
transfer the funds of a noncustomer’s bank account. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1036                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Federal Reserve Board has promulgated a series of regulations, known as Regulation E, 
which informs banks of how they must implement the EFTA. Banks must be aware of their 
obligations under these laws and regulations in order both to minimize their exposure to 
electronic fund transfer fraud and to know how to deal with their customers when such 
fraud occurs. Under these laws and regulations, EBPP and P2P systems will usually qualify 
as electronic fund transfers. Other transactions that are initiated by the consumer through 
computer or telephonic instruments without the intervention of bank personnel, including 
transactions involving debit cards and automated teller machine (ATM) transactions, may 
also qualify as electronic fund transfers.  
 
Access Device 
An “access device” includes a card, code, or other means of access to a customer’s account 
for the purpose of initiating electronic fund transfers. These include debit cards, personal 
identification numbers (PINs), telephone transfer and bill payment codes, and other means 
that a consumer may use to initiate an electronic fund transfer from his account. A 
consumer’s account is considered an asset account, such as a demand deposit or savings 
account, established for personal, family, or household purposes. A credit card is not 
considered an access device since it provides access to a credit line rather than to a 
consumer’s account. The term “access device” does not include a check or draft used to 
capture to MICR encoding to initiate a one-time ACH debit. For example, if a customer 
authorizes a single ACH debit from his account by giving a check to the merchant so they 
can capture the routing, account, and serial numbers to initiate the debit, the check is not an 
access device. If the customer, however, provides a payee with a check, or with information 
from a check that is physically retained by the consumer, in order to allow the payee to 
capture routing, account, and serial number information, the result transfer does constitute 
an electronic fund transfer.  
 
When an access devise is necessary to instruct a financial institution to perform a transfer, 
the financial institution will be able to claim that it was authorized to debit or credit a 
consumer’s account only if the transfer was initiated through use of an “accepted” access 
device. An access device will qualify for this status only if the devise was issued to a person: 
• Who requested and received it. 
• Who signed and used it. 
• Who authorized another to use the access device. 
• For the purpose of transferring money between accounts or obtaining money, property, 
labor, or services. 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1037 
If a consumer uses an accepted access device to initiate a transfer, the EFTA will cover the 
transaction, even though a bank employee has intervened to complete the transaction. 
Assume, for instance, that Smith wishes to transfer $100 from her checking account to her 
savings account. She asks the teller at her bank to perform the transaction. The teller 
requests that Smith enter her PIN into a card-reading device at the teller’s station. If the PIN 
is used to initiate the transfer, the transaction is an electronic fund transfer. 
 
Consumer Initiation 
Notice that the definition of electronic fund transfer applies literally only to consumer 
transactions. One might speculate that if the consumer does not actually use the terminal, 
the transaction is not an electronic fund transfer. If, for instance, a consumer desires to 
purchase goods and hands the merchant a debit card to pay for the transaction, one might 
argue that the consumer has not initiated the transaction. Nevertheless, the Federal Reserve 
Board has construed the definition to apply to a POS terminal that captures data 
electronically in order to debit or credit a consumer’s bank account. This definition is broad 
enough to include the situation in which a merchant physically swipes or inserts the 
consumer’s debit card through the terminal, but does so at the direction of the consumer. In 
any event, the transaction would constitute an electronic fund transfer under the part of the 
definition that includes transfer “initiated through computer.” 
 
Even though a telephone is not itself an electronic terminal, transfers that the consumer 
initiates by telephone may be considered electronic transfer funds. Telephone transfers 
(which likely include fax transmissions) fall within the EFTA if made pursuant to a 
prearranged plan or agreement that is entered into between the consumer and the financial 
institution making the transfer and that contemplates periodic or recurring transfers. If an 
effective agreement exists, a transfer that the consumer initiates by telephone falls within the 
EFTA, even though an employee of the bank completes the transfer, or the consumer 
initiates the transfer through a facsimile machine, or the consumer initiates the transfer 
through the bank’s audio- or voice-response telephone system.  
 
Electronic Bill Presentment and Payment 
Electronic bill presentment and payment (EBPP) involves the presentment of bills from one 
or more sellers of goods, or providers of services, to a consumer through electronic means 
and the payment of that bill by the consumer, also through electronic means. Some experts 
expect EBPP to become one of the fastest growing applications of electronic fund transfers. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1038                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
At present, EBPP systems vary in organization and complexity. They may involve a 
transaction between a single merchant and a customer, or the consolidation of multiple bills 
from different billers or of multiple payments from different customers. Initially, EBPP 
systems were offered by proprietary providers. More recently, however, banks have begun to 
enter the field, often by contracting out implementation of the system to proprietary 
providers. Banks may have an advantage in marketing these systems because consumers who 
are likely to use these systems often have existing relationships with their banks. Bank 
customers, therefore, may be more willing to trust those institutions to handle their accounts 
than to entrust funds to a new entity with whom they have no previous or tangible 
relationship. 
 
Biller Direct Systems 
Existing EBPP systems usually fall within one of two categories: biller direct systems and 
consolidation/aggregations systems. In a biller direct system, merchants deal with each 
customer individually. In a typical transaction, the customer will enter an Internet site that 
the biller has created. There, the customer who wishes to pay his telephone bill online will 
simply log on to the telephone company’s web site, enter a username and password that 
allows the customer to pull up a copy of his bill, review it, and instruct the biller to obtain 
payment from the customer’s bank account. Prior to this time, the customer will have 
entered into an agreement with the biller to receive and to pay his bills electronically. The 
customer will have created the username and password (which qualifies as an access device 
under EFTA) and will have provided the biller with information about the customer and the 
customer’s account at the financial institut ion from which the biller may collect payment. 
Typically, this will include the customer’s e-mail address, the routing number of the 
customer’s bank, and the customer’s account number at the bank. In some systems, the 
biller will send an e-mail to the customer indicating that a bill is outstanding and directing 
the customer to the biller’s website. 
 
After the customer views the information posted by the biller, the customer may approve 
the information and authorize payment. The biller will then initiate payment by contacting a 
payment provider that has agreed to collect payments on behalf of the biller. The payment 
provider will contact the financial institution that holds the customer’s account and request 
the institution to debit the customer’s a ccount and remit the proceeds to the payment 
provider. The payment provider will then credit the proceeds, minus any fees, to the biller. 
These payments may be transferred through an ACH transfer or through a paper transfer 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1039 
such as a cashier’s check when the recipient is not able to receive payments in an electronic 
form.  
 
Person to Person (P2P) Payment Systems 
Personal online payment systems, often called P2P or person-to-person payment systems, 
have become popular ways for making relatively small payments between individuals or 
between an individual and a business. These payments have become popular in the online 
auction market, where winning bids may be too small to justify the use of a credit card or the 
seller is an individual who does not accept credit card payments. In 2002, eBay, the online 
auction site, acquired PayPal, the dominant provider of P2P services. PayPal currently has 
more than 164 million accounts worldwide, and is available in 190 markets and 17 different 
currencies. The success of proprietary systems like PayPal has induced conventional banks to 
consider entering the P2P arena. Many banks have begun to offer similar services. 
 
One restriction of most current P2P systems is that they will only complete transfers to 
persons who are also subscribers to the service. While this restriction may help a system to 
gain a customer base and reduce fraud by obtaining information about recipients, it also 
limits the scope of potential users.  
 
A Model of P2P: PayPal 
There is a significant opportunity for change and growth in implementation since P2P 
systems are still in their beginning stages. PayPal is dominant in the market at this point, so 
we will use it as the model of the P2P system for illustrative purposes. Potential users of the 
system must log in to the provider’s websi te and submit registration information including 
their name, mailing and e-mail addresses, and phone number. An e-mail is sent from PayPal 
to the user’s provided e-mail address with the user’s password. Before initiating any 
transfers, the user must send that password from the e-mail account that the user indicated 
at the time of registration. This permits the provider to verify information about the user 
and reduce the probability that the user is engaged in fraudulent activity or has established an 
account in the name of a fictitious person.  
 
In order to make a payment, the user enters his username and password along with the e-
 mail address and payment information for the recipient. Users may authorize the provider to 
withdraw funds from any of three sources. First, the user may maintain an account directly 
with the provider. The user may authorize the provider to withdraw funds from the user’s 
account at another financial institution. If the user registers his bank account as a source of 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1040                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
payment, the provider will verify the user’s control of the account by making two small 
deposits to the account in an undisclosed amount and requiring the user to confirm the 
amount of the deposits. Third, the user may authorize the provider to charge his credit card 
with the amount of the payment.  
 
Transfers initiated by the user from his account registered with the provider will constitute 
electronic fund transfers. This is true even if the provider is not a bank. (Proprietary 
providers such as PayPal probably do not qualify as “banks” because they do not make 
loans. They may, however, qualify as money transmitters and may require state licenses for 
that purpose.) The EFTA defines an electronic fund transfer as a transfer of funds “initiated 
through an electronic terminal, telephonic instrument, or computer so as to order a 
financial institution to debit or credit an account.” But a “financial institution” is defined 
with sufficient breadth to include institutions that do not qualify as banks. A “financial 
institution” for purposes of EFTA is “any person who, directly, or indirectly, holds an 
account belonging to a consumer,” and an “account” is any “asset account established 
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.” Therefore, electronic transfers 
initiated by a consumer to transfer funds from an asset account held by a proprietary P2P 
provider would be governed by EFTA and Regulation E.  
 
Types of Fraud 
There are several ways in which fraud may be perpetrated through EBPP and P2P systems 
since passwords that allow access into customer bank accounts must be made available to 
third parties. Also, bills that contain significant information about customers must be passed 
through multiple parties. Potential sources of fraud include the following: 
• A biller may send a bill for services not rendered or for goods never sent. 
• A person who has obtained information about another person’s bank account may  
instruct a biller to obtain payment from the other person’s account. 
• A hacker could obtain passwords and usernames from an aggregator and use that  
information to direct transfers from a consumer’s bank account. 
• An employee at the site providing EBPP services that has been provided a consumer’s 
usernames and passwords for screen scraping purposes could use that information to 
direct transfers from the consumer’s bank account. 
• A bank employee may use customer information to direct transfers from a  
customer’s account. 
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1041 
Unfortunately, the financial institution that offers electronic fund transfers to its customers 
will have difficulty determining the source of any leak of customer information necessary to 
initiate a transfer. Therefore, in order to maintain good relations with its customer and to 
avoid further liability, a bank may accept responsibility for them. Thus, the best strategy for 
the bank will be to take measures that reduce the probability that fraud will materialize in the 
first place.  
 
Detection and Deterrence of Electronic Transfer Fraud 
Considering the limited capacity of banks to shift losses from unauthorized electronic fund 
transfers to their customers, banks should make efforts to minimize the incidence of fraud. 
The very justification for limiting consumer liability may be that banks are in a superior 
position to learn of and counteract fraudulent schemes that are employed to effect 
unauthorized transactions. Banks can take certain initiatives to secure access devices and 
computers from interference. Banks can also follow “know your customer” rules in order to 
prevent the issuance of access devices to individuals who are likely to use them fraudulently.  
 
The following sections provide specific safeguards that banks can perform to reduce the risk 
that they or their customers can become victimized by unauthorized electronic fund 
transfers. 
 
Issuance and Use of Access Devices 
Electronic fund transfer fraud often involves individuals who use information to obtain 
access to the accounts of others. As a result, bank personnel can prevent fraud by exercising 
care in the initial decision to allow an individual to access the bank’s computerized services. 
Banks offering EBPP or P2P systems to customers should: 
• Confirm phone and mailing addresses on the application to ensure that they are  
consistent with information about the applicant that is available from other sources and, 
with respect to existing customers, consistent with current records about these  
customers. This may involve obtaining credit reports about the applicant or obtaining 
copies of utility bills that show the applicant’s address. 
• Make sure that the area code on the applicant’s telephone number matches the  
geographical area for the applicant’s address. 
• Send a “welcome” letter to the address on the application with the bank’s return address 
so that the letter will be returned if the applicant is not living at that address. 
• Verify by telephone or additional mailings any change of address requests in the same 
way that you would verify a new account application. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1042                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• If a customer reports the loss or theft of an access device, cancel the existing card, PIN, 
or other form of access and issue a new one. 
• If a customer reports that a person previously authorized to use access device reports no 
longer has that authority, cancel all cards, PINs, or other access devices and issue new 
ones to the customer. 
• Always mail PINs separately from other information, such as usernames, with which 
they are associated. 
• Separate the responsibility of bank employees who have custody of information relating 
to access devices from those who have responsibility for issuance, verification, or 
reissuance of PINs. 
• Ensure that any communication concerning usernames or passwords is sent in a secure 
encrypted format. 
• Customers who register for EBPP or P2P systems should be required to provide 
information indicating that they are authorized to use the bank account or credit card 
from which payments will be made. 
 
Use of ACH Network 
When non-customers of the bank are able to attain access to information about an actual 
customer, fraud may occur. To limit this possibility, banks should perform strict user 
authentication standards. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) requires 
banks within its jurisdiction to uphold a commercially reasonable method to authenticate the 
identity of a customer. Banks that use the ACH are also subject to National Automated 
Clearing House Association (NACHA) rules that require originating banks to take certain 
measures to ensure that the correct customer has authorized the transaction. 
 
NACHA has implemented specific rules for Internet-initiated entries. A specific standard 
entry class (SEC) code must be used for Internet-initiated entries. That code, WEB, must be 
used to identify an ACH debit entry to a consumer account that a receiver authorizes 
through the Internet. The rules apply to both single-entry and recurring debits and require 
ODFIs that transmit WEB entries to warrant that their originators have complied with 
certain standards that protect the security of the ACH network and consumer financial 
information. 
Originators of WEB entries are required to: 
• Obtain consumer authorization prior to initiating a WEB entry. The authorization must 
provide evidence of the consumer’s identity and asset to the authorization. 
• Employ commercially reasonable fraudulent transaction detection systems to screen 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1043 
entries in order to maintain the risk of fraud. Different transactions may require different 
levels of authentication, depending on the risk level of the transaction. 
• Use commercially reasonable fraudulent transaction detection systems to screen entries 
in order to minimize the risk of fraud. Different transactions may require different levels 
of authentication, depending on the risk level of the transaction. 
• Establish a secure Internet session with each customer using a commercially reasonable 
security technology. That session must be in place from the time consumers enter their 
banking information through the time of the transmission to the originator, including 
any transmission to a service provider such as an aggregator. 
• Conduct an annual security audit to ensure that financial information obtained from 
consumers is protected by security practices and procedures that include adequate levels 
of (1) physical security to protect against theft, tampering, or damage; (2) personnel and 
access controls to protect against unauthorized access and use; and (3) network security 
to ensure capture, storage, and distribution of financial information. 
 
Operation of Payment Systems 
Banks that participate in EBPP or P2P systems can take steps to detect fraudulent 
transactions, either by providing information to customers or by analyzing transactions that 
have characteristics associated with fraud. These measures include the following: 
• Send customers e-mail alerts when a new bill arrives or a payment is sent. The e-mail 
should advise the customer to contact the bank immediately if the bill was not expected 
or the payment was not authorized. 
• Refuse or scrutinize any transactions from a payer or recipient who has been the subject 
of a notice from a credit card issuer indicating that the person was involved in an 
unauthorized credit card transaction or unauthorized transfer to or from a bank account. 
• Ensure that the name on the bank account associated with the P2P account matches the 
name on the P2P account itself. 
• Track and verify payments of similar amounts to the same recipient. 
• Since P2P systems are frequently used to make payments for online activities, be aware 
of activities that are typically associated with fraud and scrutinize transactions with 
customers who engage in such activities. These activities include pyramid schemes, 
online auctions, and sale of items that have a delayed delivery date. 
 
Protection of Internet Addresses 
Banks or their customers may become victims of fraud, especially identity theft, if they do 
not carefully monitor the use of their name on the Internet. Fraudulent actors may create 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1044                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
false domain names to attract the bank’s customers and get them to provide information that 
will then be used for illicit purposes. This activity, known as cybercloning, involves the creation 
of a “spoof” site, complete with a domain name close to the domain name of a legitimate 
bank and containing the real bank’s logo. An e-mail may be sent asking customers and 
potential customers to log on to the false domain name. Those who respond may be asked 
for information such as account numbers and credit card numbers. Alternately, individuals 
may register domain names close to the domain name of actual banks and use those sites to 
market goods or services with which the bank would not want to be associated. For instance, 
Citigroup had a battle with an individual who registered the name citicard.com and directed 
users who logged in to this site to an online gambling site.  
 
Prevention of EFT Fraud in Other Companies 
The Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) recommends several 
steps for prevention of EFT fraud in companies. The following is a brief overview: 
• Define the EFT process and controls points  
• Define EFT policies and procedures 
• Ensure physical security surrounding all EFT components 
• Implement effective EFT application security 
• Implement effective network operating system security 
• Implement effective security surrounding EFT data 
• Implement effective system logging that establishes a baseline that can be used to 
measure unusual activity. 
• Conduct reconciliations to allow for the determination of whether data have been 
modified during any stage of the EFT process. 
  
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1101 



:


check and credit card fraud
check fraud
check fraud is on of the fastestgrow problem affect the nation financi system
produc estim yearli loss of up to 20 billion not onli is the dollar amount
involv in check fraud increas yearli the complex of fraud tool is grow as well
with increas sophist in laser printer more accur color copier and desktop
publish capabl duplic and forg check ha becom more accur and thu
more difficult to detect
due to demand of law enforc prosecutor fail to pursu 75 percent of bank check
fraud case accord to the us govern account offic in larg citi where a
major of resourc ar us to prosecut violent crime the percentag rise to 90 percent
law enforc offici mai neglect report of check fraud feel that busi ought
to be more vigil in detect bad check mani merchant have tri to us the polic and
prosecutor as check collect agenc therefor law enforc and prosecutor ar
often not eager to pursu these case mani badcheckpass ar constantli on the move
as well make prosecut even more difficult
the best solut for financi institut and merchant then is to educ employe to
recogn forg and fraudul check and the scheme behind them merchant and
financi institut should have a strict check accept polici with which all employe
ar familiar when accept check employe should alwai ask for identif and
make sure it is valid mani check passer mollifi store personnel by show them a small
lamin rectangular document with a pictur after look at sever hundr of these
most employe tend not to scrutin them check passer count on thi it is import for
employe to examin each piec of identif close everi time thei ar present
with on
employ must also watch for behavior among employe that could be red flag of insid
check fraud dissatisfact with job pai rate or home life a lack of recognit or lavish
lifestyl or a problem with gambl alcohol or drug ar indic that an employe mai
be commit intern fraud
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11002 2011 fraud examin manual
counterfeit check
an effect check counterfeit oper can turn a simpl 5000 invest into a
1000000 windfal within a 30dai timefram thi can be done without high level of
comput expertis or program simpl check print softwar can be purchas in
almost ani offic suppli store along with blank paper stock and magnet ink cartridg the
overal initi invest consist of a qualiti comput color inkjet printer check format
and micr font softwar magnet ink cartridg and paper stock after make the initi
invest the printer onli have to concern themselv with purchas addit ink
and paper
sign of counterfeit and forg check
a counterfeit will go to great length to make hi check appear to be the genuin articl
howev there ar a few giveawai that a check is counterfeit if the print on the check
doe not seem uniform in textur and color or slant up or down the check is not good
also the transit number in the top right corner must match the electron encod
number at the bottom of the check these number normal do not coincid on alter
check the first three of the electron encod number indic the state and district
offic of the issuer again on forg check these number do not alwai match properli
the check number itself should be found in the encod serial number at the bottom
know that mani merchant regard check with low check number as suspect forger
often attempt to add a digit here again thei mai have difficulti match the ink us to
produc the check a simpl and effect method of detect bad check is to fan a group
of check counterfeit check will sometim stand out as a slightli differ color
check fraud vulner
a particular institut mai be target for check fraud becaus of it locat inadequ
intern control or market strategi that present opportun to savvi check fraud
artist some mutual fund compani for exampl regularli allow custom to open
account by mail a form of commun with mani secur vulner a signific
number of check fraud complaint from a particular geograph area mai indic the
presenc of an activ organ group which warrant law enforc attent
investig assign to a region or institut should keep regular contact with busi
and regul specif inquiri aim to identifi weak develop control and prevent
futur loss analyz the complaint file by other victim of check fraud includ
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11003
retail oper check cash establish and food storesmai reveal common
element of scheme that might not otherwis seem relat
check theft
three type of check theft ar us stolen cancel check to obtain new check check
wash and steal blank check stock
stolen cancel check and statement although a stolen cancel check cant be negoti
it doe have fraud implic us a stolen cancel check a check thief can order
check from a mailord check printer and have them sent to a mail drop address
check can then be written on the new stock and cash onc fals identif ar
acquir
check wash check wash take place to the tu ne of 815 million everi year in the
us and it is increas at an alarm rate check ar stolen from mailroom and
mailbox and then the check is insert into a solut of chemic that can be
purchas at a hardwar store onc the check is dri the fraudster can write in ani
amount and the check ar usual cash without question most check washer alter
check for rel small amount
stolen check stock profession thiev us sophist method steal blank check
stock alreadi encod with custom account inform which make pass the
check even easier corpor check ar the most like target sinc thei ar easili cash
and deposit
check fraud scheme
paperhang
paperhang ar the expert of phoni check pass thei frequent pick a particular
establish or store and observ it secur method ani store that scrutin check
writer identif is not a good target for a paperhang howev thei will observ and
select the least experienc or most lackadais of store employe to whom to pass the
check the paperhang will then ask the clerk for cash back from the transact and make
the check out for an amount greater than the price of the purchas in some case the
check be written ar counterfeit howev in other case the check ar purposefulli
be written on a close account a variat of thi scam is make a fraudul deposit at
a bank and ask for cash back
these expert will go to great length to blend in with the clientel stand out in a crowd
is not to their advantag women ar often quit good as paperhang a mother with
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11004 2011 fraud examin manual
cry children pai with a check is usual not the profil on expect for a bad
checkpass
stop payment order
thi scheme is quit simpl a custom purc hase an expens item with a check and
then notifi hi bank to stop payment savvi check passer mai even contact the merchant
sai the item wa defect and that thei should expect to hear from the custom
attornei meanwhil the check passer sell the item for a tidi profit
anoth scenario is that after purchas the item and notifi the bank to stop payment
the fraudster goe back to the store wish to return the item and receiv a full refund the
merchant refund the amount in cash and the scheme is success
check kite
check kite is on of the origin whitecollar crime it continu to surviv even with a
financi institut abil to detect kite in a kite scheme multipl bank account ar
open and monei is deposit from acco unt to account although the monei
never exist
float make check kite possibl float is the addit valu of fund gener in
the process of collect and aris becaus the current holder of fund ha been given credit
for the fund befor it clear the financi institut upon which it is drawn busi ar
most suscept to check kite if thei have employe who ar author to write check
or make deposit in more than on bank account todai check kite is more difficult
becaus electron technolog ar make the float smaller all the time in mani case
electron debit to an account occur simultan with the transact unless
detect thi process can continu indefinit cover on check written against
insuffici fund with anoth check
demand draft
demand draft can also be us to commit check fraud thi practic involv the misus of
account inform to obtain fund from a person bank account without that person
signatur on a negoti instrument other term for demand draft ar preauthor
draft and telephon draft while there ar mani legitim busi us for demand
draft such as quickturnaround telephon transact initi by airlin and car rental
compani demand draft have been us by decept telemarket who obtain bank
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11005
account inform and withdraw unauthor fund from consum bank account
without their realiz that such withdraw ar occur
thirdparti bill pai servic
the check produc by these thirdparti bill pai servic provid do not includ the
payor signatur instead the signatur line reflect someth such as signatur on file
unauthor check produc by thirdparti payment servic ar not usual detect until
the custom review the monthli bank statement by the time the custom identifi the
unauthor check it is often too late to recov the fund sinc the 24hour window
actual until midnight of the next bank dai for the time return of check ha long
sinc pass these check usual sail right through the check sort oper sinc thei
includ good account inform and sometim even includ good serial number too
often both busi and individu account holder seem unawar of how their account
inform given too freeli to a request parti can be us for fraudul purpos
travel check
the us of travel check is declin signif icantli and will like eventu be replac by
electron option in fact an increas number of vendor in locat throughout
europeand in other part of the worldno long er accept travel check as a valid form
of payment howev for mani travel travel check continu to provid a conveni
payment method while abroad
anyon familiar with travel check know that 100 check ar quit common some
check ring special in the product and distribut of thi type of check commonli
check passer of thi type make small purchas us a fake 100 travel check and
receiv the bulk of the amount back in cash natur thi scheme work well in area that
have a lot of tourist busi ring often pull thi scam sever time in on area in rapid
success
travel check have sever distinguish featur watermark and hologram ar
common as well as microprint and ultraviolet ink there ar basic two method of
counterfeit travel check color copyin g and offset lithographyprint color copi
check lack the rais ink textur that the intaglio print press give most travel check
instead of a textur feel a phoni check will appear slick and flat offset lithograph
reproduct of actual check ar of higher qualiti than colorcopi check howev
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11006 2011 fraud examin manual
neither will have the textur watermark microprint or hologram that the genuin
articl have
payrol check fraud
check procur emploi by payrol check process compani print duplic payrol
check that ar sold to third parti or ar cash by member of the procur organ
to avoid the secur emploi by financi institut the check ar cash at groceri
store and checkcash oper with loos control the check ar usual written for
amount of 300 or less to avoid suspicion of cours check procur have access to
person inform on the legitim recipi of the payrol check and make us of it in
the futur
dumpster dive
often check fraud can be as simpl as retriev bank materi from a trash receptacl
exampl
thirti peopl were charg in a 10 millio n fraud scheme that involv counterfeit
check bank statement and credit card receipt pull out of the trash the defend
who defraud peopl in 17 state us check bank statement credit card receipt and
other document from garbag bin to creat counterfeit check fals driver licens and
fals credit report offici said counterfeit blank check print on highqual color
printer allegedli were us to defraud bank of 2 million
obvious thi type of fraud is easili prevent through proper dispos by bank
merchant and individu of sensit and confidenti materi
scan
scan requir a scanner and a legitim check scanner can be purchas for less than
200 and check ar readili avail without have to actual steal the check check can
then be manufactur by scan a corpor logo from a busi card onto a simpl
businesss check
system password secur compromis
peopl have legitim access to sensit account and daili code inform for a limit
time for exampl comput consult effect improp transfer through unauthor
access
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11007
check fraud ring
sinc the late 1980 foreign crime ring have been the caus of the major of check fraud
in the us most major financi institut attribut more than 50 percent of all check fraud
to organ crime ring in 2007 an intern task forc monitor the mail in africa
europ and north america and intercept billion of dollar worth facevalu of
counterfeit check
the perpetr of organ check fraud activ ar often base in nigeria russia
vietnam and mexico most of the vietnames and mexican ring oper in california
notabl san francisco orang counti and sa cramento the russian and nigerian ring
center in the northeast spread their crimin activ over a wide area and can be found
pass through ani part of the us at ani time while most of these gang ar involv in
drug traffick and violent crime check and credit card fraud ar consid safe crime
the chanc of be arrest and prosecut ar rel low and the penalti ar not
veri harsh
the equip essenti to a check fraud ring ar a laser scanner laser printer and a person
comput easili obtain item the total cost of which is about 1500 these ring us
digit scanner and offset print to counterfeit check the check ar cash by member
of the ring or sold to third parti
most ring special in payrol or other institut check written for amount less than
300 but some group infiltr financi institut collect corpor payrol check
monei order and master origin bank check cash the duplic for between 2000
and 5000
in recent year member of nigerian and vi etnames ring have infiltr or obtain
accomplic in financi institut there thei gather person inform on custom
pass the inform to counterfeit who produc falsifi identif driver
licens credit card etc which is us to open account establish line of credit and
secur loan an organ group mai includ a counterfeit or printer a distributor on or
more provid of fals identif and sever smurf who open fals bank account
or visit checkcash establish to negoti fraudul check
foreign crime ring that practic check fraud ar ethnic homogen and usual not
rigidli structur it is common for onli the leader of these ring to know the extent of the
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11008 2011 fraud examin manual
particip of their subordin the leader of such group ar usual quit intellig
and educ often thei have an extens crimin or busi background and direct the
group activ gang have been known to share member and cooper with on
anoth in the past
check fraud detect
fbi profil of check fraud activ
accord to an analysi by fbi investig in the new york citi area fraudul check
passer us the follow common techniqu
custom attempt to open an account with a corpor check or other third
parti check
custom tri to flatter hurri or confus the teller to draw attent awai from
the transact
custom delai endors a check or produc identif dure peak hour to
frustrat the teller and hurri the transact
custom present for cash a lownumb check drawn on a new account
custom offer foreign document birth certif passport visa or nonphoto
identif social secur card credit card in lieu of photo identif to open an
account or cash a check
custom offer alter or damag identif to open an account or cash a check
custom attempt to cash or convert sever small check into wire transfer gold or
other tender
custom request an except to establish rule to forc the transact
detect techniqu
the cashier or teller is the frontlin defens in prevent check fraud it is import that
thei receiv the train necessari to identifi fraudul check thei should
be awar of magnet rout number
us extra care in examin a check drawn from a nonloc bank and requir
posit identif
examin the date on the check for accuraci of dai month and year do not accept the
check if it is not date if it is postdat or if it is more than 30 dai old
look for check with a check number less than 400 on person check or below 1500
on busi check 90 percent of bad check ar written on account less than on
year old
be awar of font us to print the custom name that ar visibl differ from the
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11009
font us to print the address
be awar that the magnet ink micr us for rout code should appear non
reflect and dull
look for micr code that doe not match the bank district and the rout symbol in
the upper righthand corner of the check
be awar of the date that the account wa open
be awar of stain or discolor on the check possibl caus by erasur or
alter
have easi access to the signatur card
look for perfor edg of the check
be awar that a color copi might reflect odd color at time due to a failur of the toner
to mix satisfactorili
notic absenc of ani design in the background of the check paper
notic absenc of bank logo and the print of the bank name in the regular letter
notic absenc of the address of the bank on the check
be cautiou of inform that is type or stamp
do not accept a check that is not legibl written it should be written and sign in ink
and must not have ani erasur or writtenov amount
be awar of what is accept identif
recogn forgedalt inform
recogn forg negoti instrument
teller should telephon the busi or account offic for approv on suspici
request
be familiar with pattern of behavior relat to potenti culprit
overli polit
nervou
aggress and hurri
check fraud prevent and investig
sinc the feder reserv regul cc wa implement mandat acceler
avail of custom fund check fraud at bank ha increas most bank custom
fund ar avail for withdraw a dai after deposit leav the bank littl time to verifi
the valid of the transact regul cc howev allow bank two dai to make
fund avail most bank provid nextdai withdraw in order to stai competit
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11010 2011 fraud examin manual
addition special secur print techniqu have been develop to make
counterfeit blank check more difficult on of the featur is the us of a pattern of
color that is difficult to separ even with special camera filter and film anoth
techniqu us is scrambl indicia print which is a seemingli random pattern of tini
color dot print on the paper us a color filter to view the check will make a word
or pattern develop
still anoth techniqu which is also us by credit card issuer is to print a microlin on
the check which appear as a solid line when view normal but us a magnifi glass
will show that the line is actual veri small word or letter which ar veri difficult to
recreat with the normal print process other secur measur includ us a three
dimension hologram which is easili identifi by the human ey but is imposs to
reproduc via ordinari copi or print some check have a secur seal on the back of
the check that is visibl when held up to a light reproduct even good on will not
have a seal
check fraud investig
dure a check fraud investig look for the follow
frequent deposit and check
in the same amount
in round number
with check written on the same other bank
frequent atm account balanc inquiri
mani larg deposit made on thursdai or fridai to take advantag of the weekend
larg period balanc in individu account with no appar busi
low averag balanc compar to high level of deposit
mani check made payabl to other bank
bank willing to pai against uncollect fund
deposit not made daili or intact
entiti us receipt that do not indic mode of payment
on or more person check in the cash drawer by the fund custodian
deposit time lag
irregular check endors
amount of deposit doe not agre with daili activ report
inappropri access to signatur plate
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11011
check number paye name date and amount dont agre with entri in the
check regist
void check ar not retain
check ar issu to individu for larg even dollar amount
support document for check is not avail or ha been prematur destroi
cash withdraw with deposit check drawn on anoth bank
there ar sever tip for busi to us when cash busi and payrol check
examin all check insist that the check be sign in front of the clerk compar the
signatur written on the check with the signatur on the driver licens or state
identif
be particularli care with largedollar check present by noncustom
examin all check for sign of counterfeit such as a glossi crayonish appear
and ani lack of detail and sharp
look for sign of alter or erasur es pecial in the signatur or numer and
written amount
compar the bank identif and rout number for a match
the textur of the check should appear smooth a rough document might signal
erasur
be cautiou of inform that is type or stamp
all check except govern issu should have at least on perfor edg
the magnet ink us for rout code should appear nonreflect and dull
look for fade color paper which can indic that the check ha been chemic
bleach
a color copi might reflect odd color at time due to a failur of the toner to mix
satisfactorili
black letter might have a slightli greenish cast when examin under a magnifi
glass
a light color or delic background might fade out when copi
absenc of ani design in background of check paper
absenc of bank logo and the print of the bank name in regular letter
absenc of the address of the bank on the check
overal appear of poor qualiti of print and paper
a payrol check will usual be for an odd amount and will appear neat clean and
usual unfold
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11012 2011 fraud examin manual
teller should telephon the busi or account offic for approv on suspici
request
check fraud prevent tool
check write pen
when a check is written a special pen design to prevent check wash should be us
these pen ar call check write pen and can be found at just about ani offic suppli
store these pen have special ink that will prevent crimin from us solvent to remov
ink from the check when someon tri to wash a check written from these pen it will
either not work therebi leav the check intact or smear the ink and make it appar that
a check ha been wash
individu with busi account ar a much greater risk when it come to check wash
busi have much stricter requir in term of what the compani must do to
protect their check if the busi doesnt follow a strict plan to protect their check it
like that if ani monei is stolen from their account the bank will not return their monei if
an individu ha a busi account thei should make sure that the check ar lock
secur when not in us make sure not to leav blank computerprint check in the
printer or the busi will be equal liabl for the monei that could potenti be stolen
fingerprint identifi
a biometr fingerprint identifi requir the check writer to match fingerprint with the account
holder which ar on file bank report reduct in check fraud of 40 percent after the
machin wa introduc in the mid1990
nonaccount holder who want check cash at bank that have implement thi system
ar requir to put an inkless fingerprint on their check if the check doe prove fals law
enforc will alreadi have evid regard the fraudster ident the cost to a bank
of implement the inkless fingerprint system could be redeem by prevent a singl
instanc of check fraud bank throughout the nation now us thi techniqu to cut
fraud loss
forens document examin
through handwrit an individu can be posit identifi as is the case with dna or
fingerprint when investig check fraud a forens document examin focus on
the signatur and the handwrit itself
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11013
signatur
if the examin were investig a forg signatur he would compar the suspici
signatur to a sampl of the actual on note discrep between the two while on
signatur mai chang over time it would be close to imposs for a forger to duplic a
signatur with on hundr percent accuraci minut identifi characterist mark
peopl write and ar not reproduc
the ebank discoveri system develop by asv technolog emploi signatur
verif softwar us multipl feat ur set extract technolog drawn from
forens scienc the state and qualiti of a signatur twodimension characterist ar
analyz and verifi against sampl the program identifi flourish arc distanc
between letter and up to 100 other featur reject signatur along with the reason for
reject and signatur sampl ar forward to a human for visual verif asv
technolog claim it result match those of the most highli train and accur signatur
verifi
handwrit
like fingerprint handwrit is uniqu to an individu consequ if the narr
portion of the check is handwritten it offer a document examin a greater opportun to
identifi a forgeri
video spectral compar
forens examin us thi tool to test question document the document is examin
for photocopi and liquid paper under a control light sourc letter ad to a
document can be detect with thi devic
electrostat detect apparatu
thi tool allow examin to detect indent write from the top page of a pad of paper up
to five page below the origin the electrostat detect apparatu us photocopi
toner to develop the area of indent after a document ha been cover with an
electr charg plastic film in the best of case when the document is process with
the electrostat devic and the toner imag is develop the write impress ar clearli
defin and highli contrast if the develop write is to be us in an investig or to
demonstr result for the court the examin must turn to electron imag process
technolog for further enhanc
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11014 2011 fraud examin manual
credit card fraud
credit card fraud is the misus of a credit card to make purchas without author or
counterfeit a credit card the us of credit card as a form of payment ha grown
dramat over the past decad with more than 80 percent of us household have at
least on credit card as the industri continu to expand and offer credit to more and more
consum fraud will also grow
credit card fraud is success becaus the chanc of be caught ar small and
prosecut is not assur retail store have identifi credit card thiev and contact law
enforc onli to be turn down for action
credit card scheme
there ar mani differ type of credit card scheme includ sell the card to thiev
famili member us the credit card without author and fraudul obtain a
card statut relat to the misus of credit card gener prohibit the obtain of
properti or servic through the us of a credit card if the us of the card is for ani reason
unauthor the feder statut prohibit the us of fraudul credit card is found at 15
usc 1664 thi statut prohibit us a fraudul obtain credit card to obtain
anyth of valu aggreg 1000 or more and it prohibit receiv anyth of valu
purchas with an illeg credit card a violat mai be fine up to 10000 andor
imprison for up to 10 year
unauthor us of a lost or stolen card
fraudul activ normal occur within hour of the loss or theft befor most victim
have call to report the loss increasingli victim arent even awar that their credit card
ar be fraudul us until thei receiv their monthli statement it is extrem
import that victim report the loss or theft of their card within 60 dai of receiv the
statement with the fraudul charg as thei will not be held respons for ani charg
beyond 50 that occur dure that time frame if the credit card compani is not notifi of
the theft and the card is us the custom will be liabl
organ crime ring
nigerian ring ar especi notori for steal credit card and bank inform from
the mail these articl ar us to gener fals identif document such as driver
licens and social secur card the credit card themselv ar duplic and distribut
to member of the ring the fals id ar then displai dure purchas made with the
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11015
stolen card member of the ring go on spend spree end onli when the credit ha
dri up or the legitim owner report their card as stolen often counterfeit and stolen
card ar expressmail to member of the ring in other part of the countri
advanc payment
consum regul requir credit card issuer to credit custom account immedi
upon receipt of payment thi mean deduct from the balanc of the account befor the
check or other payment instrument ha actual clear the bank a loophol such as thi is
easili exploit by experienc fraud ring
us a forg or counterfeit check an advanc or overpay is made on a stolen credit
card sinc the issuer must credit the payment at the time it is made there is no time to
verifi the authent of the check consequ cash advanc and purchas can be made
immedi thi scheme can be extrem lucr to the perpetr
stolen card number
the internet ha becom a breed ground for individu to obtain stolen credit card
inform the thiev who steal thi inform find credit card or list of credit card
holder and the correspond number to their account thei then make the number
avail to a larger group which us the inform to obtain good and servic in the
name of the cardhold wrongfulli obtain inform mai be post on websit that
origin in foreign countri the intern natur of the fraud make it arduou to deter
or punish on report involv a romanian websit that displai stolen credit card
number of more than 450 individu most from the unit state the list contain
identifi inform of cardhold and wa avail for sever week befor be shut
down
shave and past
ani number of alphanumer charact is slice from the card surfac and other charact
ar attach util fast dry epoxytyp glue thi might be done to put an entir
differ but valid account number on the card or to chang the name
deembossreemboss
in thi scheme the credit card is expos to heat usual from a household iron a candl or
hot water in the microwav plastic card primarili compos of polyvinylchlorid becom
more elast when heat and the emboss alphanumer charact ar remov an
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11016 2011 fraud examin manual
emboss put new number and name on the card thi process will gener creat a
ghost imag
counterfeit card
anoth type of bankcard fraud involv the illeg counterfeit of credit card known as
white plastic card thi scheme util creditcards plastic with emboss account
number and name thi scheme work in conjunct with a corrupt and collus
merchant or a merchant employe other counterfeit card ar manufactur from scratch
us high speed print facil and us in associ with organ crime group
manufactur facil have been trace to the far east
counterfeit oper ar center in taiwan china and hong kong where the
specialti is produc the hologram and magnet strip that appear on mani card forg
hologram ar smuggl into the us and canada by ring member from asia and
distribut throughout both countri a substanti amount of them end up in california
where most of the asian counterfeit oper in the us ar locat not surprisingli
california notabl orang counti experi more credit card fraud than ani area in
the countri
the actual counterfeit process ha been immeasur eas by technolog that allow for
more accur duplic duplic legitim card is still an intric oper
howev magnet strip number hologram and logo must all appear authent
desktop comput emboss tip foil and lamin ar common tool in the
reproduct process perhap most difficult of all to accur reproduc howev is the
hologram most phoni hologram can be sold for between 5 and 15 true hologram us
a lenticular refract process counterfeit ar gener onli reflect materi usual a
foil with an imag stamp on it these decal ar attach to the surfac of the card rather
than fix into the plastic as is the case with legitim card some hologram do not
chang color as legitim on do when view from variou angl counterfeit credit
card ar the most damag scheme of those mention here howev with the increas
us of chip insid the card and the addit of a pin person identif number
counterfeit card ha decreas significantli as a method of bank card fraud in the us
uk and other countri implement thi technolog
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11017
telephonemail order fraud
the fraudster might offer a free trip or other nice prize with the onli catch be that the
winner must have a credit card onc the thief ha the number he can order merchandis or
have monei wire to himself
a great deal of credit card fraud is childishli simpl to complet mani crook have great
success by simpli select a name from the phone book call and pretend to be a
visamastercard repres the victim is told that hi card number mai have been
obtain and us illeg by crimin or a repres of a travel agenc mai call
claim the victim ha won a discount travel packag in ani case the victim is ask to
read the card number off for verif or inclus in the discount deal a surprisingli
larg amount of peopl fall for thi scheme and give out their credit card inform
purchas through catalogu and mail order ar then made us the victim card number
thei mai select an unoccupi address to which their merchandis can be deliv
perhap leav a note ask the deliveri servic to simpli put the packag by the
back door
mail theft
a thief mai steal credit card alreadi appli for by a bank custom and issu by the
bank the thief will then attempt to us the card by pose as the intend recipi
fals applic
perpetr might appli for a new card us inform stolen from a wallet purs or the
trash or by steal a preapprov credit card applic out of the mail or trash also
takeon applic that ar promin in store offer credit card to the public ar
ripe for fraud
credit doctor
credit doctor is the term us for fraudster who sell stolen credit card account number via
newspap ad to peopl unabl to get credit card
true name fraud
new credit card account can be open by individu possess a victim true name
identif such as a driver licens or social secur number the true identif wa
either obtain as a secondari object in the commiss of a more aggress offens
such as robberi or as the primari target of a lesser crime such as pick pocket
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11018 2011 fraud examin manual
nonreceipt fraud
a form of credit card fraud in which the perpetr intercept credit card that ar in transit
between the credit issuer and the author account holder loss attribut to mail theft
have declin significantli as a result of c ard activ program where the cardhold
must call their financi institut and confirm their ident befor the card is activ
keyent counterfeit
when bank began us the cvv for visa and cvc for mastercard secur system
fraudster came up with thi clever ruse in respons the cvv system us a threedigit
number embed in the magnet strip of a credit card identifi it as a legitim issu
credit instrument credit card counterfeit figur out a wai to beat the system howev
by leav the magnet strip uncod or make it unread fraudster forc merchant
handl the transact to enter the credit card number manual thi mean the
transact never fall under the scope of the cvv system
clever bank and credit card offici veri quickli found a patch for thi scheme though the
cvv2 and cvc2 system us a threedigit secur code that is print on the back of
card it is design to valid that a genuin card is be us dure a transact when
a pointofsal po termin read a card ma gnetic stripe visa card verif valu
cvv or mastercard card valid code cvc can be verifi dure the
author merchant us cvv2cvc2 can expect to reduc their chargeback by as
much as 26 percent the number appear in revers ital at the top of the signatur panel at
the end the cvv2 and cvc2 program can also be us to reduc fraud in cardnot
present transact
creditmast
thi softwar program download from the internet allow the user to produc valid
credit card number counterfeit can then put these number to us in phoni card
probe
the fraudster set up a comput program that let him run stolen number through variou
financi institut in the hope that on of them will still honor the number number
that clear ar often sold en mass to counterfeit
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11019
skim
thi scheme requir a devic known as a wedg which store up to 200 credit card
number credit card skim is more frequent in busi where an employe must
leav the custom presenc in order to ru n the transact a restaur patron for
exampl hand hi credit card to a waiter who swipe the card into a wedg while
conduct the legitim transact onc the waiter ha collect enough number he can
either sell them to a counterfeit or simpli produc hi own fake card us the stolen
inform it mai be month befor the custom notic phoni transact on hi
statement make the point of loss veri difficult to determin it follow that the guilti
waiter is therefor unlik to get caught skim can also occur by tap into a line
us to transport credit card data
pretext call
some fraudul actor will call unsuspect custom and pose as bank or credit card
agent the actor will request account inform or other identifi inform from the
victim and us the inform to appli for addit credit card or to us the credit card
to purchas good or servic
account takeov
the fake actor mai take over a victim acco unt by request a chang of address on the
account and then call to report the card lost or stolen the issu bank will then send the
replac card to the new address
institut ident theft and spoof site
fraudul actor mai creat fals internet site pretend to sell good to buyer who
must enter their credit card inform and other person inform in order to make
purchas the seller then us the inform to make fraudul purchas in the name
of the buyer more recent fraudul actor have begun creat affili site of actual
seller or other creditor such as bank the perpetr of the fraud then send email to
exist custom of the actual seller or creator these email inform the unsuspect
custom that there is a problem with hi account and ask the custom to log on to the site
of the compani that the wrongdoer ha copi and to reenter their person and credit card
inform the fraudul actor then us the inform to make purchas
inform on how to commit credit card fraud is readili avail to anyon will to
make the effort to look post on the internet give stepbystep instruct on how to
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11020 2011 fraud examin manual
obtain carbon paper receipt and call creditreport agenc us merchant number the
latter is done in order to verifi that the card is valid and to obtain the amount of credit
avail the fraudster usual watch a store employe dial the number of the agenc
note the number as thei ar dial thei then listen to the employe give the merchant
number thi number can often be found next to regist and can be copi down if in
plain sight the fraudster now ha an excel avenu to test stolen card
the law concern credit card fraud
feder law deal with legal principl surround loss from the fraudul us of credit
card unlik check fraud which is primarili govern by state law credit card fraud is
govern by feder law even so the feder law and regul govern credit card
howev pertain onli to the relationship between the card issuer and the cardhold thu
contract law and the contractu agreement between the merchant and the merchant bank
as well as the merchant bank and the issu bank ar typic what regul the outcom
of fraudul credit card usag
the most import legal principl concern the alloc of loss between credit card
issuer and credit card holder come from regul z of the feder reserv system
which wa promulg pursuant to the feder truthinlend act tila
congress design tila to protect consum therefor it provis gener do not
appli to creditor that extend credit primarili for busi agricultur or commerci
purpos tila howev defer to ani state la w that give greater protect and benefit to
consum so state law that provid consum cardhold more right than feder law will
prevail where there is a conflict
the provis of regul z that ar most re levant to credit card fraud place limit
on a cardhold liabil for unauthor us under tila the term cardhold includ
ani person or organ to which a card is issu for ani purposeinclud a busi
agricultur or commerci purpos thi constitut an except to the gener rule that
most tila provis do not appli to credit card transact for busi agricultur or
commerci purpos
the basic liabil rule provid that the cardhold is not liabl for unauthor us of the
card the card issuer can shift from unauthor us back to the cardhold onli if
the card is an accept credit card ie on that the cardhold ha request and
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11021
sign us or ha author anoth person to us
the cardhold liabil is not more than 50
the card issuer ha given notic to the cardhold of the potenti liabil
the card issuer ha provid the cardhold with a descript of the mean by which
the card issuer mai be notifi of loss or theft of the card either on the period
statement that the issuer send to the consum or on a separ notic that accompani
that statement
the unauthor us occur befor the card issuer ha been notifi that an
unauthor us of the credit card
the card issuer ha provid a method by which the user of the card can be identifi as
the person author to us it
the feder reserv board staff ha interpret regul z to impos the 50 limit to a
seri of unauthor us assum for instanc that a thief steal a credit card and
within a rel short period of time us the credit card to make separ 100 purchas
at three differ store the consum mai maintain that under the feder reserv board
staff interpret the card issuer mai onli impos on 50 charg becaus the transact
were all part of the same seri
guidanc for cardhold
it is in the interest of both the issu bank and the cardhold to minim credit card fraud
although the cardhold monetari liabil for unauthor us of a credit card cannot
exce 50 and mani issu bank do not ev en impos that charg on their custom
cardhold mai have to spend signific time and monei sometim includ legal
expens to refut alleg that thei open credit card account us card in particular
wai or otherwis author transact about which thei have no knowledg and with
which thei have no connect although cardhold mai be awar of the pervas of
ident of theft thei mai be unawar of the consequ or of wai to prevent it or
minim it effect sinc issu bank will not often bear the loss relat to ident theft
that involv credit card bank should inform cardhold of wai to protect both physic
card and the risk of ident theft
bank should send cardhold occasion remind of step that can be taken to safeguard
their credit card ident includ the follow
alwai carri the least amount of credit card with you as necessari
sign credit slip and new credit card as soon as you receiv them
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11022 2011 fraud examin manual
do not suppli credit card inform to unauthor peopl
do not leav credit card unattend with merchant
make it a habit to review credit card statement and immedi report ani
unrecogniz charg
immedi report the loss or theft of ani credit card to the card issuer
obtain credit report annual in order to detect ani suspici activ in which credit
card or other extens of credit have been grant or appli for without
your consent
never reveal account number or other credit card account inform to person
attempt to gain your inform on the telephon after thei repres themselv as
agent of a bank
if you ar awar of suspici activ immedi inform the relev credit report
agenc and have a fraud alert place on your account thi will prevent ani
potenti new creditor from grant new credit without first contact you person
the major credit report agenc and their telephon number ar experian 888397
3742 equifax 8887660008 and the transunion 8008607289
alwai keep credit card receipt in a safe place and destroi them after you have receiv
the bill statement that reflect the charg
if you receiv a credit card you didnt appli for call the issuer and determin why thei
sent the card someon mai have appli in your name and miss the opportun to
steal the card from your mailbox when it arriv
void incorrect receipt and destroi carbon of credit card slip
keep a record of account number expi ration date and phone number and address
of each card issuer so that you can contact them in the event of the loss or theft of your
credit card
do not lend your card to anoth person
do not write your account number on a postcard or the outsid of an envelop
merchant scam
collus occur between the sale peopl and the credit card fraudster to process valid
credit card number on white plastic card thei might also make sever imprint on sale
ticket and fill them in later on
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11023
magnet stripe diagram
as shown in the abov magnet stripe diagram abov two track appear on the credit
card magnet stripe track two is the most wide read it is 40 charact in length is
strictli numer contain the account number expir date a secur code and
discretionari bank data track on is 79 charact in length is alpha numer and contain
the abov inform plu the cardhold name
magnet stripe compromis is a more sophist method of obtain account
inform for fraudul purpos it requir the transfer or encod of legitim
account inform along with a secur code from the legitim magnet stripe to a
counterfeit card with a magnet stripe the full unalt legitim magnet stripe must
be obtain to accomplish fraud by thi method
skimmer ar becom preval in credit card and atmdebit card fraud a skimmer is a
cardread devic similar to the swipe machin us by cashier to valid credit card it
can be purchas at electron store and us by credit card thiev to read data imprint
on inform track within the magnet strip locat on the card in addit crimin
ar us the devic to swipe credit inform from on credit card and put it on anoth
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11024 2011 fraud examin manual
nowadai crimin have gotten even more sophist by place pinhol camera on the
atm to captur the card number as well to watch as the victim enter hi pin into the
keypad
compani credit card
compani credit card ar provid to employe for conveni in conduct of compani
busi no person expens mai be charg on the compani credit card except as
specif author by compani procedur the employe must pai ani charg
person expens promptli compani credit card should not be us to avoid prepar
document for direct payment to vendor where allow by local law charg on
compani credit card for which a properli approv expens report ha not been receiv at
the time of an employe termin of employ mai be deduct from the employe
last paycheck the compani will pursu repay by the employe of ani amount it ha to
pai on the employe behalf
prevent and detect of credit card fraud
the essenti part of ani detect program is the educ of the teller and merchant
who ar respons for handl the transact in a studi by monei magazin it wa
found that 95 percent of store clerk and cashier did not check credit card signatur
while ani of the follow can occur in a perfectli legitim transact these
characterist ar frequent present dure fraudul transact teller and merchant
should be advis to be alert for the custom who
take a card from a pocket instead of a wallet or purs
purchas an unusu number of expens item
make random purchas select item with littl regard to size qualiti or valu
make sever small purchas to stai under the floor limit or ask what the floor
limit is
doe not ask question on major purchas
sign the sale draft slowli or awkwardli
charg expens item on a newli valid credit card
cannot provid photo identif when ask
rush the merchant or teller
purchas a larg item such as a televis consol and insist on take it at the time
even when deliveri is includ in the price
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11025
make purchas and leav the store but then return to make more purchas
becom argument with the teller or merchant while wait for the transact to
be complet
make larg purchas just after the store open or as the store is close
merchant should also be awar of potenti sign of fraud in cardnotpres transact
larger than normal order
order that includ sever of the same item
order made up of bigticket item
rush or overnight ship
ship to an intern address
transact with similar account number
ship to a singl address but transact place on multipl card
multipl transact on on card over a veri short period of time
multipl transact on on card or a similar card with a singl bill
in onlin transact multipl card us from a singl ip internet protocol address
order from internet address that make us of a free email servic
teller and merchant should be awar of the common sign of forg credit card
hologram crude stamp or badli fake with tini bit of aluminum foil
misspel word on the card
alter signatur panel
discolor
glu
paint
cover with white tape
card that appear to have been flatten and restamp
at the consum level the credit card user should rememb the follow
know where your card is at all time
never leav your card unattend at workth re ar more credit card theft in the
workplac than in ani other singl situat
dont leav the store or atm without all of the copi and carbon
dont leav your card in plain sight where other can get the number
dont leav receipt in a public trash can hotel or shop bag
review monthli statement for accuraci and ani item that you might not have charg
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11026 2011 fraud examin manual
review your statement via electron mean rather than wait for paper statement if
possibl cancel paper statement altogeth sinc most fraudster still practic
dumpster dive and will riffl through your trash for old receipt and credit card
statement
sign the back of a new card as soon as you get it and destroi old card that ar outdat
or no longer us
make a list of all of your card and their number thi kei inform is help when
report lost or stolen card store thi list in a highli secur area
be wari of offer that come through the mail
never reveal your card number over the phone to anyon who ha offer you a prize
report miss card immedi
dont reveal person inform such as your address and telephon number
dont allow a salesperson to record your credit card number on your check
keep your card out of the view of other in a store or at a public telephon so thei
cannot read the name and account number
us a tier seethrough contain in your wallet for credit card so it will be easier to
notic miss card
alwai check your card when return to you after a purchas make sure it is your card
if you becom suspici of a telephon call offer or mail solicit report the activ
us the nation consum leagu fraud center onlin fraud report form at
httpssecurenclformsorgnficwebnfichtm
prevent
prevent is the kei to reduc credit card loss sever program can and ar in place to
reduc loss some of them ar
educ program
teller and merchant should be train to be familiar with the secur featur of the credit
card although the major of counterfeit card contain some of the secur featur thei
ar usual not complet and offer indic that the card is not legitim credit card
issuer should take measur to inform their custom about credit card fraud what the
financi institut is do about fraud and how the consum can help
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11027
liaison with law enforc
compani should develop strong liaison with law enforc when a compani receiv
intellig of hot fraud law enforc should be notifi immedi
credit card compani secur initi
both visa and mastercard have initi secur measur to help combat onlin theft the
verifi by visa program protect merchant from fraudrel chargeback on all visa
person debit and credit card transact even when process transact from non
particip issuer verifi by visa also protect consum by requir a password in the
verifi by visa window dure purchas with particip onlin store help ensur
that no on els can us their visa card onlin e at onlin store not yet particip in
verifi by visa the visa credit card will continu to work the same as usual addition
visa work alongsid financi institut and merchant to continu monitor consum
account to detect suspici or unusu activ by take these step visa is abl to work
proactiv to reduc fraudul transact
here ar some of the red flag that mai indic fraudul activ
ship address is differ from the bill address or the ship address ha
suddenli chang
unusu larg purchas compar to normal purchas pattern for the account in
question
chang in name on the account
chang in date of birth or social secur number
mastercard securecod allow credit card holder to regist and set up their own privat
securecod number user of securecod will be automat prompt by their financi
institut at checkout to provid their securecod each time thei make a purchas with a
particip onlin merchant the securecod is quickli confirm by the financi
institut and then the purchas is complet the securecod will never be share with
the merchant it just like enter a pin at an atm mastercard ha also initi the
paypass system in which cardhold can make purchas with a simpl tap rather than
swipe or dip their card thi add a level of secur sinc the card or paypass devic
never leav the cardhold hand
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11028 2011 fraud examin manual
physic secur featur
in respons to the counterfeit problem credit card compani ar master the
possibl of make credit card fraud more difficult some of their program ar
discuss below
visa card featur
the visa logo should have microprint around the border the fine print is bare
readabl without magnif
the fly dove hologram should appear to be threedimension and appear to move
when the card is tilt back and forth
visa emboss account number begin with a 4 and contain 16 digit all digit must
be clean even and the same size and shape if a card ha been reemboss the number
mai appear to be fuzzi as a gener rule of thumb alwai check the hologram it is
easier to spot a reemboss number there
a fly v is an emboss secur charact besid the good thru date if the v
is not italic or it is miss the card is counterfeit howev thi is not a requir
secur featur and mai or mai not be present on the card
if there ar ghost imag of the number behind the emboss on either the front or
back of the card it ha been reemboss if the card ha been reemboss the
hologram might be damag
a fourdigit number must be print below the emboss account number thi four
digit number must match exactli with the first four digit of the account number both
must begin with 4
the visa brand mark appear in blue and gold on a white background it must appear in
either the bottom right top left or top right corner
an ultraviolet sensit dove is visibl on the face of the card when the card is place
under an ultraviolet light
if someon ha tri to eras the signatur panel the word void will be displai
card verif valu 2 cvv2 is a threedigit code that appear on the back of the
card in the signatur panel typic the signatur panel will have a seri of number
but onli the last three digit make up the cvv2 code cvv2 is us primarili in card
notpres transact to verifi that the custom is in possess of a valid visa card
at the time of the sale merchant will request the cvv2 from the cardhold at
checkout and the inform is sent electron to the cardissu bank to verifi it
valid within second the cvv2 result ar return with author if it return
as invalid merchant have the right to stop the transact for ad protect
merchant ar prohibit from keep or store the cvv2 number after the
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11029
transact ha been complet
check the valid date for evid of tamper do not accept an expir card
for more inform about visa secur featur visit their websit at
httpwwwvisacaenmerchantfraudpreventioncardfeaturescfm
mastercard card featur
a larg mc is visibl under ultraviol et light for mastercard the mc secur
charact is no longer permit on newli issu card effect june 1 2006 but mai
continu to appear on card through june 2010
all card must includ the fullcolor mastercard brand mark thi mark mai be below
or abov the global hologram merchant should be awar that the mastercard card
design and the mastercard brand mark mai be orient vertic
the hologram whether on global or debit card can be locat on the front or back of
the card base on the designtyp unless holomag tape is us
mastercard emboss account number begin with a 5 and contain 16 digit the
number must be clear and uniform in size and space and must appear on on line
the first four number of the account number must be the same digit as those print
directli below preprint bin
the front of the card must includ a valid expir date
the signatur panel locat on the back of the card must includ the word mastercard
print in multicolor at a 45 degre angl the last four digit of the account number
must be print in revers ital in the upper right corner of the signatur panel thi is
requir as of june 1 2006 prior to thi the revers ital could be found at the upper
center of the signatur panel
magnet tape must be present and appear smooth and straight with no sign of
tamper holomag tape mai be us in place of the tradit magnet tape
the holomag tape or mastercard hologram must be includ on the back of the card if
it cannot be found on the front
cvc2 number threedigit valid number must be print in revers ital to the
right of the last four digit of the account number as of june 1 2006 the cvc2
number wa requir to be print in revers ital in an adjac white box to the right
of the signatur panel
for more inform about mastercard secur featur visit their websit at
httpwwwmastercardcomusmerchantsecuritywhatcandocardfeatureshtml
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11030 2011 fraud examin manual
american express featur
ultraviolet ink ar us such that when a genuin card is examin with a black light
the letter amex as well as phosphoresc in the portrait of the centurion ar
visibl
the portrait of the centurion is print with a high degre of clariti and detail such as
the portrait on us currenc
erasur or tamper with the signatur panel will caus the wave print background to
appear white or smudg
the card member account number is 15 digit begin with 37 the emboss should
be clear and uniform in size and space
a duplic account number is on the revers of the card to ensur the card number
appear on the front of the card ha not been alter
the preprint nonemboss card identif number cid which is a four
digit number print on the front of the card that is us to ensur that the individu
us the card is actual the owner of the card should alwai appear abov the account
number on either the right or the left edg of the card
the card number or cardmemb name should be print in the same typefac as the
american express typefac
all american express card includ network optima and corpor will bear the
same secur featur outlin here
for more inform on american expresss secur featur visit their websit at
httpswww209americanexpresscommerchantsinglevoiceusengfrontservletrequest
typen avigatepagecardsecurityfeatur
technolog deterr
bank can take advantag of technolog develop to deter credit card fraud these
develop can make both the counterfeit of card and us of valid card more
difficult some of these develop requir veri littl technolog for instanc most
credit card now includ verif code on the back to help merchant match card us
in purchas transact with author cardhold card network also maintain address
and zip code verif servic so that merchant especi those involv in internet or
telephon transact can determin whether the suppos cardhold live at the address
given by the person place the order
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11031
photograph
photograph of the legitim cardhold will deter counterfeit to a degre though thei
have becom increasingli easi for counterfeit to purchas photograph can be alter
but technolog advanc permit digit encod of the cardhold imag on the
magnet strip of the credit card us of thi technolog would requir special process
termin that would add to the cost of fraud detect
hologram
hologram have been us by issuer as secur devic sinc the earli 1980 not long after
implement of thi featur howev it wa found that a veri accur counterfeit
industri wa emerg in asia if on assess the averag credit limit of fraudul card at a
conserv 2000 it take few in circul to add up to consider loss to the issuer
signatur panel
signatur panel usual contain imag of the issuer logo blank or damag signatur
panel ar red flag of forg credit card signatur on the panel and the sale receipt
should alwai be compar for consist while it mai be most merchant polici that
employe compar these signatur it is often ignor
activ of card
in an effort to curb credit card fraud perpetr us the mail compani send new
card in the mail do not activ them until the custom contact the credit card compani
upon contact the credit card issuer then ask the caller for person inform such as
their mother maiden name and birth date or other inform that the ordinari thief
probabl would not have onc the inform ha been satisfactorili answer the card is
activ for us
advanc author
visa recent unveil technolog for analyz card transact both individu and
collect across it network in order to detect emerg fraud pattern when a credit card
is swipe advanc author provid an instantan rate of the transact
potenti for fraud to the cardissu financi institut includ whether the card
number wa among those lost or stolen in a datasecur incid the system is design to
spot situat where multipl account ar associ with fraudul test or some other
type of coordin attack involv multipl account
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11032 2011 fraud examin manual
cybersourc advanc fraud screen
cybersourc advanc fraud screen enhanc by visa is the first ecommerc fraud
detect system enabl with current worldwid fraud trend and global paymentcard
usag pattern that provid a comprehens transact risk assess of activ
combin thi with cybersourc hybrid system neural network and rulesbas
technolog and merchantact data provid ecommerc merchant with target fraud
detect abil cybersourc advanc fraud screen oper around the clock 7 dai a
week 24 hour a dai it effect screen shopper locat anywher in the world and
work with all payment card
the cybersourc advanc fraud screen riskmanag tool us frequent updat
intellig about global paymentcard usag pattern includ onlin and offlin
purchas profil to provid an accur fraud detect servic thi advantag can help
merchant lower fraudrel cost by identifi riski transact and increas consum
goodwil by elimin unintent insult that mai occur from incorrectli declin
order
comput edit
comput edit ar built into some credit card such that if the card is usual us five time
per month and it is us 25 time in on dai the system will prohibit author of
further purchas
card scrutini at point of sale
how often do merchant scrutin your card in mani store thei never get the chanc
consum us the creditdebit card machin at the sale counter and the card never leav
their possess while thi make thing more conveni for the consum it often mean
that the merchant is left hold the bag when a transact is return if on of the kei
author compon is miss signatur expir date author number card
imprint the merchant ha to swallow the loss
internettelephon order
with these transact vendor never have the opportun to see the custom credit
card the onli failsaf selfprotect measur open to them is to postpon deliveri until
the transact ha clear the custom account in our nextdaydeliveri societi
howev thi is mai be detriment to busi for some vendor there ar a coupl of
other option open to merchant
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11033
bewar of order with differ bill to and ship to address unless the item is
intend as a gift
set up free email account with compani like hotmail or yahoo is veri simpl and
allow the user anonym order receiv from free email account should be treat
with extra scrutini
potenti sign of cardnotpres fraud
firsttim shopper crimin ar alwai look for new victim
largerthannorm order becaus stolen card or account number have a limit life
span crook need to maxim the size of their purchas
order that includ sever of the same itemhav multipl of the same item
increas a crimin profit
order made up of bigticket item these item have maximum resal valu and
therefor maximum profit potenti
rush or overnight ship fraudster want these fraudul obtain item as
soon as possibl for the quickest possibl resal and arent concern about extra
deliveri charg
ship to an intern address a signific number of fraudul transact
ar ship to fraudul cardhold outsid of the us
transact with similar account number particularli us if the account number
us have been gener us softwar avail on the internet such as
creditmast
ship to a singl address but transact place on multipl cardscould involv
an account number gener us special softwar or the us of sever of stolen card
multipl transact on on card over a veri short period of timecould be an attempt
to run a card until the account is close
multipl transact on on card or a similar card with a singl ip internet protocol
address more than on or two card could indic a fraud scheme
order from internet address that make us of free email servicesthes email
servic involv no bill relationship and therefor provid neither an audit trail nor
verif that a legitim cardhold ha open the account
financi institut measur
bank and other financi institut have great resourc at their dispos to prevent
fraudul transact mani of them need me reli to enforc their exist polici
new account screen educ personnel to thoroughli check applic
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11034 2011 fraud examin manual
inform compar id inform address and credit report for accuraci
pin activ bank custom ar often requir to provid person identif
number in order to activ their card over the phone caller who ar not abl to
provid the pin number mai have manufactur or stolen the card in question
caller id most peopl call to activ their card will do so from home if the
number on caller id doe not match ani of the telephon number list in the
custom account inform bank personnel should ask some identifi question
cvv2cvc2 implement these system as soon as possibl thei ar among the best
defens financi institut have against credit card fraud
smart card
smart card contain a microprocessor memori chip instead of hologram these card ar
abl to identifi the user through encrypt inform on the chip and must be insert
into a card reader attach to the comput that mean the card cannot be us unless
the purchas is current hold it a pin is also requir for the card so the thief need to
physic have the card and the secur code in order to us it thi allow cardhold
more purchas option as well as increas secur
judg from the past credit opportun for consum will increas over time and
consequ more will fall victim to fraud in the futur the trend will be on card for all
type of financi transact prototyp ar current be develop and test by the
major credit card issuer fraud ring will adjust accordingli and new counterfeit
method will emerg law enforc and investig must maintain a global outlook
when face thi type of fraud as much of it origin outsid the us
electron bill payment and persontoperson payment
increasingli consum ar us electron fund transfer rather than actual currenc or
paper to pai bill or make onlin purchas through onlin servic offer by mani
financi institut an individu can make bank transact us a system call
electron bill payment and present or ebpp individu can pai each other for good or
servic through thi same electron form which is known as the persontoperson or p2p
system
although these system ar still young some expert suggest that thei will plai an import
part in the wai payment ar made accord to the sheshunoff and as pratt public
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11035
electron fund transfer fraud protect ident theft to wire transfer fraud there
is rel low process and custom servic cost for biller while custom can
reduc time and cost in make payment with some ebpp system some custom mai
even be abl to manag their fund more effect electron bill payment ha receiv
faster accept than bill present though accept appear to be depend on the
price of these servic as the ebpp method of payment continu to increas it is
import to be prepar to combat fraud that mai surfac in thi area
electron fund tran fer
the electron fund transfer act efta is intend to protect the right of consum
unlik the state law that govern check or wholesal wire transfer the law concern
electron fund transfer initi from consum account is feder law
as defin in the efta an electron fund transfer is ani transfer of fund other than
on origin by a check or similar paper instrument that is initi through an electron
termin telephon instrument or comput or magnet tape that order or purport to
author a financi institut to debit or credit an account each of the follow would
constitut an electron fund transfer for purpos of feder law
a custom withdraw of fund from the custom own account by us of an atm
a custom transfer of fund from the c ustom check account to the custom
save account at the same financi institut initi by the custom through hi
person comput
a custom transfer of fund from the custom check account to the custom
save account at the same financi institut initi by the custom through the
bank autom telephon servic
a custom us of a debit card to purchas good from a merchant who swipe the
custom card through a pointofsal po devic to author deduct of the
amount of the sale from the custom check account
a custom transfer of fund from hi bank account to a thirdparti initi by the
custom through hi person comput
an employ instruct initi by comput or through a magnet tape to a
financi institut to deposit fund repres an employe pai into the
employe account
a noncustom instruct initi by comput or through a magnet tape to a
financi institut to withdraw fund from the check account of a custom and
transfer the fund of a noncustom bank account
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11036 2011 fraud examin manual
the feder reserv board ha promulg a seri of regul known as regul e
which inform bank of how thei must implement the efta bank must be awar of their
oblig under these law and regul in order both to minim their exposur to
electron fund transfer fraud and to know how to deal with their custom when such
fraud occur under these law and regul ebpp and p2p system will usual qualifi
as electron fund transfer other transact that ar initi by the consum through
comput or telephon instrument without the intervent of bank personnel includ
transact involv debit card and autom teller machin atm transact mai
also qualifi as electron fund transfer
access devic
an access devic includ a card code or other mean of access to a custom account
for the purpos of initi electron fund transfer these includ debit card person
identif number pin telephon transfer and bill payment code and other mean
that a consum mai us to initi an electron fund transfer from hi account a
consum account is consid an asset account such as a demand deposit or save
account establish for person famili or household purpos a credit card is not
consid an access devic sinc it provid access to a credit line rather than to a
consum account the term access devic doe not includ a check or draft us to
captur to micr encod to initi a onetim ach debit for exampl if a custom
author a singl ach debit from hi account by give a check to the merchant so thei
can captur the rout account and serial number to initi the debit the check is not an
access devic if the custom howev provid a paye with a check or with inform
from a check that is physic retain by the consum in order to allow the paye to
captur rout account and serial number inform the result transfer doe constitut
an electron fund transfer
when an access devis is necessari to instruct a financi institut to perform a transfer
the financi institut will be abl to claim that it wa author to debit or credit a
consum account onli if the transfer wa initi through us of an accept access
devic an access devic will qualifi for thi statu onli if the devis wa issu to a person
who request and receiv it
who sign and us it
who author anoth to us the access devic
for the purpos of transfer monei between account or obtain monei properti
labor or servic
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11037
if a consum us an accept access devic to initi a transfer the efta will cover the
transact even though a bank employe ha interven to complet the transact
assum for instanc that smith wish to transfer 100 from her check account to her
save account she ask the teller at her bank to perform the transact the teller
request that smith enter her pin into a cardread devic at the teller station if the pin
is us to initi the transfer the transact is an electron fund transfer
consum initi
notic that the definit of electron fund transfer appli liter onli to consum
transact on might specul that if the consum doe not actual us the termin
the transact is not an electron fund transfer if for instanc a consum desir to
purchas good and hand the merchant a debit card to pai for the transact on might
argu that the consum ha not initi the transact nevertheless the feder reserv
board ha constru the definit to appli to a po termin that captur data
electron in order to debit or credit a consum bank account thi definit is broad
enough to includ the situat in which a merchant physic swipe or insert the
consum debit card through the termin but doe so at the direct of the consum in
ani event the transact would constitut an electron fund transfer under the part of the
definit that includ transfer initi through comput
even though a telephon is not itself an electron termin transfer that the consum
initi by telephon mai be consid electron transfer fund telephon transfer
which like includ fax transmiss fall within the efta if made pursuant to a
prearrang plan or agreement that is enter into between the consum and the financi
institut make the transfer and that contempl period or recur transfer if an
effect agreement exist a transfer that the consum initi by telephon fall within the
efta even though an employe of the bank complet the transfer or the consum
initi the transfer through a facsimil machin or the consum initi the transfer
through the bank audio or voicerespons telephon system
electron bill present and payment
electron bill present and payment ebpp involv the present of bill from on
or more seller of good or provid of servic to a consum through electron mean
and the payment of that bill by the consum also through electron mean some expert
expect ebpp to becom on of the fastest grow applic of electron fund transfer
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11038 2011 fraud examin manual
at present ebpp system vari in organ and complex thei mai involv a
transact between a singl merchant and a custom or the consolid of multipl bill
from differ biller or of multipl payment from differ custom initi ebpp
system were offer by proprietari provid more recent howev bank have begun to
enter the field often by contract out implement of the system to proprietari
provid bank mai have an advantag in market these system becaus consum who
ar like to us these system often have exist relationship with their bank bank
custom therefor mai be more will to trust those institut to handl their account
than to entrust fund to a new entiti with whom thei have no previou or tangibl
relationship
biller direct system
exist ebpp system usual fall within on of two categori biller direct system and
consolidationaggreg system in a biller direct system merchant deal with each
custom individu in a typic transact the custom will enter an internet site that
the biller ha creat there the custom who wish to pai hi telephon bill onlin will
simpli log on to the telephon compani web site enter a usernam and password that
allow the custom to pull up a copi of hi bill review it and instruct the biller to obtain
payment from the custom bank account prior to thi time the custom will have
enter into an agreement with the biller to receiv and to pai hi bill electron the
custom will have creat the usernam and password which qualifi as an access devic
under efta and will have provid the biller with inform about the custom and the
custom account at the financi institut ion from which the biller mai collect payment
typic thi will includ the custom email address the rout number of the
custom bank and the custom account number at the bank in some system the
biller will send an email to the custom indic that a bill is outstand and direct
the custom to the biller websit
after the custom view the inform post by the biller the custom mai approv
the inform and author payment the biller will then initi payment by contact a
payment provid that ha agre to collect payment on behalf of the biller the payment
provid will contact the financi institut that hold the custom account and request
the institut to debit the custom a ccount and remit the proce to the payment
provid the payment provid will then credit the proce minu ani fee to the biller
these payment mai be transfer through an ach transfer or through a paper transfer
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11039
such as a cashier check when the recipi is not abl to receiv payment in an electron
form
person to person p2p payment system
person onlin payment system often call p2p or persontoperson payment system
have becom popular wai for make rel small payment between individu or
between an individu and a busi these payment have becom popular in the onlin
auction market where win bid mai be too small to justifi the us of a credit card or the
seller is an individu who doe not accept credit card payment in 2002 ebai the onlin
auction site acquir paypal the domin provid of p2p servic paypal current ha
more than 164 million account worldwid and is avail in 190 market and 17 differ
currenc the success of proprietari system like paypal ha induc convent bank to
consid enter the p2p arena mani bank have begun to offer similar servic
on restrict of most current p2p system is that thei will onli complet transfer to
person who ar also subscrib to the servic while thi restrict mai help a system to
gain a custom base and reduc fraud by obtain inform about recipi it also
limit the scope of potenti user
a model of p2p paypal
there is a signific opportun for chang and growth in implement sinc p2p
system ar still in their begin stage paypal is domin in the market at thi point so
we will us it as the model of the p2p system for illustr purpos potenti user of the
system must log in to the provid websi te and submit registr inform includ
their name mail and email address and phone number an email is sent from paypal
to the user provid email address with the user password befor initi ani
transfer the user must send that password from the email account that the user indic
at the time of registr thi permit the provid to verifi inform about the user
and reduc the probabl that the user is engag in fraudul activ or ha establish an
account in the name of a fictiti person
in order to make a payment the user enter hi usernam and password along with the e
mail address and payment inform for the recipi user mai author the provid to
withdraw fund from ani of three sourc first the user mai maintain an account directli
with the provid the user mai author the provid to withdraw fund from the user
account at anoth financi institut if the user regist hi bank account as a sourc of
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11040 2011 fraud examin manual
payment the provid will verifi the user control of the account by make two small
deposit to the account in an undisclos amount and requir the user to confirm the
amount of the deposit third the user mai author the provid to charg hi credit card
with the amount of the payment
transfer initi by the user from hi account regist with the provid will constitut
electron fund transfer thi is true even if the provid is not a bank proprietari
provid such as paypal probabl do not qualifi as bank becaus thei do not make
loan thei mai howev qualifi as monei transmitt and mai requir state licens for
that purpos the efta defin an electron fund transfer as a transfer of fund initi
through an electron termin telephon instrument or comput so as to order a
financi institut to debit or credit an account but a financi institut is defin
with suffici breadth to includ institut that do not qualifi as bank a financi
institut for purpos of efta is ani person who directli or indirectli hold an
account belong to a consum and an account is ani asset account establish
primarili for person famili or household purpos therefor electron transfer
initi by a consum to transfer fund from an asset account held by a proprietari p2p
provid would be govern by efta and regul e
type of fraud
there ar sever wai in which fraud mai be perpetr through ebpp and p2p system
sinc password that allow access into custom bank account must be made avail to
third parti also bill that contain signific inform about custom must be pass
through multipl parti potenti sourc of fraud includ the follow
a biller mai send a bill for servic not render or for good never sent
a person who ha obtain inform about anoth person bank account mai
instruct a biller to obtain payment from the other person account
a hacker could obtain password and usernam from an aggreg and us that
inform to direct transfer from a consum bank account
an employe at the site provid ebpp servic that ha been provid a consum
usernam and password for screen scrape purpos could us that inform to
direct transfer from the consum bank account
a bank employe mai us custom inform to direct transfer from a
custom account
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11041
unfortun the financi institut that offer electron fund transfer to it custom
will have difficulti determin the sourc of ani leak of custom inform necessari to
initi a transfer therefor in order to maintain good relat with it custom and to
avoid further liabil a bank mai accept respons for them thu the best strategi for
the bank will be to take measur that reduc the probabl that fraud will materi in the
first place
detect and deterr of electron transfer fraud
consid the limit capac of bank to shift loss from unauthor electron fund
transfer to their custom bank should make effort to minim the incid of fraud
the veri justif for limit consum liabil mai be that bank ar in a superior
posit to learn of and counteract fraudul scheme that ar emploi to effect
unauthor transact bank can take certain initi to secur access devic and
comput from interfer bank can also follow know your custom rule in order to
prevent the issuanc of access devic to individu who ar like to us them fraudul
the follow section provid specif safeguard that bank can perform to reduc the risk
that thei or their custom can becom victim by unauthor electron fund
transfer
issuanc and us of access devic
electron fund transfer fraud often involv individu who us inform to obtain
access to the account of other as a result bank personnel can prevent fraud by exercis
care in the initi decis to allow an individu to access the bank computer servic
bank offer ebpp or p2p system to custom should
confirm phone and mail address on the applic to ensur that thei ar
consist with inform about the applic that is avail from other sourc and
with respect to exist custom consist with current record about these
custom thi mai involv obtain credit report about the applic or obtain
copi of util bill that show the applic address
make sure that the area code on the applic telephon number match the
geograph area for the applic address
send a welcom letter to the address on the applic with the bank return address
so that the letter will be return if the applic is not live at that address
verifi by telephon or addit mail ani chang of address request in the same
wai that you would verifi a new account applic
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11042 2011 fraud examin manual
if a custom report the loss or theft of an access devic cancel the exist card pin
or other form of access and issu a new on
if a custom report that a person previous author to us access devic report no
longer ha that author cancel all card pin or other access devic and issu new
on to the custom
alwai mail pin separ from other inform such as usernam with which
thei ar associ
separ the respons of bank employe who have custodi of inform relat
to access devic from those who have respons for issuanc verif or
reissuanc of pin
ensur that ani commun concern usernam or password is sent in a secur
encrypt format
custom who regist for ebpp or p2p system should be requir to provid
inform indic that thei ar author to us the bank account or credit card
from which payment will be made
us of ach network
when noncustom of the bank ar abl to attain access to inform about an actual
custom fraud mai occur to limit thi possibl bank should perform strict user
authent standard the offic of the comptrol of the currenc occ requir
bank within it jurisdict to uphold a commerci reason method to authent the
ident of a custom bank that us the ach ar also subject to nation autom
clear hous associ nacha rule that requir origin bank to take certain
measur to ensur that the correct custom ha author the transact
nacha ha implement specif rule for internetiniti entri a specif standard
entri class sec code must be us for internetiniti entri that code web must be
us to identifi an ach debit entri to a consum account that a receiv author
through the internet the rule appli to both singleentri and recur debit and requir
odfi that transmit web entri to warrant that their origin have compli with
certain standard that protect the secur of the ach network and consum financi
inform
origin of web entri ar requir to
obtain consum author prior to initi a web entri the author must
provid evid of the consum ident and asset to the author
emploi commerci reason fraudul transact detect system to screen
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11043
entri in order to maintain the risk of fraud differ transact mai requir differ
level of authent depend on the risk level of the transact
us commerci reason fraudul transact detect system to screen entri
in order to minim the risk of fraud differ transact mai requir differ level
of authent depend on the risk level of the transact
establish a secur internet session with each custom us a commerci reason
secur technolog that session must be in place from the time consum enter their
bank inform through the time of the transmiss to the origin includ
ani transmiss to a servic provid such as an aggreg
conduct an annual secur audit to ensur that financi inform obtain from
consum is protect by secur practic and procedur that includ adequ level
of 1 physic secur to protect against theft tamper or damag 2 personnel and
access control to protect against unauthor access and us and 3 network secur
to ensur captur storag and distribut of financi inform
oper of payment system
bank that particip in ebpp or p2p system can take step to detect fraudul
transact either by provid inform to custom or by analyz transact that
have characterist associ with fraud these measur includ the follow
send custom email alert when a new bill arriv or a payment is sent the email
should advis the custom to contact the bank immedi if the bill wa not expect
or the payment wa not author
refus or scrutin ani transact from a payer or recipi who ha been the subject
of a notic from a credit card issuer indic that the person wa involv in an
unauthor credit card transact or unauthor transfer to or from a bank account
ensur that the name on the bank account associ with the p2p account match the
name on the p2p account itself
track and verifi payment of similar amount to the same recipi
sinc p2p system ar frequent us to make payment for onlin activ be awar
of activ that ar typic associ with fraud and scrutin transact with
custom who engag in such activ these activ includ pyramid scheme
onlin auction and sale of item that have a delai deliveri date
protect of internet address
bank or their custom mai becom victim of fraud especi ident theft if thei do
not carefulli monitor the us of their name on the internet fraudul actor mai creat
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11044 2011 fraud examin manual
fals domain name to attract the bank custom and get them to provid inform that
will then be us for illicit purpos thi activ known as cyberclon involv the creation
of a spoof site complet with a domain name close to the domain name of a legitim
bank and contain the real bank logo an email mai be sent ask custom and
potenti custom to log on to the fals domain name those who respond mai be ask
for inform such as account number and credit card number altern individu
mai regist domain name close to the domain name of actual bank and us those site to
market good or servic with which the bank would not want to be associ for instanc
citigroup had a battl with an individu who regist the name citicardcom and direct
user who log in to thi site to an onlin gambl site
prevent of eft fraud in other compani
the inform system audit and control associ isaca recommend sever
step for prevent of eft fraud in compani the follow is a brief overview
defin the eft process and control point
defin eft polici and procedur
ensur physic secur surround all eft compon
implement effect eft applic secur
implement effect network oper system secur
implement effect secur surround eft data
implement effect system log that establish a baselin that can be us to
measur unusu activ
conduct reconcili to allow for the determin of whether data have been
modifi dure ani stage of the eft process
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11101
