2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Check Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Check Fraud 
Check fraud is one of the fastest-growing problems affecting the nation’s financial system,  
producing estimated yearly losses of up to $20 billion. Not only is the dollar amount 
involved in check fraud increasing yearly, the complexity of fraud tools is growing as well. 
With increased sophistication in laser printers, more accurate color copiers and desktop 
publishing capabilities, duplicating and forging checks has become more accurate and thus 
more difficult to detect.  
 
Due to demands of law enforcement, prosecutors fail to pursue 75 percent of bank check 
fraud cases. According to the U.S. Government Accountability Office, in large cities where a 
majority of resources are used to prosecute violent crime the percentage rises to 90 percent. 
Law enforcement officials may neglect reports of check fraud, feeling that businesses ought 
to be more vigilant in detecting bad checks. Many merchants have tried to use the police and 
prosecutors as check collection agencies; therefore, law enforcement and prosecutors are 
often not eager to pursue these cases. Many bad-check-passers are constantly on the move, 
as well, making prosecution even more difficult. 
 
The best solution for financial institutions and merchants, then, is to educate employees to 
recognize forged and fraudulent checks and the schemes behind them. Merchants and 
financial institutions should have a strict check acceptance policy with which all employees 
are familiar. When accepting checks, employees should always ask for identification and 
make sure it is valid. Many check passers mollify store personnel by showing them a small 
laminated rectangular document with a picture. After looking at several hundred of these, 
most employees tend not to scrutinize them. Check passers count on this. It is important for 
employees to examine each piece of identification closely every time they are presented 
 with one. 
 
Employers must also watch for behavior among employees that could be red flags of inside 
check fraud. Dissatisfaction with job, pay rate, or home life; a lack of recognition or lavish 
lifestyle; or a problem with gambling, alcohol, or drugs are indications that an employee may 
be committing internal fraud. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1002                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Counterfeiting Checks 
An effective check counterfeiting operation can turn a simple $5,000 investment into a 
$1,000,000 windfall within a 30-day timeframe. This can be done without high levels of 
computer expertise or programming. Simple check printing software can be purchased in 
almost any office supply store along with blank paper stock and magnetic ink cartridges. The 
overall initial investment consists of a quality computer, color inkjet printer, check format 
and MICR font software, magnetic ink cartridges, and paper stock. After making the initial 
investment, the printers only have to concern themselves with purchasing additional ink  
and paper. 
 
Signs of Counterfeit and Forged Checks 
A counterfeiter will go to great lengths to make his check appear to be the genuine article. 
However, there are a few giveaways that a check is counterfeit. If the printing on the check 
does not seem uniform in texture and color, or slants up or down, the check is not good. 
Also, the transit number in the top right corner must match the electronically encoded 
number at the bottom of the check. These numbers normally do not coincide on altered 
checks. The first three of the electronically encoded numbers indicate the state and district 
office of the issuer. Again, on forged checks, these numbers do not always match properly. 
The check number itself should be found in the encoded serial number at the bottom.  
 
Knowing that many merchants regard checks with low check numbers as suspect, forgers 
often attempt to add a digit. Here again, they may have difficulty matching the ink used to 
produce the check. A simple and effective method of detecting bad checks is to fan a group 
of checks. Counterfeit checks will sometimes stand out as a slightly different color. 
 
Check Fraud Vulnerabilities 
A particular institution may be targeted for check frauds because of its location, inadequate 
internal controls, or marketing strategies that present opportunities to savvy check fraud 
artists. Some mutual funds companies, for example, regularly allow customers to open 
accounts by mail, a form of communication with many security vulnerabilities. A significant 
number of check fraud complaints from a particular geographic area may indicate the 
presence of an active, organized group, which warrants law enforcement attention. 
 
Investigators assigned to a region or institution should keep regular contact with businesses 
and regulators. Specific inquiries aim to identify weaknesses, develop controls, and prevent 
future losses. Analyzing the complaints filed by other victims of check fraud — including 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1003 
retail operations, check cashing establishments and food stores—may reveal common 
elements of schemes that might not otherwise seem related. 
 
Check Theft 
Three types of check theft are:  using stolen canceled checks to obtain new checks, check 
washing, and stealing blank check stock. 
• Stolen canceled checks and statements — Although a stolen canceled check can’t be negotiated, 
it does have fraud implications. Using a stolen canceled check, a check thief can order 
checks from a mail-order check printer and have them sent to a mail drop address. 
Checks can then be written on the new stock and cashed once false identifications are 
acquired. 
• Check washing — Check washing takes place to the tu ne of $815 million every year in the 
U.S., and it is increasing at an alarming rate. Checks are stolen from mailrooms and 
mailboxes, and then the check is inserted into a solution of chemicals that can be 
purchased at a hardware store. Once the check is dried, the fraudster can write in any 
amount and the checks are usually cashed without question. Most check washers alter 
checks for relatively small amounts. 
• Stolen check stock — Professional thieves using sophisticated methods steal blank check 
stock already encoded with customer account information, which makes passing the 
check even easier. Corporate checks are the most likely target since they are easily cashed 
and deposited. 
 
Check Fraud Schemes 
Paperhangers 
Paperhangers are the experts of phony check passing. They frequently pick a particular 
establishment or store and observe its security methods. Any store that scrutinizes check 
writers’ identification is not a good target for a paperhanger. However, they will observe and 
select the least experienced or most lackadaisical of store employees to whom to pass the 
check. The paperhanger will then ask the clerk for cash back from the transaction and make 
the check out for an amount greater than the price of the purchase. In some cases, the 
checks being written are counterfeit; however, in other cases the checks are purposefully 
being written on a closed account. A variation of this scam is making a fraudulent deposit at 
a bank and asking for cash back.  
 
These experts will go to great lengths to blend in with the clientele. Standing out in a crowd 
is not to their advantage. Women are often quite good as paperhangers. A mother with 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1004                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
crying children paying with a check is usually not the profile one expects for a bad- 
check-passer.  
 
Stop Payment Orders 
This scheme is quite simple. A “customer” purc hases an expensive item with a check, and 
then notifies his bank to stop payment. Savvy check passers may even contact the merchant, 
saying the item was defective, and that they should expect to hear from the customer’s 
attorney. Meanwhile, the check passer sells the item for a tidy profit.  
 
Another scenario is that, after purchasing the item and notifying the bank to stop payment, 
the fraudster goes back to the store, wishing to return the item and receive a full refund. The 
merchant refunds the amount in cash and the scheme is successful. 
 
Check Kiting 
Check kiting is one of the original white-collar crimes. It continues to survive even with a 
financial institution’s ability to detect kiting. In a kiting scheme, multiple bank accounts are 
opened and money is “deposited” from acco unt to account, although the money  
never exists.  
 
Floating makes check kiting possible. Floating is the additional value of funds generated in 
the process of collection and arises because the current holder of funds has been given credit 
for the funds before it clears the financial institution upon which it is drawn. Businesses are 
most susceptible to check kiting, if they have employees who are authorized to write checks 
or make deposits in more than one bank account. Today, check kiting is more difficult 
because electronic technologies are making the float smaller all the time. In many cases, 
electronic debiting to an account occurs simultaneously with the transaction. Unless 
detected, this process can continue indefinitely, covering one check written against 
insufficient funds with another check. 
 
Demand Drafts 
Demand drafts can also be used to commit check fraud. This practice involves the misuse of 
account information to obtain funds from a person’s bank account without that person’s 
signature on a negotiable instrument. Other terms for demand drafts are “preauthorized 
drafts” and “telephone drafts.” While there are many legitimate business uses for demand 
drafts, such as quick-turnaround telephone transactions initiated by airlines and car rental 
companies, demand drafts have been used by deceptive telemarketers who obtain bank 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1005 
account information and withdraw unauthorized funds from consumers’ bank accounts, 
without their realizing that such withdrawals are occurring. 
 
Third-Party Bill Paying Services 
The checks produced by these third-party bill paying service providers do not include the 
payor signature. Instead, the signature line reflects something such as “signature on file.” 
Unauthorized checks produced by third-party payment services are not usually detected until 
the customer reviews the monthly bank statement. By the time the customer identifies the 
unauthorized check, it is often too late to recover the funds, since the “24-hour window” 
(actually until midnight of the next banking day) for the timely return of checks has long 
since passed. These checks usually sail right through the check sorting operation, since they 
include good account information and sometimes even include good serial numbers. Too 
often, both business and individual account holders seem unaware of how their account 
information, given too freely to a requesting party, can be used for fraudulent purposes. 
 
Traveler’s Checks 
The use of traveler’s checks is declining signif icantly and will likely eventually be replaced by 
electronic options. In fact, an increasing number of vendors in locations throughout 
Europe—and in other parts of the world—no long er accept traveler’s checks as a valid form 
of payment. However, for many travelers, traveler’s checks continue to provide a convenient 
payment method while abroad. 
 
Anyone familiar with traveler’s checks knows that $100 checks are quite common. Some 
check rings specialize in the production and distribution of this type of check. Commonly, 
check passers of this type make small purchases using a fake $100 traveler’s check, and 
receive the bulk of the amount back in cash. Naturally, this scheme works well in areas that 
have a lot of tourist business. Rings often pull this scam several times in one area in rapid 
succession.  
 
Traveler’s checks have several distinguishing features. Watermarks and holograms are 
common, as well as microprinting and ultraviolet ink. There are basically two methods of 
counterfeiting traveler’s checks: color copyin g and offset lithography/printing. Color copied 
checks lack the raised ink texture that the intaglio printing press gives most traveler’s checks. 
Instead of a textured feel, a phony check will appear slick and flat. Offset lithographic 
reproductions of actual checks are of higher quality than color-copied checks. However, 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1006                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
neither will have the texture, watermarks, microprinting, or holograms that the genuine 
articles have.  
 
Payroll Check Fraud 
Check procurers employed by payroll check processing companies print duplicate payroll 
checks that are sold to third parties or are cashed by members of the procurer’s organization. 
To avoid the security employed by financial institutions, the checks are cashed at grocery 
stores and check-cashing operations with loose controls. The checks are usually written for 
amounts of $300 or less to avoid suspicion. Of course, check procurers have access to 
personal information on the legitimate recipients of the payroll checks and make use of it in 
the future. 
 
Dumpster Diving 
Often, check fraud can be as simple as retrieving bank materials from a trash receptacle. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Thirty people were charged in a $10 millio n fraud scheme that involved counterfeiting 
checks, bank statements, and credit card receipts pulled out of the trash. The defendants, 
who defrauded people in 17 states, used checks, bank statements, credit card receipts, and 
other documents from garbage bins to create counterfeit checks, false driver’s licenses, and 
false credit reports, officials said. Counterfeit  blank checks, printed on high-quality color 
printers, allegedly were used to  defraud banks of $2 million. 
 
Obviously, this type of fraud is easily preventable through proper disposal by banks, 
merchants, and individuals of sensitive and confidential materials.  
 
Scanning 
Scanning requires a scanner and a legitimate check. Scanners can be purchased for less than 
$200 and checks are readily available without having to actually steal the check. Checks can 
then be manufactured by scanning a corporate logo from a business card onto a simple 
business-sized check. 
 
System Password Security Compromised 
People having legitimate access to sensitive account and daily code information for a limited 
time (for example, computer consultants) effect improper transfers through unauthorized 
access. 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1007 
Check Fraud Rings 
Since the late 1980s, foreign crime rings have been the cause of the majority of check fraud 
in the U.S. Most major financial institutions attribute more than 50 percent of all check fraud 
to organized crime rings. In 2007, an international task force monitored the mail in Africa, 
Europe, and North America and intercepted billions of dollars worth (face-value) of 
counterfeit checks.  
 
The perpetrators of organized check fraud activity are often based in Nigeria, Russia, 
Vietnam, and Mexico. Most of the Vietnamese and Mexican rings operate in California, 
notably San Francisco, Orange County, and Sa cramento. The Russian and Nigerian rings, 
centered in the Northeast, spread their criminal activities over a wide area and can be found 
passing through any part of the U.S. at any time. While most of these gangs are involved in 
drug trafficking and violent crimes, check and credit card fraud are considered “safe” crimes. 
The chances of being arrested and prosecuted are relatively low and the penalties are not 
very harsh. 
 
The equipment essential to a check fraud ring are a laser scanner, laser printer and a personal 
computer, easily obtainable items, the total cost of which is about $1,500. These rings use 
digital scanners and offset printing to counterfeit checks. The checks are cashed by members 
of the ring or sold to third parties. 
 
Most rings specialize in payroll or other institutional checks, written for amounts less than 
$300. But some groups infiltrate financial institutions, collecting corporate payroll checks, 
money orders, and master original bank checks, cashing the duplicates for between $2,000 
and $5,000. 
 
In recent years, members of Nigerian and Vi etnamese rings have infiltrated or obtained 
accomplices in financial institutions. There they gather personal information on customers, 
passing the information to counterfeiters who produce falsified identification (driver’s 
licenses, credit cards, etc.), which is used to open accounts, establish lines of credit, and 
secure loans. An organized group may include a counterfeiter or printer, a distributor, one or 
more providers of false identification, and several “smurfs,” who open false bank accounts 
or visit check-cashing establishments to negotiate fraudulent checks.  
 
Foreign crime rings that practice check fraud are ethnically homogenous and usually not 
rigidly structured. It is common for only the leaders of these rings to know the extent of the 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1008                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
participation of their subordinates. The leaders of such groups are usually quite intelligent 
and educated. Often, they have an extensive criminal or business background and direct the 
group’s activities. Gangs have been known to share members and cooperate with one 
another in the past. 
 
Check Fraud Detection 
FBI Profile of Check Fraud Activity 
According to an analysis by FBI investigators in the New York City area, fraudulent check 
passers use the following common techniques: 
• Customer attempts to open an account with a corporate check or other third- 
party check. 
• Customer tries to flatter, hurry, or confuse the teller to draw attention away from  
the transaction. 
• Customer delays endorsing a check or producing identification during peak hours to 
frustrate the teller and hurry the transaction. 
• Customer presents for cash a low-numbered check drawn on a new account. 
• Customer offers foreign documentation (birth certificate, passport, visa) or non-photo 
identification (Social Security card, credit card) in lieu of photo identification to open an 
account or cash a check. 
• Customer offers altered or damaged identification to open an account or cash a check. 
• Customer attempts to cash or convert several small checks into wire transfer, gold, or 
other tender. 
• Customer requests an exception to established rules to force the transaction. 
 
Detection Techniques 
The cashier or teller is the front-line defense in preventing check fraud. It is important that 
they receive the training necessary to identify fraudulent checks. They should: 
• Be aware of magnetic routing numbers. 
• Use extra care in examining a check drawn from a non-local bank and require  
positive identification. 
• Examine the date on the check for accuracy of day, month, and year. Do not accept the 
check if it is not dated, if it is postdated, or if it is more than 30 days old. 
• Look for checks with a check number less than 400 on personal checks or below 1,500 
on business checks (90 percent of bad checks are written on accounts less than one 
year old). 
• Be aware of fonts used to print the customer’s  name that are visibly different from the 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1009 
font used to print the address. 
• Be aware that the magnetic ink (MICR) used for routing codes should appear non-
 reflective and dull. 
• Look for MICR coding that does not match the bank district and the routing symbol in 
the upper right-hand corner of the check. 
• Be aware of the date that the account was opened. 
• Be aware of stains or discolorations on the check possibly caused by erasures or 
alterations. 
• Have easy access to the signature card. 
• Look for perforated edges of the checks. 
• Be aware that a color copy might reflect odd colors at times due to a failure of the toner 
to mix satisfactorily. 
• Notice absence of any design in the background of the check paper. 
• Notice absence of bank logo and the printing of the bank name in the regular lettering. 
• Notice absence of the address of the bank on the check. 
• Be cautious of information that is typed or stamped. 
• Do not accept a check that is not legibly written. It should be written and signed in ink 
and must not have any erasures or written-over amounts.  
• Be aware of what is acceptable identification. 
• Recognize forged/altered information. 
• Recognize forged negotiable instruments. 
• Tellers should telephone the business or account officer for approval on suspicious 
requests. 
• Be familiar with patterns of behavior related to potential culprits: 
? Overly polite 
? Nervous 
? Aggressive and hurried 
 
Check Fraud Prevention and Investigation 
Since the Federal Reserve’s Regulation CC was implemented, mandating accelerated 
availability of customers’ funds, check fraud at banks has increased. Most bank customers’ 
funds are available for withdrawal a day after deposit, leaving the bank little time to verify 
the validity of the transaction. Regulation CC, however, allows banks two days to make 
funds available. Most banks provide next-day withdrawal in order to stay competitive. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1010                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Additionally, special security printing techniques have been developed to make 
counterfeiting blank checks more difficult. One of the features is the use of a pattern of 
colors that is difficult to separate even with special cameras, filters, and film. Another 
technique used is scrambled indicia printing, which is a seemingly random pattern of tiny 
colored dots printed on the paper. Using a colored filter to view the check will make a word 
or pattern develop.  
 
Still another technique, which is also used by credit card issuers, is to print a “micro-line” on 
the check, which appears as a solid line when viewed normally. But using a magnifying glass 
will show that the line is actually very small words or letters, which are very difficult to 
recreate with the normal printing process. Other security measures include using a three 
dimensional hologram, which is easily identifiable by the human eye, but is impossible to 
reproduce via ordinary copying or printing. Some checks have a security seal on the back of 
the check that is visible when held up to a light. Reproductions, even good ones, will not 
have a seal.  
 
Check Fraud Investigations 
During a check fraud investigation, look for the following: 
• Frequent deposits and checks: 
? In the same amounts. 
? In round numbers. 
? With checks written on the same (other) bank. 
• Frequent ATM account balance inquiries. 
• Many large deposits made on Thursday or Friday to take advantage of the weekend. 
• Large periodic balances in individual  accounts with no apparent business. 
• Low average balance compared to high level of deposits. 
• Many checks made payable to other banks. 
• Bank willingness to pay against uncollected funds. 
• Deposits not made daily or intact. 
• Entity uses receipts that do not indicate mode of payment. 
• One or more personal checks in the cash drawer by the fund custodian. 
• Deposit timing lags. 
• Irregular check endorsements. 
• Amount of deposit does not agree with daily activity report. 
• Inappropriate access to signature plate. 
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1011 
• Check numbers, payee name, date, and amount don’t agree with entries in the  
check register. 
• Voided checks are not retained. 
• Checks are issued to individuals for large, even dollar amounts. 
• Supporting documentation for checks is not available or has been prematurely destroyed. 
• Cash withdrawal with deposit checks drawn on another bank. 
 
There are several tips for businesses to use when cashing business and payroll checks: 
• Examine all checks. Insist that the check be signed in front of the clerk. Compare the 
signature written on the check with the signature on the driver’s license or state 
identification. 
• Be particularly careful with large-dollar checks presented by noncustomers.  
• Examine all checks for signs of counterfeiting, such as a glossy, “crayonish” appearance 
and any lack of detail and sharpness. 
• Look for signs of alterations or erasures, es pecially in the signature or numerical and 
written amounts.  
• Compare the bank identification and routing numbers for a match. 
• The texture of the check should appear smooth; a rough document might signal 
erasures. 
• Be cautious of information that is typed or stamped. 
• All checks, except government issue, should have at least one perforated edge. 
• The magnetic ink used for routing codes should appear nonreflective and dull. 
• Look for faded colored paper, which can indicate that the check has been chemically 
bleached. 
• A color copy might reflect odd colors at times due to a failure of the toner to mix 
satisfactorily. 
• Black lettering might have a slightly greenish cast when examined under a magnifying 
glass. 
• A light colored or delicate background might fade out when copied. 
• Absence of any design in background of check paper. 
• Absence of bank logo and the printing of the bank name in regular lettering. 
• Absence of the address of the bank on the check. 
• Overall appearance of poor quality of printing and paper. 
• A payroll check will usually be for an odd amount and will appear neat, clean, and  
usually unfolded. 
  
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1012                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Tellers should telephone the business or account officer for approval on suspicious 
requests. 
 
Check Fraud Prevention Tools 
CHECK WRITING PENS 
When a check is written, a special pen designed to prevent check washing should be used. 
These pens are called “check writing” pens and can be found at just about any office supply 
store. These pens have special ink that will prevent criminals from using solvents to remove 
ink from the check. When someone tries to wash a check written from these pens, it will 
either not work, thereby leaving the check intact, or smear the ink and make it apparent that 
a check has been washed. 
 
Individuals with business accounts are a much greater risk when it comes to check washing. 
Businesses have much stricter requirements in terms of what the company must do to 
protect their checks. If the business doesn’t follow a strict plan to protect their checks, it’s 
likely that if any money is stolen from their accounts, the bank will not return their money. If 
an individual has a business account, they should make sure that the checks are locked 
securely when not in use. Make sure not to leave blank computer-printed checks in the 
printer or the business will be equally liable for the money that could potentially be stolen.  
 
FINGERPRINT IDENTIFIERS 
A biometric fingerprint identifier  requires the check writer to match fingerprints with the account 
holder’s, which are on file. Banks reported reductions in check fraud of 40 percent after the 
machine was introduced in the mid-1990s. 
 
Non-account holders who want checks cashed at banks that have implemented this system 
are required to put an inkless fingerprint on their check. If the check does prove false, law 
enforcement will already have evidence regarding the fraudster’s identity. The cost to a bank 
of implementing the inkless fingerprint system could be redeemed by preventing a single 
instance of check fraud. Banks throughout the nation now use this technique to cut  
fraud losses. 
 
FORENSIC DOCUMENT EXAMINATION 
Through handwriting, an individual can be positively identified, as is the case with DNA or 
fingerprinting. When investigating check fraud, a forensic document examiner focuses on 
the signature and the handwriting itself.  
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1013 
SIGNATURE 
If the examiner were investigating a forged signature, he would compare the suspicious 
signature to a sample of the actual one, noting discrepancies between the two. While one’s 
signature may change over time, it would be close to impossible for a forger to duplicate a 
signature with one hundred percent accuracy;  minute identifying characteristics mark 
people’s writing and are not reproducible. 
 
The eBank ™ Discovery System, developed by ASV Technologies, employs signature 
verification software. Using “multiple feat ure set extraction” technology drawn from 
forensic science, the state and quality of a signature’s two-dimensional characteristics are 
analyzed and verified against samples. The program identifies flourishes, arcs, distances 
between letters, and up to 100 other features. Rejected signatures, along with the reason for 
rejection and signature samples, are forwarded to a human for visual verification. ASV 
Technologies claim its results match those of the most highly trained and accurate signature 
verifier. 
 
HANDWRITING 
Like fingerprints, handwriting is unique to an individual. Consequently, if the narrative 
portion of the check is handwritten, it offers a document examiner a greater opportunity to 
identify a forgery. 
 
VIDEO SPECTRAL COMPARATOR 
Forensic examiners use this tool to test questionable documents. The document is examined 
for photocopying and liquid paper under a controlled light source. Lettering added to a 
document can be detected with this device. 
 
ELECTROSTATIC DETECTION APPARATUS 
This tool allows examiners to detect indented writing from the top page of a pad of paper up 
to five pages below the original. The Electrostatic Detection Apparatus uses photocopier 
toner to develop the areas of indentation after a document has been covered with an 
electrically charged plastic film. In the best of cases, when the document is processed with 
the electrostatic device and the toner image is developed, the writing impressions are clearly 
defined and highly contrasted. If the developed writing is to be used in an investigation or to 
demonstrate results for the courts, the examiner must turn to electronic image processing 
technology for further enhancement. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1014                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


check fraud
check fraud is on of the fastestgrow problem affect the nation financi system
produc estim yearli loss of up to 20 billion not onli is the dollar amount
involv in check fraud increas yearli the complex of fraud tool is grow as well
with increas sophist in laser printer more accur color copier and desktop
publish capabl duplic and forg check ha becom more accur and thu
more difficult to detect
due to demand of law enforc prosecutor fail to pursu 75 percent of bank check
fraud case accord to the us govern account offic in larg citi where a
major of resourc ar us to prosecut violent crime the percentag rise to 90 percent
law enforc offici mai neglect report of check fraud feel that busi ought
to be more vigil in detect bad check mani merchant have tri to us the polic and
prosecutor as check collect agenc therefor law enforc and prosecutor ar
often not eager to pursu these case mani badcheckpass ar constantli on the move
as well make prosecut even more difficult
the best solut for financi institut and merchant then is to educ employe to
recogn forg and fraudul check and the scheme behind them merchant and
financi institut should have a strict check accept polici with which all employe
ar familiar when accept check employe should alwai ask for identif and
make sure it is valid mani check passer mollifi store personnel by show them a small
lamin rectangular document with a pictur after look at sever hundr of these
most employe tend not to scrutin them check passer count on thi it is import for
employe to examin each piec of identif close everi time thei ar present
with on
employ must also watch for behavior among employe that could be red flag of insid
check fraud dissatisfact with job pai rate or home life a lack of recognit or lavish
lifestyl or a problem with gambl alcohol or drug ar indic that an employe mai
be commit intern fraud
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11002 2011 fraud examin manual
counterfeit check
an effect check counterfeit oper can turn a simpl 5000 invest into a
1000000 windfal within a 30dai timefram thi can be done without high level of
comput expertis or program simpl check print softwar can be purchas in
almost ani offic suppli store along with blank paper stock and magnet ink cartridg the
overal initi invest consist of a qualiti comput color inkjet printer check format
and micr font softwar magnet ink cartridg and paper stock after make the initi
invest the printer onli have to concern themselv with purchas addit ink
and paper
sign of counterfeit and forg check
a counterfeit will go to great length to make hi check appear to be the genuin articl
howev there ar a few giveawai that a check is counterfeit if the print on the check
doe not seem uniform in textur and color or slant up or down the check is not good
also the transit number in the top right corner must match the electron encod
number at the bottom of the check these number normal do not coincid on alter
check the first three of the electron encod number indic the state and district
offic of the issuer again on forg check these number do not alwai match properli
the check number itself should be found in the encod serial number at the bottom
know that mani merchant regard check with low check number as suspect forger
often attempt to add a digit here again thei mai have difficulti match the ink us to
produc the check a simpl and effect method of detect bad check is to fan a group
of check counterfeit check will sometim stand out as a slightli differ color
check fraud vulner
a particular institut mai be target for check fraud becaus of it locat inadequ
intern control or market strategi that present opportun to savvi check fraud
artist some mutual fund compani for exampl regularli allow custom to open
account by mail a form of commun with mani secur vulner a signific
number of check fraud complaint from a particular geograph area mai indic the
presenc of an activ organ group which warrant law enforc attent
investig assign to a region or institut should keep regular contact with busi
and regul specif inquiri aim to identifi weak develop control and prevent
futur loss analyz the complaint file by other victim of check fraud includ
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11003
retail oper check cash establish and food storesmai reveal common
element of scheme that might not otherwis seem relat
check theft
three type of check theft ar us stolen cancel check to obtain new check check
wash and steal blank check stock
stolen cancel check and statement although a stolen cancel check cant be negoti
it doe have fraud implic us a stolen cancel check a check thief can order
check from a mailord check printer and have them sent to a mail drop address
check can then be written on the new stock and cash onc fals identif ar
acquir
check wash check wash take place to the tu ne of 815 million everi year in the
us and it is increas at an alarm rate check ar stolen from mailroom and
mailbox and then the check is insert into a solut of chemic that can be
purchas at a hardwar store onc the check is dri the fraudster can write in ani
amount and the check ar usual cash without question most check washer alter
check for rel small amount
stolen check stock profession thiev us sophist method steal blank check
stock alreadi encod with custom account inform which make pass the
check even easier corpor check ar the most like target sinc thei ar easili cash
and deposit
check fraud scheme
paperhang
paperhang ar the expert of phoni check pass thei frequent pick a particular
establish or store and observ it secur method ani store that scrutin check
writer identif is not a good target for a paperhang howev thei will observ and
select the least experienc or most lackadais of store employe to whom to pass the
check the paperhang will then ask the clerk for cash back from the transact and make
the check out for an amount greater than the price of the purchas in some case the
check be written ar counterfeit howev in other case the check ar purposefulli
be written on a close account a variat of thi scam is make a fraudul deposit at
a bank and ask for cash back
these expert will go to great length to blend in with the clientel stand out in a crowd
is not to their advantag women ar often quit good as paperhang a mother with
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11004 2011 fraud examin manual
cry children pai with a check is usual not the profil on expect for a bad
checkpass
stop payment order
thi scheme is quit simpl a custom purc hase an expens item with a check and
then notifi hi bank to stop payment savvi check passer mai even contact the merchant
sai the item wa defect and that thei should expect to hear from the custom
attornei meanwhil the check passer sell the item for a tidi profit
anoth scenario is that after purchas the item and notifi the bank to stop payment
the fraudster goe back to the store wish to return the item and receiv a full refund the
merchant refund the amount in cash and the scheme is success
check kite
check kite is on of the origin whitecollar crime it continu to surviv even with a
financi institut abil to detect kite in a kite scheme multipl bank account ar
open and monei is deposit from acco unt to account although the monei
never exist
float make check kite possibl float is the addit valu of fund gener in
the process of collect and aris becaus the current holder of fund ha been given credit
for the fund befor it clear the financi institut upon which it is drawn busi ar
most suscept to check kite if thei have employe who ar author to write check
or make deposit in more than on bank account todai check kite is more difficult
becaus electron technolog ar make the float smaller all the time in mani case
electron debit to an account occur simultan with the transact unless
detect thi process can continu indefinit cover on check written against
insuffici fund with anoth check
demand draft
demand draft can also be us to commit check fraud thi practic involv the misus of
account inform to obtain fund from a person bank account without that person
signatur on a negoti instrument other term for demand draft ar preauthor
draft and telephon draft while there ar mani legitim busi us for demand
draft such as quickturnaround telephon transact initi by airlin and car rental
compani demand draft have been us by decept telemarket who obtain bank
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11005
account inform and withdraw unauthor fund from consum bank account
without their realiz that such withdraw ar occur
thirdparti bill pai servic
the check produc by these thirdparti bill pai servic provid do not includ the
payor signatur instead the signatur line reflect someth such as signatur on file
unauthor check produc by thirdparti payment servic ar not usual detect until
the custom review the monthli bank statement by the time the custom identifi the
unauthor check it is often too late to recov the fund sinc the 24hour window
actual until midnight of the next bank dai for the time return of check ha long
sinc pass these check usual sail right through the check sort oper sinc thei
includ good account inform and sometim even includ good serial number too
often both busi and individu account holder seem unawar of how their account
inform given too freeli to a request parti can be us for fraudul purpos
travel check
the us of travel check is declin signif icantli and will like eventu be replac by
electron option in fact an increas number of vendor in locat throughout
europeand in other part of the worldno long er accept travel check as a valid form
of payment howev for mani travel travel check continu to provid a conveni
payment method while abroad
anyon familiar with travel check know that 100 check ar quit common some
check ring special in the product and distribut of thi type of check commonli
check passer of thi type make small purchas us a fake 100 travel check and
receiv the bulk of the amount back in cash natur thi scheme work well in area that
have a lot of tourist busi ring often pull thi scam sever time in on area in rapid
success
travel check have sever distinguish featur watermark and hologram ar
common as well as microprint and ultraviolet ink there ar basic two method of
counterfeit travel check color copyin g and offset lithographyprint color copi
check lack the rais ink textur that the intaglio print press give most travel check
instead of a textur feel a phoni check will appear slick and flat offset lithograph
reproduct of actual check ar of higher qualiti than colorcopi check howev
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11006 2011 fraud examin manual
neither will have the textur watermark microprint or hologram that the genuin
articl have
payrol check fraud
check procur emploi by payrol check process compani print duplic payrol
check that ar sold to third parti or ar cash by member of the procur organ
to avoid the secur emploi by financi institut the check ar cash at groceri
store and checkcash oper with loos control the check ar usual written for
amount of 300 or less to avoid suspicion of cours check procur have access to
person inform on the legitim recipi of the payrol check and make us of it in
the futur
dumpster dive
often check fraud can be as simpl as retriev bank materi from a trash receptacl
exampl
thirti peopl were charg in a 10 millio n fraud scheme that involv counterfeit
check bank statement and credit card receipt pull out of the trash the defend
who defraud peopl in 17 state us check bank statement credit card receipt and
other document from garbag bin to creat counterfeit check fals driver licens and
fals credit report offici said counterfeit blank check print on highqual color
printer allegedli were us to defraud bank of 2 million
obvious thi type of fraud is easili prevent through proper dispos by bank
merchant and individu of sensit and confidenti materi
scan
scan requir a scanner and a legitim check scanner can be purchas for less than
200 and check ar readili avail without have to actual steal the check check can
then be manufactur by scan a corpor logo from a busi card onto a simpl
businesss check
system password secur compromis
peopl have legitim access to sensit account and daili code inform for a limit
time for exampl comput consult effect improp transfer through unauthor
access
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11007
check fraud ring
sinc the late 1980 foreign crime ring have been the caus of the major of check fraud
in the us most major financi institut attribut more than 50 percent of all check fraud
to organ crime ring in 2007 an intern task forc monitor the mail in africa
europ and north america and intercept billion of dollar worth facevalu of
counterfeit check
the perpetr of organ check fraud activ ar often base in nigeria russia
vietnam and mexico most of the vietnames and mexican ring oper in california
notabl san francisco orang counti and sa cramento the russian and nigerian ring
center in the northeast spread their crimin activ over a wide area and can be found
pass through ani part of the us at ani time while most of these gang ar involv in
drug traffick and violent crime check and credit card fraud ar consid safe crime
the chanc of be arrest and prosecut ar rel low and the penalti ar not
veri harsh
the equip essenti to a check fraud ring ar a laser scanner laser printer and a person
comput easili obtain item the total cost of which is about 1500 these ring us
digit scanner and offset print to counterfeit check the check ar cash by member
of the ring or sold to third parti
most ring special in payrol or other institut check written for amount less than
300 but some group infiltr financi institut collect corpor payrol check
monei order and master origin bank check cash the duplic for between 2000
and 5000
in recent year member of nigerian and vi etnames ring have infiltr or obtain
accomplic in financi institut there thei gather person inform on custom
pass the inform to counterfeit who produc falsifi identif driver
licens credit card etc which is us to open account establish line of credit and
secur loan an organ group mai includ a counterfeit or printer a distributor on or
more provid of fals identif and sever smurf who open fals bank account
or visit checkcash establish to negoti fraudul check
foreign crime ring that practic check fraud ar ethnic homogen and usual not
rigidli structur it is common for onli the leader of these ring to know the extent of the
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11008 2011 fraud examin manual
particip of their subordin the leader of such group ar usual quit intellig
and educ often thei have an extens crimin or busi background and direct the
group activ gang have been known to share member and cooper with on
anoth in the past
check fraud detect
fbi profil of check fraud activ
accord to an analysi by fbi investig in the new york citi area fraudul check
passer us the follow common techniqu
custom attempt to open an account with a corpor check or other third
parti check
custom tri to flatter hurri or confus the teller to draw attent awai from
the transact
custom delai endors a check or produc identif dure peak hour to
frustrat the teller and hurri the transact
custom present for cash a lownumb check drawn on a new account
custom offer foreign document birth certif passport visa or nonphoto
identif social secur card credit card in lieu of photo identif to open an
account or cash a check
custom offer alter or damag identif to open an account or cash a check
custom attempt to cash or convert sever small check into wire transfer gold or
other tender
custom request an except to establish rule to forc the transact
detect techniqu
the cashier or teller is the frontlin defens in prevent check fraud it is import that
thei receiv the train necessari to identifi fraudul check thei should
be awar of magnet rout number
us extra care in examin a check drawn from a nonloc bank and requir
posit identif
examin the date on the check for accuraci of dai month and year do not accept the
check if it is not date if it is postdat or if it is more than 30 dai old
look for check with a check number less than 400 on person check or below 1500
on busi check 90 percent of bad check ar written on account less than on
year old
be awar of font us to print the custom name that ar visibl differ from the
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11009
font us to print the address
be awar that the magnet ink micr us for rout code should appear non
reflect and dull
look for micr code that doe not match the bank district and the rout symbol in
the upper righthand corner of the check
be awar of the date that the account wa open
be awar of stain or discolor on the check possibl caus by erasur or
alter
have easi access to the signatur card
look for perfor edg of the check
be awar that a color copi might reflect odd color at time due to a failur of the toner
to mix satisfactorili
notic absenc of ani design in the background of the check paper
notic absenc of bank logo and the print of the bank name in the regular letter
notic absenc of the address of the bank on the check
be cautiou of inform that is type or stamp
do not accept a check that is not legibl written it should be written and sign in ink
and must not have ani erasur or writtenov amount
be awar of what is accept identif
recogn forgedalt inform
recogn forg negoti instrument
teller should telephon the busi or account offic for approv on suspici
request
be familiar with pattern of behavior relat to potenti culprit
overli polit
nervou
aggress and hurri
check fraud prevent and investig
sinc the feder reserv regul cc wa implement mandat acceler
avail of custom fund check fraud at bank ha increas most bank custom
fund ar avail for withdraw a dai after deposit leav the bank littl time to verifi
the valid of the transact regul cc howev allow bank two dai to make
fund avail most bank provid nextdai withdraw in order to stai competit
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11010 2011 fraud examin manual
addition special secur print techniqu have been develop to make
counterfeit blank check more difficult on of the featur is the us of a pattern of
color that is difficult to separ even with special camera filter and film anoth
techniqu us is scrambl indicia print which is a seemingli random pattern of tini
color dot print on the paper us a color filter to view the check will make a word
or pattern develop
still anoth techniqu which is also us by credit card issuer is to print a microlin on
the check which appear as a solid line when view normal but us a magnifi glass
will show that the line is actual veri small word or letter which ar veri difficult to
recreat with the normal print process other secur measur includ us a three
dimension hologram which is easili identifi by the human ey but is imposs to
reproduc via ordinari copi or print some check have a secur seal on the back of
the check that is visibl when held up to a light reproduct even good on will not
have a seal
check fraud investig
dure a check fraud investig look for the follow
frequent deposit and check
in the same amount
in round number
with check written on the same other bank
frequent atm account balanc inquiri
mani larg deposit made on thursdai or fridai to take advantag of the weekend
larg period balanc in individu account with no appar busi
low averag balanc compar to high level of deposit
mani check made payabl to other bank
bank willing to pai against uncollect fund
deposit not made daili or intact
entiti us receipt that do not indic mode of payment
on or more person check in the cash drawer by the fund custodian
deposit time lag
irregular check endors
amount of deposit doe not agre with daili activ report
inappropri access to signatur plate
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11011
check number paye name date and amount dont agre with entri in the
check regist
void check ar not retain
check ar issu to individu for larg even dollar amount
support document for check is not avail or ha been prematur destroi
cash withdraw with deposit check drawn on anoth bank
there ar sever tip for busi to us when cash busi and payrol check
examin all check insist that the check be sign in front of the clerk compar the
signatur written on the check with the signatur on the driver licens or state
identif
be particularli care with largedollar check present by noncustom
examin all check for sign of counterfeit such as a glossi crayonish appear
and ani lack of detail and sharp
look for sign of alter or erasur es pecial in the signatur or numer and
written amount
compar the bank identif and rout number for a match
the textur of the check should appear smooth a rough document might signal
erasur
be cautiou of inform that is type or stamp
all check except govern issu should have at least on perfor edg
the magnet ink us for rout code should appear nonreflect and dull
look for fade color paper which can indic that the check ha been chemic
bleach
a color copi might reflect odd color at time due to a failur of the toner to mix
satisfactorili
black letter might have a slightli greenish cast when examin under a magnifi
glass
a light color or delic background might fade out when copi
absenc of ani design in background of check paper
absenc of bank logo and the print of the bank name in regular letter
absenc of the address of the bank on the check
overal appear of poor qualiti of print and paper
a payrol check will usual be for an odd amount and will appear neat clean and
usual unfold
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11012 2011 fraud examin manual
teller should telephon the busi or account offic for approv on suspici
request
check fraud prevent tool
check write pen
when a check is written a special pen design to prevent check wash should be us
these pen ar call check write pen and can be found at just about ani offic suppli
store these pen have special ink that will prevent crimin from us solvent to remov
ink from the check when someon tri to wash a check written from these pen it will
either not work therebi leav the check intact or smear the ink and make it appar that
a check ha been wash
individu with busi account ar a much greater risk when it come to check wash
busi have much stricter requir in term of what the compani must do to
protect their check if the busi doesnt follow a strict plan to protect their check it
like that if ani monei is stolen from their account the bank will not return their monei if
an individu ha a busi account thei should make sure that the check ar lock
secur when not in us make sure not to leav blank computerprint check in the
printer or the busi will be equal liabl for the monei that could potenti be stolen
fingerprint identifi
a biometr fingerprint identifi requir the check writer to match fingerprint with the account
holder which ar on file bank report reduct in check fraud of 40 percent after the
machin wa introduc in the mid1990
nonaccount holder who want check cash at bank that have implement thi system
ar requir to put an inkless fingerprint on their check if the check doe prove fals law
enforc will alreadi have evid regard the fraudster ident the cost to a bank
of implement the inkless fingerprint system could be redeem by prevent a singl
instanc of check fraud bank throughout the nation now us thi techniqu to cut
fraud loss
forens document examin
through handwrit an individu can be posit identifi as is the case with dna or
fingerprint when investig check fraud a forens document examin focus on
the signatur and the handwrit itself
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11013
signatur
if the examin were investig a forg signatur he would compar the suspici
signatur to a sampl of the actual on note discrep between the two while on
signatur mai chang over time it would be close to imposs for a forger to duplic a
signatur with on hundr percent accuraci minut identifi characterist mark
peopl write and ar not reproduc
the ebank discoveri system develop by asv technolog emploi signatur
verif softwar us multipl feat ur set extract technolog drawn from
forens scienc the state and qualiti of a signatur twodimension characterist ar
analyz and verifi against sampl the program identifi flourish arc distanc
between letter and up to 100 other featur reject signatur along with the reason for
reject and signatur sampl ar forward to a human for visual verif asv
technolog claim it result match those of the most highli train and accur signatur
verifi
handwrit
like fingerprint handwrit is uniqu to an individu consequ if the narr
portion of the check is handwritten it offer a document examin a greater opportun to
identifi a forgeri
video spectral compar
forens examin us thi tool to test question document the document is examin
for photocopi and liquid paper under a control light sourc letter ad to a
document can be detect with thi devic
electrostat detect apparatu
thi tool allow examin to detect indent write from the top page of a pad of paper up
to five page below the origin the electrostat detect apparatu us photocopi
toner to develop the area of indent after a document ha been cover with an
electr charg plastic film in the best of case when the document is process with
the electrostat devic and the toner imag is develop the write impress ar clearli
defin and highli contrast if the develop write is to be us in an investig or to
demonstr result for the court the examin must turn to electron imag process
technolog for further enhanc
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11014 2011 fraud examin manual
