2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Check Fraud/Check Fraud Rings


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Check Fraud Rings 
Since the late 1980s, foreign crime rings have been the cause of the majority of check fraud 
in the U.S. Most major financial institutions attribute more than 50 percent of all check fraud 
to organized crime rings. In 2007, an international task force monitored the mail in Africa, 
Europe, and North America and intercepted billions of dollars worth (face-value) of 
counterfeit checks.  
 
The perpetrators of organized check fraud activity are often based in Nigeria, Russia, 
Vietnam, and Mexico. Most of the Vietnamese and Mexican rings operate in California, 
notably San Francisco, Orange County, and Sa cramento. The Russian and Nigerian rings, 
centered in the Northeast, spread their criminal activities over a wide area and can be found 
passing through any part of the U.S. at any time. While most of these gangs are involved in 
drug trafficking and violent crimes, check and credit card fraud are considered “safe” crimes. 
The chances of being arrested and prosecuted are relatively low and the penalties are not 
very harsh. 
 
The equipment essential to a check fraud ring are a laser scanner, laser printer and a personal 
computer, easily obtainable items, the total cost of which is about $1,500. These rings use 
digital scanners and offset printing to counterfeit checks. The checks are cashed by members 
of the ring or sold to third parties. 
 
Most rings specialize in payroll or other institutional checks, written for amounts less than 
$300. But some groups infiltrate financial institutions, collecting corporate payroll checks, 
money orders, and master original bank checks, cashing the duplicates for between $2,000 
and $5,000. 
 
In recent years, members of Nigerian and Vi etnamese rings have infiltrated or obtained 
accomplices in financial institutions. There they gather personal information on customers, 
passing the information to counterfeiters who produce falsified identification (driver’s 
licenses, credit cards, etc.), which is used to open accounts, establish lines of credit, and 
secure loans. An organized group may include a counterfeiter or printer, a distributor, one or 
more providers of false identification, and several “smurfs,” who open false bank accounts 
or visit check-cashing establishments to negotiate fraudulent checks.  
 
Foreign crime rings that practice check fraud are ethnically homogenous and usually not 
rigidly structured. It is common for only the leaders of these rings to know the extent of the 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1008                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
participation of their subordinates. The leaders of such groups are usually quite intelligent 
and educated. Often, they have an extensive criminal or business background and direct the 
group’s activities. Gangs have been known to share members and cooperate with one 
another in the past. 
 



:


check fraud ring
sinc the late 1980 foreign crime ring have been the caus of the major of check fraud
in the us most major financi institut attribut more than 50 percent of all check fraud
to organ crime ring in 2007 an intern task forc monitor the mail in africa
europ and north america and intercept billion of dollar worth facevalu of
counterfeit check
the perpetr of organ check fraud activ ar often base in nigeria russia
vietnam and mexico most of the vietnames and mexican ring oper in california
notabl san francisco orang counti and sa cramento the russian and nigerian ring
center in the northeast spread their crimin activ over a wide area and can be found
pass through ani part of the us at ani time while most of these gang ar involv in
drug traffick and violent crime check and credit card fraud ar consid safe crime
the chanc of be arrest and prosecut ar rel low and the penalti ar not
veri harsh
the equip essenti to a check fraud ring ar a laser scanner laser printer and a person
comput easili obtain item the total cost of which is about 1500 these ring us
digit scanner and offset print to counterfeit check the check ar cash by member
of the ring or sold to third parti
most ring special in payrol or other institut check written for amount less than
300 but some group infiltr financi institut collect corpor payrol check
monei order and master origin bank check cash the duplic for between 2000
and 5000
in recent year member of nigerian and vi etnames ring have infiltr or obtain
accomplic in financi institut there thei gather person inform on custom
pass the inform to counterfeit who produc falsifi identif driver
licens credit card etc which is us to open account establish line of credit and
secur loan an organ group mai includ a counterfeit or printer a distributor on or
more provid of fals identif and sever smurf who open fals bank account
or visit checkcash establish to negoti fraudul check
foreign crime ring that practic check fraud ar ethnic homogen and usual not
rigidli structur it is common for onli the leader of these ring to know the extent of the
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11008 2011 fraud examin manual
particip of their subordin the leader of such group ar usual quit intellig
and educ often thei have an extens crimin or busi background and direct the
group activ gang have been known to share member and cooper with on
anoth in the past
