2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Check Fraud/Check Fraud Prevention Tools


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Check Fraud Prevention Tools 
CHECK WRITING PENS 
When a check is written, a special pen designed to prevent check washing should be used. 
These pens are called “check writing” pens and can be found at just about any office supply 
store. These pens have special ink that will prevent criminals from using solvents to remove 
ink from the check. When someone tries to wash a check written from these pens, it will 
either not work, thereby leaving the check intact, or smear the ink and make it apparent that 
a check has been washed. 
 
Individuals with business accounts are a much greater risk when it comes to check washing. 
Businesses have much stricter requirements in terms of what the company must do to 
protect their checks. If the business doesn’t follow a strict plan to protect their checks, it’s 
likely that if any money is stolen from their accounts, the bank will not return their money. If 
an individual has a business account, they should make sure that the checks are locked 
securely when not in use. Make sure not to leave blank computer-printed checks in the 
printer or the business will be equally liable for the money that could potentially be stolen.  
 
FINGERPRINT IDENTIFIERS 
A biometric fingerprint identifier  requires the check writer to match fingerprints with the account 
holder’s, which are on file. Banks reported reductions in check fraud of 40 percent after the 
machine was introduced in the mid-1990s. 
 
Non-account holders who want checks cashed at banks that have implemented this system 
are required to put an inkless fingerprint on their check. If the check does prove false, law 
enforcement will already have evidence regarding the fraudster’s identity. The cost to a bank 
of implementing the inkless fingerprint system could be redeemed by preventing a single 
instance of check fraud. Banks throughout the nation now use this technique to cut  
fraud losses. 
 
FORENSIC DOCUMENT EXAMINATION 
Through handwriting, an individual can be positively identified, as is the case with DNA or 
fingerprinting. When investigating check fraud, a forensic document examiner focuses on 
the signature and the handwriting itself.  
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1013 
SIGNATURE 
If the examiner were investigating a forged signature, he would compare the suspicious 
signature to a sample of the actual one, noting discrepancies between the two. While one’s 
signature may change over time, it would be close to impossible for a forger to duplicate a 
signature with one hundred percent accuracy;  minute identifying characteristics mark 
people’s writing and are not reproducible. 
 
The eBank ™ Discovery System, developed by ASV Technologies, employs signature 
verification software. Using “multiple feat ure set extraction” technology drawn from 
forensic science, the state and quality of a signature’s two-dimensional characteristics are 
analyzed and verified against samples. The program identifies flourishes, arcs, distances 
between letters, and up to 100 other features. Rejected signatures, along with the reason for 
rejection and signature samples, are forwarded to a human for visual verification. ASV 
Technologies claim its results match those of the most highly trained and accurate signature 
verifier. 
 
HANDWRITING 
Like fingerprints, handwriting is unique to an individual. Consequently, if the narrative 
portion of the check is handwritten, it offers a document examiner a greater opportunity to 
identify a forgery. 
 
VIDEO SPECTRAL COMPARATOR 
Forensic examiners use this tool to test questionable documents. The document is examined 
for photocopying and liquid paper under a controlled light source. Lettering added to a 
document can be detected with this device. 
 
ELECTROSTATIC DETECTION APPARATUS 
This tool allows examiners to detect indented writing from the top page of a pad of paper up 
to five pages below the original. The Electrostatic Detection Apparatus uses photocopier 
toner to develop the areas of indentation after a document has been covered with an 
electrically charged plastic film. In the best of cases, when the document is processed with 
the electrostatic device and the toner image is developed, the writing impressions are clearly 
defined and highly contrasted. If the developed writing is to be used in an investigation or to 
demonstrate results for the courts, the examiner must turn to electronic image processing 
technology for further enhancement. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1014                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


check fraud prevent tool
check write pen
when a check is written a special pen design to prevent check wash should be us
these pen ar call check write pen and can be found at just about ani offic suppli
store these pen have special ink that will prevent crimin from us solvent to remov
ink from the check when someon tri to wash a check written from these pen it will
either not work therebi leav the check intact or smear the ink and make it appar that
a check ha been wash
individu with busi account ar a much greater risk when it come to check wash
busi have much stricter requir in term of what the compani must do to
protect their check if the busi doesnt follow a strict plan to protect their check it
like that if ani monei is stolen from their account the bank will not return their monei if
an individu ha a busi account thei should make sure that the check ar lock
secur when not in us make sure not to leav blank computerprint check in the
printer or the busi will be equal liabl for the monei that could potenti be stolen
fingerprint identifi
a biometr fingerprint identifi requir the check writer to match fingerprint with the account
holder which ar on file bank report reduct in check fraud of 40 percent after the
machin wa introduc in the mid1990
nonaccount holder who want check cash at bank that have implement thi system
ar requir to put an inkless fingerprint on their check if the check doe prove fals law
enforc will alreadi have evid regard the fraudster ident the cost to a bank
of implement the inkless fingerprint system could be redeem by prevent a singl
instanc of check fraud bank throughout the nation now us thi techniqu to cut
fraud loss
forens document examin
through handwrit an individu can be posit identifi as is the case with dna or
fingerprint when investig check fraud a forens document examin focus on
the signatur and the handwrit itself
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11013
signatur
if the examin were investig a forg signatur he would compar the suspici
signatur to a sampl of the actual on note discrep between the two while on
signatur mai chang over time it would be close to imposs for a forger to duplic a
signatur with on hundr percent accuraci minut identifi characterist mark
peopl write and ar not reproduc
the ebank discoveri system develop by asv technolog emploi signatur
verif softwar us multipl feat ur set extract technolog drawn from
forens scienc the state and qualiti of a signatur twodimension characterist ar
analyz and verifi against sampl the program identifi flourish arc distanc
between letter and up to 100 other featur reject signatur along with the reason for
reject and signatur sampl ar forward to a human for visual verif asv
technolog claim it result match those of the most highli train and accur signatur
verifi
handwrit
like fingerprint handwrit is uniqu to an individu consequ if the narr
portion of the check is handwritten it offer a document examin a greater opportun to
identifi a forgeri
video spectral compar
forens examin us thi tool to test question document the document is examin
for photocopi and liquid paper under a control light sourc letter ad to a
document can be detect with thi devic
electrostat detect apparatu
thi tool allow examin to detect indent write from the top page of a pad of paper up
to five page below the origin the electrostat detect apparatu us photocopi
toner to develop the area of indent after a document ha been cover with an
electr charg plastic film in the best of case when the document is process with
the electrostat devic and the toner imag is develop the write impress ar clearli
defin and highli contrast if the develop write is to be us in an investig or to
demonstr result for the court the examin must turn to electron imag process
technolog for further enhanc
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11014 2011 fraud examin manual
