2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Credit Card Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Credit Card Fraud 
Credit card fraud is the misuse of a credit card to make purchases without authorization, or 
counterfeiting a credit card. The use of credit cards as a form of payment has grown 
dramatically over the past decades, with more than 80 percent of U.S. households having at 
least one credit card. As the industry continues to expand and offer credit to more and more 
consumers, fraud will also grow. 
 
Credit card fraud is successful because the chances of being caught are small and 
prosecution is not assured. Retail stores have identified credit card thieves and contacted law 
enforcement only to be turned down for action. 
 
Credit Card Schemes 
There are many different types of credit card schemes including selling the cards to thieves, 
family members using the credit cards without authorization, and fraudulently obtaining a 
card. Statutes relating to the misuse of credit cards generally prohibit the obtaining of 
property or services through the use of a credit card if the use of the card is for any reason 
unauthorized. The federal statute prohibiting the use of fraudulent credit cards is found at 15 
U.S.C. § 1664. This statute prohibits using a fraudulently obtained credit card to obtain 
anything of value aggregating $1,000 or more, and it prohibits receiving anything of value 
purchased with an illegal credit card. A violator may be fined up to $10,000 and/or 
imprisoned for up to 10 years.  
  
Unauthorized Use of a Lost or Stolen Card 
Fraudulent activity normally occurs within hours of the loss or theft, before most victims 
have called to report the loss. Increasingly, victims aren’t even aware that their credit cards 
are being fraudulently used until they receive their monthly statement. It is extremely 
important that victims report the loss or theft of their card within 60 days of receiving the 
statement with the fraudulent charges, as they will not be held responsible for any charges 
(beyond $50) that occur during that time frame.  If the credit card company is not notified of 
the theft and the card is used, the customer will be liable. 
 
Organized Crime Rings 
Nigerian rings are especially notorious for stealing credit card and bank information from 
the mail. These articles are used to generate false identification documents, such as driver’s 
licenses and Social Security cards. The credit cards themselves are duplicated and distributed 
to members of the rings. The false IDs are then displayed during purchases made with the 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1015 
stolen cards. Members of the ring go on spending sprees, ending only when the credit has 
dried up or the legitimate owner reports their card as stolen. Often, counterfeit and stolen 
cards are express-mailed to members of the ring in other parts of the country. 
 
Advance Payments
Consumer regulations require credit card issuers to credit customers’ accounts immediately 
upon receipt of payment. This means deducting from the balance of the account before the 
check or other payment instrument has actually cleared the bank. A loophole such as this is 
easily exploited by experienced fraud rings. 
 
Using a forged or counterfeit check, an advance or overpayment is made on a stolen credit 
card. Since the issuer must credit the payment at the time it is made, there is no time to 
verify the authenticity of the check. Consequently, cash advances and purchases can be made 
immediately. This scheme can be extremely lucrative to the perpetrators.  
 
Stolen Card Numbers 
The Internet has become a breeding ground for individuals to obtain stolen credit card 
information. The thieves who steal this information find credit cards or lists of credit card 
holders and the corresponding numbers to their accounts. They then make the numbers 
available to a larger group, which uses the information to obtain goods and services in the 
name of the cardholder. Wrongfully obtained information may be posted on websites that 
originate in foreign countries. The international nature of the fraud makes it arduous to deter 
or punish. One report involved a Romanian website that displayed stolen credit card 
numbers of more than 450 individuals, most from the United States. The list contained 
identifying information of cardholders and was available for several weeks before being shut 
down.  
 
Shave and Paste 
Any number of alphanumeric characters is sliced from the card surface and other characters 
are attached, utilizing fast drying epoxy-type glues. This might be done to put an entirely 
different but valid account number on the card or to change the name.  
 
De-Emboss/Re-Emboss 
In this scheme, the credit card is exposed to heat, usually from a household iron, a candle, or 
hot water in the microwave. Plastic cards, primarily composed of polyvinylchloride, become 
more elastic when heated, and the embossed alphanumeric characters are removed. An 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1016                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
embosser puts new numbers and names on the cards. This process will generally create a 
“ghost image.” 
 
Counterfeit Cards 
Another type of bankcard fraud involves the illegal counterfeiting of credit cards. Known as 
“white plastic” cards, this scheme utilizes credit-card-sized plastic with embossed account 
numbers and names. This scheme works in conjunction with a corrupt and collusive 
merchant or a merchant’s employee. Other counterfeit cards are manufactured from scratch 
using high speed printing facilities and used in association with organized crime groups. 
Manufacturing facilities have been traced to the Far East. 
 
Counterfeiting operations are centered in Taiwan, China, and Hong Kong, where the 
specialty is producing the holograms and magnetic strips that appear on many cards. Forged 
holograms are smuggled into the U.S. and Canada by ring members from Asia and 
distributed throughout both countries. A substantial amount of them end up in California, 
where most of the Asian counterfeiting operations in the U.S. are located. Not surprisingly, 
California, notably Orange County, experiences more credit card fraud than any area in  
the country.  
 
The actual counterfeiting process has been immeasurably eased by technology that allows for 
more accurate duplication. Duplicating legitimate cards is still an intricate operation, 
however. Magnetic strips, numbers, holograms, and logos must all appear authentic. 
Desktop computers, embossers, tipping foil, and laminators are common tools in the 
reproduction process. Perhaps most difficult of all to accurately reproduce, however, is the 
hologram. Most phony holograms can be sold for between $5 and $15. True holograms use 
a “lenticular refraction” process; counterfeits are generally only reflected materials, usually a 
foil with an image stamped on it. These decals are attached to the surface of the card, rather 
than fixed into the plastic, as is the case with legitimate cards. Some holograms do not 
change colors, as legitimate ones do, when viewed from various angles. Counterfeit credit 
cards are the most damaging scheme of those mentioned here. However, with the increasing 
use of chips inside the cards and the addition of a PIN (Personal Identification Number), 
counterfeiting cards has decreased significantly as a method of bank card fraud in the U.S., 
U.K., and other countries implementing this technology. 
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1017 
Telephone/Mail Order Fraud 
The fraudster might offer a free trip or other nice prize, with the only catch being that the 
winner must have a credit card. Once the thief has the number, he can order merchandise or 
have money wired to himself. 
 
A great deal of credit card fraud is childishly simple to complete. Many crooks have great 
success by simply selecting a name from the phone book, calling, and pretending to be a 
Visa/MasterCard representative. The victim is told that his card number may have been 
obtained and used illegally by criminals. Or, a representative of a travel agency may call, 
claiming the victim has won a discount travel package. In any case, the victim is asked to 
read the card number off for verification or inclusion in the discount deal. A surprisingly 
large amount of people fall for this scheme and give out their credit card information. 
Purchases through catalogues and mail order are then made using the victim’s card number. 
They may select an unoccupied address to which their merchandise can be delivered, 
perhaps leaving a note asking the delivery service to simply put the package by the  
back door. 
 
Mail Theft  
A thief may steal credit cards already applied for by a bank’s customer and issued by the 
bank. The thief will then attempt to use the card by posing as the intended recipient. 
 
False Applications 
Perpetrators might apply for a new card using information stolen from a wallet, purse, or the 
trash, or by stealing a pre-approved credit card application out of the mail or trash. Also 
“take-one” applications that are prominent in stores offering credit cards to the public are 
ripe for fraud. 
 
Credit “Doctors” 
Credit doctor is the term used for fraudsters who sell stolen credit card account numbers via 
newspaper ads to people unable to get credit cards. 
 
True Name Fraud 
New credit card accounts can be opened by individuals possessing a victim’s true name 
identification such as a driver’s license or Social Security number. The true identification was 
either obtained as a secondary objective in the commission of a more aggressive offense 
such as robbery or as the primary target of a lesser crime such as pick pocketing. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1018                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Non-Receipt Fraud 
A form of credit card fraud in which the perpetrator intercepts credit cards that are in transit 
between the credit issuer and the authorized account holder. Losses attributable to mail theft 
have declined significantly as a result of “c ard activation” programs, where the cardholder 
must call their financial institution and confirm their identity before the card is activated. 
 
Key-Enter Counterfeiting 
When banks began using the CVV (for Visa) and CVC (for MasterCard) security system, 
fraudsters came up with this clever ruse in response. The CVV system uses a three-digit 
number embedded in the magnetic strip of a credit card, identifying it as a legitimately issued 
credit instrument. Credit card counterfeiters figured out a way to beat the system, however. 
By leaving the magnetic strip uncoded or making it unreadable, fraudsters force merchants 
handling the transaction to enter the credit card number manually. This means the 
transaction never falls under the scope of the CVV system.  
 
Clever bank and credit card officials very quickly found a patch for this scheme though. The 
CVV2 and CVC2 systems use a three-digit security code that is printed on the backs of 
cards. It is designed to validate that a genuine card is being used during a transaction. When 
a point-of-sale (POS) terminal reads a card’s ma gnetic stripe, Visa’s card Verification Value 
(CVV) or MasterCard’s Card Validation Code (CVC) can be verified during the 
authorization. Merchants using CVV2/CVC2 can expect to reduce their chargebacks by as 
much as 26 percent. The number appears in reverse italic at the top of the signature panel at 
the end. The CVV2 and CVC2 programs can also be used to reduce fraud in card-not-
 present transactions.  
 
Creditmaster 
This software program, downloadable from the Internet, allows the user to produce valid 
credit card numbers. Counterfeiters can then put these numbers to use in phony cards.  
 
Probing
The fraudster sets up a computer program that lets him run stolen numbers through various 
financial institutions in the hopes that one of them will still honor the number. Numbers 
that clear are often sold en masse to counterfeiters.  
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1019 
Skimming 
This scheme requires a device known as a wedge, which stores up to 200 credit card 
numbers. Credit card skimming is more frequent in businesses where an employee must 
leave the customer’s presence in order to ru n the transaction. A restaurant patron, for 
example, hands his credit card to a waiter who swipes the card into a wedge while 
conducting the legitimate transaction. Once the waiter has collected enough numbers, he can 
either sell them to a counterfeiter or simply produce his own fake cards using the stolen 
information. It may be months before the customer notices phony transactions on his 
statement, making the point of loss very difficult to determine. It follows that the guilty 
waiter is, therefore, unlikely to get caught. Skimming can also occur by tapping into a line 
used to transport credit card data.  
 
Pretext Calling 
Some fraudulent actors will call unsuspecting customers and pose as bank or credit card 
agents. The actor will request account information or other identifying information from the 
victim and use the information to apply for additional credit cards or to use the credit cards 
to purchase goods or services. 
 
Account Takeover 
The fake actor may take over a victim’s acco unt by requesting a change of address on the 
account and then calling to report the card lost or stolen. The issuing bank will then send the 
replacement card to the new address. 
 
Institutional Identity Theft and “Spoof” Sites  
Fraudulent actors may create false Internet sites, pretending to sell goods to buyers who 
must enter their credit card information and other personal information in order to make 
purchases. The “seller” then uses the information to make fraudulent purchases in the name 
of the buyer. More recently, fraudulent actors have begun creating “affiliate” sites of actual 
sellers or other creditors, such as banks. The perpetrator of the fraud then sends e-mails to 
existing customers of the actual seller or creator. These e-mails inform the unsuspecting 
customer that there is a problem with his account and asks the customer to log on to the site 
of the company that the wrongdoer has copied and to re-enter their personal and credit card 
information. The fraudulent actor then uses the information to make purchases. 
 
Information on how to commit credit card fraud is readily available to anyone willing to 
make the effort to look. Postings on the Internet give step-by-step instructions on how to 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1020                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
obtain carbon paper receipts and call credit-reporting agencies using merchant numbers. The 
latter is done in order to verify that the card is valid and to obtain the amount of credit 
available. The fraudster usually watches a store employee dial the number of the agency, 
noting the numbers as they are dialed. They then listen to the employee give the merchant 
number. This number can often be found next to registers and can be copied down if in 
plain sight. The fraudster now has an excellent avenue to test stolen cards. 
 
The Law Concerning Credit Card Fraud 
Federal law deals with legal principles surrounding losses from the fraudulent use of credit 
cards. Unlike check fraud, which is primarily governed by state law, credit card fraud is 
governed by federal law. Even so, the federal laws and regulations governing credit cards, 
however, pertain only to the relationship between the card issuer and the cardholder. Thus, 
contract law and the contractual agreement between the merchant and the merchant’s bank, 
as well as the merchant’s bank and the issuing bank, are typically what regulates the outcome 
of fraudulent credit card usage.  
 
The most important legal principles concerning the allocation of losses between credit card 
issuers and credit card holders come from Regulation Z of the Federal Reserve System, 
which was promulgated pursuant to the federal Truth-In-Lending Act (TILA).  
 
Congress designed TILA to protect consumers; therefore, its provisions generally do not 
apply to creditors that extend credit primarily for business, agricultural, or commercial 
purposes. TILA, however, defers to any state la w that gives greater protection and benefit to 
consumers, so state law that provides consumer cardholders more rights than federal law will 
prevail where there is a conflict.  
 
The provisions of Regulation Z that are most re levant to credit card fraud place limitations 
on a cardholder’s liability for unauthorized use. Under TILA, the term “cardholder” includes 
any person or organization to which a card is issued for any purpose—including a business, 
agricultural, or commercial purpose. This constitutes an exception to the general rule that 
most TILA provisions do not apply to credit card transactions for business, agricultural, or 
commercial purposes. 
 
The basic liability rule provides that the cardholder is not liable for unauthorized use of the 
card. The card issuer can shift from unauthorized use back to the cardholder only if: 
• The card is an “accepted” credit card (i.e., one that the cardholder has requested and 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1021 
signed, used, or has authorized another person to use). 
• The cardholder’s liability is not more than $50. 
• The card issuer has given notice to the cardholder of the potential liability. 
• The card issuer has provided the cardholder with a description of the means by which 
the card issuer may be notified of loss or theft of the card, either on the periodic 
statement that the issuer sends to the consumer or on a separate notice that accompanies 
that statement. 
• The unauthorized use occurs before the card issuer has been notified that an 
unauthorized use of the credit card. 
• The card issuer has provided a method by which the user of the card can be identified as 
the person authorized to use it. 
 
The Federal Reserve Board staff has interpreted Regulation Z to impose the $50 limit to a 
“series of unauthorized uses.” Assume, for instance, that a thief steals a credit card and, 
within a relatively short period of time, uses the credit card to make separate $100 purchases 
at three different stores. The consumer may maintain that, under the Federal Reserve Board 
staff interpretation, the card issuer may only impose one $50 charge because the transactions 
were all part of the same series. 
 
Guidance for Cardholders  
It is in the interest of both the issuing bank and the cardholder to minimize credit card fraud. 
Although the cardholder’s monetary liability for unauthorized use of a credit card cannot 
exceed $50, and many issuing banks do not ev en impose that charge on their customers, 
cardholders may have to spend significant time and money, sometimes including legal 
expenses, to refute allegations that they opened credit card accounts, used cards in particular 
ways, or otherwise authorized transactions about which they have no knowledge and with 
which they have no connection. Although cardholders may be aware of the pervasiveness of 
identity of theft, they may be unaware of the consequences or of ways to prevent it or 
minimize its effects. Since issuing banks will not often bear the losses related to identity theft 
that involves credit cards, banks should inform cardholders of ways to protect both physical 
cards and the risk of identity theft. 
 
Banks should send cardholders occasional reminders of steps that can be taken to safeguard 
their credit card identities, including the following: 
• Always carry the least amount of credit cards with you as necessary. 
• Sign credit slips and new credit cards as soon as you receive them. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1022                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Do not supply credit card information to unauthorized people. 
• Do not leave credit card unattended with merchants. 
• Make it a habit to review credit card  statements and immediately report any 
unrecognizable charges. 
• Immediately report the loss or theft of any credit card to the card issuer. 
• Obtain credit reports annually in order to detect any suspicious activity in which credit 
cards or other extensions of credit have been granted or applied for without  
your consent. 
• Never reveal account numbers or other credit card account information to persons 
attempting to gain your information on the telephone after they represent themselves as 
agents of a bank. 
• If you are aware of suspicious activity, immediately inform the relevant credit reporting 
agencies and have a “Fraud Alert” placed  on your account. This will prevent any 
potential new creditor from granting new credit without first contacting you personally. 
The major credit reporting agencies and their telephone numbers are Experian (888-397-
 3742), Equifax (888-766-0008), and the TransUnion (800-860-7289). 
• Always keep credit card receipts in a safe place, and destroy them after you have received 
the billing statement that reflects the charges. 
• If you receive a credit card you didn’t apply for, call the issuer and determine why they 
sent the card. Someone may have applied in your name and missed the opportunity to 
steal the card from your mailbox when it arrived. 
• Void incorrect receipts and destroy carbons of credit card slips.  
• Keep a record of account numbers, expi ration dates and phone numbers and addresses 
of each card issuer so that you can contact them in the event of the loss or theft of your 
credit card. 
• Do not lend your card to another person. 
• Do not write your account number on a postcard or the outside of an envelope. 
 
Merchant Scams 
Collusion occurs between the sales people and the credit card fraudster to process valid 
credit card numbers on white plastic cards. They might also make several imprints on sales 
tickets and fill them in later on.  
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1023 
Magnetic Stripe Diagram  
 
 
As shown in the above Magnetic Stripe Diagram above, two tracks appear on the credit 
card’s magnetic stripe. Track two is the most widely read. It is 40 characters in length, is 
strictly numeric containing the account number, expiration date, a security code, and 
discretionary bank data. Track one is 79 characters in length, is alpha numeric, and contains 
the above information plus the cardholder’s name. 
 
Magnetic stripe compromise is a more sophisticated method of obtaining account 
information for fraudulent purposes. It requires the transfer, or encoding, of legitimate 
account information, along with a security code, from the legitimate magnetic stripe to a 
counterfeited card with a magnetic stripe. The full, unaltered, legitimate magnetic stripe must 
be obtained to accomplish fraud by this method.  
 
Skimmers are becoming prevalent in credit card and ATM/debit card frauds. A skimmer is a 
card-reading device similar to the swipe machine used by cashiers to validate credit cards. It 
can be purchased at electronic stores and used by credit card thieves to read data imprinted 
on information tracks within the magnetic strip located on the card. In addition, criminals 
are using the device to swipe credit information from one credit card and put it on another.  
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1024                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Nowadays, criminals have gotten even more sophisticated by placing pinhole cameras on the 
ATMs to capture the card number as well to watch as the victim enter his PIN into the 
keypad. 
 
Company Credit Cards 
Company credit cards are provided to employees for convenience in conduction of company 
business. No personal expenses may be charged on the company credit card except as 
specifically authorized by company procedures. The employee must pay any charged 
personal expenses promptly. Company credit cards should not be used to avoid preparing 
documentation for direct payment to vendors. Where allowed by local law, charges on 
company credit cards for which a properly approved expense report has not been received at 
the time of an employee’s termination of employment may be deducted from the employee’s 
last paycheck. The company will pursue repayment by the employee of any amounts it has to 
pay on the employee’s behalf. 
 
 



:


credit card fraud
credit card fraud is the misus of a credit card to make purchas without author or
counterfeit a credit card the us of credit card as a form of payment ha grown
dramat over the past decad with more than 80 percent of us household have at
least on credit card as the industri continu to expand and offer credit to more and more
consum fraud will also grow
credit card fraud is success becaus the chanc of be caught ar small and
prosecut is not assur retail store have identifi credit card thiev and contact law
enforc onli to be turn down for action
credit card scheme
there ar mani differ type of credit card scheme includ sell the card to thiev
famili member us the credit card without author and fraudul obtain a
card statut relat to the misus of credit card gener prohibit the obtain of
properti or servic through the us of a credit card if the us of the card is for ani reason
unauthor the feder statut prohibit the us of fraudul credit card is found at 15
usc 1664 thi statut prohibit us a fraudul obtain credit card to obtain
anyth of valu aggreg 1000 or more and it prohibit receiv anyth of valu
purchas with an illeg credit card a violat mai be fine up to 10000 andor
imprison for up to 10 year
unauthor us of a lost or stolen card
fraudul activ normal occur within hour of the loss or theft befor most victim
have call to report the loss increasingli victim arent even awar that their credit card
ar be fraudul us until thei receiv their monthli statement it is extrem
import that victim report the loss or theft of their card within 60 dai of receiv the
statement with the fraudul charg as thei will not be held respons for ani charg
beyond 50 that occur dure that time frame if the credit card compani is not notifi of
the theft and the card is us the custom will be liabl
organ crime ring
nigerian ring ar especi notori for steal credit card and bank inform from
the mail these articl ar us to gener fals identif document such as driver
licens and social secur card the credit card themselv ar duplic and distribut
to member of the ring the fals id ar then displai dure purchas made with the
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11015
stolen card member of the ring go on spend spree end onli when the credit ha
dri up or the legitim owner report their card as stolen often counterfeit and stolen
card ar expressmail to member of the ring in other part of the countri
advanc payment
consum regul requir credit card issuer to credit custom account immedi
upon receipt of payment thi mean deduct from the balanc of the account befor the
check or other payment instrument ha actual clear the bank a loophol such as thi is
easili exploit by experienc fraud ring
us a forg or counterfeit check an advanc or overpay is made on a stolen credit
card sinc the issuer must credit the payment at the time it is made there is no time to
verifi the authent of the check consequ cash advanc and purchas can be made
immedi thi scheme can be extrem lucr to the perpetr
stolen card number
the internet ha becom a breed ground for individu to obtain stolen credit card
inform the thiev who steal thi inform find credit card or list of credit card
holder and the correspond number to their account thei then make the number
avail to a larger group which us the inform to obtain good and servic in the
name of the cardhold wrongfulli obtain inform mai be post on websit that
origin in foreign countri the intern natur of the fraud make it arduou to deter
or punish on report involv a romanian websit that displai stolen credit card
number of more than 450 individu most from the unit state the list contain
identifi inform of cardhold and wa avail for sever week befor be shut
down
shave and past
ani number of alphanumer charact is slice from the card surfac and other charact
ar attach util fast dry epoxytyp glue thi might be done to put an entir
differ but valid account number on the card or to chang the name
deembossreemboss
in thi scheme the credit card is expos to heat usual from a household iron a candl or
hot water in the microwav plastic card primarili compos of polyvinylchlorid becom
more elast when heat and the emboss alphanumer charact ar remov an
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11016 2011 fraud examin manual
emboss put new number and name on the card thi process will gener creat a
ghost imag
counterfeit card
anoth type of bankcard fraud involv the illeg counterfeit of credit card known as
white plastic card thi scheme util creditcards plastic with emboss account
number and name thi scheme work in conjunct with a corrupt and collus
merchant or a merchant employe other counterfeit card ar manufactur from scratch
us high speed print facil and us in associ with organ crime group
manufactur facil have been trace to the far east
counterfeit oper ar center in taiwan china and hong kong where the
specialti is produc the hologram and magnet strip that appear on mani card forg
hologram ar smuggl into the us and canada by ring member from asia and
distribut throughout both countri a substanti amount of them end up in california
where most of the asian counterfeit oper in the us ar locat not surprisingli
california notabl orang counti experi more credit card fraud than ani area in
the countri
the actual counterfeit process ha been immeasur eas by technolog that allow for
more accur duplic duplic legitim card is still an intric oper
howev magnet strip number hologram and logo must all appear authent
desktop comput emboss tip foil and lamin ar common tool in the
reproduct process perhap most difficult of all to accur reproduc howev is the
hologram most phoni hologram can be sold for between 5 and 15 true hologram us
a lenticular refract process counterfeit ar gener onli reflect materi usual a
foil with an imag stamp on it these decal ar attach to the surfac of the card rather
than fix into the plastic as is the case with legitim card some hologram do not
chang color as legitim on do when view from variou angl counterfeit credit
card ar the most damag scheme of those mention here howev with the increas
us of chip insid the card and the addit of a pin person identif number
counterfeit card ha decreas significantli as a method of bank card fraud in the us
uk and other countri implement thi technolog
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11017
telephonemail order fraud
the fraudster might offer a free trip or other nice prize with the onli catch be that the
winner must have a credit card onc the thief ha the number he can order merchandis or
have monei wire to himself
a great deal of credit card fraud is childishli simpl to complet mani crook have great
success by simpli select a name from the phone book call and pretend to be a
visamastercard repres the victim is told that hi card number mai have been
obtain and us illeg by crimin or a repres of a travel agenc mai call
claim the victim ha won a discount travel packag in ani case the victim is ask to
read the card number off for verif or inclus in the discount deal a surprisingli
larg amount of peopl fall for thi scheme and give out their credit card inform
purchas through catalogu and mail order ar then made us the victim card number
thei mai select an unoccupi address to which their merchandis can be deliv
perhap leav a note ask the deliveri servic to simpli put the packag by the
back door
mail theft
a thief mai steal credit card alreadi appli for by a bank custom and issu by the
bank the thief will then attempt to us the card by pose as the intend recipi
fals applic
perpetr might appli for a new card us inform stolen from a wallet purs or the
trash or by steal a preapprov credit card applic out of the mail or trash also
takeon applic that ar promin in store offer credit card to the public ar
ripe for fraud
credit doctor
credit doctor is the term us for fraudster who sell stolen credit card account number via
newspap ad to peopl unabl to get credit card
true name fraud
new credit card account can be open by individu possess a victim true name
identif such as a driver licens or social secur number the true identif wa
either obtain as a secondari object in the commiss of a more aggress offens
such as robberi or as the primari target of a lesser crime such as pick pocket
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11018 2011 fraud examin manual
nonreceipt fraud
a form of credit card fraud in which the perpetr intercept credit card that ar in transit
between the credit issuer and the author account holder loss attribut to mail theft
have declin significantli as a result of c ard activ program where the cardhold
must call their financi institut and confirm their ident befor the card is activ
keyent counterfeit
when bank began us the cvv for visa and cvc for mastercard secur system
fraudster came up with thi clever ruse in respons the cvv system us a threedigit
number embed in the magnet strip of a credit card identifi it as a legitim issu
credit instrument credit card counterfeit figur out a wai to beat the system howev
by leav the magnet strip uncod or make it unread fraudster forc merchant
handl the transact to enter the credit card number manual thi mean the
transact never fall under the scope of the cvv system
clever bank and credit card offici veri quickli found a patch for thi scheme though the
cvv2 and cvc2 system us a threedigit secur code that is print on the back of
card it is design to valid that a genuin card is be us dure a transact when
a pointofsal po termin read a card ma gnetic stripe visa card verif valu
cvv or mastercard card valid code cvc can be verifi dure the
author merchant us cvv2cvc2 can expect to reduc their chargeback by as
much as 26 percent the number appear in revers ital at the top of the signatur panel at
the end the cvv2 and cvc2 program can also be us to reduc fraud in cardnot
present transact
creditmast
thi softwar program download from the internet allow the user to produc valid
credit card number counterfeit can then put these number to us in phoni card
probe
the fraudster set up a comput program that let him run stolen number through variou
financi institut in the hope that on of them will still honor the number number
that clear ar often sold en mass to counterfeit
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11019
skim
thi scheme requir a devic known as a wedg which store up to 200 credit card
number credit card skim is more frequent in busi where an employe must
leav the custom presenc in order to ru n the transact a restaur patron for
exampl hand hi credit card to a waiter who swipe the card into a wedg while
conduct the legitim transact onc the waiter ha collect enough number he can
either sell them to a counterfeit or simpli produc hi own fake card us the stolen
inform it mai be month befor the custom notic phoni transact on hi
statement make the point of loss veri difficult to determin it follow that the guilti
waiter is therefor unlik to get caught skim can also occur by tap into a line
us to transport credit card data
pretext call
some fraudul actor will call unsuspect custom and pose as bank or credit card
agent the actor will request account inform or other identifi inform from the
victim and us the inform to appli for addit credit card or to us the credit card
to purchas good or servic
account takeov
the fake actor mai take over a victim acco unt by request a chang of address on the
account and then call to report the card lost or stolen the issu bank will then send the
replac card to the new address
institut ident theft and spoof site
fraudul actor mai creat fals internet site pretend to sell good to buyer who
must enter their credit card inform and other person inform in order to make
purchas the seller then us the inform to make fraudul purchas in the name
of the buyer more recent fraudul actor have begun creat affili site of actual
seller or other creditor such as bank the perpetr of the fraud then send email to
exist custom of the actual seller or creator these email inform the unsuspect
custom that there is a problem with hi account and ask the custom to log on to the site
of the compani that the wrongdoer ha copi and to reenter their person and credit card
inform the fraudul actor then us the inform to make purchas
inform on how to commit credit card fraud is readili avail to anyon will to
make the effort to look post on the internet give stepbystep instruct on how to
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11020 2011 fraud examin manual
obtain carbon paper receipt and call creditreport agenc us merchant number the
latter is done in order to verifi that the card is valid and to obtain the amount of credit
avail the fraudster usual watch a store employe dial the number of the agenc
note the number as thei ar dial thei then listen to the employe give the merchant
number thi number can often be found next to regist and can be copi down if in
plain sight the fraudster now ha an excel avenu to test stolen card
the law concern credit card fraud
feder law deal with legal principl surround loss from the fraudul us of credit
card unlik check fraud which is primarili govern by state law credit card fraud is
govern by feder law even so the feder law and regul govern credit card
howev pertain onli to the relationship between the card issuer and the cardhold thu
contract law and the contractu agreement between the merchant and the merchant bank
as well as the merchant bank and the issu bank ar typic what regul the outcom
of fraudul credit card usag
the most import legal principl concern the alloc of loss between credit card
issuer and credit card holder come from regul z of the feder reserv system
which wa promulg pursuant to the feder truthinlend act tila
congress design tila to protect consum therefor it provis gener do not
appli to creditor that extend credit primarili for busi agricultur or commerci
purpos tila howev defer to ani state la w that give greater protect and benefit to
consum so state law that provid consum cardhold more right than feder law will
prevail where there is a conflict
the provis of regul z that ar most re levant to credit card fraud place limit
on a cardhold liabil for unauthor us under tila the term cardhold includ
ani person or organ to which a card is issu for ani purposeinclud a busi
agricultur or commerci purpos thi constitut an except to the gener rule that
most tila provis do not appli to credit card transact for busi agricultur or
commerci purpos
the basic liabil rule provid that the cardhold is not liabl for unauthor us of the
card the card issuer can shift from unauthor us back to the cardhold onli if
the card is an accept credit card ie on that the cardhold ha request and
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11021
sign us or ha author anoth person to us
the cardhold liabil is not more than 50
the card issuer ha given notic to the cardhold of the potenti liabil
the card issuer ha provid the cardhold with a descript of the mean by which
the card issuer mai be notifi of loss or theft of the card either on the period
statement that the issuer send to the consum or on a separ notic that accompani
that statement
the unauthor us occur befor the card issuer ha been notifi that an
unauthor us of the credit card
the card issuer ha provid a method by which the user of the card can be identifi as
the person author to us it
the feder reserv board staff ha interpret regul z to impos the 50 limit to a
seri of unauthor us assum for instanc that a thief steal a credit card and
within a rel short period of time us the credit card to make separ 100 purchas
at three differ store the consum mai maintain that under the feder reserv board
staff interpret the card issuer mai onli impos on 50 charg becaus the transact
were all part of the same seri
guidanc for cardhold
it is in the interest of both the issu bank and the cardhold to minim credit card fraud
although the cardhold monetari liabil for unauthor us of a credit card cannot
exce 50 and mani issu bank do not ev en impos that charg on their custom
cardhold mai have to spend signific time and monei sometim includ legal
expens to refut alleg that thei open credit card account us card in particular
wai or otherwis author transact about which thei have no knowledg and with
which thei have no connect although cardhold mai be awar of the pervas of
ident of theft thei mai be unawar of the consequ or of wai to prevent it or
minim it effect sinc issu bank will not often bear the loss relat to ident theft
that involv credit card bank should inform cardhold of wai to protect both physic
card and the risk of ident theft
bank should send cardhold occasion remind of step that can be taken to safeguard
their credit card ident includ the follow
alwai carri the least amount of credit card with you as necessari
sign credit slip and new credit card as soon as you receiv them
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11022 2011 fraud examin manual
do not suppli credit card inform to unauthor peopl
do not leav credit card unattend with merchant
make it a habit to review credit card statement and immedi report ani
unrecogniz charg
immedi report the loss or theft of ani credit card to the card issuer
obtain credit report annual in order to detect ani suspici activ in which credit
card or other extens of credit have been grant or appli for without
your consent
never reveal account number or other credit card account inform to person
attempt to gain your inform on the telephon after thei repres themselv as
agent of a bank
if you ar awar of suspici activ immedi inform the relev credit report
agenc and have a fraud alert place on your account thi will prevent ani
potenti new creditor from grant new credit without first contact you person
the major credit report agenc and their telephon number ar experian 888397
3742 equifax 8887660008 and the transunion 8008607289
alwai keep credit card receipt in a safe place and destroi them after you have receiv
the bill statement that reflect the charg
if you receiv a credit card you didnt appli for call the issuer and determin why thei
sent the card someon mai have appli in your name and miss the opportun to
steal the card from your mailbox when it arriv
void incorrect receipt and destroi carbon of credit card slip
keep a record of account number expi ration date and phone number and address
of each card issuer so that you can contact them in the event of the loss or theft of your
credit card
do not lend your card to anoth person
do not write your account number on a postcard or the outsid of an envelop
merchant scam
collus occur between the sale peopl and the credit card fraudster to process valid
credit card number on white plastic card thei might also make sever imprint on sale
ticket and fill them in later on
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11023
magnet stripe diagram
as shown in the abov magnet stripe diagram abov two track appear on the credit
card magnet stripe track two is the most wide read it is 40 charact in length is
strictli numer contain the account number expir date a secur code and
discretionari bank data track on is 79 charact in length is alpha numer and contain
the abov inform plu the cardhold name
magnet stripe compromis is a more sophist method of obtain account
inform for fraudul purpos it requir the transfer or encod of legitim
account inform along with a secur code from the legitim magnet stripe to a
counterfeit card with a magnet stripe the full unalt legitim magnet stripe must
be obtain to accomplish fraud by thi method
skimmer ar becom preval in credit card and atmdebit card fraud a skimmer is a
cardread devic similar to the swipe machin us by cashier to valid credit card it
can be purchas at electron store and us by credit card thiev to read data imprint
on inform track within the magnet strip locat on the card in addit crimin
ar us the devic to swipe credit inform from on credit card and put it on anoth
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11024 2011 fraud examin manual
nowadai crimin have gotten even more sophist by place pinhol camera on the
atm to captur the card number as well to watch as the victim enter hi pin into the
keypad
compani credit card
compani credit card ar provid to employe for conveni in conduct of compani
busi no person expens mai be charg on the compani credit card except as
specif author by compani procedur the employe must pai ani charg
person expens promptli compani credit card should not be us to avoid prepar
document for direct payment to vendor where allow by local law charg on
compani credit card for which a properli approv expens report ha not been receiv at
the time of an employe termin of employ mai be deduct from the employe
last paycheck the compani will pursu repay by the employe of ani amount it ha to
pai on the employe behalf
