2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Credit Card Fraud/Guidance for Cardholders


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Guidance for Cardholders  
It is in the interest of both the issuing bank and the cardholder to minimize credit card fraud. 
Although the cardholder’s monetary liability for unauthorized use of a credit card cannot 
exceed $50, and many issuing banks do not ev en impose that charge on their customers, 
cardholders may have to spend significant time and money, sometimes including legal 
expenses, to refute allegations that they opened credit card accounts, used cards in particular 
ways, or otherwise authorized transactions about which they have no knowledge and with 
which they have no connection. Although cardholders may be aware of the pervasiveness of 
identity of theft, they may be unaware of the consequences or of ways to prevent it or 
minimize its effects. Since issuing banks will not often bear the losses related to identity theft 
that involves credit cards, banks should inform cardholders of ways to protect both physical 
cards and the risk of identity theft. 
 
Banks should send cardholders occasional reminders of steps that can be taken to safeguard 
their credit card identities, including the following: 
• Always carry the least amount of credit cards with you as necessary. 
• Sign credit slips and new credit cards as soon as you receive them. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1022                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Do not supply credit card information to unauthorized people. 
• Do not leave credit card unattended with merchants. 
• Make it a habit to review credit card  statements and immediately report any 
unrecognizable charges. 
• Immediately report the loss or theft of any credit card to the card issuer. 
• Obtain credit reports annually in order to detect any suspicious activity in which credit 
cards or other extensions of credit have been granted or applied for without  
your consent. 
• Never reveal account numbers or other credit card account information to persons 
attempting to gain your information on the telephone after they represent themselves as 
agents of a bank. 
• If you are aware of suspicious activity, immediately inform the relevant credit reporting 
agencies and have a “Fraud Alert” placed  on your account. This will prevent any 
potential new creditor from granting new credit without first contacting you personally. 
The major credit reporting agencies and their telephone numbers are Experian (888-397-
 3742), Equifax (888-766-0008), and the TransUnion (800-860-7289). 
• Always keep credit card receipts in a safe place, and destroy them after you have received 
the billing statement that reflects the charges. 
• If you receive a credit card you didn’t apply for, call the issuer and determine why they 
sent the card. Someone may have applied in your name and missed the opportunity to 
steal the card from your mailbox when it arrived. 
• Void incorrect receipts and destroy carbons of credit card slips.  
• Keep a record of account numbers, expi ration dates and phone numbers and addresses 
of each card issuer so that you can contact them in the event of the loss or theft of your 
credit card. 
• Do not lend your card to another person. 
• Do not write your account number on a postcard or the outside of an envelope. 
 



:


guidanc for cardhold
it is in the interest of both the issu bank and the cardhold to minim credit card fraud
although the cardhold monetari liabil for unauthor us of a credit card cannot
exce 50 and mani issu bank do not ev en impos that charg on their custom
cardhold mai have to spend signific time and monei sometim includ legal
expens to refut alleg that thei open credit card account us card in particular
wai or otherwis author transact about which thei have no knowledg and with
which thei have no connect although cardhold mai be awar of the pervas of
ident of theft thei mai be unawar of the consequ or of wai to prevent it or
minim it effect sinc issu bank will not often bear the loss relat to ident theft
that involv credit card bank should inform cardhold of wai to protect both physic
card and the risk of ident theft
bank should send cardhold occasion remind of step that can be taken to safeguard
their credit card ident includ the follow
alwai carri the least amount of credit card with you as necessari
sign credit slip and new credit card as soon as you receiv them
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11022 2011 fraud examin manual
do not suppli credit card inform to unauthor peopl
do not leav credit card unattend with merchant
make it a habit to review credit card statement and immedi report ani
unrecogniz charg
immedi report the loss or theft of ani credit card to the card issuer
obtain credit report annual in order to detect ani suspici activ in which credit
card or other extens of credit have been grant or appli for without
your consent
never reveal account number or other credit card account inform to person
attempt to gain your inform on the telephon after thei repres themselv as
agent of a bank
if you ar awar of suspici activ immedi inform the relev credit report
agenc and have a fraud alert place on your account thi will prevent ani
potenti new creditor from grant new credit without first contact you person
the major credit report agenc and their telephon number ar experian 888397
3742 equifax 8887660008 and the transunion 8008607289
alwai keep credit card receipt in a safe place and destroi them after you have receiv
the bill statement that reflect the charg
if you receiv a credit card you didnt appli for call the issuer and determin why thei
sent the card someon mai have appli in your name and miss the opportun to
steal the card from your mailbox when it arriv
void incorrect receipt and destroi carbon of credit card slip
keep a record of account number expi ration date and phone number and address
of each card issuer so that you can contact them in the event of the loss or theft of your
credit card
do not lend your card to anoth person
do not write your account number on a postcard or the outsid of an envelop
