2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Prevention and Detection of Credit Card Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Prevention and Detection of Credit Card Fraud 
The essential part of any detection program is the education of the tellers and merchants 
who are responsible for handling the transactions. In a study by Money Magazine, it was 
found that 95 percent of store clerks and cashiers did not check credit card signatures.  
 
While any of the following can occur in a perfectly legitimate transaction, these 
characteristics are frequently present during fraudulent transactions. Tellers and merchants 
should be advised to be alert for the customer who: 
• Takes a card from a pocket instead of a wallet or purse.  
• Purchases an unusual number of expensive items. 
• Makes random purchases, selecting items with  little regard to size, quality, or value. 
• Makes several small purchases to stay under the floor limit, or asks what the floor  
limit is. 
• Does not ask questions on major purchases. 
• Signs the sales draft slowly or awkwardly. 
• Charges expensive items on a newly valid credit card. 
• Cannot provide photo identification when asked. 
• Rushes the merchant or teller. 
• Purchases a large item, such as a television console, and insists on taking it at the time, 
even when delivery is included in the price. 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1025 
• Makes purchases and leaves the store but then returns to make more purchases. 
• Becomes argumentative with the teller or merchant while waiting for the transaction to 
be completed. 
• Makes large purchases just after the store’s opening or as the store is closing. 
 
Merchants should also be aware of potential signs of fraud in card-not-present transactions: 
• Larger than normal orders. 
• Orders that include several of the same item. 
• Orders made up of big-ticket items. 
• Rush or overnight shipping. 
• Shipping to an international address. 
• Transactions with similar account numbers. 
• Shipping to a single address, but transactions placed on multiple cards. 
• Multiple transactions on one card over a very short period of time. 
• Multiple transactions on one card or a similar card with a single billing. 
• In online transactions, multiple cards used from a single IP (Internet protocol) address. 
• Orders from Internet addresses that make use of a free e-mail service. 
 
Tellers and merchants should be aware of the common signs of forged credit cards: 
• Holograms crudely stamped or badly faked with tiny bits of aluminum foil 
• Misspelled words on the card 
• Altered signature panel 
• Discolored 
• Glued 
• Painted 
• Covered with white tape 
• Cards that appear to have been flattened and restamped 
 
At the consumer level, the credit card user should remember the following: 
• Know where your card is at all times. 
• Never leave your card unattended at work—the re are more credit card thefts in the 
workplace than in any other single situation. 
• Don’t leave the store or ATM without all of the copies and carbons. 
• Don’t leave your card in plain sight where others can get the number. 
• Don’t leave receipts in a public trash can, hotel, or shopping bag. 
• Review monthly statements for accuracy and any items that you might not have charged. 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1026                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Review your statements via electronic means rather than waiting for paper statements. If 
possible, cancel paper statements altogether since most fraudsters still practice 
“dumpster diving” and will riffle through your trash for old receipts and credit card 
statements. 
• Sign the back of a new card as soon as you get it and destroy old cards that are outdated 
or no longer used. 
• Make a list of all of your cards and their numbers. This key information is helpful when 
reporting lost or stolen cards. Store this list in a highly secured area. 
• Be wary of offers that come through the mail. 
• Never reveal your card number over the phone to anyone who has offered you a prize 
• Report missing cards immediately. 
• Don’t reveal personal information such as your address and telephone number. 
• Don’t allow a salesperson to record your credit card number on your check. 
• Keep your card out of the view of others in a store or at a public telephone so they 
cannot read the name and account number. 
• Use a tiered, see-through container in your wallet for credit cards, so it will be easier to 
notice missing cards. 
• Always check your card when returned to you after a purchase. Make sure it is your card. 
 
If you become suspicious of a telephone call offer or mail solicitations, report the activity 
using the National Consumers League’s Fraud Center Online Fraud Report Form at 
https://secure.nclforms.org/nficweb/nfic.htm.  
 
Prevention 
Prevention is the key to reducing credit card losses. Several programs can and are in place to 
reduce losses. Some of them are: 
 
Education Programs 
Tellers and merchants should be trained to be familiar with the security features of the credit 
card. Although the majority of counterfeit cards contain some of the security features, they 
are usually not complete and offer indicators that the card is not legitimate. Credit card 
issuers should take measures to inform their customers about credit card fraud, what the 
financial institution is doing about fraud, and how the consumer can help. 
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1027 
Liaison with Law Enforcement 
Companies should develop strong liaison with law enforcement. When a company receives 
intelligence of hot frauds, law enforcement should be notified immediately.  
 
Credit Card Company Security Initiatives 
Both Visa and MasterCard have initiated security measures to help combat online theft. The 
Verified by Visa program protects merchants from fraud-related chargebacks on all Visa 
personal debit and credit card transactions, even when processing transactions from non-
 participating issuers. Verified by Visa also protects consumers by requiring a password in the 
Verified by Visa window during purchases with participating online stores, helping ensure 
that no one else can use their Visa card onlin e. At online stores not yet participating in 
Verified by Visa, the Visa credit card will continue to work the same as usual. Additionally, 
Visa works alongside financial institutions and merchants to continually monitor consumer’s 
accounts to detect suspicious or unusual activity. By taking these steps, Visa is able to work 
proactively to reduce fraudulent transactions. 
 
Here are some of the red flags that may indicate fraudulent activity:  
• Shipping address is different from the billing address, or the shipping address has 
suddenly changed.  
• Unusually large purchase compared to normal purchase patterns for the account in 
question.  
• Change in name on the account.  
• Change in date of birth or Social Security number.  
 
MasterCard’s SecureCode allows credit card holders to register and set up their own private 
SecureCode number. Users of SecureCode will be automatically prompted by their financial 
institution at checkout to provide their SecureCode each time they make a purchase with a 
participating online merchant. The SecureCode is quickly confirmed by the financial 
institution and then the purchase is completed. The SecureCode will never be shared with 
the merchant. It’s just like entering a PIN at an ATM. MasterCard has also initiated the 
PayPass system in which cardholders can make purchases with a simple tap, rather than 
swiping or dipping their card. This adds a level of security since the card or PayPass device 
never leaves the cardholder’s hand. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1028                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Physical Security Features 
In response to the counterfeiting problems, credit card companies are mastering the 
possibilities of making credit card fraud more difficult. Some of their programs are  
discussed below. 
 
VISA CARD FEATURES 
• The Visa logo should have micro-printing around the border. The fine print is barely 
readable without magnification. 
• The flying dove hologram should appear to be three-dimensional and appear to move 
when the card is tilted back and forth. 
• Visa’s embossed account numbers begin with a 4 and contain 16 digits. All digits must 
be clean, even and the same size and shape. If a card has been re-embossed, the numbers 
may appear to be fuzzy. As a general rule of thumb always check the hologram. It is 
easier to spot a re-embossed number there. 
• A flying “V” is an embossed security character  beside the “Good Thru” date. If the “V” 
is not italicized or it is missing, the card is counterfeit. However, this is not a required 
security feature and may or may not be present on the card. 
• If there are “ghost images” of the numbers behind the embossing on either the front or 
back of the card, it has been re-embossed. If the card has been re-embossed the 
hologram might be damaged. 
• A four-digit number must be printed below the embossed account number. This four-
 digit number must match exactly with the first four digits of the account number. Both 
must begin with 4. 
• The Visa brand mark appears in blue and gold on a white background. It must appear in 
either the bottom right, top left, or top right corner. 
• An ultraviolet sensitive dove is visible on the face of the card when the card is placed 
under an ultraviolet light. 
• If someone has tried to erase the signature panel, the word “VOID” will be displayed. 
• Card Verification Value 2 (CVV2) is a three-digit code that appears on the back of the 
card in the signature panel. Typically the signature panel will have a series of numbers 
but only the last three digits make up the CVV2 code. CVV2 is used primarily in card-
 not-present transactions to verify that the customer is in possession of a valid Visa card 
at the time of the sale. Merchants will request the CVV2 from the cardholder at 
checkout, and the information is sent electronically to the card-issuing bank to verify its 
validity. Within seconds the CVV2 results are returned with authorization. If it’s returned 
as invalid, merchants have the right to stop the transaction. For added protection, 
merchants are prohibited from keeping or storing the CVV2 number after the 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1029 
transaction has been completed.  
• Check the valid dates for evidence of tampering. Do not accept an expired card. 
 
For more information about Visa’s security features, visit their website at: 
http://www.visa.ca/en/merchant/fraudprevention/cardfeatures.cfm.  
 
MASTERCARD CARD FEATURES 
• A large “MC” is visible under ultraviol et light for MasterCard. The “MC” security 
character is no longer permitted on newly issued cards (effective June 1, 2006), but may 
continue to appear on cards through June 2010. 
• All cards must include the full-color MasterCard Brand Mark. This mark may be below 
or above the Global Hologram. Merchants should be aware that the MasterCard card 
design and the MasterCard Brand Mark may be oriented vertically. 
• The hologram (whether on global or debit cards) can be located on the front or back of 
the card based on the design/type unless HoloMag tape is used. 
• MasterCard’s embossed account numbers begin with a 5 and contain 16 digits. The 
number must be clear and uniform in size and spacing and must appear on one line. 
• The first four numbers of the account number must be the same digits as those printed 
directly below (pre-printed BIN). 
• The front of the card must include a valid expiration date. 
• The signature panel located on the back of the card must include the word “MasterCard” 
printed in multicolors at a 45 degree angle. The last four digits of the account number 
must be printed in reverse italics in the upper right corner of the signature panel (this is 
required as of June 1, 2006, prior to this the reverse italics could be found at the upper 
center of the signature panel). 
• Magnetic tape must be present and appear smooth and straight with no signs of 
tampering. HoloMag tape may be used in place of the traditional magnetic tape. 
• The HoloMag tape or MasterCard hologram must  be included on the back of the card if 
it cannot be found on the front. 
• CVC2 number (three-digit validation number) must be printed in reverse italics to the 
right of the last four digits of the account number. As of June 1, 2006, the CVC2 
number was required to be printed in reverse italics in an adjacent white box to the right 
of the signature panel. 
 
For more information about MasterCard’s security features, visit their website at: 
http://www.mastercard.com/us/merchant/security/what_can_do/card_features.html.  
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1030                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
AMERICAN EXPRESS FEATURES 
• Ultraviolet inks are used such that when a genuine card is examined with a black light, 
the letters AMEX, as well as phosphorescence in the portrait of the Centurion are 
visible.  
• The portrait of the Centurion is printed with a high degree of clarity and detail such as 
the portraits on U.S. currency. 
• Erasure or tampering with the signature panel will cause the waved print background to 
appear white or smudged. 
• The card member account number is 15 digits beginning with 37. The embossing should 
be clear and uniform in size and spacing. 
• A duplicate account number is on the reverse of the card to ensure the card number 
appearing on the front of the card has not been altered. 
• The pre-printed (non-embossed) Card Identification Number (CID), which is a four-
 digit number printed on the front of the card that is used to ensure that the individual 
using the card is actually the owner of the card, should always appear above  the account 
number, on either the right or the left edge of the card. 
• The card number or cardmember name should be printed in the same typeface as the 
American Express typeface.  
• All American Express cards, including Network, Optima and Corporate, will bear the 
same security features outlined here. 
 
For more information on American Express’s security features, visit their website at: 
https://www209.americanexpress.com/merchant/singlevoice/USEng/FrontServlet?request
 _type=n avigate&page=cardSecurityFeatures.  
 
Technological Deterrents 
Banks can take advantage of technological developments to deter credit card fraud. These 
developments can make both the counterfeiting of cards and use of valid cards more 
difficult. Some of these developments require very little technology. For instance, most 
credit cards now include verification codes on the back to help merchants match cards used 
in purchase transactions with authorized cardholders. Card networks also maintain address 
and zip code verification services so that merchants, especially those involved in Internet or 
telephone transactions, can determine whether the supposed cardholder lives at the address 
given by the person placing the order.  
 
  
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1031 
Photographs 
Photographs of the legitimate cardholder will deter counterfeiting to a degree, though they 
have become increasingly easy for counterfeiters to purchase. Photographs can be altered, 
but technological advancements permit digital encoding of the cardholder’s image on the 
magnetic strip of the credit card. Use of this technology would require specialized processing 
terminals that would add to the cost of fraud detection. 
 
Holograms  
Holograms have been used by issuers as security devices since the early 1980s. Not long after 
implementation of this feature, however, it was found that a very accurate counterfeiting 
industry was emerging in Asia. If one assesses the average credit limit of fraudulent cards at a 
conservative $2,000, it takes few in circulation to  add up to considerable losses to the issuer.  
 
Signature Panel 
Signature panels usually contain images of the issuer’s logo. Blank or damaged signature 
panels are red flags of forged credit cards. Signatures on the panel and the sales receipt 
should always be compared for consistency. While it may be most merchants’ policy that 
employees compare these signatures, it is often ignored.  
 
Activation of Cards 
In an effort to curb credit card fraud perpetrated using the mail, companies sending new 
cards in the mail do not activate them until the customer contacts the credit card company. 
Upon contact, the credit card issuer then asks the caller for personal information such as 
their mother’s maiden name and birth date, or other information that the ordinary thief 
probably would not have. Once the information has been satisfactorily answered, the card is 
activated for use. 
 
Advanced Authorization 
Visa recently unveiled technology for analyzing card transactions both individually and 
collectively across its network in order to detect emerging fraud patterns. When a credit card 
is swiped, Advanced Authorization provides an instantaneous rating of the transaction’s 
potential for fraud to the card-issuing financial institution, including whether the card 
number was among those lost or stolen in a data-security incident. The system is designed to 
spot situations where multiple accounts are associated with fraudulent testing or some other 
type of coordinated attack involving multiple accounts.  
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1032                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CyberSource Advanced Fraud Screen 
CyberSource Advanced Fraud Screen enhanced by Visa is the first e-commerce fraud 
detection system enabled with current worldwide fraud trends and global payment-card 
usage patterns that provides a comprehensive transaction risk assessment of activity. 
Combining this with CyberSource’s hybrid  system (neural network and rules-based 
technology) and merchant-activity data provides e-commerce merchants with targeted fraud 
detection ability. CyberSource Advanced Fraud Screen operates around the clock, 7 days a 
week, 24 hours a day. It effectively screens shoppers located anywhere in the world and 
works with all payment cards. 
 
The CyberSource Advanced Fraud Screen’s risk-management tool uses frequently updated 
intelligence about global payment-card usage patterns, including online and offline 
purchasing profiles, to provide an accurate fraud detection service. This advantage can help 
merchants lower fraud-related costs by identifying risky transactions, and increase consumer 
goodwill by eliminating unintentional “insults” that may occur from incorrectly declined 
orders. 
 
Computer Edits 
Computer edits are built into some credit cards such that if the card is usually used five times 
per month, and it is used 25 times in one day, the system will prohibit authorization of 
further purchases. 
 
Card Scrutiny at Point of Sale 
How often do merchants scrutinize your card? In many stores, they never get the chance. 
Consumers use the credit/debit card machines at the sales counter and the cards never leave 
their possession. While this makes things more convenient for the consumer, it often means 
that the merchant is left holding the bag when a transaction is returned. If one of the key 
authorization components is missing (signature, expiration date, authorization number, card 
imprint) the merchant has to swallow the loss.  
 
Internet/Telephone Orders 
With these transactions, vendors never have the opportunity to see the customer’s credit 
card. The only fail-safe, self-protective measure open to them is to postpone delivery until 
the transaction has cleared the customer’s account. In our next-day-delivery society, 
however, this is may be detrimental to business for some vendors. There are a couple of 
other options open to merchants: 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1033 
• Beware of orders with different “bill to” and “ship to” addresses unless the item is 
intended as a gift.  
• Setting up free e-mail accounts with companies like Hotmail or Yahoo is very simple and 
allows the user anonymity. Orders received from free e-mail accounts should be treated 
with extra scrutiny.  
 
Potential signs of card-not-present fraud: 
• First-time shopper — Criminals are always looking for new victims. 
• Larger-than-normal orders — Because stolen cards or account numbers have a limited life 
span, crooks need to maximize the size of their purchase. 
• Orders that include several of the same item—Having multiples of the same item 
increases a criminal’s profits. 
• Orders made up of big-ticket item — These items have maximum resale value and 
therefore maximum profit potential. 
• “Rush” or “overnight” shipping — Fraudsters want these fraudulently obtained items as 
soon as possible for the quickest possible resale, and aren’t concerned about extra 
delivery charges. 
• Shipping to an international address — A significant number of fraudulent transactions 
are shipped to fraudulent cardholders outside of the U.S. 
• Transactions with similar account numbers — Particularly useful if the account numbers 
used have been generated using software available on the Internet (such as 
CreditMaster). 
• Shipping to a single address, but transactions placed on multiple cards—Could involve 
an account number generated using special software or the use of several of stolen cards. 
• Multiple transactions on one card over a very short period of time—Could be an attempt 
to “run a card” until the account is closed. 
• Multiple transactions on one card or a similar card with a single IP (Internet Protocol) 
address — More than one or two cards could indicate a fraud scheme. 
• Orders from Internet addresses that make  use of free e-mail services—These e-mail 
services involve no billing relationships, and therefore provide neither an audit trail nor 
verification that a legitimate cardholder has opened the account. 
 
Financial Institution Measures 
Banks and other financial institutions have great resources at their disposal to prevent 
fraudulent transactions. Many of them need me rely to enforce their existing policies.  
• New account screening — Educate personnel to thoroughly check applicants’ 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1034                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
information, comparing ID information, addresses, and credit reports for accuracy.  
• PIN activation — Bank customers are often required to provide personal identification 
numbers in order to activate their cards over the phone. Callers who are not able to 
provide the PIN number may have manufactured or stolen the card in question.  
• Caller ID — Most people calling to activate their card will do so from home. If the 
number on Caller ID does not match any of the telephone numbers listed in the 
customer’s account information bank personnel should ask some identifying questions.  
• CVV2/CVC2 — Implement these systems as soon as possible. They are among the best 
defenses financial institutions have against credit card fraud.  
 
Smart Cards 
Smart Cards contain a microprocessor memory chip instead of holograms. These cards are 
able to identify the user through encrypted information on the chip, and must be inserted 
into a “card reader” attached to the computer. That means the card cannot be used unless 
the purchaser is currently holding it. A PIN is also required for the card so the thief needs to 
physically have the card and the security code in order to use it. This allows cardholders 
more purchasing options as well as increased security. 
 
Judging from the past, credit opportunities for consumers will increase over time and, 
consequently, more will fall victim to fraud. In the future, the trend will be one card for all 
types of financial transactions. Prototypes are currently being developed and tested by the 
major credit card issuers. Fraud rings will adjust accordingly, and new counterfeiting 
methods will emerge. Law enforcement and investigators must maintain a global outlook 
when facing this type of fraud, as much of it originates outside the U.S.  
 
 



:


prevent and detect of credit card fraud
the essenti part of ani detect program is the educ of the teller and merchant
who ar respons for handl the transact in a studi by monei magazin it wa
found that 95 percent of store clerk and cashier did not check credit card signatur
while ani of the follow can occur in a perfectli legitim transact these
characterist ar frequent present dure fraudul transact teller and merchant
should be advis to be alert for the custom who
take a card from a pocket instead of a wallet or purs
purchas an unusu number of expens item
make random purchas select item with littl regard to size qualiti or valu
make sever small purchas to stai under the floor limit or ask what the floor
limit is
doe not ask question on major purchas
sign the sale draft slowli or awkwardli
charg expens item on a newli valid credit card
cannot provid photo identif when ask
rush the merchant or teller
purchas a larg item such as a televis consol and insist on take it at the time
even when deliveri is includ in the price
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11025
make purchas and leav the store but then return to make more purchas
becom argument with the teller or merchant while wait for the transact to
be complet
make larg purchas just after the store open or as the store is close
merchant should also be awar of potenti sign of fraud in cardnotpres transact
larger than normal order
order that includ sever of the same item
order made up of bigticket item
rush or overnight ship
ship to an intern address
transact with similar account number
ship to a singl address but transact place on multipl card
multipl transact on on card over a veri short period of time
multipl transact on on card or a similar card with a singl bill
in onlin transact multipl card us from a singl ip internet protocol address
order from internet address that make us of a free email servic
teller and merchant should be awar of the common sign of forg credit card
hologram crude stamp or badli fake with tini bit of aluminum foil
misspel word on the card
alter signatur panel
discolor
glu
paint
cover with white tape
card that appear to have been flatten and restamp
at the consum level the credit card user should rememb the follow
know where your card is at all time
never leav your card unattend at workth re ar more credit card theft in the
workplac than in ani other singl situat
dont leav the store or atm without all of the copi and carbon
dont leav your card in plain sight where other can get the number
dont leav receipt in a public trash can hotel or shop bag
review monthli statement for accuraci and ani item that you might not have charg
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11026 2011 fraud examin manual
review your statement via electron mean rather than wait for paper statement if
possibl cancel paper statement altogeth sinc most fraudster still practic
dumpster dive and will riffl through your trash for old receipt and credit card
statement
sign the back of a new card as soon as you get it and destroi old card that ar outdat
or no longer us
make a list of all of your card and their number thi kei inform is help when
report lost or stolen card store thi list in a highli secur area
be wari of offer that come through the mail
never reveal your card number over the phone to anyon who ha offer you a prize
report miss card immedi
dont reveal person inform such as your address and telephon number
dont allow a salesperson to record your credit card number on your check
keep your card out of the view of other in a store or at a public telephon so thei
cannot read the name and account number
us a tier seethrough contain in your wallet for credit card so it will be easier to
notic miss card
alwai check your card when return to you after a purchas make sure it is your card
if you becom suspici of a telephon call offer or mail solicit report the activ
us the nation consum leagu fraud center onlin fraud report form at
httpssecurenclformsorgnficwebnfichtm
prevent
prevent is the kei to reduc credit card loss sever program can and ar in place to
reduc loss some of them ar
educ program
teller and merchant should be train to be familiar with the secur featur of the credit
card although the major of counterfeit card contain some of the secur featur thei
ar usual not complet and offer indic that the card is not legitim credit card
issuer should take measur to inform their custom about credit card fraud what the
financi institut is do about fraud and how the consum can help
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11027
liaison with law enforc
compani should develop strong liaison with law enforc when a compani receiv
intellig of hot fraud law enforc should be notifi immedi
credit card compani secur initi
both visa and mastercard have initi secur measur to help combat onlin theft the
verifi by visa program protect merchant from fraudrel chargeback on all visa
person debit and credit card transact even when process transact from non
particip issuer verifi by visa also protect consum by requir a password in the
verifi by visa window dure purchas with particip onlin store help ensur
that no on els can us their visa card onlin e at onlin store not yet particip in
verifi by visa the visa credit card will continu to work the same as usual addition
visa work alongsid financi institut and merchant to continu monitor consum
account to detect suspici or unusu activ by take these step visa is abl to work
proactiv to reduc fraudul transact
here ar some of the red flag that mai indic fraudul activ
ship address is differ from the bill address or the ship address ha
suddenli chang
unusu larg purchas compar to normal purchas pattern for the account in
question
chang in name on the account
chang in date of birth or social secur number
mastercard securecod allow credit card holder to regist and set up their own privat
securecod number user of securecod will be automat prompt by their financi
institut at checkout to provid their securecod each time thei make a purchas with a
particip onlin merchant the securecod is quickli confirm by the financi
institut and then the purchas is complet the securecod will never be share with
the merchant it just like enter a pin at an atm mastercard ha also initi the
paypass system in which cardhold can make purchas with a simpl tap rather than
swipe or dip their card thi add a level of secur sinc the card or paypass devic
never leav the cardhold hand
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11028 2011 fraud examin manual
physic secur featur
in respons to the counterfeit problem credit card compani ar master the
possibl of make credit card fraud more difficult some of their program ar
discuss below
visa card featur
the visa logo should have microprint around the border the fine print is bare
readabl without magnif
the fly dove hologram should appear to be threedimension and appear to move
when the card is tilt back and forth
visa emboss account number begin with a 4 and contain 16 digit all digit must
be clean even and the same size and shape if a card ha been reemboss the number
mai appear to be fuzzi as a gener rule of thumb alwai check the hologram it is
easier to spot a reemboss number there
a fly v is an emboss secur charact besid the good thru date if the v
is not italic or it is miss the card is counterfeit howev thi is not a requir
secur featur and mai or mai not be present on the card
if there ar ghost imag of the number behind the emboss on either the front or
back of the card it ha been reemboss if the card ha been reemboss the
hologram might be damag
a fourdigit number must be print below the emboss account number thi four
digit number must match exactli with the first four digit of the account number both
must begin with 4
the visa brand mark appear in blue and gold on a white background it must appear in
either the bottom right top left or top right corner
an ultraviolet sensit dove is visibl on the face of the card when the card is place
under an ultraviolet light
if someon ha tri to eras the signatur panel the word void will be displai
card verif valu 2 cvv2 is a threedigit code that appear on the back of the
card in the signatur panel typic the signatur panel will have a seri of number
but onli the last three digit make up the cvv2 code cvv2 is us primarili in card
notpres transact to verifi that the custom is in possess of a valid visa card
at the time of the sale merchant will request the cvv2 from the cardhold at
checkout and the inform is sent electron to the cardissu bank to verifi it
valid within second the cvv2 result ar return with author if it return
as invalid merchant have the right to stop the transact for ad protect
merchant ar prohibit from keep or store the cvv2 number after the
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11029
transact ha been complet
check the valid date for evid of tamper do not accept an expir card
for more inform about visa secur featur visit their websit at
httpwwwvisacaenmerchantfraudpreventioncardfeaturescfm
mastercard card featur
a larg mc is visibl under ultraviol et light for mastercard the mc secur
charact is no longer permit on newli issu card effect june 1 2006 but mai
continu to appear on card through june 2010
all card must includ the fullcolor mastercard brand mark thi mark mai be below
or abov the global hologram merchant should be awar that the mastercard card
design and the mastercard brand mark mai be orient vertic
the hologram whether on global or debit card can be locat on the front or back of
the card base on the designtyp unless holomag tape is us
mastercard emboss account number begin with a 5 and contain 16 digit the
number must be clear and uniform in size and space and must appear on on line
the first four number of the account number must be the same digit as those print
directli below preprint bin
the front of the card must includ a valid expir date
the signatur panel locat on the back of the card must includ the word mastercard
print in multicolor at a 45 degre angl the last four digit of the account number
must be print in revers ital in the upper right corner of the signatur panel thi is
requir as of june 1 2006 prior to thi the revers ital could be found at the upper
center of the signatur panel
magnet tape must be present and appear smooth and straight with no sign of
tamper holomag tape mai be us in place of the tradit magnet tape
the holomag tape or mastercard hologram must be includ on the back of the card if
it cannot be found on the front
cvc2 number threedigit valid number must be print in revers ital to the
right of the last four digit of the account number as of june 1 2006 the cvc2
number wa requir to be print in revers ital in an adjac white box to the right
of the signatur panel
for more inform about mastercard secur featur visit their websit at
httpwwwmastercardcomusmerchantsecuritywhatcandocardfeatureshtml
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11030 2011 fraud examin manual
american express featur
ultraviolet ink ar us such that when a genuin card is examin with a black light
the letter amex as well as phosphoresc in the portrait of the centurion ar
visibl
the portrait of the centurion is print with a high degre of clariti and detail such as
the portrait on us currenc
erasur or tamper with the signatur panel will caus the wave print background to
appear white or smudg
the card member account number is 15 digit begin with 37 the emboss should
be clear and uniform in size and space
a duplic account number is on the revers of the card to ensur the card number
appear on the front of the card ha not been alter
the preprint nonemboss card identif number cid which is a four
digit number print on the front of the card that is us to ensur that the individu
us the card is actual the owner of the card should alwai appear abov the account
number on either the right or the left edg of the card
the card number or cardmemb name should be print in the same typefac as the
american express typefac
all american express card includ network optima and corpor will bear the
same secur featur outlin here
for more inform on american expresss secur featur visit their websit at
httpswww209americanexpresscommerchantsinglevoiceusengfrontservletrequest
typen avigatepagecardsecurityfeatur
technolog deterr
bank can take advantag of technolog develop to deter credit card fraud these
develop can make both the counterfeit of card and us of valid card more
difficult some of these develop requir veri littl technolog for instanc most
credit card now includ verif code on the back to help merchant match card us
in purchas transact with author cardhold card network also maintain address
and zip code verif servic so that merchant especi those involv in internet or
telephon transact can determin whether the suppos cardhold live at the address
given by the person place the order
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11031
photograph
photograph of the legitim cardhold will deter counterfeit to a degre though thei
have becom increasingli easi for counterfeit to purchas photograph can be alter
but technolog advanc permit digit encod of the cardhold imag on the
magnet strip of the credit card us of thi technolog would requir special process
termin that would add to the cost of fraud detect
hologram
hologram have been us by issuer as secur devic sinc the earli 1980 not long after
implement of thi featur howev it wa found that a veri accur counterfeit
industri wa emerg in asia if on assess the averag credit limit of fraudul card at a
conserv 2000 it take few in circul to add up to consider loss to the issuer
signatur panel
signatur panel usual contain imag of the issuer logo blank or damag signatur
panel ar red flag of forg credit card signatur on the panel and the sale receipt
should alwai be compar for consist while it mai be most merchant polici that
employe compar these signatur it is often ignor
activ of card
in an effort to curb credit card fraud perpetr us the mail compani send new
card in the mail do not activ them until the custom contact the credit card compani
upon contact the credit card issuer then ask the caller for person inform such as
their mother maiden name and birth date or other inform that the ordinari thief
probabl would not have onc the inform ha been satisfactorili answer the card is
activ for us
advanc author
visa recent unveil technolog for analyz card transact both individu and
collect across it network in order to detect emerg fraud pattern when a credit card
is swipe advanc author provid an instantan rate of the transact
potenti for fraud to the cardissu financi institut includ whether the card
number wa among those lost or stolen in a datasecur incid the system is design to
spot situat where multipl account ar associ with fraudul test or some other
type of coordin attack involv multipl account
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11032 2011 fraud examin manual
cybersourc advanc fraud screen
cybersourc advanc fraud screen enhanc by visa is the first ecommerc fraud
detect system enabl with current worldwid fraud trend and global paymentcard
usag pattern that provid a comprehens transact risk assess of activ
combin thi with cybersourc hybrid system neural network and rulesbas
technolog and merchantact data provid ecommerc merchant with target fraud
detect abil cybersourc advanc fraud screen oper around the clock 7 dai a
week 24 hour a dai it effect screen shopper locat anywher in the world and
work with all payment card
the cybersourc advanc fraud screen riskmanag tool us frequent updat
intellig about global paymentcard usag pattern includ onlin and offlin
purchas profil to provid an accur fraud detect servic thi advantag can help
merchant lower fraudrel cost by identifi riski transact and increas consum
goodwil by elimin unintent insult that mai occur from incorrectli declin
order
comput edit
comput edit ar built into some credit card such that if the card is usual us five time
per month and it is us 25 time in on dai the system will prohibit author of
further purchas
card scrutini at point of sale
how often do merchant scrutin your card in mani store thei never get the chanc
consum us the creditdebit card machin at the sale counter and the card never leav
their possess while thi make thing more conveni for the consum it often mean
that the merchant is left hold the bag when a transact is return if on of the kei
author compon is miss signatur expir date author number card
imprint the merchant ha to swallow the loss
internettelephon order
with these transact vendor never have the opportun to see the custom credit
card the onli failsaf selfprotect measur open to them is to postpon deliveri until
the transact ha clear the custom account in our nextdaydeliveri societi
howev thi is mai be detriment to busi for some vendor there ar a coupl of
other option open to merchant
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11033
bewar of order with differ bill to and ship to address unless the item is
intend as a gift
set up free email account with compani like hotmail or yahoo is veri simpl and
allow the user anonym order receiv from free email account should be treat
with extra scrutini
potenti sign of cardnotpres fraud
firsttim shopper crimin ar alwai look for new victim
largerthannorm order becaus stolen card or account number have a limit life
span crook need to maxim the size of their purchas
order that includ sever of the same itemhav multipl of the same item
increas a crimin profit
order made up of bigticket item these item have maximum resal valu and
therefor maximum profit potenti
rush or overnight ship fraudster want these fraudul obtain item as
soon as possibl for the quickest possibl resal and arent concern about extra
deliveri charg
ship to an intern address a signific number of fraudul transact
ar ship to fraudul cardhold outsid of the us
transact with similar account number particularli us if the account number
us have been gener us softwar avail on the internet such as
creditmast
ship to a singl address but transact place on multipl cardscould involv
an account number gener us special softwar or the us of sever of stolen card
multipl transact on on card over a veri short period of timecould be an attempt
to run a card until the account is close
multipl transact on on card or a similar card with a singl ip internet protocol
address more than on or two card could indic a fraud scheme
order from internet address that make us of free email servicesthes email
servic involv no bill relationship and therefor provid neither an audit trail nor
verif that a legitim cardhold ha open the account
financi institut measur
bank and other financi institut have great resourc at their dispos to prevent
fraudul transact mani of them need me reli to enforc their exist polici
new account screen educ personnel to thoroughli check applic
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11034 2011 fraud examin manual
inform compar id inform address and credit report for accuraci
pin activ bank custom ar often requir to provid person identif
number in order to activ their card over the phone caller who ar not abl to
provid the pin number mai have manufactur or stolen the card in question
caller id most peopl call to activ their card will do so from home if the
number on caller id doe not match ani of the telephon number list in the
custom account inform bank personnel should ask some identifi question
cvv2cvc2 implement these system as soon as possibl thei ar among the best
defens financi institut have against credit card fraud
smart card
smart card contain a microprocessor memori chip instead of hologram these card ar
abl to identifi the user through encrypt inform on the chip and must be insert
into a card reader attach to the comput that mean the card cannot be us unless
the purchas is current hold it a pin is also requir for the card so the thief need to
physic have the card and the secur code in order to us it thi allow cardhold
more purchas option as well as increas secur
judg from the past credit opportun for consum will increas over time and
consequ more will fall victim to fraud in the futur the trend will be on card for all
type of financi transact prototyp ar current be develop and test by the
major credit card issuer fraud ring will adjust accordingli and new counterfeit
method will emerg law enforc and investig must maintain a global outlook
when face thi type of fraud as much of it origin outsid the us
