2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Prevention and Detection of Credit Card Fraud/Physical Security Features


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Physical Security Features 
In response to the counterfeiting problems, credit card companies are mastering the 
possibilities of making credit card fraud more difficult. Some of their programs are  
discussed below. 
 
VISA CARD FEATURES 
• The Visa logo should have micro-printing around the border. The fine print is barely 
readable without magnification. 
• The flying dove hologram should appear to be three-dimensional and appear to move 
when the card is tilted back and forth. 
• Visa’s embossed account numbers begin with a 4 and contain 16 digits. All digits must 
be clean, even and the same size and shape. If a card has been re-embossed, the numbers 
may appear to be fuzzy. As a general rule of thumb always check the hologram. It is 
easier to spot a re-embossed number there. 
• A flying “V” is an embossed security character  beside the “Good Thru” date. If the “V” 
is not italicized or it is missing, the card is counterfeit. However, this is not a required 
security feature and may or may not be present on the card. 
• If there are “ghost images” of the numbers behind the embossing on either the front or 
back of the card, it has been re-embossed. If the card has been re-embossed the 
hologram might be damaged. 
• A four-digit number must be printed below the embossed account number. This four-
 digit number must match exactly with the first four digits of the account number. Both 
must begin with 4. 
• The Visa brand mark appears in blue and gold on a white background. It must appear in 
either the bottom right, top left, or top right corner. 
• An ultraviolet sensitive dove is visible on the face of the card when the card is placed 
under an ultraviolet light. 
• If someone has tried to erase the signature panel, the word “VOID” will be displayed. 
• Card Verification Value 2 (CVV2) is a three-digit code that appears on the back of the 
card in the signature panel. Typically the signature panel will have a series of numbers 
but only the last three digits make up the CVV2 code. CVV2 is used primarily in card-
 not-present transactions to verify that the customer is in possession of a valid Visa card 
at the time of the sale. Merchants will request the CVV2 from the cardholder at 
checkout, and the information is sent electronically to the card-issuing bank to verify its 
validity. Within seconds the CVV2 results are returned with authorization. If it’s returned 
as invalid, merchants have the right to stop the transaction. For added protection, 
merchants are prohibited from keeping or storing the CVV2 number after the 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1029 
transaction has been completed.  
• Check the valid dates for evidence of tampering. Do not accept an expired card. 
 
For more information about Visa’s security features, visit their website at: 
http://www.visa.ca/en/merchant/fraudprevention/cardfeatures.cfm.  
 
MASTERCARD CARD FEATURES 
• A large “MC” is visible under ultraviol et light for MasterCard. The “MC” security 
character is no longer permitted on newly issued cards (effective June 1, 2006), but may 
continue to appear on cards through June 2010. 
• All cards must include the full-color MasterCard Brand Mark. This mark may be below 
or above the Global Hologram. Merchants should be aware that the MasterCard card 
design and the MasterCard Brand Mark may be oriented vertically. 
• The hologram (whether on global or debit cards) can be located on the front or back of 
the card based on the design/type unless HoloMag tape is used. 
• MasterCard’s embossed account numbers begin with a 5 and contain 16 digits. The 
number must be clear and uniform in size and spacing and must appear on one line. 
• The first four numbers of the account number must be the same digits as those printed 
directly below (pre-printed BIN). 
• The front of the card must include a valid expiration date. 
• The signature panel located on the back of the card must include the word “MasterCard” 
printed in multicolors at a 45 degree angle. The last four digits of the account number 
must be printed in reverse italics in the upper right corner of the signature panel (this is 
required as of June 1, 2006, prior to this the reverse italics could be found at the upper 
center of the signature panel). 
• Magnetic tape must be present and appear smooth and straight with no signs of 
tampering. HoloMag tape may be used in place of the traditional magnetic tape. 
• The HoloMag tape or MasterCard hologram must  be included on the back of the card if 
it cannot be found on the front. 
• CVC2 number (three-digit validation number) must be printed in reverse italics to the 
right of the last four digits of the account number. As of June 1, 2006, the CVC2 
number was required to be printed in reverse italics in an adjacent white box to the right 
of the signature panel. 
 
For more information about MasterCard’s security features, visit their website at: 
http://www.mastercard.com/us/merchant/security/what_can_do/card_features.html.  
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1030                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
AMERICAN EXPRESS FEATURES 
• Ultraviolet inks are used such that when a genuine card is examined with a black light, 
the letters AMEX, as well as phosphorescence in the portrait of the Centurion are 
visible.  
• The portrait of the Centurion is printed with a high degree of clarity and detail such as 
the portraits on U.S. currency. 
• Erasure or tampering with the signature panel will cause the waved print background to 
appear white or smudged. 
• The card member account number is 15 digits beginning with 37. The embossing should 
be clear and uniform in size and spacing. 
• A duplicate account number is on the reverse of the card to ensure the card number 
appearing on the front of the card has not been altered. 
• The pre-printed (non-embossed) Card Identification Number (CID), which is a four-
 digit number printed on the front of the card that is used to ensure that the individual 
using the card is actually the owner of the card, should always appear above  the account 
number, on either the right or the left edge of the card. 
• The card number or cardmember name should be printed in the same typeface as the 
American Express typeface.  
• All American Express cards, including Network, Optima and Corporate, will bear the 
same security features outlined here. 
 
For more information on American Express’s security features, visit their website at: 
https://www209.americanexpress.com/merchant/singlevoice/USEng/FrontServlet?request
 _type=n avigate&page=cardSecurityFeatures.  
 



:


physic secur featur
in respons to the counterfeit problem credit card compani ar master the
possibl of make credit card fraud more difficult some of their program ar
discuss below
visa card featur
the visa logo should have microprint around the border the fine print is bare
readabl without magnif
the fly dove hologram should appear to be threedimension and appear to move
when the card is tilt back and forth
visa emboss account number begin with a 4 and contain 16 digit all digit must
be clean even and the same size and shape if a card ha been reemboss the number
mai appear to be fuzzi as a gener rule of thumb alwai check the hologram it is
easier to spot a reemboss number there
a fly v is an emboss secur charact besid the good thru date if the v
is not italic or it is miss the card is counterfeit howev thi is not a requir
secur featur and mai or mai not be present on the card
if there ar ghost imag of the number behind the emboss on either the front or
back of the card it ha been reemboss if the card ha been reemboss the
hologram might be damag
a fourdigit number must be print below the emboss account number thi four
digit number must match exactli with the first four digit of the account number both
must begin with 4
the visa brand mark appear in blue and gold on a white background it must appear in
either the bottom right top left or top right corner
an ultraviolet sensit dove is visibl on the face of the card when the card is place
under an ultraviolet light
if someon ha tri to eras the signatur panel the word void will be displai
card verif valu 2 cvv2 is a threedigit code that appear on the back of the
card in the signatur panel typic the signatur panel will have a seri of number
but onli the last three digit make up the cvv2 code cvv2 is us primarili in card
notpres transact to verifi that the custom is in possess of a valid visa card
at the time of the sale merchant will request the cvv2 from the cardhold at
checkout and the inform is sent electron to the cardissu bank to verifi it
valid within second the cvv2 result ar return with author if it return
as invalid merchant have the right to stop the transact for ad protect
merchant ar prohibit from keep or store the cvv2 number after the
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11029
transact ha been complet
check the valid date for evid of tamper do not accept an expir card
for more inform about visa secur featur visit their websit at
httpwwwvisacaenmerchantfraudpreventioncardfeaturescfm
mastercard card featur
a larg mc is visibl under ultraviol et light for mastercard the mc secur
charact is no longer permit on newli issu card effect june 1 2006 but mai
continu to appear on card through june 2010
all card must includ the fullcolor mastercard brand mark thi mark mai be below
or abov the global hologram merchant should be awar that the mastercard card
design and the mastercard brand mark mai be orient vertic
the hologram whether on global or debit card can be locat on the front or back of
the card base on the designtyp unless holomag tape is us
mastercard emboss account number begin with a 5 and contain 16 digit the
number must be clear and uniform in size and space and must appear on on line
the first four number of the account number must be the same digit as those print
directli below preprint bin
the front of the card must includ a valid expir date
the signatur panel locat on the back of the card must includ the word mastercard
print in multicolor at a 45 degre angl the last four digit of the account number
must be print in revers ital in the upper right corner of the signatur panel thi is
requir as of june 1 2006 prior to thi the revers ital could be found at the upper
center of the signatur panel
magnet tape must be present and appear smooth and straight with no sign of
tamper holomag tape mai be us in place of the tradit magnet tape
the holomag tape or mastercard hologram must be includ on the back of the card if
it cannot be found on the front
cvc2 number threedigit valid number must be print in revers ital to the
right of the last four digit of the account number as of june 1 2006 the cvc2
number wa requir to be print in revers ital in an adjac white box to the right
of the signatur panel
for more inform about mastercard secur featur visit their websit at
httpwwwmastercardcomusmerchantsecuritywhatcandocardfeatureshtml
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11030 2011 fraud examin manual
american express featur
ultraviolet ink ar us such that when a genuin card is examin with a black light
the letter amex as well as phosphoresc in the portrait of the centurion ar
visibl
the portrait of the centurion is print with a high degre of clariti and detail such as
the portrait on us currenc
erasur or tamper with the signatur panel will caus the wave print background to
appear white or smudg
the card member account number is 15 digit begin with 37 the emboss should
be clear and uniform in size and space
a duplic account number is on the revers of the card to ensur the card number
appear on the front of the card ha not been alter
the preprint nonemboss card identif number cid which is a four
digit number print on the front of the card that is us to ensur that the individu
us the card is actual the owner of the card should alwai appear abov the account
number on either the right or the left edg of the card
the card number or cardmemb name should be print in the same typefac as the
american express typefac
all american express card includ network optima and corpor will bear the
same secur featur outlin here
for more inform on american expresss secur featur visit their websit at
httpswww209americanexpresscommerchantsinglevoiceusengfrontservletrequest
typen avigatepagecardsecurityfeatur
