2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Prevention and Detection of Credit Card Fraud/Smart Cards


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Smart Cards 
Smart Cards contain a microprocessor memory chip instead of holograms. These cards are 
able to identify the user through encrypted information on the chip, and must be inserted 
into a “card reader” attached to the computer. That means the card cannot be used unless 
the purchaser is currently holding it. A PIN is also required for the card so the thief needs to 
physically have the card and the security code in order to use it. This allows cardholders 
more purchasing options as well as increased security. 
 
Judging from the past, credit opportunities for consumers will increase over time and, 
consequently, more will fall victim to fraud. In the future, the trend will be one card for all 
types of financial transactions. Prototypes are currently being developed and tested by the 
major credit card issuers. Fraud rings will adjust accordingly, and new counterfeiting 
methods will emerge. Law enforcement and investigators must maintain a global outlook 
when facing this type of fraud, as much of it originates outside the U.S.  
 
 



:


smart card
smart card contain a microprocessor memori chip instead of hologram these card ar
abl to identifi the user through encrypt inform on the chip and must be insert
into a card reader attach to the comput that mean the card cannot be us unless
the purchas is current hold it a pin is also requir for the card so the thief need to
physic have the card and the secur code in order to us it thi allow cardhold
more purchas option as well as increas secur
judg from the past credit opportun for consum will increas over time and
consequ more will fall victim to fraud in the futur the trend will be on card for all
type of financi transact prototyp ar current be develop and test by the
major credit card issuer fraud ring will adjust accordingli and new counterfeit
method will emerg law enforc and investig must maintain a global outlook
when face thi type of fraud as much of it origin outsid the us
