2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Check Fraud/Traveler’s Checks


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Traveler’s Checks 
The use of traveler’s checks is declining signif icantly and will likely eventually be replaced by 
electronic options. In fact, an increasing number of vendors in locations throughout 
Europe—and in other parts of the world—no long er accept traveler’s checks as a valid form 
of payment. However, for many travelers, traveler’s checks continue to provide a convenient 
payment method while abroad. 
 
Anyone familiar with traveler’s checks knows that $100 checks are quite common. Some 
check rings specialize in the production and distribution of this type of check. Commonly, 
check passers of this type make small purchases using a fake $100 traveler’s check, and 
receive the bulk of the amount back in cash. Naturally, this scheme works well in areas that 
have a lot of tourist business. Rings often pull this scam several times in one area in rapid 
succession.  
 
Traveler’s checks have several distinguishing features. Watermarks and holograms are 
common, as well as microprinting and ultraviolet ink. There are basically two methods of 
counterfeiting traveler’s checks: color copyin g and offset lithography/printing. Color copied 
checks lack the raised ink texture that the intaglio printing press gives most traveler’s checks. 
Instead of a textured feel, a phony check will appear slick and flat. Offset lithographic 
reproductions of actual checks are of higher quality than color-copied checks. However, 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1006                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
neither will have the texture, watermarks, microprinting, or holograms that the genuine 
articles have.  
 



:


travel check
the us of travel check is declin signif icantli and will like eventu be replac by
electron option in fact an increas number of vendor in locat throughout
europeand in other part of the worldno long er accept travel check as a valid form
of payment howev for mani travel travel check continu to provid a conveni
payment method while abroad
anyon familiar with travel check know that 100 check ar quit common some
check ring special in the product and distribut of thi type of check commonli
check passer of thi type make small purchas us a fake 100 travel check and
receiv the bulk of the amount back in cash natur thi scheme work well in area that
have a lot of tourist busi ring often pull thi scam sever time in on area in rapid
success
travel check have sever distinguish featur watermark and hologram ar
common as well as microprint and ultraviolet ink there ar basic two method of
counterfeit travel check color copyin g and offset lithographyprint color copi
check lack the rais ink textur that the intaglio print press give most travel check
instead of a textur feel a phoni check will appear slick and flat offset lithograph
reproduct of actual check ar of higher qualiti than colorcopi check howev
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11006 2011 fraud examin manual
neither will have the textur watermark microprint or hologram that the genuin
articl have
