2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Check Fraud/Detection Techniques


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Detection Techniques 
The cashier or teller is the front-line defense in preventing check fraud. It is important that 
they receive the training necessary to identify fraudulent checks. They should: 
• Be aware of magnetic routing numbers. 
• Use extra care in examining a check drawn from a non-local bank and require  
positive identification. 
• Examine the date on the check for accuracy of day, month, and year. Do not accept the 
check if it is not dated, if it is postdated, or if it is more than 30 days old. 
• Look for checks with a check number less than 400 on personal checks or below 1,500 
on business checks (90 percent of bad checks are written on accounts less than one 
year old). 
• Be aware of fonts used to print the customer’s  name that are visibly different from the 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1009 
font used to print the address. 
• Be aware that the magnetic ink (MICR) used for routing codes should appear non-
 reflective and dull. 
• Look for MICR coding that does not match the bank district and the routing symbol in 
the upper right-hand corner of the check. 
• Be aware of the date that the account was opened. 
• Be aware of stains or discolorations on the check possibly caused by erasures or 
alterations. 
• Have easy access to the signature card. 
• Look for perforated edges of the checks. 
• Be aware that a color copy might reflect odd colors at times due to a failure of the toner 
to mix satisfactorily. 
• Notice absence of any design in the background of the check paper. 
• Notice absence of bank logo and the printing of the bank name in the regular lettering. 
• Notice absence of the address of the bank on the check. 
• Be cautious of information that is typed or stamped. 
• Do not accept a check that is not legibly written. It should be written and signed in ink 
and must not have any erasures or written-over amounts.  
• Be aware of what is acceptable identification. 
• Recognize forged/altered information. 
• Recognize forged negotiable instruments. 
• Tellers should telephone the business or account officer for approval on suspicious 
requests. 
• Be familiar with patterns of behavior related to potential culprits: 
? Overly polite 
? Nervous 
? Aggressive and hurried 
 



:


detect techniqu
the cashier or teller is the frontlin defens in prevent check fraud it is import that
thei receiv the train necessari to identifi fraudul check thei should
be awar of magnet rout number
us extra care in examin a check drawn from a nonloc bank and requir
posit identif
examin the date on the check for accuraci of dai month and year do not accept the
check if it is not date if it is postdat or if it is more than 30 dai old
look for check with a check number less than 400 on person check or below 1500
on busi check 90 percent of bad check ar written on account less than on
year old
be awar of font us to print the custom name that ar visibl differ from the
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11009
font us to print the address
be awar that the magnet ink micr us for rout code should appear non
reflect and dull
look for micr code that doe not match the bank district and the rout symbol in
the upper righthand corner of the check
be awar of the date that the account wa open
be awar of stain or discolor on the check possibl caus by erasur or
alter
have easi access to the signatur card
look for perfor edg of the check
be awar that a color copi might reflect odd color at time due to a failur of the toner
to mix satisfactorili
notic absenc of ani design in the background of the check paper
notic absenc of bank logo and the print of the bank name in the regular letter
notic absenc of the address of the bank on the check
be cautiou of inform that is type or stamp
do not accept a check that is not legibl written it should be written and sign in ink
and must not have ani erasur or writtenov amount
be awar of what is accept identif
recogn forgedalt inform
recogn forg negoti instrument
teller should telephon the busi or account offic for approv on suspici
request
be familiar with pattern of behavior relat to potenti culprit
overli polit
nervou
aggress and hurri
