2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Credit Card Fraud/Key-Enter Counterfeiting


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Key-Enter Counterfeiting 
When banks began using the CVV (for Visa) and CVC (for MasterCard) security system, 
fraudsters came up with this clever ruse in response. The CVV system uses a three-digit 
number embedded in the magnetic strip of a credit card, identifying it as a legitimately issued 
credit instrument. Credit card counterfeiters figured out a way to beat the system, however. 
By leaving the magnetic strip uncoded or making it unreadable, fraudsters force merchants 
handling the transaction to enter the credit card number manually. This means the 
transaction never falls under the scope of the CVV system.  
 
Clever bank and credit card officials very quickly found a patch for this scheme though. The 
CVV2 and CVC2 systems use a three-digit security code that is printed on the backs of 
cards. It is designed to validate that a genuine card is being used during a transaction. When 
a point-of-sale (POS) terminal reads a card’s ma gnetic stripe, Visa’s card Verification Value 
(CVV) or MasterCard’s Card Validation Code (CVC) can be verified during the 
authorization. Merchants using CVV2/CVC2 can expect to reduce their chargebacks by as 
much as 26 percent. The number appears in reverse italic at the top of the signature panel at 
the end. The CVV2 and CVC2 programs can also be used to reduce fraud in card-not-
 present transactions.  
 



:


keyent counterfeit
when bank began us the cvv for visa and cvc for mastercard secur system
fraudster came up with thi clever ruse in respons the cvv system us a threedigit
number embed in the magnet strip of a credit card identifi it as a legitim issu
credit instrument credit card counterfeit figur out a wai to beat the system howev
by leav the magnet strip uncod or make it unread fraudster forc merchant
handl the transact to enter the credit card number manual thi mean the
transact never fall under the scope of the cvv system
clever bank and credit card offici veri quickli found a patch for thi scheme though the
cvv2 and cvc2 system us a threedigit secur code that is print on the back of
card it is design to valid that a genuin card is be us dure a transact when
a pointofsal po termin read a card ma gnetic stripe visa card verif valu
cvv or mastercard card valid code cvc can be verifi dure the
author merchant us cvv2cvc2 can expect to reduc their chargeback by as
much as 26 percent the number appear in revers ital at the top of the signatur panel at
the end the cvv2 and cvc2 program can also be us to reduc fraud in cardnot
present transact
