2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Credit Card Fraud/Institutional Identity Theft and “Spoof” Sites


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Institutional Identity Theft and “Spoof” Sites  
Fraudulent actors may create false Internet sites, pretending to sell goods to buyers who 
must enter their credit card information and other personal information in order to make 
purchases. The “seller” then uses the information to make fraudulent purchases in the name 
of the buyer. More recently, fraudulent actors have begun creating “affiliate” sites of actual 
sellers or other creditors, such as banks. The perpetrator of the fraud then sends e-mails to 
existing customers of the actual seller or creator. These e-mails inform the unsuspecting 
customer that there is a problem with his account and asks the customer to log on to the site 
of the company that the wrongdoer has copied and to re-enter their personal and credit card 
information. The fraudulent actor then uses the information to make purchases. 
 
Information on how to commit credit card fraud is readily available to anyone willing to 
make the effort to look. Postings on the Internet give step-by-step instructions on how to 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1020                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
obtain carbon paper receipts and call credit-reporting agencies using merchant numbers. The 
latter is done in order to verify that the card is valid and to obtain the amount of credit 
available. The fraudster usually watches a store employee dial the number of the agency, 
noting the numbers as they are dialed. They then listen to the employee give the merchant 
number. This number can often be found next to registers and can be copied down if in 
plain sight. The fraudster now has an excellent avenue to test stolen cards. 
 



:


institut ident theft and spoof site
fraudul actor mai creat fals internet site pretend to sell good to buyer who
must enter their credit card inform and other person inform in order to make
purchas the seller then us the inform to make fraudul purchas in the name
of the buyer more recent fraudul actor have begun creat affili site of actual
seller or other creditor such as bank the perpetr of the fraud then send email to
exist custom of the actual seller or creator these email inform the unsuspect
custom that there is a problem with hi account and ask the custom to log on to the site
of the compani that the wrongdoer ha copi and to reenter their person and credit card
inform the fraudul actor then us the inform to make purchas
inform on how to commit credit card fraud is readili avail to anyon will to
make the effort to look post on the internet give stepbystep instruct on how to
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11020 2011 fraud examin manual
obtain carbon paper receipt and call creditreport agenc us merchant number the
latter is done in order to verifi that the card is valid and to obtain the amount of credit
avail the fraudster usual watch a store employe dial the number of the agenc
note the number as thei ar dial thei then listen to the employe give the merchant
number thi number can often be found next to regist and can be copi down if in
plain sight the fraudster now ha an excel avenu to test stolen card
