2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Credit Card Fraud/Merchant Scams


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Merchant Scams 
Collusion occurs between the sales people and the credit card fraudster to process valid 
credit card numbers on white plastic cards. They might also make several imprints on sales 
tickets and fill them in later on.  
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1023 
Magnetic Stripe Diagram  
 
 
As shown in the above Magnetic Stripe Diagram above, two tracks appear on the credit 
card’s magnetic stripe. Track two is the most widely read. It is 40 characters in length, is 
strictly numeric containing the account number, expiration date, a security code, and 
discretionary bank data. Track one is 79 characters in length, is alpha numeric, and contains 
the above information plus the cardholder’s name. 
 
Magnetic stripe compromise is a more sophisticated method of obtaining account 
information for fraudulent purposes. It requires the transfer, or encoding, of legitimate 
account information, along with a security code, from the legitimate magnetic stripe to a 
counterfeited card with a magnetic stripe. The full, unaltered, legitimate magnetic stripe must 
be obtained to accomplish fraud by this method.  
 
Skimmers are becoming prevalent in credit card and ATM/debit card frauds. A skimmer is a 
card-reading device similar to the swipe machine used by cashiers to validate credit cards. It 
can be purchased at electronic stores and used by credit card thieves to read data imprinted 
on information tracks within the magnetic strip located on the card. In addition, criminals 
are using the device to swipe credit information from one credit card and put it on another.  
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1024                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Nowadays, criminals have gotten even more sophisticated by placing pinhole cameras on the 
ATMs to capture the card number as well to watch as the victim enter his PIN into the 
keypad. 
 



:


merchant scam
collus occur between the sale peopl and the credit card fraudster to process valid
credit card number on white plastic card thei might also make sever imprint on sale
ticket and fill them in later on
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11023
magnet stripe diagram
as shown in the abov magnet stripe diagram abov two track appear on the credit
card magnet stripe track two is the most wide read it is 40 charact in length is
strictli numer contain the account number expir date a secur code and
discretionari bank data track on is 79 charact in length is alpha numer and contain
the abov inform plu the cardhold name
magnet stripe compromis is a more sophist method of obtain account
inform for fraudul purpos it requir the transfer or encod of legitim
account inform along with a secur code from the legitim magnet stripe to a
counterfeit card with a magnet stripe the full unalt legitim magnet stripe must
be obtain to accomplish fraud by thi method
skimmer ar becom preval in credit card and atmdebit card fraud a skimmer is a
cardread devic similar to the swipe machin us by cashier to valid credit card it
can be purchas at electron store and us by credit card thiev to read data imprint
on inform track within the magnet strip locat on the card in addit crimin
ar us the devic to swipe credit inform from on credit card and put it on anoth
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11024 2011 fraud examin manual
nowadai crimin have gotten even more sophist by place pinhol camera on the
atm to captur the card number as well to watch as the victim enter hi pin into the
keypad
