2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES/External Auditors/Performing an ICOFR Audit/PLANNING THE AUDIT


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Manager's and Auditor's Responsibilities


:


PLANNING THE AUDIT 
When planning an integrated audit of ICOFR and the financial statements, the auditor must: 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.236                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Evaluate whether the following matters are important to the financial statements and to 
ICOFR and, if so, how they w ill affect the audit procedures: 
? Knowledge of the company’s ICOFR obtained during other engagements; 
? Information about the company’s industry, including financial reporting practices, 
economic conditions, laws and regulations, and technological changes;  
? Information about the company’s business activities, organization, operating 
characteristics, and capital structure;  
? The existence and extent of any recent changes in the company, its operations, or its 
ICOFR;  
? The auditor’s preliminary judgments about materiality, risk, and other factors relating 
to the determination of material weaknesses;  
? Any control deficiencies previously communicated to the audit committee, board of 
directors, or company management;  
? Legal or regulatory issues of which the company is aware;  
? The type and extent of evidence related to the effectiveness of the company’s 
ICOFR; 
? Preliminary judgments about the effectiveness of ICOFR;  
? Public information about the company related to the evaluation of the likelihood of 
material misstatements in the company’s financial statements and the effectiveness of 
the company’s ICOFR; 
? Knowledge about the risks related to the company that were considered as part of 
the auditor’s client acceptance and retention evaluation; and 
? The relative complexity of the company’s operations. 
• Assess the risk that material weaknesses exist in areas of the company’s ICOFR in order 
to determine which accounts, disclosures, and assertions are significant and relevant to 
the audit, which controls to test, and what evidence is necessary for a given control. In 
forming this assessment, the complexity of the organization, business unit, or process 
will play an important role. 
• Focus the audit attention on those areas of the company’s ICOFR that are assessed to 
have the highest risk that a material weakness exists. The auditor should keep in mind 
that the risk a company’s ICOFR will fail to  prevent or detect a misstatement caused by 
fraud usually is higher than the risk of failure to prevent or detect errors. 
• Scale the audit appropriately based on the ways the company meets its control 
objectives, with attention given to the size and complexity of the company, its business 
processes, and its business units.  
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.237 
• Evaluate the extent to which he will use the work of others to reduce his own audit 
work. 
• Use the same materiality considerations used in planning the audit of the company’s 
financial statements. 
 



:


plan the audit
when plan an integr audit of icofr and the financi statement the auditor must
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1236 2011 fraud examin manual
evalu whether the follow matter ar import to the financi statement and to
icofr and if so how thei w ill affect the audit procedur
knowledg of the compani icofr obtain dure other engag
inform about the compani industri includ financi report practic
econom condit law and regul and technolog chang
inform about the compani busi activ organ oper
characterist and capit structur
the exist and extent of ani recent chang in the compani it oper or it
icofr
the auditor preliminari judgment about materi risk and other factor relat
to the determin of materi weak
ani control defici previous commun to the audit committe board of
director or compani manag
legal or regulatori issu of which the compani is awar
the type and extent of evid relat to the effect of the compani
icofr
preliminari judgment about the effect of icofr
public inform about the compani relat to the evalu of the likelihood of
materi misstat in the compani financi statement and the effect of
the compani icofr
knowledg about the risk relat to the compani that were consid as part of
the auditor client accept and retent evalu and
the rel complex of the compani oper
assess the risk that materi weak exist in area of the compani icofr in order
to determin which account disclosur and assert ar signific and relev to
the audit which control to test and what evid is necessari for a given control in
form thi assess the complex of the organ busi unit or process
will plai an import role
focu the audit attent on those area of the compani icofr that ar assess to
have the highest risk that a materi weak exist the auditor should keep in mind
that the risk a compani icofr will fail to prevent or detect a misstat caus by
fraud usual is higher than the risk of failur to prevent or detect error
scale the audit appropri base on the wai the compani meet it control
object with attent given to the size and complex of the compani it busi
process and it busi unit
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1237
evalu the extent to which he will us the work of other to reduc hi own audit
work
us the same materi consider us in plan the audit of the compani
financi statement
