2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Types of Insurance Policies


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Types of Insurance Policies 
Property insurance indemnifies against pecuniary loss to the insured’s property (a nd, in some 
policies, to the property of others) for specific losses, for example, from fire, theft, or auto 
collision. Casualty insurance indemnifies against legal liability to others for injury or damage to 
people, property, or other defined legal interests because of specified risks or conduct. 
Casualty insurance is of several types, such as health, disability, life, fidelity, and bonds. 
Health insurance indemnifies against medical care costs under specified circumstances.  
 
Disability insurance indemnifies against income loss under defined circumstances. Life insurance 
indemnifies for the death of the insured. Fidelity insurance indemnifies against economic loss 
to the insured because of employee dishonesty. Bonds indemnify against loss to third-party 
beneficiaries when the insured fails to fulfill a specific undertaking for the third  
party’s benefit. 
 
Insurance policies can be marketed in combinations. Homeowners insurance and auto 
insurance policies usually include features of both property and casualty insurance. Some 
health insurance plans, for example, also might include disability benefit provisions. There 
are a multitude of insurance fraud schemes. Likewise, there are fraud schemes that are 
prevalent only in specific insurance areas. The largest amount of fraud is in health care. Like 
all other industries, insurance is susceptible to both internal and external fraud schemes. 
 
  
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1102                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
External health care fraud is perpetrated by outsiders against the company. The two main 
types of external fraud schemes are those committed by providers (such as doctors, 
institutions, and home health agencies) and claim fraud by the insured. Health care frauds —
 a specific variation of insurance fraud — will be discussed in the next chapter. 
 
 



:


type of insur polici
properti insur indemnifi against pecuniari loss to the insur properti a nd in some
polici to the properti of other for specif loss for exampl from fire theft or auto
collis casualti insur indemnifi against legal liabil to other for injuri or damag to
peopl properti or other defin legal interest becaus of specifi risk or conduct
casualti insur is of sever type such as health disabl life fidel and bond
health insur indemnifi against medic care cost under specifi circumst
disabl insur indemnifi against incom loss under defin circumst life insur
indemnifi for the death of the insur fidel insur indemnifi against econom loss
to the insur becaus of employe dishonesti bond indemnifi against loss to thirdparti
beneficiari when the insur fail to fulfil a specif undertak for the third
parti benefit
insur polici can be market in combin homeown insur and auto
insur polici usual includ featur of both properti and casualti insur some
health insur plan for exampl also might includ disabl benefit provis there
ar a multitud of insur fraud scheme likewis there ar fraud scheme that ar
preval onli in specif insur area the largest amount of fraud is in health care like
all other industri insur is suscept to both intern and extern fraud scheme
insur fraud financi transact
11102 2011 fraud examin manual
extern health care fraud is perpetr by outsid against the compani the two main
type of extern fraud scheme ar those commit by provid such as doctor
institut and home health agenc and claim fraud by the insur health care fraud
a specif variat of insur fraud will be discuss in the next chapter
