2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Workers' Compensation Fraud/Claimant Fraud Investigation Tips


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Claimant Fraud Investigation Tips
• In spite of the possible indicators of fraud, medical treatment must be secured 
immediately, but an investigation should be opened immediately if there is a suspicion of 
fraud. 
• The manager who is responsible for the area where the injury occurred should initiate an 
investigation on each reportable accident. 
• As soon as possible the accident should be discussed with the employee. 
• Obtain a signed statement from the employee as soon as the employee is able to do so. 
• In obtaining a signed statement, the following questions should be answered as 
applicable: 
? What was the employee doing just prior to the accident, and after the accident? 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1123 
? Was the employee carrying out his regular duties and in the manner they should 
normally be conducted? 
? Had the employee been properly instructed as to how to safely perform the duties? 
When, and by whom? 
? Did they work in accordance with these instructions? 
? Did another employee cause the injury? 
? Was the equipment or machinery properly guarded and in good condition? 
? Was the equipment suited for the purpose it was being used? 
? Was the workplace properly lighted? 
? What were the housekeeping conditions in the area? 
? Does the work being done by the injured employee differ in any way from that being 
performed by other employees? 
? Is there a safer way that his operation can be performed? 
? Was the injured employee in good health when he reported to work on the date of 
the accident? 
 
Have an independent medical examination performed to document the illness. The person 
performing the exam should photograph the patient, obtain a copy of the patient’s photo 
identification such as a driver’s license, and obtain the patient’s signature. 
The following questions should be asked: 
• Are you disabled from working? 
• Are you now working part-time, full-time, or not at all? 
• What are your daily activities? 
• What is your activity level with regards to your ability to walk, jog, run, drive, swim, or 
participate in sports activities or hobbies? 
  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1201 



:


claimant fraud investig tip
in spite of the possibl indic of fraud medic treatment must be secur
immedi but an investig should be open immedi if there is a suspicion of
fraud
the manag who is respons for the area where the injuri occur should initi an
investig on each report accid
as soon as possibl the accid should be discuss with the employe
obtain a sign statement from the employe as soon as the employe is abl to do so
in obtain a sign statement the follow question should be answer as
applic
what wa the employe do just prior to the accid and after the accid
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11123
wa the employe carri out hi regular duti and in the manner thei should
normal be conduct
had the employe been properli instruct as to how to safe perform the duti
when and by whom
did thei work in accord with these instruct
did anoth employe caus the injuri
wa the equip or machineri properli guard and in good condit
wa the equip suit for the purpos it wa be us
wa the workplac properli light
what were the housekeep condit in the area
doe the work be done by the injur employe differ in ani wai from that be
perform by other employe
is there a safer wai that hi oper can be perform
wa the injur employe in good health when he report to work on the date of
the accid
have an independ medic examin perform to document the ill the person
perform the exam should photograph the patient obtain a copi of the patient photo
identif such as a driver licens and obtain the patient signatur
the follow question should be ask
ar you disabl from work
ar you now work parttim fulltim or not at all
what ar your daili activ
what is your activ level with regard to your abil to walk jog run drive swim or
particip in sport activ or hobbi
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11201
