2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Register Disbursement Schemes/Fictitious Refunds


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Fictitious Refunds 
In a fictitious refund scheme, an employee processes a transaction as if a customer were 
returning merchandise, even though there is no actual return. Two things result from this 
fraudulent transaction. The first is that the employee takes cash from the register in the 
amount of the false return. For instance, if the employee processes a fictitious return for a 
$100 pair of shoes, he removes $100 from the register. The register tape will indicate that the 
shoes were returned, so the disbursement appears to be legitimate. The register tape balances 
with the amount of cash on hand because the fraudulent refund accounts for the cash that 
the employee stole.  
 
The second thing that happens in a fictitious refund scheme is that a debit is made to the 
inventory system showing that the merchandise has been returned to the inventory. Since 
the transaction is fictitious, no merchandise is actually returned. The result is that the 
company’s inventory is overstated.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager created $5,500 worth of false re turns, resulting in a large shortage in the 
company’s inventory. He was able to carry his scheme on for several months, however, 
because (1) inventory was not counted regularly, and (2) the perpetrator, a manager, was 
one of the people who performed inventory counts.  
 



:


fictiti refund
in a fictiti refund scheme an employe process a transact as if a custom were
return merchandis even though there is no actual return two thing result from thi
fraudul transact the first is that the employe take cash from the regist in the
amount of the fals return for instanc if the employe process a fictiti return for a
100 pair of shoe he remov 100 from the regist the regist tape will indic that the
shoe were return so the disburs appear to be legitim the regist tape balanc
with the amount of cash on hand becaus the fraudul refund account for the cash that
the employe stole
the second thing that happen in a fictiti refund scheme is that a debit is made to the
inventori system show that the merchandis ha been return to the inventori sinc
the transact is fictiti no merchandis is actual return the result is that the
compani inventori is overst
exampl
a manag creat 5500 worth of fals re turn result in a larg shortag in the
compani inventori he wa abl to carri hi scheme on for sever month howev
becaus 1 inventori wa not count regularli and 2 the perpetr a manag wa
on of the peopl who perform inventori count
