2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Register Disbursement Schemes/Credit Card Refunds


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Credit Card Refunds 
When purchases are made with a credit card rather than cash, refunds appear as credits to 
the customer’s credit card rather than as cash disbursements. Some dishonest employees 
process false refunds on credit card sales in lieu of processing a normal cash transaction. 
One benefit of the credit card method is that the perpetrator does not have to physically take 
cash from the register and carry it out of the store. By processing the refunds to a credit card 
account, a perpetrator reaps a financial gain and avoids the potential embarrassment of being 
caught red-handed taking cash.  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.504                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In a typical credit card refund scheme, the perpetrator rings up a refund on a credit card sale, 
even though the merchandise is not actually being returned. The employee credits his own 
credit card number rather than the customer’s. The result is that the cost of the item is 
credited to the perpetrator’s credit card account.  
 
A more creative and wide-ranging application of the credit card refund scheme occurs when 
employees process refunds to the accounts of other people, and in return receive a portion 
of the refund as a kickback. Suppose a person is $100 short on the rent. That person goes to 
the retail store where his friend is a teller and has the teller process a credit of $150 to his 
account. The “customer” then goes to an ATM machine and withdraws $150 in cash. He 
pays $50 to the teller and keeps $100 for himself.  
 
Refund schemes are more difficult to perpetrate in many high-tech retail stores where the 
cash registers have anti-fraud controls that require the refund to be made to the original 
credit card used for the purchase or that only allow for refunds in the form of a store credit 
for the current value of the item purchased.    
 



:


credit card refund
when purchas ar made with a credit card rather than cash refund appear as credit to
the custom credit card rather than as cash disburs some dishonest employe
process fals refund on credit card sale in lieu of process a normal cash transact
on benefit of the credit card method is that the perpetr doe not have to physic take
cash from the regist and carri it out of the store by process the refund to a credit card
account a perpetr reap a financi gain and avoid the potenti embarrass of be
caught redhand take cash
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1504 2011 fraud examin manual
in a typic credit card refund scheme the perpetr ring up a refund on a credit card sale
even though the merchandis is not actual be return the employe credit hi own
credit card number rather than the custom the result is that the cost of the item is
credit to the perpetr credit card account
a more creativ and widerang applic of the credit card refund scheme occur when
employe process refund to the account of other peopl and in return receiv a portion
of the refund as a kickback suppos a person is 100 short on the rent that person goe to
the retail store where hi friend is a teller and ha the teller process a credit of 150 to hi
account the custom then goe to an atm machin and withdraw 150 in cash he
pai 50 to the teller and keep 100 for himself
refund scheme ar more difficult to perpetr in mani hightech retail store where the
cash regist have antifraud control that requir the refund to be made to the origin
credit card us for the purchas or that onli allow for refund in the form of a store credit
for the current valu of the item purchas
