2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Register Disbursement Schemes/Prevention of Register Disbursement Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Prevention of Register Disbursement Schemes 
• Review the segregation of duties of key employees who staff the register as well as the 
duties of their supervisors.  
• As cash is received it is important to ensure that the employees responsible for 
completing these important tasks are informed of their responsibilities and properly 
supervised.  
• An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and agreeing them to register totals.  
• Complete register documentation and cash must be delivered to the appropriate 
personnel in a timely manner.  
• Cash thefts are sometimes revealed by customers who have paid money on an account 
and have not received credit, or in some cases, who have been credited for an amount 
that does not agree with the payment they have made. Complaints and inquiries are also 
received frequently from banks. 
• Access to the register must be closely monitored and access codes must be kept secure.  
• Quantity of refunds should be analyzed to detect multiple small refunds. 
• Communicate and adhere to company policy of performing unannounced cash counts. 
• Maintain the presence of a manager or supervisor near the area of the cash register as a 
deterrent to theft. 
• Review supporting documents for voided and refunded transactions for propriety (i.e., 
legitimacy and approvals). 
• Review the numerical sequence and completeness of cash register tapes. 
 
 



:


prevent of regist disburs scheme
review the segreg of duti of kei employe who staff the regist as well as the
duti of their supervisor
as cash is receiv it is import to ensur that the employe respons for
complet these import task ar inform of their respons and properli
supervis
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and agre them to regist total
complet regist document and cash must be deliv to the appropri
personnel in a time manner
cash theft ar sometim reveal by custom who have paid monei on an account
and have not receiv credit or in some case who have been credit for an amount
that doe not agre with the payment thei have made complaint and inquiri ar also
receiv frequent from bank
access to the regist must be close monitor and access code must be kept secur
quantiti of refund should be analyz to detect multipl small refund
commun and adher to compani polici of perform unannounc cash count
maintain the presenc of a manag or supervisor near the area of the cash regist as a
deterr to theft
review support document for void and refund transact for proprieti ie
legitimaci and approv
review the numer sequenc and complet of cash regist tape
