2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/The Fraudster Reconciling the Bank Statement


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


The Fraudster Reconciling the Bank Statement 
A large percentage of those who perpetrate check tampering frauds are involved in 
reconciling the company’s bank statement. The bank statement that a company receives 
normally includes the canceled checks that have been cashed in the preceding period. A 
person who reconciles the accounts is therefore in a position to hide the existence of any 
fraudulent checks he has written to himself. He can remove the fraudulent checks or doctor 
the bank statement or both. 
 
In forged maker and authorized maker schemes, the perpetrator usually has to code the 
check in the disbursements journal. The most basic way to hide the check is to code it as 
“void” or to include no listing at all in the journal. Then, when the bank statement arrives, 
the perpetrator removes the fraudulent check from the stack of returned checks and destroys 
it. Now there is no record of the payment in the journal and no physical evidence of the 
check on hand. Of course, the bank will have  a copy of the check, but unless someone 
questions the missing check it is unlikely that the company will discover the problem. And 
since the perpetrator is the one who reconciles the account, it is unlikely that anyone will 
even notice that the check is missing.  
 
The problem with simply omitting the fraudulent check from the disbursements journal is 
that the bank balance will not reconcile to the book balance. For instance, if the perpetrator 
wrote a $25,000 check to himself and did not record it, then the book balance will be 
$25,000 higher than the bank balance ($25,000  was taken out of the bank account by the 
perpetrator, but was not credited out of the company’s cash account). Employees usually 
omit their illicit checks from the disbursement journal only in situations where they 
personally reconcile the bank statement and no one reviews their work. This allows the 
perpetrator to “force” the reconciliation. In ot her words, the perpetrator reports that the 
bank balance and book balance match, when in fact they do not.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.528                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Some victim organizations simply do not regularly reconcile their accounts. This makes it 
easy for employees to write checks without recording them. In a system where controls are 
so lax, almost any concealment method will be effective to disguise fraud. In fact, it may not 
be necessary to make any effort at all to conceal the crime.  
 
Some fraudsters physically alter the bank statement to cause it to match the company’s book 
balance. For instance, a person engaging in a forged maker scheme may decide to steal blank 
checks from the back of the checkbook. These checks are out of sequence and therefore will 
be listed last on the bank statement. This employee can delete the clump of fraudulent 
checks at the end of the statement and alter the balance to match the victim company’s 
books.  
 



:


the fraudster reconcil the bank statement
a larg percentag of those who perpetr check tamper fraud ar involv in
reconcil the compani bank statement the bank statement that a compani receiv
normal includ the cancel check that have been cash in the preced period a
person who reconcil the account is therefor in a posit to hide the exist of ani
fraudul check he ha written to himself he can remov the fraudul check or doctor
the bank statement or both
in forg maker and author maker scheme the perpetr usual ha to code the
check in the disburs journal the most basic wai to hide the check is to code it as
void or to includ no list at all in the journal then when the bank statement arriv
the perpetr remov the fraudul check from the stack of return check and destroi
it now there is no record of the payment in the journal and no physic evid of the
check on hand of cours the bank will have a copi of the check but unless someon
question the miss check it is unlik that the compani will discov the problem and
sinc the perpetr is the on who reconcil the account it is unlik that anyon will
even notic that the check is miss
the problem with simpli omit the fraudul check from the disburs journal is
that the bank balanc will not reconcil to the book balanc for instanc if the perpetr
wrote a 25000 check to himself and did not record it then the book balanc will be
25000 higher than the bank balanc 25000 wa taken out of the bank account by the
perpetr but wa not credit out of the compani cash account employe usual
omit their illicit check from the disburs journal onli in situat where thei
person reconcil the bank statement and no on review their work thi allow the
perpetr to forc the reconcili in ot her word the perpetr report that the
bank balanc and book balanc match when in fact thei do not
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1528 2011 fraud examin manual
some victim organ simpli do not regularli reconcil their account thi make it
easi for employe to write check without record them in a system where control ar
so lax almost ani conceal method will be effect to disguis fraud in fact it mai not
be necessari to make ani effort at all to conceal the crime
some fraudster physic alter the bank statement to caus it to match the compani book
balanc for instanc a person engag in a forg maker scheme mai decid to steal blank
check from the back of the checkbook these check ar out of sequenc and therefor will
be list last on the bank statement thi employe can delet the clump of fraudul
check at the end of the statement and alter the balanc to match the victim compani
book
