2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Re-Issuing Intercepted Checks


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Re-Issuing Intercepted Checks 
In intercepted check schemes, the employee faces detection not only through his employer’s 
normal control procedures, but also from the intended recipients of the stolen checks. When 
the real payees do not receive their checks, they are likely to complain. These complaints, in 
turn, could trigger a fraud investigation. One way for an employee to avoid this problem is 
to issue new checks to the intended payees.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An accounts payable troubleshooter was in char ge of auditing payments to all suppliers, 
reviewing supporting documents, and mailing checks. Every once in a while, she would 
purposely fail to mail a check to a vendor. The vendor, of course, would call accounts 
payable about the late payment and would be told that his invoice had been paid on a 
certain date. Since accounts payable did not have a copy of the canceled check (because the 
fraudster was still holding it), they would call the troubleshooter to research the problem. 
Unfortunately for the company, the troubleshooter was the one who had stolen the check. 
She would tell accounts payable to issue another check to the vendor while she stopped 
payment on the first check. Thus the vendor received his payment. Meanwhile, instead of 
stopping payment on the first check, the troubleshooter deposited it into her own account. 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.530                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


reissu intercept check
in intercept check scheme the employe face detect not onli through hi employ
normal control procedur but also from the intend recipi of the stolen check when
the real paye do not receiv their check thei ar like to complain these complaint in
turn could trigger a fraud investig on wai for an employe to avoid thi problem is
to issu new check to the intend paye
exampl
an account payabl troubleshoot wa in char ge of audit payment to all supplier
review support document and mail check everi onc in a while she would
purpos fail to mail a check to a vendor the vendor of cours would call account
payabl about the late payment and would be told that hi invoic had been paid on a
certain date sinc account payabl did not have a copi of the cancel check becaus the
fraudster wa still hold it thei would call the troubleshoot to research the problem
unfortun for the compani the troubleshoot wa the on who had stolen the check
she would tell account payabl to issu anoth check to the vendor while she stop
payment on the first check thu the vendor receiv hi payment meanwhil instead of
stop payment on the first check the troubleshoot deposit it into her own account
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1530 2011 fraud examin manual
