2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes/Forming a Shell Company


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Forming a Shell Company 
Shell companies are fictitious entities created for the purpose of committing fraud. They may 
be nothing more than a fabricated name and a post office box that an employee uses to 
collect disbursements from false billings. However, since the checks received will be made 
out in the name of the shell company, the perpetrator will normally also set up a bank 
account in his new company’s name, so he can deposit and cash the fraudulent checks. (See 
“False Billings from Shell Companies” flowchart.) 
 
A person will probably have to present a bank with a certificate of incorporation or an 
assumed-name certificate in order to open a bank account for a shell company. These are 
documents that a company must obtain through a state or local government. The documents 
can be forged, but it is more likely that the perpetrator will simply file the requisite 
paperwork and obtain legitimate documents from his state or county. This can usually be 
accomplished for a small fee, the cost of which will be more than offset by a successful fraud 
scheme.  
 
If it is discovered that a vendor is falsely billing a company, investigators for the victim 
company may be able to identify the owner of the suspect company by reviewing its business 
registration filings, which are a matter of public record.  
 
To avoid being detected through a records search, some perpetrators form their shell 
companies under another name. It is common, for instance, for employees to set up shell 
companies in the name of a spouse or other close relative. Male fraudsters often establish 
shell companies under their wives’ maiden names. An employee might also form the 
company under a completely fictitious name. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.536                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.537 
EXAMPLE 
An employee used a coworker’s identification to form a shell vendor. The fraudster then 
proceeded to bill his employer  for approximately $20,000 in false services. The resulting 
checks were deposited in the account of the shell company and currency was withdrawn from 
the account through an ATM.  
 
Another issue involved in forming a shell company is the entity’s address—the place where 
fraudulent checks will be collected. Often, an employee rents a post office box and lists it as 
the mailing address of his shell company. Some employees list their home address instead. A 
comparison of employee addresses to vendor addresses might reveal shell companies in an 
accounts payable system.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A department head set up a dummy company us ing his residence as the mailing address. 
Over a two-year period, this man submitted over $250,000 worth of false invoices. 
Eventually, the scheme was detected by a newly hired clerk. The clerk was processing an 
invoice when she noticed that the address of the vendor was the same as her boss’s address. 
(By a lucky coincidence, the clerk had typed a personal letter for her boss earlier that day 
and remembered his address.) Had the department head used a P.O. box instead of his 
home address on the invoices, his scheme might have continued indefinitely. 
 
Employees often use their home addresses to collect fraudulent disbursements because 
many businesses are wary of sending checks to vendors that have a post office box for a 
mailing address. Other common collection sites for shell company schemes are the addresses 
of relatives, friends, or accomplices.  
 



:


form a shell compani
shell compani ar fictiti entiti creat for the purpos of commit fraud thei mai
be noth more than a fabric name and a post offic box that an employe us to
collect disburs from fals bill howev sinc the check receiv will be made
out in the name of the shell compani the perpetr will normal also set up a bank
account in hi new compani name so he can deposit and cash the fraudul check see
fals bill from shell compani flowchart
a person will probabl have to present a bank with a certif of incorpor or an
assumednam certif in order to open a bank account for a shell compani these ar
document that a compani must obtain through a state or local govern the document
can be forg but it is more like that the perpetr will simpli file the requisit
paperwork and obtain legitim document from hi state or counti thi can usual be
accomplish for a small fee the cost of which will be more than offset by a success fraud
scheme
if it is discov that a vendor is fals bill a compani investig for the victim
compani mai be abl to identifi the owner of the suspect compani by review it busi
registr file which ar a matter of public record
to avoid be detect through a record search some perpetr form their shell
compani under anoth name it is common for instanc for employe to set up shell
compani in the name of a spous or other close rel male fraudster often establish
shell compani under their wive maiden name an employe might also form the
compani under a complet fictiti name
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1536 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1537
exampl
an employe us a cowork identif to form a shell vendor the fraudster then
proceed to bill hi employ for approxim 20000 in fals servic the result
check were deposit in the account of the shell compani and currenc wa withdrawn from
the account through an atm
anoth issu involv in form a shell compani is the entiti addressth place where
fraudul check will be collect often an employe rent a post offic box and list it as
the mail address of hi shell compani some employe list their home address instead a
comparison of employe address to vendor address might reveal shell compani in an
account payabl system
exampl
a depart head set up a dummi compani us ing hi resid as the mail address
over a twoyear period thi man submit over 250000 worth of fals invoic
eventu the scheme wa detect by a newli hire clerk the clerk wa process an
invoic when she notic that the address of the vendor wa the same as her bosss address
by a lucki coincid the clerk had type a person letter for her boss earlier that dai
and rememb hi address had the depart head us a po box instead of hi
home address on the invoic hi scheme might have continu indefinit
employe often us their home address to collect fraudul disburs becaus
mani busi ar wari of send check to vendor that have a post offic box for a
mail address other common collect site for shell compani scheme ar the address
of rel friend or accomplic
