2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes/Pass-Through Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Pass-Through Schemes 
In most shell company schemes, victim organizations are billed for completely fictitious 
purchases of goods or services. However, there is a subcategory of shell-company schemes 
in which actual goods or services are sold to the victim company. These are known as pass-through 
schemes.  
 
Pass-through schemes are usually undertaken by employees in charge of purchasing on 
behalf of the victim company. Instead of buying merchandise directly from a vendor, the 
employee sets up a shell company and purchases the merchandise through that fictitious 
entity. He then resells the merchandise to his employer from the shell company at an  
inflated price.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A department director was put in charge of purchasing computer equipment. Because of his 
expertise on the subject and his high standing within the company, he was unsupervised in 
this task. The director set up  a shell company in another state and bought used computers 
through the shell company, then turned around and sold them to his employer at a greatly 
exaggerated price. The money from the victim company’s first installment on the computers 
was used to pay the shell company’s debts to the real vendors. Subsequent payments were 
profits for the bogus company. The scheme cost the victim company over $1 million.  
 



:


passthrough scheme
in most shell compani scheme victim organ ar bill for complet fictiti
purchas of good or servic howev there is a subcategori of shellcompani scheme
in which actual good or servic ar sold to the victim compani these ar known as passthrough
scheme
passthrough scheme ar usual undertaken by employe in charg of purchas on
behalf of the victim compani instead of bui merchandis directli from a vendor the
employe set up a shell compani and purchas the merchandis through that fictiti
entiti he then resel the merchandis to hi employ from the shell compani at an
inflat price
exampl
a depart director wa put in charg of purchas comput equip becaus of hi
expertis on the subject and hi high stand within the compani he wa unsupervis in
thi task the director set up a shell compani in anoth state and bought us comput
through the shell compani then turn around and sold them to hi employ at a greatli
exagger price the monei from the victim compani first instal on the comput
wa us to pai the shell compani debt to the real vendor subsequ payment were
profit for the bogu compani the scheme cost the victim compani over 1 million
