2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes/Pay-and-Return Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Pay-and-Return Schemes 
Instead of using shell companies in their overbilling schemes, some employees generate 
fraudulent disbursements by using the invoices of legitimate third-party vendors who are not 
a part of the fraud scheme. In a pay-and-return  scheme, an employee intentionally mishandles 
payments that are owed to legitimate vendors. (See “Pay and Return Schemes” flowchart.) 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.541 
One way to do this is to purposely double-p ay an invoice. For instance, a clerk might 
intentionally pay an invoice twice, then call the vendor and request that one of the checks be 
returned. The clerk then intercepts the returned check.  
 
Another way to accomplish a pay-and-return scheme is to intentionally pay the wrong 
vendor. In this type of scheme an employee sends Vendor A’s check to  Vendor B. After the 
checks are mailed, the employee calls the vendors to explain the “mistake” and requests that 
they return the checks to his attention. When the checks arrive, the employee converts them 
and keeps the money. The employee usually runs the vouchers through the accounts payable 
system a second time so that the vendors eventually get their money.  
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.542                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
An employee might also pay the proper vendor, but intentionally overpay him. Once again, 
the employee contacts the vendor, this time to request that the excess payment be returned. 
Finally, an employee might intentionally purchase excess merchandise, return the excess, and 
pocket the refund.  
 



:


payandreturn scheme
instead of us shell compani in their overbil scheme some employe gener
fraudul disburs by us the invoic of legitim thirdparti vendor who ar not
a part of the fraud scheme in a payandreturn scheme an employe intention mishandl
payment that ar ow to legitim vendor see pai and return scheme flowchart
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1541
on wai to do thi is to purpos doublep ay an invoic for instanc a clerk might
intention pai an invoic twice then call the vendor and request that on of the check be
return the clerk then intercept the return check
anoth wai to accomplish a payandreturn scheme is to intention pai the wrong
vendor in thi type of scheme an employe send vendor as check to vendor b after the
check ar mail the employe call the vendor to explain the mistak and request that
thei return the check to hi attent when the check arriv the employe convert them
and keep the monei the employe usual run the voucher through the account payabl
system a second time so that the vendor eventu get their monei
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1542 2011 fraud examin manual
an employe might also pai the proper vendor but intention overpai him onc again
the employe contact the vendor thi time to request that the excess payment be return
final an employe might intention purchas excess merchandis return the excess and
pocket the refund
