2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Payroll Fraud/Adding the Ghost to the Payroll


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Adding the Ghost to the Payroll  
The first step in a ghost employee scheme is entering the ghost on the payroll. In some 
businesses, all hiring is done through a centralized personnel department, while in others the 
personnel function is spread over the managerial responsibilities of various departments. 
Regardless of how hiring of new employees is handled within a business, it is the person or 
persons with authority to add new employees and remove terminated employees that are in 
the best position to put ghosts on the payroll.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager who was responsible for hiring and scheduling janitorial work added over 80 
ghost employees to his payroll. The ghosts in this case were actual people who worked at 
other jobs for different companies. The manager filled out time sheets for the fictitious 
employees and authorized them, then took the resulting paychecks to the ghost employees, 
who cashed them and split the proceeds with the manager. It was this manager’s authority 
in the hiring and supervision of employees that enabled him to perpetrate this fraud.  
 
Employees in payroll accounting also sometimes create ghost employees. In a perfect world, 
every name listed on the payroll would be verified against personnel records to make sure 
that those persons receiving paychecks actually work for the company, but in practice this 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.556                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
does not always happen. Thus, persons in payroll accounting may be able to create fictitious 
employees by simply adding a new name to the payroll records. Access to these records is 
usually restricted, with only high-level employees having the ability to make changes to the 
payroll. These persons would therefore be among the most likely suspects in a ghost 
employee scheme. On the other hand, lower level employees sometimes gain access to 
restricted payroll information and should not be disregarded as possible suspects. 
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee in the payroll department was gi ven the authority to enter new employees into 
the payroll system, make corrections to payroll information, and distribute paychecks. This 
employee’s manager gave rubber-stamp approval to the employee’s actions because of a 
trusting relationship between the two. The lack of separation of duties and the absence of 
review made it simple for the culprit to add a fictitious employee into the payroll system.  
 
One way perpetrators try to conceal the presence of a ghost on the payroll is to create a 
ghost with a name very similar to that of a real employee. The name on the fraudulent 
paycheck, then, will appear to be legitimate to anyone who glances at it. For instance, if a 
victim organization has an employee named John Doe, the ghost may be named “John 
Doer.”   
 
Instead of adding new names to the payroll, some employees undertake ghost employee 
schemes when they fail to remove the names of terminated employees. Paychecks to the 
terminated employee continue to be generated even though the employee no longer works 
for the victim organization. The perpetrator intercepts these fraudulent paychecks and 
converts them to his own use.  
 



:


ad the ghost to the payrol
the first step in a ghost employe scheme is enter the ghost on the payrol in some
busi all hire is done through a central personnel depart while in other the
personnel function is spread over the manageri respons of variou depart
regardless of how hire of new employe is handl within a busi it is the person or
person with author to add new employe and remov termin employe that ar in
the best posit to put ghost on the payrol
exampl
a manag who wa respons for hire and schedul janitori work ad over 80
ghost employe to hi payrol the ghost in thi case were actual peopl who work at
other job for differ compani the manag fill out time sheet for the fictiti
employe and author them then took the result paycheck to the ghost employe
who cash them and split the proce with the manag it wa thi manag author
in the hire and supervis of employe that enabl him to perpetr thi fraud
employe in payrol account also sometim creat ghost employe in a perfect world
everi name list on the payrol would be verifi against personnel record to make sure
that those person receiv paycheck actual work for the compani but in practic thi
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1556 2011 fraud examin manual
doe not alwai happen thu person in payrol account mai be abl to creat fictiti
employe by simpli ad a new name to the payrol record access to these record is
usual restrict with onli highlevel employe have the abil to make chang to the
payrol these person would therefor be among the most like suspect in a ghost
employe scheme on the other hand lower level employe sometim gain access to
restrict payrol inform and should not be disregard as possibl suspect
exampl
an employe in the payrol depart wa gi ven the author to enter new employe into
the payrol system make correct to payrol inform and distribut paycheck thi
employe manag gave rubberstamp approv to the employe action becaus of a
trust relationship between the two the lack of separ of duti and the absenc of
review made it simpl for the culprit to add a fictiti employe into the payrol system
on wai perpetr try to conceal the presenc of a ghost on the payrol is to creat a
ghost with a name veri similar to that of a real employe the name on the fraudul
paycheck then will appear to be legitim to anyon who glanc at it for instanc if a
victim organ ha an employe name john doe the ghost mai be name john
doer
instead of ad new name to the payrol some employe undertak ghost employe
scheme when thei fail to remov the name of termin employe paycheck to the
termin employe continu to be gener even though the employe no longer work
for the victim organ the perpetr intercept these fraudul paycheck and
convert them to hi own us
