2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Payroll Fraud/Collecting Timekeeping Information


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Collecting Timekeeping Information 
The second thing that must occur in order for a paycheck to be issued to a ghost employee, 
at least in the case of hourly employees, is the collection and computation of timekeeping 
information. The perpetrator must provide payroll accounting with a timecard or other 
instrument showing how many hours the fictitious employee worked over the most recent 
pay period. This information, along with the wage rate information contained in personnel 
or payroll files, will be used to compute the amount of the fraudulent paycheck.  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.557 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.558                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Timekeeping records can be maintained in a variety of ways. Employees might manually 
record their hours on timecards or punch time clocks that record the time at which a person 
starts and finishes his work. In more sophisticated environments, computer systems can 
track an employee’s hours.  
 
When a ghost employee scheme is in place, someone must create documentation for the 
ghost’s hours. This essentially amounts to preparing a fake timecard showing when the ghost 
was allegedly present at work. Depending upon the normal procedure for recording hours, a 
fraudster might write up a fake timecard and sign it in the ghost’s name, punch the time 
clock for the ghost, and so on. The preparing of the timecard is not a great obstacle to the 
perpetrator. The real key is obtaining approval of the timecard.  
 
A supervisor should approve the timecards of hourly employees before paychecks are issued. 
This verifies to the payroll department that the employee actually worked the hours that are 
claimed on the card. A ghost employee, by definition, does not work for the victim 
organization, so approval will have to be fraudulently obtained. Often, the supervisor 
himself is the one who creates the ghost. When this is the case, the supervisor fills out a 
timecard in the name of the ghost, then affixes his own approval. The timecard is thereby 
authenticated and a paycheck will be issued. When a nonsupervisor is committing a ghost 
employee scheme, he will typically forge the necessary approval, then forward the bogus 
timecard directly to payroll accounting, bypassing his supervisor.  
 
In computerized systems, a supervisor’s signature might not be required. In lieu of this, the 
supervisor inputs data into the payroll system and the use of his password serves to 
authorize the entry. If an employee has access to the supervisor’s password, he can input 
data for the ghost, which will appear in the payroll system with a seal of approval.  
If the perpetrator creates ghosts who are salaried rather than hourly employees, it is not 
necessary to collect timekeeping information. Salaried employees are paid a certain amount 
each pay period regardless of how many hours they work. Because the timekeeping function 
can be avoided, it may be easier for a perpetrator to create a ghost employee who works on 
salary. However, most businesses have fewer salaried employees and they are more likely to 
be members of management. The salaried ghost may therefore be more difficult to conceal. 
 



:


collect timekeep inform
the second thing that must occur in order for a paycheck to be issu to a ghost employe
at least in the case of hourli employe is the collect and comput of timekeep
inform the perpetr must provid payrol account with a timecard or other
instrument show how mani hour the fictiti employe work over the most recent
pai period thi inform along with the wage rate inform contain in personnel
or payrol file will be us to comput the amount of the fraudul paycheck
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1557
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1558 2011 fraud examin manual
timekeep record can be maintain in a varieti of wai employe might manual
record their hour on timecard or punch time clock that record the time at which a person
start and finish hi work in more sophist environ comput system can
track an employe hour
when a ghost employe scheme is in place someon must creat document for the
ghost hour thi essenti amount to prepar a fake timecard show when the ghost
wa allegedli present at work depend upon the normal procedur for record hour a
fraudster might write up a fake timecard and sign it in the ghost name punch the time
clock for the ghost and so on the prepar of the timecard is not a great obstacl to the
perpetr the real kei is obtain approv of the timecard
a supervisor should approv the timecard of hourli employe befor paycheck ar issu
thi verifi to the payrol depart that the employe actual work the hour that ar
claim on the card a ghost employe by definit doe not work for the victim
organ so approv will have to be fraudul obtain often the supervisor
himself is the on who creat the ghost when thi is the case the supervisor fill out a
timecard in the name of the ghost then affix hi own approv the timecard is therebi
authent and a paycheck will be issu when a nonsupervisor is commit a ghost
employe scheme he will typic forg the necessari approv then forward the bogu
timecard directli to payrol account bypass hi supervisor
in computer system a supervisor signatur might not be requir in lieu of thi the
supervisor input data into the payrol system and the us of hi password serv to
author the entri if an employe ha access to the supervisor password he can input
data for the ghost which will appear in the payrol system with a seal of approv
if the perpetr creat ghost who ar salari rather than hourli employe it is not
necessari to collect timekeep inform salari employe ar paid a certain amount
each pai period regardless of how mani hour thei work becaus the timekeep function
can be avoid it mai be easier for a perpetr to creat a ghost employe who work on
salari howev most busi have fewer salari employe and thei ar more like to
be member of manag the salari ghost mai therefor be more difficult to conceal
