2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Introduction


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Introduction to Fraud Examination


:


Introduction

INTRODUCTION 
Fraud Examination Defined 
Fraud examination  is a methodology for resolving fraud allegations from inception to 
disposition. More specifically, fraud examination involves obtaining evidence and taking 
statements, writing reports, testifying to findings, and assisting in the detection and 
prevention of fraud. 
 
Obtaining Evidence and Taking Statements 
Evidence of fraud usually takes the form of documents or statements by witnesses. 
Accordingly, the fraud examiner must know how to properly and legally obtain evidence, as 
well as how to conduct interviews of witnesses and related parties. 
 
Writing Reports 
Once evidence has been obtained and the appropriate witnesses have been interviewed, the 
fraud examiner is responsible for writing clear, accurate, and unbiased reports reflecting the 
fraud examination results. These reports ultimately might be used by management, attorneys, 
prosecutors, and others to determine the facts. The fraud examiner is a gatherer of 
evidence — not the ultimate judge thereof. Opinions in fraud examination matters are 
generally avoided. 
 
Testifying to Findings 
Once a fraud examination has been completed, the evidence assembled, and the written 
report prepared, the fraud examiner often is called upon to testify before judicial authorities 
regarding the findings. Fraud examiners are expected to testify truthfully to matters relevant 
to the examination and to do so in a clear, and succinct manner. 
 
Assisting in the Detection and Prevention of Fraud 
The responsibility for the prevention of fraud lies with management or other appropriate 
authority. However, the fraud examiner is expected to actively pursue and recommend 
appropriate policies and procedures to prevent fraud. 
 
The detection of fraud within organizations is the primary responsibility of internal and 
external auditors. However, once evidence of fraud is presented, the fraud examiner is 
expected to perform sufficient procedures, as set forth in this manual, to resolve the issue. 
Allegations must be resolved in a legal and professional manner. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Many fraud examiners have an accounting background. Indeed, some fraud examiners are 
employed primarily in the audit function of their organizations. Although fraud examination 
and auditing are related, they are not the same discipline. The following table lists some of 
the principal differences. 
 
 
Auditing vs. Fraud Examination 
 
Issue  Auditing  Fraud Examination  
 
Timing 
 
Recurring 
 
Non Recurring 
Audits are conducted on a regular, recurring basis. Fraud examinations are non-recurring. 
They are conducted only with sufficient predication. 
 
Scope 
 
General 
 
Specific 
The scope of the audit is a general examination of financial data.  
The fraud examination is conducted to resolve specific allegations. 
 
Objective  
 
Opinion  
 
Affix Blame 
An audit is generally conducted for 
the purpose of expressing an 
opinion on the financial statements 
or related information. 
The fraud examination’s goal is to determine 
whether fraud has/is occurring, and to 
determine who is responsible. 
 
Relationship 
 
Non Adversarial 
 
Adversarial 
The audit process is non-adversarial in nature. 
Fraud examinations, because they involve 
efforts to affix blame, are adversarial in nature. 
 
Methodology  
 
Audit Techniques 
 
Fraud Examination Techniques 
Audits are conducted primarily by 
examining financial data. 
Fraud examinations are conducted by (1) 
document examination; (2) review of outside 
data such as public records; and (3) interviews.  
 
Presumption 
 
Professional Skepticism 
 
Proof 
Auditors are required to approach 
audits with professional skepticism. 
Fraud examiners approach the resolution of a 
fraud by attempting to establish sufficient proof 
to support or refute an allegation of fraud. 
 
Techniques for the examination of fraud issues differ considerably from other disciplines. 
Because of fraud’s fundamental elements, several axioms must be considered, regardless of 
the nature or extent of the fraud. 
 
Fraud Examination and Forensic Accounting 
Forensic accounting and fraud examination are different but related. Forensic accounting 
work is done by accountants in anticipation of litigation and can include fraud, valuation, 
I-2     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
bankruptcy, and a host of other professional services. Fraud examinations can be conducted 
by either accountants or nonaccountants and refer only to anti-fraud matters.  
 
Forensic accounting is the use of professional accounting skills in matters involving potential 
or actual civil or criminal litigation. The word forensic  is defined by Black’s Law Dictionary  as 
“used in or suitable to courts of law or public debate.” Therefore, forensic accounting  is actually 
litigation support involving accounting.  
 
Accordingly, most fraud examinations involve forensic accounting but not all forensic 
accounting is fraud examination. For example, the valuation of a property in a minority 
shareholder derivative suit would be included under forensic accounting but may not 
necessarily involve fraud. 
 
Fraud examinations will generally fall under the category of forensic accounting because the 
majority of examinations, investigations, and reports regarding fraud are done with “an eye 
toward litigation.” In other words, fraud examiners are taught to conduct their examination 
with the assumption that the case may end in litigation. 
 
 
Axioms of Fraud Examination 
 
Fraud Is Hidden 
Unlike other offenses, part of the method of fraud is to conceal its existence. A bank robber 
uses threats or force, while a bank embezzler not only steals money, but also covers up the 
theft. As a result, no opinion should be given to any person that fraud does or does not exist within a 
specific environment. The methods for concealing fraud are so numerous and sometimes 
ingenious that almost anyone — even the examiner — might be defrauded. Offering opinions 
might leave the examiner personally vulnerable to legal problems. 
 
Reverse Proof 
The examination of fraud matters is approached from two perspectives. To prove that a 
fraud has occurred, the proof must include attempts to prove it has not occurred. The reverse 
is also true. In attempting to prove fraud has not occurred, that proof must also attempt to 
prove that it has. The reason is that both sides of fraud must be examined. Under the law, proof 
of fraud must preclude any explanation other than guilt.  
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-3  
INTRODUCTION 
Existence of Fraud 
The existence of fraud is solely the purview of the courts and juries. The examiner must not 
express opinions on the guilt or innocence of any person or party. In resolving fraud issues, the 
examiner must postulate a theory — guilt or innocence — in order to attempt to prove that 
theory. Any discussion of guilt or innocence is only a part of that theory; the examiner must 
not make statements that could be construed to be conclusive in regard to the theory. 
 
 
Assembling the Fraud Team 
Fraud examinations usually require a cooperative effort among different disciplines. A typical 
investigation team might include the following: 
 
Certified Fraud Examiners 
A CFE is trained to conduct a complex fraud case from inception to conclusion. 
 
Auditors 
Internal auditors often are used to review internal documentary evidence, evaluate tips or 
complaints, schedule losses, and provide assistance in technical areas of the company’s 
operations. 
 
Security 
Security department investigators often are assigned the “field work” stage of the 
investigation, including interviewing outside witnesses and obtaining public records and 
other documents from third parties. 
 
Human Resources Personnel 
The human resources department should be consulted to ensure that the laws governing the 
rights of employees in the workplace are not violated. Such involvement will lessen the 
possibility of a wrongful discharge suit or other civil action by the employee. Advice from a 
human resources specialist might also be needed. Normally this person would not directly 
participate in the investigation. 
 
Management Representative
A representative of management, or in significant cases, the audit committee of the Board of 
Directors, should be kept informed of the progress of the investigation, and be available to 
I-4     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
lend the necessary assistance. A sensitive employee investigation has virtually no hope of 
success without strong management support. 
 
Outside Consultant 
In some cases, particularly when the suspect employee is particularly powerful or popular, it 
might be useful to employ outside specialists who are relatively immune from company 
politics or threats of reprisals. Such experts might also have greater experience and 
investigative contacts than insiders. 
 
Legal Counsel 
It is necessary to have counsel involved in, and in most cases, “directing” the investigation, 
at least as far as the legal aspects are concerned. 
 
 
Characteristics of a Fraud Examiner 
Fraud examiners should have unique abilities. In addition to technical skills, the successful 
examiner has the ability to elicit facts from numerous witnesses in a fair, impartial, lawful, 
and accurate manner, and to report the examination results accurately and completely. The 
ability to ascertain the facts and to report them accurately are of equal importance. The fraud 
examiner is part lawyer, part accountant, part criminologist, and part detective or 
investigator. 
 
Allan Pinkerton, one of the first successful private investigators, stated what qualities a 
detective should possess: 
 
The detective must possess certain qualifications of prudence, secrecy, inventiveness, persistency, 
personal courage, and above all other things, honesty; while he must add to these the same 
quality of reaching out and be coming possessed of that almost boundless information which will 
permit of the immediate and effective application of his detective talent in whatever degree that 
might be possessed. 
 
The ability to deal effectively with people is paramount for fraud examiners. The examiner 
typically meets people for a short period of time and with a specific purpose: to obtain 
information. Ideally, the examiner has the personality to attract and motivate people to be 
helpful. 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-5  
INTRODUCTION 
The examiner’s attitude toward others affects their attitude toward him. A hostile attitude 
will create anxiety in the respondents, thereby causing them to become withdrawn and 
protective, even if there is no reason to do so. Contrary to lore, the successful investigator is 
rarely “tough,” except when the need arises and toughness has been carefully planned and 
evaluated. 
 
Art Buckwalter says, “The secret is for each private investigator to be the kind of person 
others will want to deal with.”  Examiners who mislead others will often themselves be 
misled. For each guilty person an examiner  encounters, he will deal with many innocent 
witnesses. Those innocent witnesses, and the examiner’s ability to draw them out, are 
indispensable to fraud examination methodology. Because an examiner deals with people 
from all walks of life, being able to establish rapport with strangers is vital.       
 
Because no two people are alike, the fraud examiner must be able to communicate in the 
respondent’s language. A college graduate will not be questioned exactly the same way as a 
ninth-grade dropout; someone with a technical  vocabulary won’t respond in the same 
manner as a person with an artistic background. As each case differs, so will the examiner’s 
approach. 
 
The fraud examiner must have the technical ability to understand financial concepts, and the 
ability to draw inferences from them. A unique feature of fraud cases is that, unlike 
traditional property crimes, the perpetrator’s identity usually is known. In a bank robbery, for 
example, the issue is not whether a crime was committed, but rather who committed the 
crime. In fraud cases, the issue usually is not the identity of the culprit, but whether or not 
the conduct constitutes fraud.  
 
It is important that the examiner be able to simplify financial concepts so that others 
comprehend them. Fraud cases often involve issues that appear complicated, but in reality 
most fraud is rather simple; the concealment methods make it appear complex.  
 
 
Fraud Examination Methodology 
Fraud examination methodology requires that all fraud allegations be handled in a uniform, 
legal fashion and be resolved on a timely basis. Assuming there is sufficient reason 
(predication) to conduct a fraud examination, specific examination steps usually are 
employed. At each step of the fraud examination process, the evidence obtained and the 
I-6     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
fraud theory approach continually is assessed. That is to say, the suspect (subject) of the 
inquiry typically would be interviewed last, only after the fraud examiner has obtained 
enough general and specific information to address the allegations adequately. 
 
The fraud examination methodology gathers evidence from the general to the specific. 
Because of the legal ramifications of fraud examiners’ actions, the rights of all individuals 
must be observed throughout. 
 
Predication 
Investigation of fraud consists of the multitude of steps necessary to resolve allegations of 
fraud — interviewing witnesses, assembling evidence, writing reports, and dealing with 
prosecutors and the courts. The investigation of fraud, because it deals with the individual 
rights of others, must be conducted only with adequate cause or predication. 
 
Predication is the totality of circumstances that would lead a reasonable, professionally trained, 
and prudent individual to believe a fraud has occurred, is occurring, and/or will occur. 
Predication is the basis upon which an examination is commenced. Fraud examinations 
should not be conducted without proper predication.  
 
Fraud Theory Approach 
Each fraud examination begins with the proposition that all cases will end in litigation. 
To solve a fraud 
without complete evidence, the examiner must make certain assumptions. This is not unlike 
the scientist who postulates a theory based on observation and then tests it. In the case of 
complex fraud, fraud theory is almost indispensable. Fraud theory begins with the 
assumption, based on the known facts, of what might have occurred. Then that assumption 
is tested to determine whether it is provable. The fraud theory approach involves the 
following steps, in the order of their occurrence: 
• Analyze available data 
• Create a hypothesis 
• Test the hypothesis 
• Refine and amend the hypothesis 
 
A case study on internal fraud that is based on an actual incident, and one that is common in 
the commercial and governmental environment, illustrates the concepts involved in the 
fraud examination process. The names and certain other facts have been changed for 
purposes of illustration. 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-7  
INTRODUCTION 
LINDA REED COLLINS CASE STUDY 
Linda Reed Collins is purchasing manager for Bailey Books Incorporated in St. Augustine, 
Florida. Bailey, with $226 million in annual sales, is one of the country’s leading producers of 
textbooks for the college and university market as well as technical manuals for the medical and 
dental professions. 
 
Bailey’s headquarters consists of 126 employees, plus numerous sales personnel in the field. 
Because of the competitive nature of the textbook business, their profit margins are quite thin. 
Bailey’s purchases average about $75 million annually, consisting mostly of paper stock and 
covering used in the manufacturing process. The great majority of the manufacturing is done in 
Mexico through contracts with the Mexican government. 
 
The purchasing function is principally handled by three purchasing agents. Linda Reed Collins 
is the purchasing manager and has two other buyers who report to her, plus another 18 clerical 
and support personnel. 
 
Because Bailey Books is required by investors and lenders to have audited annual financial 
statements, Bailey employs a large regional CPA firm to conduct its annual audit, and has a 
staff of five internal auditors. All internal fraud matters within the company are referred to 
Loren D. Bridges, a Certified Fraud Examiner. The typical internal frauds at Bailey involve 
defalcations by their cashiers, as well as a constant stream of complaints concerning alleged fraud 
by Bailey Books’ salespeople and distributors. 
 
On January 28, Bridges was referred a telephone call. The male caller advised that he did not 
wish to disclose his identity. However, he claimed to have been a “long-term” supplier to Bailey 
in the area of books and sundries, and magazines.  The caller said that ever since Linda Collins 
took over as purchasing manager for Bailey several years ago, he has been systematically 
“squeezed out” of doing business with Bailey. Although Bridges queried the caller for additional 
information, the person hung up the telephone. 
 
There could be many legitimate reasons why a vendor would feel unfairly treated. To use the 
fraud theory approach, the Certified Fraud Examiner, in this case Bridges, must analyze the 
available data before coming to any preliminary hypothesis as to what has occurred. 
 
I-8     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
Analyzing Available Data 
If an audit of the entire purchasing function is deemed warranted, it would be conducted at 
this time and would specifically keep in mind the possibility of fraud resulting from the 
anonymous allegation. 
 
Creating a Hypothesis 
The hypothesis is invariably a “worst-case” scenario. That is, based on the allegation, what is 
the worst possible outcome? In this case, for Bailey Books, it would be that one of its 
purchasing agents was accepting kickbacks to steer business to a particular vendor. A 
hypothesis can be created for any specific allegation, i.e., a bribery or kickback scheme, 
embezzlement, conflict of interest, financial statement fraud, etc. In furtherance of the 
hypotheses, fraud examiners know that each specific scheme has its own unique 
characteristics that constitute the badges or “red flags” of fraud. 
 
Testing the Hypothesis 
Testing a hypothesis involves creating a “what-if” scenario. If, as part of the hypothesis, a 
bribery of a purchasing agent existed, the fraud examiner likely would find some or all of the 
following facts: 
• A personal relationship between the buyer and vendor 
• Ability of the purchasing agent to steer business toward a favored vendor 
• Higher prices and/or lower quality for the product or service being purchased 
• Excessive spending by the purchasing agent 
 
In the hypothetical case of Linda Reed Collins, the Certified Fraud Examiner—using Bailey 
Books’ own records—can readily establish whether or not one vendor is receiving a larger 
proportional share of the business than similar vendors. Bridges could ascertain whether or 
not Bailey Books was paying too much for a particular product, such as paper, by simply 
calling other vendors and determining competitive pricing. A personal relationship with any 
suspected vendor and the buyer could be confirmed by discreet observation or inquiry. 
Whether or not a particular purchasing agent had the ability to steer business toward a 
favored vendor could be determined by reviewing the company’s internal controls to 
ascertain who is involved in the decision-making process. The purchasing agent’s lifestyle 
could be discreetly determined through examination of public documents such as real estate 
records and vehicle titles. 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-9  
INTRODUCTION 
Refining and Amending the Hypothesis 
In testing the hypothesis, the fraud examiner might find that all facts do not fit a particular 
scenario. If such is the case, the hypothesis should be revised and retested. (Obviously, if the 
known facts are tested with negative results, it could be that a fraud is not present, or it 
could indicate that the fraud cannot be proved.) In the Linda Reed Collins example, a 
discreet inquiry might determine that Collins did not have an excessive lifestyle but rather 
significant personal indebtedness. The fraud theory could then be appropriately revised. 
 
Following is a flow chart setting forth how the fraud examination process is used to resolve 
allegations. 
I-10     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
Evaluate relationship between
 sales and cost of sales on the
 financial statements
 What are the normal internal controls?
 Are there instances when normal internal controls
  are not followed?
 Who are the personnel involved in the processes?
 Have there been any changes in personnel or
     processes?
 Is predication
 sufficient?
 No
 Yes
 Cost of sales is too high?
 Initial Predication
 Tips
 Complaints
 Accounting
 Clues
 Other
 Sources
 Evaluate
 Tips
 Review Financial
 Relationships
 Stop
 Go
  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-11  
INTRODUCTION 
Complete the investigation
 through:
 Interviews
 Is evidence sufficent to proceed?
 DiscontinueYes
 No
 Develop fraud theory:
 -  Who might be involved?
 -  What might have happened?
 -  Why might the allegation be true?
 -  Where are the possible concealment places or
         methods?
 -  When did this take place (past, present, or
         future)?
  -  How is the fraud being perpetrated ?
 Determine where the evidence is likely to be:
 -  On-book vs. Off-book
 -  Direct or circumstantial
 -  Identify potential witnesses
 What evidence is necessary to prove intent?
 -  Number of occurrences
 -  Other areas of impropriety
 -  Witnesses
 Revise fraud theory
 Prepare chart linking people and evidence
 Determine defenses to allegations
 Document Examination
 Observations
  
I-12     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
The Fraud Examiner’s Tool Kit 
Essentially three tools are available to the fraud examiner regardless of the nature of the 
fraud examination. First is interviewing, which is the process of obtaining relevant information 
about the matter from those with knowledge of it. For example, in developing 
information about Linda Reed Collins, it might be necessary to interview her co-workers, 
superiors, and subordinates. 
 
Second, the fraud examiner must be skilled in the examination of financial statements, books 
and records, and supporting documents. The examiner must know the legal ramifications of 
evidence and how to maintain the chain of custody over documents. For example, checks 
and other financial records to prove the case must be lawfully obtained, analyzed, and 
conclusions must be drawn, if it is determined that Linda Reed Collins was taking payoffs 
from a supplier. 
 
Finally, fraud examiners are often placed in a position where they must observe behavior, 
search for displays of wealth, and in some instances, observe specific offenses. A Certified 
Fraud Examiner, for example, might recommend a video surveillance of a company’s 
cashiers department to witness a defalcation being committed. Or, the fraud examiner might 
establish a visual surveillance in a public place to determine the patterns or activities of the 
subject. 
 
Interviewing 
If it appears that the fraud theory is still applicable after the fraud examiner analyzes the 
documents, the examiner proceeds to the next step: interviews of neutral third-party 
witnesses. 
 
Neutral Third-Party Witnesses 
A neutral third-party witness is a person not involved in a specific instance of fraud. For 
example, if the fraud examination of Lind a Reed Collins progressed past the stage of 
analyzing documents, it would be common for the fraud examiner to interview the personnel 
officer at Bailey Books Incorporated regarding Collins’ personnel file. 
 
Corroborative Witnesses 
Corroborative witnesses are those who can corroborate facts relating to a specific offense. 
These witnesses might be cooperative or uncooperative, but they are not directly related to 
the offense involved. Collins’ co-workers or subordinates at Bailey Books Inc. could be 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-13  
INTRODUCTION 
corroborative witnesses. Interviews with witnesses to corroborate facts should be done after 
interviewing neutral third-party witnesses. 
 
Co-Conspirators 
If after examining documents, neutral third-party witnesses, and corroborative witnesses, it 
still appears that further work is warranted, the fraud examiner typically would interview 
co-conspirators to the alleged offense. In the case of Linda Reed Collins, if it were determined 
that a vendor was paying Collins kickbacks, that vendor typically would be interviewed prior 
to contacting Collins. People suspected of complicity generally are interviewed in the order 
of those thought to be least culpable to those thought to be most culpable. In criminal 
prosecutions, law enforcement officers and prosecutors can sometimes promise leniency to 
co-conspirators in return for their cooperation. These individuals are called “inside 
witnesses” and will be discussed in detail later. Such promises by private sector fraud 
examiners are not permitted, and might legally invalidate any admissions that are made. 
 
Subject 
In general, the subject (also called the suspect or accused) is interviewed last, after all facts 
necessary to resolve the allegation are obtained. Even if it is felt that the subject will not 
offer a confession, an interview is usually scheduled; in many instances it can be used later 
for impeachment. An interview might also give the examiner a good idea of what defenses 
the subject might raise. 
 
 
Purpose of the Fraud Examination 
The purpose of the fraud examination is to prove or disprove the legal elements of the 
offense. Each and every element must be proven (1) beyond a reasonable doubt in criminal 
cases, and (2) by a preponderance of the evidence in civil cases. To do this, it is necessary to 
understand certain objectives common to white-collar cases. Because investigations of fraud 
often involve an extensive array of information, the fraud examiner can lose sight of the 
objectives. According to Herbert Edelhertz: 
 
One of the characteristics that most distinguishes the investigation of white-collar crime from that 
of common crimes is the necessity  for the investigator to establish the intent and underlying 
motives of the subject by placing together jigsaw puzzle pieces of apparently legitimate activities 
to add up to a picture of illegitimacy — rather than by a simple showing of one event which by 
itself flatly demonstrates wrongful intent. 
I-14     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
Elements of White-Collar Offenses 
While it is not possible or necessary to list every variation of white-collar crime and fraud, all 
have common elements, such as: 
• Intent — knowingly to commit a wrongful act or to achieve a purpose inconsistent with 
law or public policy 
• Disguise of purpose — falsities and misrepresentations employed to accomplish the 
scheme 
• Reliance — by the offender on the ignorance or carelessness of the victim 
• Voluntary victim action — to assist the offender 
• Concealment — of the offense 
 
Intent  
Intent must be shown in fraud matters. Intent rarely is self-evident, but must rather be 
demonstrated by showing a pattern of activity. Some of the more common ways to show 
intent include proof that the accused: 
• Had no legitimate motive for the activities 
• Repeatedly engaged in the same or similar activity of an apparent wrongful nature 
• Made conflicting statements 
• Made admissions 
• Acted to impede the investigation of the offense 
• Made statements the offender clearly knew to be false 
 
Disguise and Misrepresentation  
Misrepresentation usually is shown by the facts that the representation was made and that it 
was false, either by omission or commission. 
  
Voluntary Victim Action to Assist the Offender 
Proof that the victim assisted the offender usually is not difficult to obtain from the victim. 
It is important for the fraud examiner to ascertain the exact circumstances regarding the 
fraud from the victim, clearly drawing out what made the fraud possible. In the case of 
employee thefts, for example, the victim (the company) entrusted the care of assets to the 
subject. That fiduciary capacity must be established.  
 
Concealment 
Concealment is a cornerstone of fraud. As opposed to traditional crimes, where there is no 
effort to conceal, fraud perpetrators take steps to keep the victim ignorant. Acts in fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-15  
INTRODUCTION 
schemes designed to conceal include committing offenses too small to be recognized as 
fraud by the victim. In embezzlement cases, for example, the amount of money taken at any 
one time usually is small relative to the total company assets. By demonstrating a continuing 
pattern of thefts, the concealment aspect can be shown.  
 
To hide their actions, fraud perpetrators often create complex financial trails. The more 
obscure the act, the greater likelihood that it will not be detected. Some fraud cases involve 
fraudulent invoices and journal entries. Concealment in these types of cases often can be 
proven by the fact that the entries made had no purpose other than to conceal. 
 
 
Proof Stages in Fraud Cases 
Proof in most complex white-collar cases usually proceeds through three basic stages. First, 
the fraud examiner builds the circumstantial case through interviews of cooperative 
witnesses and review of available documentation. Then the examiner uses the circumstantial 
evidence to identify and persuade an inside witness who can provide direct evidence against 
the defendant. Then the case is sealed, defenses are identified and rebutted, and intent is 
proved through examination of the subject. 
 
Stage One: Building the Circumstantial Case 
As used here, circumstantial evidence  means all proof other than direct admission of  
wrongdoing by the subject or a co-conspirator. In a fraud case, it is the proof of the 
defendant’s representations, evidence of their falsity and intent. In a  corruption case, it is 
evidence of the standard behavior, the defendant’s breach, and the illegal payments. The 
circumstantial case also might include “similar act evidence” to show a common scheme or 
plan, lack of  mistake or accident, modus operandi, and most commonly, intent. 
  
Circumstantial evidence might be all that is available. It must be complete with no gaps, 
consistent (tending to prove a single point), and must exclude all explanations other than 
guilt. Collecting this type of evidence can be very difficult. Many complex cases lose 
direction during the circumstantial stage when the examiner becomes overwhelmed by the 
mass of accumulated detail and documents. To avoid getting bogged down, consider the 
following: 
 
I-16     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
Keep an Eye on the Ball 
Examiners must remember the importance of the fraud theory and keep in mind exactly 
what they are attempting to prove at all times. If examiners lose track of the objective, they 
should review and reorganize the evidence, develop an alternate theory, and refocus efforts. 
The examiner always is trying to prove or disprove something — even if merely a hunch — 
but never merely collecting information. 
 
Simplify the Case 
If the case starts to sink under its own weight, the fraud examiner might look for a less 
demanding legal theory, break the case down into smaller components (e.g., prove one set of 
charges against one set of defendants before pursuing the other), or look for an informant or 
inside witness. The objective in every complex case is to break it down to its essentials and 
make it as simple and clear as possible. 
 
Stage Two: Obtaining Direct Evidence 
In many cases cooperation from a co-conspirator or other insider is a necessity, either 
because the case is so complicated that it is otherwise unmanageable, or a key element — such 
as cash payments in a corruption case or the full extent of wrongdoing or intent in a fraud 
case — cannot be proved circumstantially. In some cases, the objective of the circumstantial 
stage is not so much to obtain evidence to convict the ultimate defendant, but rather to 
identify and turn an inside witness. 
  
Ideally, the least culpable witness should be approached first. In a corruption case, this might 
be the “bag man,” a subordinate. Or, if the only choice is the payer or taker, usually the 
payer is the better choice. A jury will react negatively if its members believe that the witness 
is more culpable than the defendant. A decision must also be made about how to convince 
the witness to assist. Ideally, to preserve the witness’ credibility, the fewer concessions the 
better. Remember that immunity might be given only with the consent of the court.  
  
Remember, too, that even the most self-incriminating testimony of a co-conspirator must be 
corroborated. Testimony from the insider should mesh with and augment the circumstantial 
evidence, not replace it. The credibility of a turned witness can become  the central issue in 
the case and distract the jury from the strength of the circumstantial evidence. If 
nonessential testimony from a co-conspirator cannot be corroborated, don’t use it. 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-17  
INTRODUCTION 
I-18     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
Be aware that cooperating, culpable witnesses in a white-collar case often minimize their role 
to avoid embarrassment, even if protected from legal consequences, and are prone to 
describe themselves more as observers than participants. This is very damaging to credibility, 
and must be overcome before such witnesses can be perceived as believable. 
 
Stage Three: Sealing the Case through Examination of the Subject 
Circumstantial evidence might be explained away, and direct testimony impeached or 
rebutted. The best witness against the suspect might be himself. The suspect’s admissions 
might provide otherwise missing elements. “False exculpatories” — lies offered to explain or 
justify conduct — might be the best evidence of intent. False denials of cash deposits in a 
corruption case might indicate an illicit source; false explanations for fraudulent 
representations might help prove that the original misstatements were intentional. 
 
To be effective, impeachment must show real, not apparent or explainable contradictions, 
and must focus on central, not tangential or trivial points. Attempted impeachment fails 
many times because the plaintiff  has not laid a sufficient foundation to show that the 
defendant’s statements were knowingly false. 
 
To adequately prepare the fraud examiner to understand and respond to the complex nature 
of fraud, the remaining material is divided into four sections: Financial Transactions and 
Fraud Schemes, Law, Investigation, and Fraud Prevention and Deterrence. 

2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.101 




:


introduct
introduct
fraud examin defin
fraud examin is a methodolog for resolv fraud alleg from incept to
disposit more specif fraud examin involv obtain evid and take
statement write report testifi to find and assist in the detect and
prevent of fraud
obtain evid and take statement
evid of fraud usual take the form of document or statement by wit
accordingli the fraud examin must know how to properli and legal obtain evid as
well as how to conduct interview of wit and relat parti
write report
onc evid ha been obtain and the appropri wit have been interview the
fraud examin is respons for write clear accur and unbias report reflect the
fraud examin result these report ultim might be us by manag attornei
prosecutor and other to determin the fact the fraud examin is a gather of
evid not the ultim judg thereof opinion in fraud examin matter ar
gener avoid
testifi to find
onc a fraud examin ha been complet the evid assembl and the written
report prepar the fraud examin often is call upon to testifi befor judici author
regard the find fraud examin ar expect to testifi truthfulli to matter relev
to the examin and to do so in a clear and succinct manner
assist in the detect and prevent of fraud
the respons for the prevent of fraud li with manag or other appropri
author howev the fraud examin is expect to activ pursu and recommend
appropri polici and procedur to prevent fraud
the detect of fraud within organ is the primari respons of intern and
extern auditor howev onc evid of fraud is present the fraud examin is
expect to perform suffici procedur as set forth in thi manual to resolv the issu
alleg must be resolv in a legal and profession manner
introduct
mani fraud examin have an account background inde some fraud examin ar
emploi primarili in the audit function of their organ although fraud examin
and audit ar relat thei ar not the same disciplin the follow tabl list some of
the princip differ
audit vs fraud examin
issu audit fraud examin
time
recur
non recur
audit ar conduct on a regular recur basi fraud examin ar nonrecur
thei ar conduct onli with suffici predic
scope
gener
specif
the scope of the audit is a gener examin of financi data
the fraud examin is conduct to resolv specif alleg
object
opinion
affix blame
an audit is gener conduct for
the purpos of express an
opinion on the financi statement
or relat inform
the fraud examin goal is to determin
whether fraud hasi occur and to
determin who is respons
relationship
non adversari
adversari
the audit process is nonadversari in natur
fraud examin becaus thei involv
effort to affix blame ar adversari in natur
methodolog
audit techniqu
fraud examin techniqu
audit ar conduct primarili by
examin financi data
fraud examin ar conduct by 1
document examin 2 review of outsid
data such as public record and 3 interview
presumpt
profession skeptic
proof
auditor ar requir to approach
audit with profession skeptic
fraud examin approach the resolut of a
fraud by attempt to establish suffici proof
to support or refut an alleg of fraud
techniqu for the examin of fraud issu differ consider from other disciplin
becaus of fraud fundament element sever axiom must be consid regardless of
the natur or extent of the fraud
fraud examin and forens account
forens account and fraud examin ar differ but relat forens account
work is done by account in anticip of litig and can includ fraud valuat
i2 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
bankruptci and a host of other profession servic fraud examin can be conduct
by either account or nonaccount and refer onli to antifraud matter
forens account is the us of profession account skill in matter involv potenti
or actual civil or crimin litig the word forens is defin by black law dictionari as
us in or suitabl to court of law or public debat therefor forens account is actual
litig support involv account
accordingli most fraud examin involv forens account but not all forens
account is fraud examin for exampl the valuat of a properti in a minor
sharehold deriv suit would be includ under forens account but mai not
necessarili involv fraud
fraud examin will gener fall under the categori of forens account becaus the
major of examin investig and report regard fraud ar done with an ey
toward litig in other word fraud examin ar taught to conduct their examin
with the assumpt that the case mai end in litig
axiom of fraud examin
fraud is hidden
unlik other offens part of the method of fraud is to conceal it exist a bank robber
us threat or forc while a bank embezzl not onli steal monei but also cover up the
theft as a result no opinion should be given to ani person that fraud doe or doe not exist within a
specif environ the method for conceal fraud ar so numer and sometim
ingeni that almost anyon even the examin might be defraud offer opinion
might leav the examin person vulner to legal problem
revers proof
the examin of fraud matter is approach from two perspect to prove that a
fraud ha occur the proof must includ attempt to prove it ha not occur the revers
is also true in attempt to prove fraud ha not occur that proof must also attempt to
prove that it ha the reason is that both side of fraud must be examin under the law proof
of fraud must preclud ani explan other than guilt
2011 fraud examin manual i3
introduct
exist of fraud
the exist of fraud is sole the purview of the court and juri the examin must not
express opinion on the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti in resolv fraud issu the
examin must postul a theori guilt or innoc in order to attempt to prove that
theori ani discuss of guilt or innoc is onli a part of that theori the examin must
not make statement that could be constru to be conclus in regard to the theori
assembl the fraud team
fraud examin usual requir a cooper effort among differ disciplin a typic
investig team might includ the follow
certifi fraud examin
a cfe is train to conduct a complex fraud case from incept to conclus
auditor
intern auditor often ar us to review intern documentari evid evalu tip or
complaint schedul loss and provid assist in technic area of the compani
oper
secur
secur depart investig often ar assign the field work stage of the
investig includ interview outsid wit and obtain public record and
other document from third parti
human resourc personnel
the human resourc depart should be consult to ensur that the law govern the
right of employe in the workplac ar not violat such involv will lessen the
possibl of a wrong discharg suit or other civil action by the employe advic from a
human resourc specialist might also be need normal thi person would not directli
particip in the investig
manag repres
a repres of manag or in signific case the audit committe of the board of
director should be kept inform of the progress of the investig and be avail to
i4 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
lend the necessari assist a sensit employe investig ha virtual no hope of
success without strong manag support
outsid consult
in some case particularli when the suspect employe is particularli power or popular it
might be us to emploi outsid specialist who ar rel immun from compani
polit or threat of repris such expert might also have greater experi and
investig contact than insid
legal counsel
it is necessari to have counsel involv in and in most case direct the investig
at least as far as the legal aspect ar concern
characterist of a fraud examin
fraud examin should have uniqu abil in addit to technic skill the success
examin ha the abil to elicit fact from numer wit in a fair imparti law
and accur manner and to report the examin result accur and complet the
abil to ascertain the fact and to report them accur ar of equal import the fraud
examin is part lawyer part account part criminologist and part detect or
investig
allan pinkerton on of the first success privat investig state what qualiti a
detect should possess
the detect must possess certain qualif of prudenc secreci invent persist
person courag and abov all other thing honesti while he must add to these the same
qualiti of reach out and be come possess of that almost boundless inform which will
permit of the immedi and effect applic of hi detect talent in whatev degre that
might be possess
the abil to deal effect with peopl is paramount for fraud examin the examin
typic meet peopl for a short period of time and with a specif purpos to obtain
inform ideal the examin ha the person to attract and motiv peopl to be
help
2011 fraud examin manual i5
introduct
the examin attitud toward other affect their attitud toward him a hostil attitud
will creat anxieti in the respond therebi caus them to becom withdrawn and
protect even if there is no reason to do so contrari to lore the success investig is
rare tough except when the need aris and tough ha been carefulli plan and
evalu
art buckwalt sai the secret is for each privat investig to be the kind of person
other will want to deal with examin who mislead other will often themselv be
misl for each guilti person an examin encount he will deal with mani innoc
wit those innoc wit and the examin abil to draw them out ar
indispens to fraud examin methodolog becaus an examin deal with peopl
from all walk of life be abl to establish rapport with stranger is vital
becaus no two peopl ar alik the fraud examin must be abl to commun in the
respond languag a colleg graduat will not be question exactli the same wai as a
ninthgrad dropout someon with a technic vocabulari wont respond in the same
manner as a person with an artist background as each case differ so will the examin
approach
the fraud examin must have the technic abil to understand financi concept and the
abil to draw infer from them a uniqu featur of fraud case is that unlik
tradit properti crime the perpetr ident usual is known in a bank robberi for
exampl the issu is not whether a crime wa commit but rather who commit the
crime in fraud case the issu usual is not the ident of the culprit but whether or not
the conduct constitut fraud
it is import that the examin be abl to simplifi financi concept so that other
comprehend them fraud case often involv issu that appear complic but in realiti
most fraud is rather simpl the conceal method make it appear complex
fraud examin methodolog
fraud examin methodolog requir that all fraud alleg be handl in a uniform
legal fashion and be resolv on a time basi assum there is suffici reason
predic to conduct a fraud examin specif examin step usual ar
emploi at each step of the fraud examin process the evid obtain and the
i6 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
fraud theori approach continu is assess that is to sai the suspect subject of the
inquiri typic would be interview last onli after the fraud examin ha obtain
enough gener and specif inform to address the alleg adequ
the fraud examin methodolog gather evid from the gener to the specif
becaus of the legal ramif of fraud examin action the right of all individu
must be observ throughout
predic
investig of fraud consist of the multitud of step necessari to resolv alleg of
fraud interview wit assembl evid write report and deal with
prosecutor and the court the investig of fraud becaus it deal with the individu
right of other must be conduct onli with adequ caus or predic
predic is the total of circumst that would lead a reason profession train
and prudent individu to believ a fraud ha occur is occur andor will occur
predic is the basi upon which an examin is commenc fraud examin
should not be conduct without proper predic
fraud theori approach
each fraud examin begin with the proposit that all case will end in litig
to solv a fraud
without complet evid the examin must make certain assumpt thi is not unlik
the scientist who postul a theori base on observ and then test it in the case of
complex fraud fraud theori is almost indispens fraud theori begin with the
assumpt base on the known fact of what might have occur then that assumpt
is test to determin whether it is provabl the fraud theori approach involv the
follow step in the order of their occurr
analyz avail data
creat a hypothesi
test the hypothesi
refin and amend the hypothesi
a case studi on intern fraud that is base on an actual incid and on that is common in
the commerci and government environ illustr the concept involv in the
fraud examin process the name and certain other fact have been chang for
purpos of illustr
2011 fraud examin manual i7
introduct
linda reed collin case studi
linda reed collin is purchas manag for bailei book incorpor in st augustin
florida bailei with 226 million in annual sale is on of the countri lead produc of
textbook for the colleg and univers market as well as technic manual for the medic and
dental profess
bailei headquart consist of 126 employe plu numer sale personnel in the field
becaus of the competit natur of the textbook busi their profit margin ar quit thin
bailei purchas averag about 75 million annual consist mostli of paper stock and
cover us in the manufactur process the great major of the manufactur is done in
mexico through contract with the mexican govern
the purchas function is princip handl by three purchas agent linda reed collin
is the purchas manag and ha two other buyer who report to her plu anoth 18 cleric
and support personnel
becaus bailei book is requir by investor and lender to have audit annual financi
statement bailei emploi a larg region cpa firm to conduct it annual audit and ha a
staff of five intern auditor all intern fraud matter within the compani ar refer to
loren d bridg a certifi fraud examin the typic intern fraud at bailei involv
defalc by their cashier as well as a constant stream of complaint concern alleg fraud
by bailei book salespeopl and distributor
on januari 28 bridg wa refer a telephon call the male caller advis that he did not
wish to disclos hi ident howev he claim to have been a longterm supplier to bailei
in the area of book and sundri and magazin the caller said that ever sinc linda collin
took over as purchas manag for bailei sever year ago he ha been systemat
squeez out of do busi with bailei although bridg queri the caller for addit
inform the person hung up the telephon
there could be mani legitim reason why a vendor would feel unfairli treat to us the
fraud theori approach the certifi fraud examin in thi case bridg must analyz the
avail data befor come to ani preliminari hypothesi as to what ha occur
i8 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
analyz avail data
if an audit of the entir purchas function is deem warrant it would be conduct at
thi time and would specif keep in mind the possibl of fraud result from the
anonym alleg
creat a hypothesi
the hypothesi is invari a worstcas scenario that is base on the alleg what is
the worst possibl outcom in thi case for bailei book it would be that on of it
purchas agent wa accept kickback to steer busi to a particular vendor a
hypothesi can be creat for ani specif alleg ie a briberi or kickback scheme
embezzl conflict of interest financi statement fraud etc in further of the
hypothes fraud examin know that each specif scheme ha it own uniqu
characterist that constitut the badg or red flag of fraud
test the hypothesi
test a hypothesi involv creat a whatif scenario if as part of the hypothesi a
briberi of a purchas agent exist the fraud examin like would find some or all of the
follow fact
a person relationship between the buyer and vendor
abil of the purchas agent to steer busi toward a favor vendor
higher price andor lower qualiti for the product or servic be purchas
excess spend by the purchas agent
in the hypothet case of linda reed collin the certifi fraud examinerus bailei
book own recordscan readili establish whether or not on vendor is receiv a larger
proport share of the busi than similar vendor bridg could ascertain whether or
not bailei book wa pai too much for a particular product such as paper by simpli
call other vendor and determin competit price a person relationship with ani
suspect vendor and the buyer could be confirm by discreet observ or inquiri
whether or not a particular purchas agent had the abil to steer busi toward a
favor vendor could be determin by review the compani intern control to
ascertain who is involv in the decisionmak process the purchas agent lifestyl
could be discreetli determin through examin of public document such as real estat
record and vehicl titl
2011 fraud examin manual i9
introduct
refin and amend the hypothesi
in test the hypothesi the fraud examin might find that all fact do not fit a particular
scenario if such is the case the hypothesi should be revis and retest obvious if the
known fact ar test with neg result it could be that a fraud is not present or it
could indic that the fraud cannot be prove in the linda reed collin exampl a
discreet inquiri might determin that collin did not have an excess lifestyl but rather
signific person indebted the fraud theori could then be appropri revis
follow is a flow chart set forth how the fraud examin process is us to resolv
alleg
i10 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
evalu relationship between
sale and cost of sale on the
financi statement
what ar the normal intern control
ar there instanc when normal intern control
ar not follow
who ar the personnel involv in the process
have there been ani chang in personnel or
process
is predic
suffici
no
ye
cost of sale is too high
initi predic
tip
complaint
account
clue
other
sourc
evalu
tip
review financi
relationship
stop
go
2011 fraud examin manual i11
introduct
complet the investig
through
interview
is evid suffic to proce
discontinuey
no
develop fraud theori
who might be involv
what might have happen
why might the alleg be true
where ar the possibl conceal place or
method
when did thi take place past present or
futur
how is the fraud be perpetr
determin where the evid is like to be
onbook vs offbook
direct or circumstanti
identifi potenti wit
what evid is necessari to prove intent
number of occurr
other area of improprieti
wit
revis fraud theori
prepar chart link peopl and evid
determin defens to alleg
document examin
observ
i12 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
the fraud examin tool kit
essenti three tool ar avail to the fraud examin regardless of the natur of the
fraud examin first is interview which is the process of obtain relev inform
about the matter from those with knowledg of it for exampl in develop
inform about linda reed collin it might be necessari to interview her cowork
superior and subordin
second the fraud examin must be skill in the examin of financi statement book
and record and support document the examin must know the legal ramif of
evid and how to maintain the chain of custodi over document for exampl check
and other financi record to prove the case must be lawfulli obtain analyz and
conclus must be drawn if it is determin that linda reed collin wa take payoff
from a supplier
final fraud examin ar often place in a posit where thei must observ behavior
search for displai of wealth and in some instanc observ specif offens a certifi
fraud examin for exampl might recommend a video surveil of a compani
cashier depart to wit a defalc be commit or the fraud examin might
establish a visual surveil in a public place to determin the pattern or activ of the
subject
interview
if it appear that the fraud theori is still applic after the fraud examin analyz the
document the examin proce to the next step interview of neutral thirdparti
wit
neutral thirdparti wit
a neutral thirdparti wit is a person not involv in a specif instanc of fraud for
exampl if the fraud examin of lind a reed collin progress past the stage of
analyz document it would be common for the fraud examin to interview the personnel
offic at bailei book incorpor regard collin personnel file
corrobor wit
corrobor wit ar those who can corrobor fact relat to a specif offens
these wit might be cooper or uncoop but thei ar not directli relat to
the offens involv collin cowork or subordin at bailei book inc could be
2011 fraud examin manual i13
introduct
corrobor wit interview with wit to corrobor fact should be done after
interview neutral thirdparti wit
coconspir
if after examin document neutral thirdparti wit and corrobor wit it
still appear that further work is warrant the fraud examin typic would interview
coconspir to the alleg offens in the case of linda reed collin if it were determin
that a vendor wa pai collin kickback that vendor typic would be interview prior
to contact collin peopl suspect of complic gener ar interview in the order
of those thought to be least culpabl to those thought to be most culpabl in crimin
prosecut law enforc offic and prosecutor can sometim promis lenienc to
coconspir in return for their cooper these individu ar call insid
wit and will be discuss in detail later such promis by privat sector fraud
examin ar not permit and might legal invalid ani admiss that ar made
subject
in gener the subject also call the suspect or accus is interview last after all fact
necessari to resolv the alleg ar obtain even if it is felt that the subject will not
offer a confess an interview is usual schedul in mani instanc it can be us later
for impeach an interview might also give the examin a good idea of what defens
the subject might rais
purpos of the fraud examin
the purpos of the fraud examin is to prove or disprov the legal element of the
offens each and everi element must be proven 1 beyond a reason doubt in crimin
case and 2 by a preponder of the evid in civil case to do thi it is necessari to
understand certain object common to whitecollar case becaus investig of fraud
often involv an extens arrai of inform the fraud examin can lose sight of the
object accord to herbert edelhertz
on of the characterist that most distinguish the investig of whitecollar crime from that
of common crime is the necess for the investig to establish the intent and underli
motiv of the subject by place togeth jigsaw puzzl piec of appar legitim activ
to add up to a pictur of illegitimaci rather than by a simpl show of on event which by
itself flatli demonstr wrong intent
i14 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
element of whitecollar offens
while it is not possibl or necessari to list everi variat of whitecollar crime and fraud all
have common element such as
intent knowingli to commit a wrong act or to achiev a purpos inconsist with
law or public polici
disguis of purpos falsiti and misrepresent emploi to accomplish the
scheme
relianc by the offend on the ignor or careless of the victim
voluntari victim action to assist the offend
conceal of the offens
intent
intent must be shown in fraud matter intent rare is selfevid but must rather be
demonstr by show a pattern of activ some of the more common wai to show
intent includ proof that the accus
had no legitim motiv for the activ
repeatedli engag in the same or similar activ of an appar wrong natur
made conflict statement
made admiss
act to imped the investig of the offens
made statement the offend clearli knew to be fals
disguis and misrepresent
misrepresent usual is shown by the fact that the represent wa made and that it
wa fals either by omiss or commiss
voluntari victim action to assist the offend
proof that the victim assist the offend usual is not difficult to obtain from the victim
it is import for the fraud examin to ascertain the exact circumst regard the
fraud from the victim clearli draw out what made the fraud possibl in the case of
employe theft for exampl the victim the compani entrust the care of asset to the
subject that fiduciari capac must be establish
conceal
conceal is a cornerston of fraud as oppos to tradit crime where there is no
effort to conceal fraud perpetr take step to keep the victim ignor act in fraud
2011 fraud examin manual i15
introduct
scheme design to conceal includ commit offens too small to be recogn as
fraud by the victim in embezzl case for exampl the amount of monei taken at ani
on time usual is small rel to the total compani asset by demonstr a continu
pattern of theft the conceal aspect can be shown
to hide their action fraud perpetr often creat complex financi trail the more
obscur the act the greater likelihood that it will not be detect some fraud case involv
fraudul invoic and journal entri conceal in these type of case often can be
proven by the fact that the entri made had no purpos other than to conceal
proof stage in fraud case
proof in most complex whitecollar case usual proce through three basic stage first
the fraud examin build the circumstanti case through interview of cooper
wit and review of avail document then the examin us the circumstanti
evid to identifi and persuad an insid wit who can provid direct evid against
the defend then the case is seal defens ar identifi and rebut and intent is
prove through examin of the subject
stage on build the circumstanti case
as us here circumstanti evid mean all proof other than direct admiss of
wrongdo by the subject or a coconspir in a fraud case it is the proof of the
defend represent evid of their falsiti and intent in a corrupt case it is
evid of the standard behavior the defend breach and the illeg payment the
circumstanti case also might includ similar act evid to show a common scheme or
plan lack of mistak or accid modu operandi and most commonli intent
circumstanti evid might be all that is avail it must be complet with no gap
consist tend to prove a singl point and must exclud all explan other than
guilt collect thi type of evid can be veri difficult mani complex case lose
direct dure the circumstanti stage when the examin becom overwhelm by the
mass of accumul detail and document to avoid get bog down consid the
follow
i16 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
keep an ey on the ball
examin must rememb the import of the fraud theori and keep in mind exactli
what thei ar attempt to prove at all time if examin lose track of the object thei
should review and reorgan the evid develop an altern theori and refocu effort
the examin alwai is try to prove or disprov someth even if mere a hunch
but never mere collect inform
simplifi the case
if the case start to sink under it own weight the fraud examin might look for a less
demand legal theori break the case down into smaller compon eg prove on set of
charg against on set of defend befor pursu the other or look for an inform or
insid wit the object in everi complex case is to break it down to it essenti and
make it as simpl and clear as possibl
stage two obtain direct evid
in mani case cooper from a coconspir or other insid is a necess either
becaus the case is so complic that it is otherwis unmanag or a kei element such
as cash payment in a corrupt case or the full extent of wrongdo or intent in a fraud
case cannot be prove circumstanti in some case the object of the circumstanti
stage is not so much to obtain evid to convict the ultim defend but rather to
identifi and turn an insid wit
ideal the least culpabl wit should be approach first in a corrupt case thi might
be the bag man a subordin or if the onli choic is the payer or taker usual the
payer is the better choic a juri will react neg if it member believ that the wit
is more culpabl than the defend a decis must also be made about how to convinc
the wit to assist ideal to preserv the wit credibl the fewer concess the
better rememb that immun might be given onli with the consent of the court
rememb too that even the most selfincrimin testimoni of a coconspir must be
corrobor testimoni from the insid should mesh with and augment the circumstanti
evid not replac it the credibl of a turn wit can becom the central issu in
the case and distract the juri from the strength of the circumstanti evid if
nonessenti testimoni from a coconspir cannot be corrobor dont us it
2011 fraud examin manual i17
introduct
i18 2011 fraud examin manual
be awar that cooper culpabl wit in a whitecollar case often minim their role
to avoid embarrass even if protect from legal consequ and ar prone to
describ themselv more as observ than particip thi is veri damag to credibl
and must be overcom befor such wit can be perceiv as believ
stage three seal the case through examin of the subject
circumstanti evid might be explain awai and direct testimoni impeach or
rebut the best wit against the suspect might be himself the suspect admiss
might provid otherwis miss element fals exculpatori li offer to explain or
justifi conduct might be the best evid of intent fals denial of cash deposit in a
corrupt case might indic an illicit sourc fals explan for fraudul
represent might help prove that the origin misstat were intent
to be effect impeach must show real not appar or explain contradict
and must focu on central not tangenti or trivial point attempt impeach fail
mani time becaus the plaintiff ha not laid a suffici foundat to show that the
defend statement were knowingli fals
to adequ prepar the fraud examin to understand and respond to the complex natur
of fraud the remain materi is divid into four section financi transact and
fraud scheme law investig and fraud prevent and deterr
2011 fraud examin manual 1101
