2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Introduction/INTRODUCTION/Assisting in the Detection and Prevention of Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Introduction to Fraud Examination


:


Assisting in the Detection and Prevention of Fraud 
The responsibility for the prevention of fraud lies with management or other appropriate 
authority. However, the fraud examiner is expected to actively pursue and recommend 
appropriate policies and procedures to prevent fraud. 
 
The detection of fraud within organizations is the primary responsibility of internal and 
external auditors. However, once evidence of fraud is presented, the fraud examiner is 
expected to perform sufficient procedures, as set forth in this manual, to resolve the issue. 
Allegations must be resolved in a legal and professional manner. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Many fraud examiners have an accounting background. Indeed, some fraud examiners are 
employed primarily in the audit function of their organizations. Although fraud examination 
and auditing are related, they are not the same discipline. The following table lists some of 
the principal differences. 
 
 
Auditing vs. Fraud Examination 
 
Issue  Auditing  Fraud Examination  
 
Timing 
 
Recurring 
 
Non Recurring 
Audits are conducted on a regular, recurring basis. Fraud examinations are non-recurring. 
They are conducted only with sufficient predication. 
 
Scope 
 
General 
 
Specific 
The scope of the audit is a general examination of financial data.  
The fraud examination is conducted to resolve specific allegations. 
 
Objective  
 
Opinion  
 
Affix Blame 
An audit is generally conducted for 
the purpose of expressing an 
opinion on the financial statements 
or related information. 
The fraud examination’s goal is to determine 
whether fraud has/is occurring, and to 
determine who is responsible. 
 
Relationship 
 
Non Adversarial 
 
Adversarial 
The audit process is non-adversarial in nature. 
Fraud examinations, because they involve 
efforts to affix blame, are adversarial in nature. 
 
Methodology  
 
Audit Techniques 
 
Fraud Examination Techniques 
Audits are conducted primarily by 
examining financial data. 
Fraud examinations are conducted by (1) 
document examination; (2) review of outside 
data such as public records; and (3) interviews.  
 
Presumption 
 
Professional Skepticism 
 
Proof 
Auditors are required to approach 
audits with professional skepticism. 
Fraud examiners approach the resolution of a 
fraud by attempting to establish sufficient proof 
to support or refute an allegation of fraud. 
 
Techniques for the examination of fraud issues differ considerably from other disciplines. 
Because of fraud’s fundamental elements, several axioms must be considered, regardless of 
the nature or extent of the fraud. 
 



:


assist in the detect and prevent of fraud
the respons for the prevent of fraud li with manag or other appropri
author howev the fraud examin is expect to activ pursu and recommend
appropri polici and procedur to prevent fraud
the detect of fraud within organ is the primari respons of intern and
extern auditor howev onc evid of fraud is present the fraud examin is
expect to perform suffici procedur as set forth in thi manual to resolv the issu
alleg must be resolv in a legal and profession manner
introduct
mani fraud examin have an account background inde some fraud examin ar
emploi primarili in the audit function of their organ although fraud examin
and audit ar relat thei ar not the same disciplin the follow tabl list some of
the princip differ
audit vs fraud examin
issu audit fraud examin
time
recur
non recur
audit ar conduct on a regular recur basi fraud examin ar nonrecur
thei ar conduct onli with suffici predic
scope
gener
specif
the scope of the audit is a gener examin of financi data
the fraud examin is conduct to resolv specif alleg
object
opinion
affix blame
an audit is gener conduct for
the purpos of express an
opinion on the financi statement
or relat inform
the fraud examin goal is to determin
whether fraud hasi occur and to
determin who is respons
relationship
non adversari
adversari
the audit process is nonadversari in natur
fraud examin becaus thei involv
effort to affix blame ar adversari in natur
methodolog
audit techniqu
fraud examin techniqu
audit ar conduct primarili by
examin financi data
fraud examin ar conduct by 1
document examin 2 review of outsid
data such as public record and 3 interview
presumpt
profession skeptic
proof
auditor ar requir to approach
audit with profession skeptic
fraud examin approach the resolut of a
fraud by attempt to establish suffici proof
to support or refut an alleg of fraud
techniqu for the examin of fraud issu differ consider from other disciplin
becaus of fraud fundament element sever axiom must be consid regardless of
the natur or extent of the fraud
