2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Introduction/INTRODUCTION/Axioms of Fraud Examination


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Introduction to Fraud Examination


:


Axioms of Fraud Examination 
 
Fraud Is Hidden 
Unlike other offenses, part of the method of fraud is to conceal its existence. A bank robber 
uses threats or force, while a bank embezzler not only steals money, but also covers up the 
theft. As a result, no opinion should be given to any person that fraud does or does not exist within a 
specific environment. The methods for concealing fraud are so numerous and sometimes 
ingenious that almost anyone — even the examiner — might be defrauded. Offering opinions 
might leave the examiner personally vulnerable to legal problems. 
 
Reverse Proof 
The examination of fraud matters is approached from two perspectives. To prove that a 
fraud has occurred, the proof must include attempts to prove it has not occurred. The reverse 
is also true. In attempting to prove fraud has not occurred, that proof must also attempt to 
prove that it has. The reason is that both sides of fraud must be examined. Under the law, proof 
of fraud must preclude any explanation other than guilt.  
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-3  
INTRODUCTION 
Existence of Fraud 
The existence of fraud is solely the purview of the courts and juries. The examiner must not 
express opinions on the guilt or innocence of any person or party. In resolving fraud issues, the 
examiner must postulate a theory — guilt or innocence — in order to attempt to prove that 
theory. Any discussion of guilt or innocence is only a part of that theory; the examiner must 
not make statements that could be construed to be conclusive in regard to the theory. 
 
 



:


axiom of fraud examin
fraud is hidden
unlik other offens part of the method of fraud is to conceal it exist a bank robber
us threat or forc while a bank embezzl not onli steal monei but also cover up the
theft as a result no opinion should be given to ani person that fraud doe or doe not exist within a
specif environ the method for conceal fraud ar so numer and sometim
ingeni that almost anyon even the examin might be defraud offer opinion
might leav the examin person vulner to legal problem
revers proof
the examin of fraud matter is approach from two perspect to prove that a
fraud ha occur the proof must includ attempt to prove it ha not occur the revers
is also true in attempt to prove fraud ha not occur that proof must also attempt to
prove that it ha the reason is that both side of fraud must be examin under the law proof
of fraud must preclud ani explan other than guilt
2011 fraud examin manual i3
introduct
exist of fraud
the exist of fraud is sole the purview of the court and juri the examin must not
express opinion on the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti in resolv fraud issu the
examin must postul a theori guilt or innoc in order to attempt to prove that
theori ani discuss of guilt or innoc is onli a part of that theori the examin must
not make statement that could be constru to be conclus in regard to the theori
