2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Introduction/INTRODUCTION/Assembling the Fraud Team


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Introduction to Fraud Examination


:


Assembling the Fraud Team 
Fraud examinations usually require a cooperative effort among different disciplines. A typical 
investigation team might include the following: 
 
Certified Fraud Examiners 
A CFE is trained to conduct a complex fraud case from inception to conclusion. 
 
Auditors 
Internal auditors often are used to review internal documentary evidence, evaluate tips or 
complaints, schedule losses, and provide assistance in technical areas of the company’s 
operations. 
 
Security 
Security department investigators often are assigned the “field work” stage of the 
investigation, including interviewing outside witnesses and obtaining public records and 
other documents from third parties. 
 
Human Resources Personnel 
The human resources department should be consulted to ensure that the laws governing the 
rights of employees in the workplace are not violated. Such involvement will lessen the 
possibility of a wrongful discharge suit or other civil action by the employee. Advice from a 
human resources specialist might also be needed. Normally this person would not directly 
participate in the investigation. 
 
Management Representative
A representative of management, or in significant cases, the audit committee of the Board of 
Directors, should be kept informed of the progress of the investigation, and be available to 
I-4     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
lend the necessary assistance. A sensitive employee investigation has virtually no hope of 
success without strong management support. 
 
Outside Consultant 
In some cases, particularly when the suspect employee is particularly powerful or popular, it 
might be useful to employ outside specialists who are relatively immune from company 
politics or threats of reprisals. Such experts might also have greater experience and 
investigative contacts than insiders. 
 
Legal Counsel 
It is necessary to have counsel involved in, and in most cases, “directing” the investigation, 
at least as far as the legal aspects are concerned. 
 
 



:


assembl the fraud team
fraud examin usual requir a cooper effort among differ disciplin a typic
investig team might includ the follow
certifi fraud examin
a cfe is train to conduct a complex fraud case from incept to conclus
auditor
intern auditor often ar us to review intern documentari evid evalu tip or
complaint schedul loss and provid assist in technic area of the compani
oper
secur
secur depart investig often ar assign the field work stage of the
investig includ interview outsid wit and obtain public record and
other document from third parti
human resourc personnel
the human resourc depart should be consult to ensur that the law govern the
right of employe in the workplac ar not violat such involv will lessen the
possibl of a wrong discharg suit or other civil action by the employe advic from a
human resourc specialist might also be need normal thi person would not directli
particip in the investig
manag repres
a repres of manag or in signific case the audit committe of the board of
director should be kept inform of the progress of the investig and be avail to
i4 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
lend the necessari assist a sensit employe investig ha virtual no hope of
success without strong manag support
outsid consult
in some case particularli when the suspect employe is particularli power or popular it
might be us to emploi outsid specialist who ar rel immun from compani
polit or threat of repris such expert might also have greater experi and
investig contact than insid
legal counsel
it is necessari to have counsel involv in and in most case direct the investig
at least as far as the legal aspect ar concern
