2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Introduction/INTRODUCTION/Fraud Examination Methodology


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Introduction to Fraud Examination


:


Fraud Examination Methodology 
Fraud examination methodology requires that all fraud allegations be handled in a uniform, 
legal fashion and be resolved on a timely basis. Assuming there is sufficient reason 
(predication) to conduct a fraud examination, specific examination steps usually are 
employed. At each step of the fraud examination process, the evidence obtained and the 
I-6     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
fraud theory approach continually is assessed. That is to say, the suspect (subject) of the 
inquiry typically would be interviewed last, only after the fraud examiner has obtained 
enough general and specific information to address the allegations adequately. 
 
The fraud examination methodology gathers evidence from the general to the specific. 
Because of the legal ramifications of fraud examiners’ actions, the rights of all individuals 
must be observed throughout. 
 
Predication 
Investigation of fraud consists of the multitude of steps necessary to resolve allegations of 
fraud — interviewing witnesses, assembling evidence, writing reports, and dealing with 
prosecutors and the courts. The investigation of fraud, because it deals with the individual 
rights of others, must be conducted only with adequate cause or predication. 
 
Predication is the totality of circumstances that would lead a reasonable, professionally trained, 
and prudent individual to believe a fraud has occurred, is occurring, and/or will occur. 
Predication is the basis upon which an examination is commenced. Fraud examinations 
should not be conducted without proper predication.  
 
Fraud Theory Approach 
Each fraud examination begins with the proposition that all cases will end in litigation. 
To solve a fraud 
without complete evidence, the examiner must make certain assumptions. This is not unlike 
the scientist who postulates a theory based on observation and then tests it. In the case of 
complex fraud, fraud theory is almost indispensable. Fraud theory begins with the 
assumption, based on the known facts, of what might have occurred. Then that assumption 
is tested to determine whether it is provable. The fraud theory approach involves the 
following steps, in the order of their occurrence: 
• Analyze available data 
• Create a hypothesis 
• Test the hypothesis 
• Refine and amend the hypothesis 
 
A case study on internal fraud that is based on an actual incident, and one that is common in 
the commercial and governmental environment, illustrates the concepts involved in the 
fraud examination process. The names and certain other facts have been changed for 
purposes of illustration. 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-7  
INTRODUCTION 
LINDA REED COLLINS CASE STUDY 
Linda Reed Collins is purchasing manager for Bailey Books Incorporated in St. Augustine, 
Florida. Bailey, with $226 million in annual sales, is one of the country’s leading producers of 
textbooks for the college and university market as well as technical manuals for the medical and 
dental professions. 
 
Bailey’s headquarters consists of 126 employees, plus numerous sales personnel in the field. 
Because of the competitive nature of the textbook business, their profit margins are quite thin. 
Bailey’s purchases average about $75 million annually, consisting mostly of paper stock and 
covering used in the manufacturing process. The great majority of the manufacturing is done in 
Mexico through contracts with the Mexican government. 
 
The purchasing function is principally handled by three purchasing agents. Linda Reed Collins 
is the purchasing manager and has two other buyers who report to her, plus another 18 clerical 
and support personnel. 
 
Because Bailey Books is required by investors and lenders to have audited annual financial 
statements, Bailey employs a large regional CPA firm to conduct its annual audit, and has a 
staff of five internal auditors. All internal fraud matters within the company are referred to 
Loren D. Bridges, a Certified Fraud Examiner. The typical internal frauds at Bailey involve 
defalcations by their cashiers, as well as a constant stream of complaints concerning alleged fraud 
by Bailey Books’ salespeople and distributors. 
 
On January 28, Bridges was referred a telephone call. The male caller advised that he did not 
wish to disclose his identity. However, he claimed to have been a “long-term” supplier to Bailey 
in the area of books and sundries, and magazines.  The caller said that ever since Linda Collins 
took over as purchasing manager for Bailey several years ago, he has been systematically 
“squeezed out” of doing business with Bailey. Although Bridges queried the caller for additional 
information, the person hung up the telephone. 
 
There could be many legitimate reasons why a vendor would feel unfairly treated. To use the 
fraud theory approach, the Certified Fraud Examiner, in this case Bridges, must analyze the 
available data before coming to any preliminary hypothesis as to what has occurred. 
 
I-8     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
Analyzing Available Data 
If an audit of the entire purchasing function is deemed warranted, it would be conducted at 
this time and would specifically keep in mind the possibility of fraud resulting from the 
anonymous allegation. 
 
Creating a Hypothesis 
The hypothesis is invariably a “worst-case” scenario. That is, based on the allegation, what is 
the worst possible outcome? In this case, for Bailey Books, it would be that one of its 
purchasing agents was accepting kickbacks to steer business to a particular vendor. A 
hypothesis can be created for any specific allegation, i.e., a bribery or kickback scheme, 
embezzlement, conflict of interest, financial statement fraud, etc. In furtherance of the 
hypotheses, fraud examiners know that each specific scheme has its own unique 
characteristics that constitute the badges or “red flags” of fraud. 
 
Testing the Hypothesis 
Testing a hypothesis involves creating a “what-if” scenario. If, as part of the hypothesis, a 
bribery of a purchasing agent existed, the fraud examiner likely would find some or all of the 
following facts: 
• A personal relationship between the buyer and vendor 
• Ability of the purchasing agent to steer business toward a favored vendor 
• Higher prices and/or lower quality for the product or service being purchased 
• Excessive spending by the purchasing agent 
 
In the hypothetical case of Linda Reed Collins, the Certified Fraud Examiner—using Bailey 
Books’ own records—can readily establish whether or not one vendor is receiving a larger 
proportional share of the business than similar vendors. Bridges could ascertain whether or 
not Bailey Books was paying too much for a particular product, such as paper, by simply 
calling other vendors and determining competitive pricing. A personal relationship with any 
suspected vendor and the buyer could be confirmed by discreet observation or inquiry. 
Whether or not a particular purchasing agent had the ability to steer business toward a 
favored vendor could be determined by reviewing the company’s internal controls to 
ascertain who is involved in the decision-making process. The purchasing agent’s lifestyle 
could be discreetly determined through examination of public documents such as real estate 
records and vehicle titles. 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-9  
INTRODUCTION 
Refining and Amending the Hypothesis 
In testing the hypothesis, the fraud examiner might find that all facts do not fit a particular 
scenario. If such is the case, the hypothesis should be revised and retested. (Obviously, if the 
known facts are tested with negative results, it could be that a fraud is not present, or it 
could indicate that the fraud cannot be proved.) In the Linda Reed Collins example, a 
discreet inquiry might determine that Collins did not have an excessive lifestyle but rather 
significant personal indebtedness. The fraud theory could then be appropriately revised. 
 
Following is a flow chart setting forth how the fraud examination process is used to resolve 
allegations. 
I-10     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
Evaluate relationship between
 sales and cost of sales on the
 financial statements
 What are the normal internal controls?
 Are there instances when normal internal controls
  are not followed?
 Who are the personnel involved in the processes?
 Have there been any changes in personnel or
     processes?
 Is predication
 sufficient?
 No
 Yes
 Cost of sales is too high?
 Initial Predication
 Tips
 Complaints
 Accounting
 Clues
 Other
 Sources
 Evaluate
 Tips
 Review Financial
 Relationships
 Stop
 Go
  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-11  
INTRODUCTION 
Complete the investigation
 through:
 Interviews
 Is evidence sufficent to proceed?
 DiscontinueYes
 No
 Develop fraud theory:
 -  Who might be involved?
 -  What might have happened?
 -  Why might the allegation be true?
 -  Where are the possible concealment places or
         methods?
 -  When did this take place (past, present, or
         future)?
  -  How is the fraud being perpetrated ?
 Determine where the evidence is likely to be:
 -  On-book vs. Off-book
 -  Direct or circumstantial
 -  Identify potential witnesses
 What evidence is necessary to prove intent?
 -  Number of occurrences
 -  Other areas of impropriety
 -  Witnesses
 Revise fraud theory
 Prepare chart linking people and evidence
 Determine defenses to allegations
 Document Examination
 Observations
  
I-12     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 



:


fraud examin methodolog
fraud examin methodolog requir that all fraud alleg be handl in a uniform
legal fashion and be resolv on a time basi assum there is suffici reason
predic to conduct a fraud examin specif examin step usual ar
emploi at each step of the fraud examin process the evid obtain and the
i6 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
fraud theori approach continu is assess that is to sai the suspect subject of the
inquiri typic would be interview last onli after the fraud examin ha obtain
enough gener and specif inform to address the alleg adequ
the fraud examin methodolog gather evid from the gener to the specif
becaus of the legal ramif of fraud examin action the right of all individu
must be observ throughout
predic
investig of fraud consist of the multitud of step necessari to resolv alleg of
fraud interview wit assembl evid write report and deal with
prosecutor and the court the investig of fraud becaus it deal with the individu
right of other must be conduct onli with adequ caus or predic
predic is the total of circumst that would lead a reason profession train
and prudent individu to believ a fraud ha occur is occur andor will occur
predic is the basi upon which an examin is commenc fraud examin
should not be conduct without proper predic
fraud theori approach
each fraud examin begin with the proposit that all case will end in litig
to solv a fraud
without complet evid the examin must make certain assumpt thi is not unlik
the scientist who postul a theori base on observ and then test it in the case of
complex fraud fraud theori is almost indispens fraud theori begin with the
assumpt base on the known fact of what might have occur then that assumpt
is test to determin whether it is provabl the fraud theori approach involv the
follow step in the order of their occurr
analyz avail data
creat a hypothesi
test the hypothesi
refin and amend the hypothesi
a case studi on intern fraud that is base on an actual incid and on that is common in
the commerci and government environ illustr the concept involv in the
fraud examin process the name and certain other fact have been chang for
purpos of illustr
2011 fraud examin manual i7
introduct
linda reed collin case studi
linda reed collin is purchas manag for bailei book incorpor in st augustin
florida bailei with 226 million in annual sale is on of the countri lead produc of
textbook for the colleg and univers market as well as technic manual for the medic and
dental profess
bailei headquart consist of 126 employe plu numer sale personnel in the field
becaus of the competit natur of the textbook busi their profit margin ar quit thin
bailei purchas averag about 75 million annual consist mostli of paper stock and
cover us in the manufactur process the great major of the manufactur is done in
mexico through contract with the mexican govern
the purchas function is princip handl by three purchas agent linda reed collin
is the purchas manag and ha two other buyer who report to her plu anoth 18 cleric
and support personnel
becaus bailei book is requir by investor and lender to have audit annual financi
statement bailei emploi a larg region cpa firm to conduct it annual audit and ha a
staff of five intern auditor all intern fraud matter within the compani ar refer to
loren d bridg a certifi fraud examin the typic intern fraud at bailei involv
defalc by their cashier as well as a constant stream of complaint concern alleg fraud
by bailei book salespeopl and distributor
on januari 28 bridg wa refer a telephon call the male caller advis that he did not
wish to disclos hi ident howev he claim to have been a longterm supplier to bailei
in the area of book and sundri and magazin the caller said that ever sinc linda collin
took over as purchas manag for bailei sever year ago he ha been systemat
squeez out of do busi with bailei although bridg queri the caller for addit
inform the person hung up the telephon
there could be mani legitim reason why a vendor would feel unfairli treat to us the
fraud theori approach the certifi fraud examin in thi case bridg must analyz the
avail data befor come to ani preliminari hypothesi as to what ha occur
i8 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
analyz avail data
if an audit of the entir purchas function is deem warrant it would be conduct at
thi time and would specif keep in mind the possibl of fraud result from the
anonym alleg
creat a hypothesi
the hypothesi is invari a worstcas scenario that is base on the alleg what is
the worst possibl outcom in thi case for bailei book it would be that on of it
purchas agent wa accept kickback to steer busi to a particular vendor a
hypothesi can be creat for ani specif alleg ie a briberi or kickback scheme
embezzl conflict of interest financi statement fraud etc in further of the
hypothes fraud examin know that each specif scheme ha it own uniqu
characterist that constitut the badg or red flag of fraud
test the hypothesi
test a hypothesi involv creat a whatif scenario if as part of the hypothesi a
briberi of a purchas agent exist the fraud examin like would find some or all of the
follow fact
a person relationship between the buyer and vendor
abil of the purchas agent to steer busi toward a favor vendor
higher price andor lower qualiti for the product or servic be purchas
excess spend by the purchas agent
in the hypothet case of linda reed collin the certifi fraud examinerus bailei
book own recordscan readili establish whether or not on vendor is receiv a larger
proport share of the busi than similar vendor bridg could ascertain whether or
not bailei book wa pai too much for a particular product such as paper by simpli
call other vendor and determin competit price a person relationship with ani
suspect vendor and the buyer could be confirm by discreet observ or inquiri
whether or not a particular purchas agent had the abil to steer busi toward a
favor vendor could be determin by review the compani intern control to
ascertain who is involv in the decisionmak process the purchas agent lifestyl
could be discreetli determin through examin of public document such as real estat
record and vehicl titl
2011 fraud examin manual i9
introduct
refin and amend the hypothesi
in test the hypothesi the fraud examin might find that all fact do not fit a particular
scenario if such is the case the hypothesi should be revis and retest obvious if the
known fact ar test with neg result it could be that a fraud is not present or it
could indic that the fraud cannot be prove in the linda reed collin exampl a
discreet inquiri might determin that collin did not have an excess lifestyl but rather
signific person indebted the fraud theori could then be appropri revis
follow is a flow chart set forth how the fraud examin process is us to resolv
alleg
i10 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
evalu relationship between
sale and cost of sale on the
financi statement
what ar the normal intern control
ar there instanc when normal intern control
ar not follow
who ar the personnel involv in the process
have there been ani chang in personnel or
process
is predic
suffici
no
ye
cost of sale is too high
initi predic
tip
complaint
account
clue
other
sourc
evalu
tip
review financi
relationship
stop
go
2011 fraud examin manual i11
introduct
complet the investig
through
interview
is evid suffic to proce
discontinuey
no
develop fraud theori
who might be involv
what might have happen
why might the alleg be true
where ar the possibl conceal place or
method
when did thi take place past present or
futur
how is the fraud be perpetr
determin where the evid is like to be
onbook vs offbook
direct or circumstanti
identifi potenti wit
what evid is necessari to prove intent
number of occurr
other area of improprieti
wit
revis fraud theori
prepar chart link peopl and evid
determin defens to alleg
document examin
observ
i12 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
