2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Introduction/INTRODUCTION/The Fraud Examiner’s Tool Kit


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Introduction to Fraud Examination


:


The Fraud Examiner’s Tool Kit 
Essentially three tools are available to the fraud examiner regardless of the nature of the 
fraud examination. First is interviewing, which is the process of obtaining relevant information 
about the matter from those with knowledge of it. For example, in developing 
information about Linda Reed Collins, it might be necessary to interview her co-workers, 
superiors, and subordinates. 
 
Second, the fraud examiner must be skilled in the examination of financial statements, books 
and records, and supporting documents. The examiner must know the legal ramifications of 
evidence and how to maintain the chain of custody over documents. For example, checks 
and other financial records to prove the case must be lawfully obtained, analyzed, and 
conclusions must be drawn, if it is determined that Linda Reed Collins was taking payoffs 
from a supplier. 
 
Finally, fraud examiners are often placed in a position where they must observe behavior, 
search for displays of wealth, and in some instances, observe specific offenses. A Certified 
Fraud Examiner, for example, might recommend a video surveillance of a company’s 
cashiers department to witness a defalcation being committed. Or, the fraud examiner might 
establish a visual surveillance in a public place to determine the patterns or activities of the 
subject. 
 
Interviewing 
If it appears that the fraud theory is still applicable after the fraud examiner analyzes the 
documents, the examiner proceeds to the next step: interviews of neutral third-party 
witnesses. 
 
Neutral Third-Party Witnesses 
A neutral third-party witness is a person not involved in a specific instance of fraud. For 
example, if the fraud examination of Lind a Reed Collins progressed past the stage of 
analyzing documents, it would be common for the fraud examiner to interview the personnel 
officer at Bailey Books Incorporated regarding Collins’ personnel file. 
 
Corroborative Witnesses 
Corroborative witnesses are those who can corroborate facts relating to a specific offense. 
These witnesses might be cooperative or uncooperative, but they are not directly related to 
the offense involved. Collins’ co-workers or subordinates at Bailey Books Inc. could be 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-13  
INTRODUCTION 
corroborative witnesses. Interviews with witnesses to corroborate facts should be done after 
interviewing neutral third-party witnesses. 
 
Co-Conspirators 
If after examining documents, neutral third-party witnesses, and corroborative witnesses, it 
still appears that further work is warranted, the fraud examiner typically would interview 
co-conspirators to the alleged offense. In the case of Linda Reed Collins, if it were determined 
that a vendor was paying Collins kickbacks, that vendor typically would be interviewed prior 
to contacting Collins. People suspected of complicity generally are interviewed in the order 
of those thought to be least culpable to those thought to be most culpable. In criminal 
prosecutions, law enforcement officers and prosecutors can sometimes promise leniency to 
co-conspirators in return for their cooperation. These individuals are called “inside 
witnesses” and will be discussed in detail later. Such promises by private sector fraud 
examiners are not permitted, and might legally invalidate any admissions that are made. 
 
Subject 
In general, the subject (also called the suspect or accused) is interviewed last, after all facts 
necessary to resolve the allegation are obtained. Even if it is felt that the subject will not 
offer a confession, an interview is usually scheduled; in many instances it can be used later 
for impeachment. An interview might also give the examiner a good idea of what defenses 
the subject might raise. 
 
 



:


the fraud examin tool kit
essenti three tool ar avail to the fraud examin regardless of the natur of the
fraud examin first is interview which is the process of obtain relev inform
about the matter from those with knowledg of it for exampl in develop
inform about linda reed collin it might be necessari to interview her cowork
superior and subordin
second the fraud examin must be skill in the examin of financi statement book
and record and support document the examin must know the legal ramif of
evid and how to maintain the chain of custodi over document for exampl check
and other financi record to prove the case must be lawfulli obtain analyz and
conclus must be drawn if it is determin that linda reed collin wa take payoff
from a supplier
final fraud examin ar often place in a posit where thei must observ behavior
search for displai of wealth and in some instanc observ specif offens a certifi
fraud examin for exampl might recommend a video surveil of a compani
cashier depart to wit a defalc be commit or the fraud examin might
establish a visual surveil in a public place to determin the pattern or activ of the
subject
interview
if it appear that the fraud theori is still applic after the fraud examin analyz the
document the examin proce to the next step interview of neutral thirdparti
wit
neutral thirdparti wit
a neutral thirdparti wit is a person not involv in a specif instanc of fraud for
exampl if the fraud examin of lind a reed collin progress past the stage of
analyz document it would be common for the fraud examin to interview the personnel
offic at bailei book incorpor regard collin personnel file
corrobor wit
corrobor wit ar those who can corrobor fact relat to a specif offens
these wit might be cooper or uncoop but thei ar not directli relat to
the offens involv collin cowork or subordin at bailei book inc could be
2011 fraud examin manual i13
introduct
corrobor wit interview with wit to corrobor fact should be done after
interview neutral thirdparti wit
coconspir
if after examin document neutral thirdparti wit and corrobor wit it
still appear that further work is warrant the fraud examin typic would interview
coconspir to the alleg offens in the case of linda reed collin if it were determin
that a vendor wa pai collin kickback that vendor typic would be interview prior
to contact collin peopl suspect of complic gener ar interview in the order
of those thought to be least culpabl to those thought to be most culpabl in crimin
prosecut law enforc offic and prosecutor can sometim promis lenienc to
coconspir in return for their cooper these individu ar call insid
wit and will be discuss in detail later such promis by privat sector fraud
examin ar not permit and might legal invalid ani admiss that ar made
subject
in gener the subject also call the suspect or accus is interview last after all fact
necessari to resolv the alleg ar obtain even if it is felt that the subject will not
offer a confess an interview is usual schedul in mani instanc it can be us later
for impeach an interview might also give the examin a good idea of what defens
the subject might rais
