2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Introduction/INTRODUCTION/Proof Stages in Fraud Cases


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Introduction to Fraud Examination


:


Proof Stages in Fraud Cases 
Proof in most complex white-collar cases usually proceeds through three basic stages. First, 
the fraud examiner builds the circumstantial case through interviews of cooperative 
witnesses and review of available documentation. Then the examiner uses the circumstantial 
evidence to identify and persuade an inside witness who can provide direct evidence against 
the defendant. Then the case is sealed, defenses are identified and rebutted, and intent is 
proved through examination of the subject. 
 
Stage One: Building the Circumstantial Case 
As used here, circumstantial evidence  means all proof other than direct admission of  
wrongdoing by the subject or a co-conspirator. In a fraud case, it is the proof of the 
defendant’s representations, evidence of their falsity and intent. In a  corruption case, it is 
evidence of the standard behavior, the defendant’s breach, and the illegal payments. The 
circumstantial case also might include “similar act evidence” to show a common scheme or 
plan, lack of  mistake or accident, modus operandi, and most commonly, intent. 
  
Circumstantial evidence might be all that is available. It must be complete with no gaps, 
consistent (tending to prove a single point), and must exclude all explanations other than 
guilt. Collecting this type of evidence can be very difficult. Many complex cases lose 
direction during the circumstantial stage when the examiner becomes overwhelmed by the 
mass of accumulated detail and documents. To avoid getting bogged down, consider the 
following: 
 
I-16     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
Keep an Eye on the Ball 
Examiners must remember the importance of the fraud theory and keep in mind exactly 
what they are attempting to prove at all times. If examiners lose track of the objective, they 
should review and reorganize the evidence, develop an alternate theory, and refocus efforts. 
The examiner always is trying to prove or disprove something — even if merely a hunch — 
but never merely collecting information. 
 
Simplify the Case 
If the case starts to sink under its own weight, the fraud examiner might look for a less 
demanding legal theory, break the case down into smaller components (e.g., prove one set of 
charges against one set of defendants before pursuing the other), or look for an informant or 
inside witness. The objective in every complex case is to break it down to its essentials and 
make it as simple and clear as possible. 
 
Stage Two: Obtaining Direct Evidence 
In many cases cooperation from a co-conspirator or other insider is a necessity, either 
because the case is so complicated that it is otherwise unmanageable, or a key element — such 
as cash payments in a corruption case or the full extent of wrongdoing or intent in a fraud 
case — cannot be proved circumstantially. In some cases, the objective of the circumstantial 
stage is not so much to obtain evidence to convict the ultimate defendant, but rather to 
identify and turn an inside witness. 
  
Ideally, the least culpable witness should be approached first. In a corruption case, this might 
be the “bag man,” a subordinate. Or, if the only choice is the payer or taker, usually the 
payer is the better choice. A jury will react negatively if its members believe that the witness 
is more culpable than the defendant. A decision must also be made about how to convince 
the witness to assist. Ideally, to preserve the witness’ credibility, the fewer concessions the 
better. Remember that immunity might be given only with the consent of the court.  
  
Remember, too, that even the most self-incriminating testimony of a co-conspirator must be 
corroborated. Testimony from the insider should mesh with and augment the circumstantial 
evidence, not replace it. The credibility of a turned witness can become  the central issue in 
the case and distract the jury from the strength of the circumstantial evidence. If 
nonessential testimony from a co-conspirator cannot be corroborated, don’t use it. 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-17  
INTRODUCTION 
I-18     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
Be aware that cooperating, culpable witnesses in a white-collar case often minimize their role 
to avoid embarrassment, even if protected from legal consequences, and are prone to 
describe themselves more as observers than participants. This is very damaging to credibility, 
and must be overcome before such witnesses can be perceived as believable. 
 
Stage Three: Sealing the Case through Examination of the Subject 
Circumstantial evidence might be explained away, and direct testimony impeached or 
rebutted. The best witness against the suspect might be himself. The suspect’s admissions 
might provide otherwise missing elements. “False exculpatories” — lies offered to explain or 
justify conduct — might be the best evidence of intent. False denials of cash deposits in a 
corruption case might indicate an illicit source; false explanations for fraudulent 
representations might help prove that the original misstatements were intentional. 
 
To be effective, impeachment must show real, not apparent or explainable contradictions, 
and must focus on central, not tangential or trivial points. Attempted impeachment fails 
many times because the plaintiff  has not laid a sufficient foundation to show that the 
defendant’s statements were knowingly false. 
 
To adequately prepare the fraud examiner to understand and respond to the complex nature 
of fraud, the remaining material is divided into four sections: Financial Transactions and 
Fraud Schemes, Law, Investigation, and Fraud Prevention and Deterrence. 

2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.101 




:


proof stage in fraud case
proof in most complex whitecollar case usual proce through three basic stage first
the fraud examin build the circumstanti case through interview of cooper
wit and review of avail document then the examin us the circumstanti
evid to identifi and persuad an insid wit who can provid direct evid against
the defend then the case is seal defens ar identifi and rebut and intent is
prove through examin of the subject
stage on build the circumstanti case
as us here circumstanti evid mean all proof other than direct admiss of
wrongdo by the subject or a coconspir in a fraud case it is the proof of the
defend represent evid of their falsiti and intent in a corrupt case it is
evid of the standard behavior the defend breach and the illeg payment the
circumstanti case also might includ similar act evid to show a common scheme or
plan lack of mistak or accid modu operandi and most commonli intent
circumstanti evid might be all that is avail it must be complet with no gap
consist tend to prove a singl point and must exclud all explan other than
guilt collect thi type of evid can be veri difficult mani complex case lose
direct dure the circumstanti stage when the examin becom overwhelm by the
mass of accumul detail and document to avoid get bog down consid the
follow
i16 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
keep an ey on the ball
examin must rememb the import of the fraud theori and keep in mind exactli
what thei ar attempt to prove at all time if examin lose track of the object thei
should review and reorgan the evid develop an altern theori and refocu effort
the examin alwai is try to prove or disprov someth even if mere a hunch
but never mere collect inform
simplifi the case
if the case start to sink under it own weight the fraud examin might look for a less
demand legal theori break the case down into smaller compon eg prove on set of
charg against on set of defend befor pursu the other or look for an inform or
insid wit the object in everi complex case is to break it down to it essenti and
make it as simpl and clear as possibl
stage two obtain direct evid
in mani case cooper from a coconspir or other insid is a necess either
becaus the case is so complic that it is otherwis unmanag or a kei element such
as cash payment in a corrupt case or the full extent of wrongdo or intent in a fraud
case cannot be prove circumstanti in some case the object of the circumstanti
stage is not so much to obtain evid to convict the ultim defend but rather to
identifi and turn an insid wit
ideal the least culpabl wit should be approach first in a corrupt case thi might
be the bag man a subordin or if the onli choic is the payer or taker usual the
payer is the better choic a juri will react neg if it member believ that the wit
is more culpabl than the defend a decis must also be made about how to convinc
the wit to assist ideal to preserv the wit credibl the fewer concess the
better rememb that immun might be given onli with the consent of the court
rememb too that even the most selfincrimin testimoni of a coconspir must be
corrobor testimoni from the insid should mesh with and augment the circumstanti
evid not replac it the credibl of a turn wit can becom the central issu in
the case and distract the juri from the strength of the circumstanti evid if
nonessenti testimoni from a coconspir cannot be corrobor dont us it
2011 fraud examin manual i17
introduct
i18 2011 fraud examin manual
be awar that cooper culpabl wit in a whitecollar case often minim their role
to avoid embarrass even if protect from legal consequ and ar prone to
describ themselv more as observ than particip thi is veri damag to credibl
and must be overcom befor such wit can be perceiv as believ
stage three seal the case through examin of the subject
circumstanti evid might be explain awai and direct testimoni impeach or
rebut the best wit against the suspect might be himself the suspect admiss
might provid otherwis miss element fals exculpatori li offer to explain or
justifi conduct might be the best evid of intent fals denial of cash deposit in a
corrupt case might indic an illicit sourc fals explan for fraudul
represent might help prove that the origin misstat were intent
to be effect impeach must show real not appar or explain contradict
and must focu on central not tangenti or trivial point attempt impeach fail
mani time becaus the plaintiff ha not laid a suffici foundat to show that the
defend statement were knowingli fals
to adequ prepar the fraud examin to understand and respond to the complex natur
of fraud the remain materi is divid into four section financi transact and
fraud scheme law investig and fraud prevent and deterr
2011 fraud examin manual 1101
