2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Introduction/INTRODUCTION/Proof Stages in Fraud Cases/Stage One: Building the Circumstantial Case


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Introduction to Fraud Examination


:


Stage One: Building the Circumstantial Case 
As used here, circumstantial evidence  means all proof other than direct admission of  
wrongdoing by the subject or a co-conspirator. In a fraud case, it is the proof of the 
defendant’s representations, evidence of their falsity and intent. In a  corruption case, it is 
evidence of the standard behavior, the defendant’s breach, and the illegal payments. The 
circumstantial case also might include “similar act evidence” to show a common scheme or 
plan, lack of  mistake or accident, modus operandi, and most commonly, intent. 
  
Circumstantial evidence might be all that is available. It must be complete with no gaps, 
consistent (tending to prove a single point), and must exclude all explanations other than 
guilt. Collecting this type of evidence can be very difficult. Many complex cases lose 
direction during the circumstantial stage when the examiner becomes overwhelmed by the 
mass of accumulated detail and documents. To avoid getting bogged down, consider the 
following: 
 
I-16     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
Keep an Eye on the Ball 
Examiners must remember the importance of the fraud theory and keep in mind exactly 
what they are attempting to prove at all times. If examiners lose track of the objective, they 
should review and reorganize the evidence, develop an alternate theory, and refocus efforts. 
The examiner always is trying to prove or disprove something — even if merely a hunch — 
but never merely collecting information. 
 
Simplify the Case 
If the case starts to sink under its own weight, the fraud examiner might look for a less 
demanding legal theory, break the case down into smaller components (e.g., prove one set of 
charges against one set of defendants before pursuing the other), or look for an informant or 
inside witness. The objective in every complex case is to break it down to its essentials and 
make it as simple and clear as possible. 
 



:


stage on build the circumstanti case
as us here circumstanti evid mean all proof other than direct admiss of
wrongdo by the subject or a coconspir in a fraud case it is the proof of the
defend represent evid of their falsiti and intent in a corrupt case it is
evid of the standard behavior the defend breach and the illeg payment the
circumstanti case also might includ similar act evid to show a common scheme or
plan lack of mistak or accid modu operandi and most commonli intent
circumstanti evid might be all that is avail it must be complet with no gap
consist tend to prove a singl point and must exclud all explan other than
guilt collect thi type of evid can be veri difficult mani complex case lose
direct dure the circumstanti stage when the examin becom overwhelm by the
mass of accumul detail and document to avoid get bog down consid the
follow
i16 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
keep an ey on the ball
examin must rememb the import of the fraud theori and keep in mind exactli
what thei ar attempt to prove at all time if examin lose track of the object thei
should review and reorgan the evid develop an altern theori and refocu effort
the examin alwai is try to prove or disprov someth even if mere a hunch
but never mere collect inform
simplifi the case
if the case start to sink under it own weight the fraud examin might look for a less
demand legal theori break the case down into smaller compon eg prove on set of
charg against on set of defend befor pursu the other or look for an inform or
insid wit the object in everi complex case is to break it down to it essenti and
make it as simpl and clear as possibl
