2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Strengthened Criminal Statutes


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Strengthened Criminal Statutes 
FERA is designed to increase anti-fraud enforcement by enhancing a number of federal 
criminal statutes used to prosecute financial fraud. First, it amends the definition of 
“financial institution” in the criminal code to include mortgage lending businesses. Under 
the revised definition, the Justice Department  may prosecute mortgage fraud cases as bank 
fraud and seek enhanced penalties under the mail and wire fraud statutes.  
 
Second, FERA broadens the prohibition against making false statements in mortgage 
applications to employees and agents of mortgage lenders. FERA amends the false 
statements in mortgage applications statute (18 U.S.C. § 1014) to include a prohibition of 
false statements in mortgage applications intended to influence any action by a mortgage 
lending business. Before FERA, section 1014 did not necessarily extend to private mortgage 
lending businesses.  
 
Third, FERA amends the major fraud statute (18 U.S.C. § 1031) to cover fraud in funds 
provided under the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) and other funds constituting 
federal assistance.  
 
Fourth, the legislation amends the federal securities statute (18 U.S.C. § 1348), which 
imposes criminal liability for securities fraud, to include fraud schemes involving 
commodities for future delivery or options on commodities for future delivery. 
 
Finally, FERA amends anti-money-laundering laws to broaden the term proceeds to include 
the gross receipts of unlawful activity, rather than merely its profits. This amendment 
addresses a recent Supreme Court ruling that proceeds of criminal activity, as treated by 
federal money laundering statutes, included only the defendant’s profits from such activity.  
 



:


strengthen crimin statut
fera is design to increas antifraud enforc by enhanc a number of feder
crimin statut us to prosecut financi fraud first it amend the definit of
financi institut in the crimin code to includ mortgag lend busi under
the revis definit the justic depart mai prosecut mortgag fraud case as bank
fraud and seek enhanc penalti under the mail and wire fraud statut
second fera broaden the prohibit against make fals statement in mortgag
applic to employe and agent of mortgag lender fera amend the fals
statement in mortgag applic statut 18 usc 1014 to includ a prohibit of
fals statement in mortgag applic intend to influenc ani action by a mortgag
lend busi befor fera section 1014 did not necessarili extend to privat mortgag
lend busi
third fera amend the major fraud statut 18 usc 1031 to cover fraud in fund
provid under the troubl asset relief program tarp and other fund constitut
feder assist
fourth the legisl amend the feder secur statut 18 usc 1348 which
impos crimin liabil for secur fraud to includ fraud scheme involv
commod for futur deliveri or option on commod for futur deliveri
final fera amend antimoneylaund law to broaden the term proce to includ
the gross receipt of unlaw activ rather than mere it profit thi amend
address a recent suprem court rule that proce of crimin activ as treat by
feder monei launder statut includ onli the defend profit from such activ
