2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Mail Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1341)


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Mail Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1341) 
The mail fraud statute is the workhorse of federal white-collar prosecutions. It has been used 
against virtually all types of commercial fraud, public corruption, and security law violations. 
In general, mail fraud is the use of the mail to perpetrate a scheme to defraud a victim of 
money or property. The statute provides: 
 
Whoever, having devised or intend ing to devise any scheme or artifice to defraud, or for obtaining 
money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises, or to 
sell, dispose of, loan, exchange, alter, give away, distribute, supply, or furnish or procure for 
unlawful use any counterfeit or spurious coin, obligation, security, or other article, or anything 
represented to be or in timated or held out to be such counterfeit or spurious article, for the 
purpose of executing such scheme or artifice or a ttempting so to do, places in any post office or 
authorized depository for mail matter, any matter or thing whatever to be sent or delivered by 
the Postal Service, deposits or ca uses to be deposited any matter or thing whatever to be sent or 
delivered by any private or commercial interstate carrier, or takes or receive, any such matter or 
thing, or knowingly causes to be delivered by mail according to the direction thereon, or at the 
place at which it is directed to be delivered by  the person to whom it is addressed, any such 
matter or thing, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than twenty years, or 
both. If the violation affects a financial institution, such person shall be fined not more than 
$1,000,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 years, or both. 
 
The gist of the offense is the use of the mail. Thus, where the postal system is not used, no 
matter how large or serious the fraud, there is no federal jurisdiction under this statute. Yet, 
the mailing does not itself need to contain the false and fraudulent representations, as long as 
it is an integral part of the scheme. What is integral or incidental depends on the facts of 
each case; generally, a mailing that helps advance the scheme in any significant way will be 
considered sufficient. 
 
Frauds and swindles are not defined in the mail fraud statute or elsewhere in the U.S. Code. 
Most of the cases treat any intentional scheme to deceive and deprive another of a tangible 
property right as being within the statute.  
 
It is not necessary that the fraudulent scheme succeed or that the victim suffer a loss for the 
statute to apply. It also is not necessary that the predicate mailing travel in interstate 
commerce; any use of the U.S. postal system provides sufficient grounds for federal 
jurisdiction. 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.232  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


mail fraud 18 usc 1341
the mail fraud statut is the workhors of feder whitecollar prosecut it ha been us
against virtual all type of commerci fraud public corrupt and secur law violat
in gener mail fraud is the us of the mail to perpetr a scheme to defraud a victim of
monei or properti the statut provid
whoever have devis or intend ing to devis ani scheme or artific to defraud or for obtain
monei or properti by mean of fals or fraudul pretens represent or promis or to
sell dispos of loan exchang alter give awai distribut suppli or furnish or procur for
unlaw us ani counterfeit or spuriou coin oblig secur or other articl or anyth
repres to be or in timat or held out to be such counterfeit or spuriou articl for the
purpos of execut such scheme or artific or a ttempt so to do place in ani post offic or
author depositori for mail matter ani matter or thing whatev to be sent or deliv by
the postal servic deposit or ca us to be deposit ani matter or thing whatev to be sent or
deliv by ani privat or commerci interst carrier or take or receiv ani such matter or
thing or knowingli caus to be deliv by mail accord to the direct thereon or at the
place at which it is direct to be deliv by the person to whom it is address ani such
matter or thing shall be fine under thi titl or imprison not more than twenti year or
both if the violat affect a financi institut such person shall be fine not more than
1000000 or imprison not more than 30 year or both
the gist of the offens is the us of the mail thu where the postal system is not us no
matter how larg or seriou the fraud there is no feder jurisdict under thi statut yet
the mail doe not itself need to contain the fals and fraudul represent as long as
it is an integr part of the scheme what is integr or incident depend on the fact of
each case gener a mail that help advanc the scheme in ani signific wai will be
consid suffici
fraud and swindl ar not defin in the mail fraud statut or elsewher in the us code
most of the case treat ani intent scheme to deceiv and depriv anoth of a tangibl
properti right as be within the statut
it is not necessari that the fraudul scheme succe or that the victim suffer a loss for the
statut to appli it also is not necessari that the predic mail travel in interst
commerc ani us of the us postal system provid suffici ground for feder
jurisdict
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2232 2011 fraud examin manual
