2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/“Honest Services” Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1346)


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


“Honest Services” Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1346) 
Under section 1346 of Title 18, U.S. Code, the mail fraud and the wire fraud statutes may be 
used to prosecute official corruption, along with the bribery laws, under the theory that the 
payment or receipt of bribes deprived the public of its right to honest and unbiased services 
of public servants. Specifically, section 1346 provides “the term scheme or artifice to defraud  
[which is the term used in the mail and wire fraud statutes among others] includes a scheme 
or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services.” 
 
This statute generally is referred to as the “honest services” fraud statute, and its core 
application is bribery or conflict of interest involving a public official that affects his official 
duties.  
 
Congress specifically enacted section 1346 in response to the U.S. Supreme Court decision 
rendered in the case of McNally v. United States, 483 U.S. 350 (1987). In McNally, the Supreme 
Court tried to halt the expansion of the mail and wire fraud statutes, ruling that those laws 
did not prohibit schemes to defraud citizens of the intangible right to honest government.  
 
  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.233 
A year later, Congress effectively overruled McNally by enacting section 1346 to ensure that 
mail and wire fraud would reach the deprivation of citizens’ rights to the honest services of 
their public officials.  
 
The crime of honest services contains the following elements: (1) a scheme to defraud that 
includes a material deception, (2) with the intent to defraud, (3) while using the mail or 
interstate wires in furtherance of that scheme, and (4) that resulted in the deprivation of the 
intangible right of honest services.  
 
Although its core involves public officials who, in violation of their fiduciary duties, accept 
bribes or personally benefit from undisclosed conflicts of interest, prosecutors have used the 
honest services statute to address a wide range of conduct by public officials and private 
actors, which make it a valuable tool for federal prosecutors in cases involving fraud. 
 
The law, however, has long been criticized for being so vague that it allows prosecutors to 
criminalize behavior that might not be explicitly illegal, and over time, the vagueness of 
“honest services” led to a medley of conflicting interpretations as courts struggled with how 
to apply the statute. 
 
In 2009, the U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari on the conviction of former Enron CEO 
Jeffrey Skilling, agreeing to harmonize the conflicting interpretations of this law. 
 
And on June 24, 2010, the Court issued a unanimous ruling, holding that the honest services 
law couldn’t be used to convict Skilling for his role in the collapse of Enron. 1 
 
In its opinion, the Court rejected Skilling’s argument on appeal that the definition of “honest 
services” was unconstitutionally vague, but it did hold that the government stretched the law 
too far when it prosecuted Skilling. The Court said Congress enacted the statute specifically 
to address bribery and kickbacks, but found that the statute could become vague if applied 
to “a wider range of offensive conduct.”   
 
Accordingly, the Court ruled that the statute wasn’t unconstitutionally vague if limited to 
bribery and kickback schemes. That is, defendants accused of violating the honest services 
statutes must have gained some benefit from the alleged conduct. And because the 
                                                 
1 S killing v. United States, No. 08-1394 (June 24, 2010). 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.234  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
government didn’t accuse Skilling of bribery or taking kickbacks, the Court sent his case 
back to the lower courts to determine whether his conviction should be overturned. 
 
In a companion case, the Court also sided with imprisoned media executive Conrad Black, 
who was convicted of honest services fraud for failing to disclose noncompetition fees, 
setting aside a federal appeals decision that upheld Black’s conviction. But as in Skilling’s 
case, Black’s conviction won’t necessarily be overturned; instead, the case will be sent back 
to the federal appellate court for further consideration.  
 
Moreover, because the Skilling  case has limited the honest services statute to bribery and 
kickbacks, it makes it more difficult for prosecutors to pursue criminal cases against 
corporate executives for misconduct that harms their companies. As a result, the decision 
will likely result in fewer private-sector fraud cases brought under the honest services fraud 
law.  
 
But even with the Court’s ruling, prosecutors still have a variety of other, less controversial 
laws they can invoke in fraud cases.  
 



:


honest servic fraud 18 usc 1346
under section 1346 of titl 18 us code the mail fraud and the wire fraud statut mai be
us to prosecut offici corrupt along with the briberi law under the theori that the
payment or receipt of bribe depriv the public of it right to honest and unbias servic
of public servant specif section 1346 provid the term scheme or artific to defraud
which is the term us in the mail and wire fraud statut among other includ a scheme
or artific to depriv anoth of the intang right of honest servic
thi statut gener is refer to as the honest servic fraud statut and it core
applic is briberi or conflict of interest involv a public offici that affect hi offici
duti
congress specif enact section 1346 in respons to the us suprem court decis
render in the case of mcnalli v unit state 483 us 350 1987 in mcnalli the suprem
court tri to halt the expans of the mail and wire fraud statut rule that those law
did not prohibit scheme to defraud citizen of the intang right to honest govern
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2233
a year later congress effect overrul mcnalli by enact section 1346 to ensur that
mail and wire fraud would reach the depriv of citizen right to the honest servic of
their public offici
the crime of honest servic contain the follow element 1 a scheme to defraud that
includ a materi decept 2 with the intent to defraud 3 while us the mail or
interst wire in further of that scheme and 4 that result in the depriv of the
intang right of honest servic
although it core involv public offici who in violat of their fiduciari duti accept
bribe or person benefit from undisclos conflict of interest prosecutor have us the
honest servic statut to address a wide rang of conduct by public offici and privat
actor which make it a valuabl tool for feder prosecutor in case involv fraud
the law howev ha long been critic for be so vagu that it allow prosecutor to
crimin behavior that might not be explicitli illeg and over time the vagu of
honest servic led to a medlei of conflict interpret as court struggl with how
to appli the statut
in 2009 the us suprem court grant certiorari on the convict of former enron ceo
jeffrei skill agre to harmon the conflict interpret of thi law
and on june 24 2010 the court issu a unanim rule hold that the honest servic
law couldnt be us to convict skill for hi role in the collaps of enron 1
in it opinion the court reject skill argument on appeal that the definit of honest
servic wa unconstitution vagu but it did hold that the govern stretch the law
too far when it prosecut skill the court said congress enact the statut specif
to address briberi and kickback but found that the statut could becom vagu if appli
to a wider rang of offens conduct
accordingli the court rule that the statut wasnt unconstitution vagu if limit to
briberi and kickback scheme that is defend accus of violat the honest servic
statut must have gain some benefit from the alleg conduct and becaus the
1 s kill v unit state no 081394 june 24 2010
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2234 2011 fraud examin manual
govern didnt accus skill of briberi or take kickback the court sent hi case
back to the lower court to determin whether hi convict should be overturn
in a companion case the court also side with imprison media execut conrad black
who wa convict of honest servic fraud for fail to disclos noncompetit fee
set asid a feder appeal decis that upheld black convict but as in skill
case black convict wont necessarili be overturn instead the case will be sent back
to the feder appel court for further consider
moreov becaus the skill case ha limit the honest servic statut to briberi and
kickback it make it more difficult for prosecutor to pursu crimin case against
corpor execut for misconduct that harm their compani as a result the decis
will like result in fewer privatesector fraud case brought under the honest servic fraud
law
but even with the court rule prosecutor still have a varieti of other less controversi
law thei can invok in fraud case
